
1. Neuroradiol J. 2017 Jan 1:1971400917710251. doi: 10.1177/1971400917710251. [Epub 
ahead of print]

Misdiagnosis: CNS Erdheim-Chester disease mimicking CLIPPERS.

Berkman J(1), Ford C(1), Johnson E(2), Malow BA(2), Aulino JM(3).

Author information: 
(1)1 Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, TN, USA.
(2)2 Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Department of Neurology, Nashville,
TN, USA.
(3)3 Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Department of Radiology and
Radiological Sciences, Nashville, TN, USA.

Introduction Chronic lymphocytic inflammation with pontine perivascular
enhancement responsive to steroids (CLIPPERS) is an inflammatory central nervous 
system (CNS) disorder with particular involvement of the pons. Diagnostic
criteria include a range of clinical symptoms related to the underlying brainstem
pathology, visible with magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). MRI findings include
the appearance of punctuate and curvilinear gadolinium enhancement 'peppering'
the pons. We discuss a patient presenting with clinical and radiographic
characteristics of CLIPPERS who was diagnosed with Erdheim-Chester disease (ECD).
Case report A 52-year-old male presented with 2 years of progressive spasticity, 
dysarthria, and gait instability. Initially, he was diagnosed with Parkinson's
disease at an outside hospital, based on tremor, rigidity, and gait instability; 
however, he failed to improve with a trial of levodopa. Brain MRI showed small
enhancing parenchymal nodules coalescing in the central pons, but also affecting 
the cerebellum and cerebellar peduncles, with more punctate enhancing lesions in 
the cerebral lobar subcortical white matter. When the patient's response to
steroids was inadequate, further imaging was done, revealing perinephric
processes. Subsequent biopsy revealed ECD. Conclusions A review of the literature
for cases of CLIPPERS demonstrated a subset of patients later found to have
various malignancies involving the CNS. This case report uses the patient's
unique radiographic and clinical presentation to demonstrate the importance of
the exclusion criteria within the CLIPPERS diagnostic requirements and stresses
red flags suggestive of alternative diagnoses. This distinction is of high
importance when differentiating a relatively benign process such as CLIPPERS from
more malignant diseases.

DOI: 10.1177/1971400917710251 
PMID: 28685649 


2. Biometals. 2017 Aug;30(4):599-607. doi: 10.1007/s10534-017-0030-1. Epub 2017 Jun 
30.

Iron modulates the activity of monoamine oxidase B in SH-SY5Y cells.

Lu H(1), Chen J(1)(2), Huang H(1)(2), Zhou M(1)(2), Zhu Q(3), Yao SQ(4), Chai
Z(1)(2), Hu Y(5)(6).

Author information: 
(1)CAS Key Laboratory for Biomedical Effects of Nanomaterials and Nanosafety,
Multidisciplinary Research Division, Institute of High Energy Physics, Chinese
Academy of Sciences (CAS), Beijing, 100049, China.
(2)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049, China.
(3)Key Laboratory of Bioorganic Synthesis of Zhejiang Province, College of
Biotechnology and Bioengineering, Zhejiang University of Technology, Chaowang
Road 18, Hangzhou, 310014, China. zhuq@zjut.edu.cn.
(4)Department of Chemistry, National University of Singapore, Singapore, 117543, 
Singapore.
(5)CAS Key Laboratory for Biomedical Effects of Nanomaterials and Nanosafety,
Multidisciplinary Research Division, Institute of High Energy Physics, Chinese
Academy of Sciences (CAS), Beijing, 100049, China. huyi@ihep.ac.cn.
(6)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049, China.
huyi@ihep.ac.cn.

Both monoamine oxidase B (MAO-B) and iron accumulation are associated with
neurologic diseases including Parkinson's disease. However, the association of
iron with MAO-B activity was poorly understood. Here we took advantage of highly 
sensitive and specific fluorescence probes to examine the change in MAO-B
activity in human dopaminergic neuroblastoma (SH-SY5Y) cells upon iron exposure. 
Both ferric and ferrous ions could significantly enhance the activity of MAO-B,
instead of MAO-A, in SH-SY5Y cells. In addition, iron-induced increase in MAO-B
probe fluorescence could be prevented by pargyline and other newly developed
MAO-B inhibitors, suggesting that it was MAO-B activity-dependent. These findings
may suggest MAO-B is an important sensor in iron-stressed neuronal cells.

DOI: 10.1007/s10534-017-0030-1 
PMID: 28685208 


3. Exp Neurol. 2017 Jun;292:113-124. doi: 10.1016/j.expneurol.2017.03.006. Epub 2017
Mar 8.

Differential effects of gaseous versus injectable anesthetics on changes in
regional cerebral blood flow and metabolism induced by l-DOPA in a rat model of
Parkinson's disease.

Bimpisidis Z(1), Öberg CM(2), Maslava N(3), Cenci MA(4), Lundblad C(5).

Author information: 
(1)Basal Ganglia Pathophysiology Unit, Department of Experimental Medical
Science, Lund University, Lund, Sweden. Electronic address:
zisis.bimpisidis@med.lu.se.
(2)Department of Clinical Sciences, Nephrology, Lund University, Lund, Sweden.
(3)Basal Ganglia Pathophysiology Unit, Department of Experimental Medical
Science, Lund University, Lund, Sweden.
(4)Basal Ganglia Pathophysiology Unit, Department of Experimental Medical
Science, Lund University, Lund, Sweden. Electronic address:
angela.cenci_nilsson@med.lu.se.
(5)Anesthesiology and Intensive Care, Department of Clinical Medical Science,
Lund University, Lund, Sweden.

Preclinical imaging of brain activity requires the use of anesthesia. In this
study, we have compared the effects of two widely used anesthetics, inhaled
isoflurane and ketamine/xylazine cocktail, on cerebral blood flow and metabolism 
in a rat model of Parkinson's disease and l-DOPA-induced dyskinesia. Specific
tracers were used to estimate regional cerebral blood flow (rCBF -
[(14)C]-iodoantipyrine) and regional cerebral metabolic rate (rCMR -
[(14)C]-2-deoxyglucose) with a highly sensitive autoradiographic method. The two 
types of anesthetics had quite distinct effects on l-DOPA-induced changes in rCBF
and rCMR. Isoflurane did not affect either the absolute rCBF values or the
increases in rCBF in the basal ganglia after l-DOPA administration. On the
contrary, rats anesthetized with ketamine/xylazine showed lower absolute rCBF
values, and the rCBF increases induced by l-DOPA were masked. We developed a
novel improved model to calculate rCMR, and found lower metabolic activities in
rats anesthetized with isoflurane compared to animals anesthetized with
ketamine/xylazine. Both anesthetics prevented changes in rCMR upon l-DOPA
administration. Pharmacological challenges in isoflurane-anesthetized rats
indicated that drugs mimicking the actions of ketamine/xylazine on adrenergic or 
glutamate receptors reproduced distinct effects of the injectable anesthetics on 
rCBF and rCMR. Our results highlight the importance of anesthesia in studies of
cerebral flow and metabolism, and provide novel insights into mechanisms
mediating abnormal neurovascular responses to l-DOPA in Parkinson's disease.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.expneurol.2017.03.006 
PMID: 28284817 


4. Pharmacol Rev. 2017 Jan;69(1):53-62. doi: 10.1124/pr.115.012161.

The Pharmacology of Autonomic Failure: From Hypotension to Hypertension.

Biaggioni I(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical Pharmacology, Departments of Medicine and Pharmacology,
Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee italo.biaggioni@vanderbilt.edu.

Primary neurodegenerative autonomic disorders are characterized clinically by
loss of autonomic regulation of blood pressure. The clinical picture is dominated
by orthostatic hypotension, but supine hypertension is also a significant
problem. Autonomic failure can result from impairment of central autonomic
pathways (multiple system atrophy) or neurodegeneration of peripheral
postganglionic autonomic fibers (pure autonomic failure, Parkinson's disease).
Pharmacologic probes such as the ganglionic blocker trimethaphan can help us in
the understanding of the underlying pathophysiology and diagnosis of these
disorders. Conversely, understanding the pathophysiology is crucial in the
development of effective pharmacotherapy for these patients. Autonomic failure
patients provide us with an unfortunate but unique research model characterized
by loss of baroreflex buffering. This greatly magnifies the effect of stimuli
that would not be apparent in normal subjects. An example of this is the
discovery of the osmopressor reflex: ingestion of water increases blood pressure 
by 30-40 mm Hg in autonomic failure patients. Animal studies indicate that the
trigger of this reflex is related to hypo-osmolality in the portal circulation
involving transient receptor potential vanilloid 4 receptors. Studies in
autonomic failure patients have also revealed that angiotensin II can be
generated through noncanonical pathways independent of plasma renin activity to
contribute to hypertension. Similarly, the mineralocorticoid receptor antagonist 
eplerenone produces acute hypotensive effects, highlighting the presence of
non-nuclear mineralocorticoid receptor pathways. These are examples of careful
clinical research that integrates pathophysiology and pharmacology to advance our
knowledge of human disease.

Copyright © 2016 by The American Society for Pharmacology and Experimental
Therapeutics.

DOI: 10.1124/pr.115.012161 
PMID: 28011746  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Neurosci Lett. 2017 Jan 1;636:218-224. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2016.10.056. Epub
2016 Oct 29.

Chronic nicotine treatment decreases LPS signaling through NF-κB and TLR-4
modulation in the hippocampus.

Café-Mendes CC(1), Garay-Malpartida HM(2), Malta MB(3), de Sá Lima L(3), Scavone 
C(3), Ferreira ZS(4), Markus RP(4), Marcourakis T(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical and Toxicological Analyses, School of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, University of São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil; School of Medicine,
University of São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.
(2)School of Arts, Sciences and Humanities, University of São Paulo, São Paulo,
Brazil.
(3)Department of Pharmacology, Institute of Biomedical Sciences, University of
São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.
(4)Laboratory of Chronopharmacology, Department of Physiology, Institute of
Biosciences, University of São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.
(5)Department of Clinical and Toxicological Analyses, School of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, University of São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil. Electronic address:
tmarcour@usp.br.

The hippocampus is a brain region that is rich in nicotinic acetylcholine
receptors (nAChRs), especially the α7 subtype. The hippocampus is severely
affected in disorders that have a neuroinflammatory component, such as
Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, and schizophrenia. Previous studies
demonstrated both in vivo and in vitro that nicotine inhibits immunological
responses, including those that are triggered by the inflammatory agent
lipopolysaccharide (LPS), the endotoxin of Gram-negative bacteria. The present
study investigated whether chronically administered nicotine interferes with the 
nuclear binding of nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB) and the expression of LPS-induced
inflammatory response genes. The results indicated that chronic nicotine
administration (0.1mg/kg, s.c., 14days) inhibited the LPS-induced nuclear binding
of NF-κB and mRNA expression levels of Tnf, Il1b, Nos2, and Tlr4. The presence of
both the selective α7 nAChR antagonist methyllycaconitine (MLA; 5.0mg/kg i.p.,
14days) and the nonselective nAChR antagonist mecamylamine (Meca; 1.0mg/kg, s.c.,
14days) reversed the inhibitory effects of nicotine. These results suggest that
the chronic activation of α7- and αxβy-containing nAChRs reduces acute
inflammatory responses in the brain.

Copyright © 2016. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neulet.2016.10.056 
PMID: 27984197 


6. Front Hum Neurosci. 2016 Nov 18;10:587. eCollection 2016.

Preliminary Evidence of Apathetic-Like Behavior in Aged Vesicular Monoamine
Transporter 2 Deficient Mice.

Baumann A(1), Moreira CG(1), Morawska MM(1), Masneuf S(1), Baumann CR(1), Noain
D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, University Hospital of Zurich Zurich, Switzerland.

Apathy is considered to be a core feature of Parkinson's disease (PD) and has
been associated with a variety of states and symptoms of the disease, such as
increased severity of motor symptoms, impaired cognition, executive dysfunction
and dementia. Apart from the high prevalence of apathy in PD, which is estimated 
to be about 40%, the underlying pathophysiology remains poorly understood and
current treatment approaches are unspecific and proved to be only partially
effective. In animal models, apathy has been sub-optimally modeled, mostly by
means of pharmacological and stress-induced methods, whereby concomitant
depressive-like symptoms could not be ruled out. In the context of PD only a few 
studies on toxin-based models (i.e., 6-hydroxydopamine (6-OHDA) or
1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP)) claimed to have determined
apathetic symptoms in animals. The assessment of apathetic symptoms in more
elaborated and multifaceted genetic animal models of PD could help to understand 
the pathophysiological development of apathy in PD and eventually advance
specific treatments for afflicted patients. Here we report the presence of
behavioral signs of apathy in 12 months old mice that express only ~5% of the
vesicular monoamine transporter 2 (VMAT2). Apathetic-like behavior in VMAT2
deficient (LO) mice was evidenced by impaired burrowing and nest building skills,
and a reduced preference for sweet solution in the saccharin preference test,
while the performance in the forced swimming test was normal. Our preliminary
results suggest that VMAT2 deficient mice show an apathetic-like phenotype that
might be independent of depressive-like symptoms. Therefore VMAT2 LO mice could
be a useful tool to study the pathophysiological substrates of apathy and to test
novel treatment strategies for apathy in the context of PD.

DOI: 10.3389/fnhum.2016.00587 
PMCID: PMC5114272
PMID: 27917116 


7. NMR Biomed. 2017 Apr;30(4). doi: 10.1002/nbm.3668. Epub 2016 Dec 1.

The clinical utility of QSM: disease diagnosis, medical management, and surgical 
planning.

Eskreis-Winkler S(1), Zhang Y(1), Zhang J(1), Liu Z(1), Dimov A(1), Gupta A(1),
Wang Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiology, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, NY, USA.

Quantitative susceptibility mapping (QSM) is an MR technique that depicts and
quantifies magnetic susceptibility sources. Mapping iron, the dominant
susceptibility source in the brain, has many important clinical applications.
Herein, we review QSM applications in the diagnosis, medical management, and
surgical treatment of disease. To assist in early disease diagnosis, QSM can
identify elevated iron levels in the motor cortex of amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis patients, in the substantia nigra of Parkinson's disease (PD) patients,
in the globus pallidus, putamen, and caudate of Huntington's disease patients,
and in the basal ganglia of Wilson's disease patients. Additionally, QSM can
distinguish between hemorrhage and calcification, which could prove useful in
tumor subclassification, and can measure microbleeds in traumatic brain injury
patients. In guiding medical management, QSM can be used to monitor iron
chelation therapy in PD patients, to monitor smoldering inflammation of multiple 
sclerosis (MS) lesions after the blood-brain barrier (BBB) seals, to monitor
active inflammation of MS lesions before the BBB seals without using gadolinium, 
and to monitor hematoma volume in intracerebral hemorrhage. QSM can also guide
neurosurgical treatment. Neurosurgeons require accurate depiction of the
subthalamic nucleus, a tiny deep gray matter nucleus, prior to inserting deep
brain stimulation electrodes into the brains of PD patients. QSM is arguably the 
best imaging tool for depiction of the subthalamic nucleus. Finally, we discuss
future directions, including bone QSM, cardiac QSM, and using QSM to map cerebral
metabolic rate of oxygen. Copyright © 2016 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

Copyright © 2016 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/nbm.3668 
PMID: 27906525 


8. Hautarzt. 2017 May;68(5):393-395. doi: 10.1007/s00105-016-3900-5.

[Multiple eccrine hidrocystomas on the lower forehead and nose of a 60-year-old
man].

[Article in German]

Winkler JK(1), Hartschuh W(2), Enk A(2), Toberer F(2).

Author information: 
(1)Universitäts-Hautklinik Heidelberg, Im Neuenheimer Feld 460, 69120,
Heidelberg, Deutschland. Julia.Winkler@med.uni-heidelberg.de.
(2)Universitäts-Hautklinik Heidelberg, Im Neuenheimer Feld 460, 69120,
Heidelberg, Deutschland.

Multiple eccrine hidrocystomas are benign cystic skin lesions which originate
from the sweat gland ducts and typically affect women's midfacial area. Sweating 
may lead to an increase in size of the translucent papules. In some cases
hidrocystomas are associated with other diseases such as Parkinson's disease.
Treatment options include laser, topical and systemic anticholinergic drugs
(glycopyrrolate, clonidine, atropine, and oxybutynin), whereby therapeutic
success is limited in most cases.

DOI: 10.1007/s00105-016-3900-5 
PMID: 27872944 


9. Neurochirurgie. 2016 Oct;62(5):281-283. doi: 10.1016/j.neuchi.2016.06.002. Epub
2016 Oct 20.

Hemiparkinsonism secondary to sphenoid wing meningioma.

Kleib AS(1), Sid'Ahmed E(2), Salihy SM(3), Boukhrissi N(2), Diagana M(4), Soumaré
O(5).

Author information: 
(1)Service de neurochirurgie, centre hospitalier national, BP 612, Nouakchott,
Mauritania. Electronic address: remyk@yahoo.fr.
(2)Service de radiologie, centre hospitalier national, Nouakchott, Mauritania.
(3)Service de neurochirurgie, centre hospitalier national, BP 612, Nouakchott,
Mauritania.
(4)Service de neurologie, centre hospitalier des spécialités, Nouakchott,
Mauritania.
(5)Service de neurochirurgie, centre hospitalier des spécialités, Nouakchott,
Mauritania.

We describe the case of a 41 year-old woman who presented with a slight slowness 
of the right hand movement, which began four months prior to admission.
Neurological examination showed slight rest tremor of the right hand, moderate
bradykinesia and rigidity. She had been taking medication for Parkinson's
disease, but without any benefit. The patient underwent a gadolinium-enhanced
brain MRI, which showed a large left sphenoid wing meningioma with surrounding
edema compressing the basal ganglia. Total excision of tumor was performed. The
right hemiparkinsonian signs were completely resolved. This rare case underlines 
the significance of neuroimaging in patients presenting with Parkinson's disease 
especially in those patients with a relatively younger age at onset or
unresponsive to medication.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuchi.2016.06.002 
PMID: 27771112  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Neural Plast. 2016;2016:6383240. Epub 2016 Sep 26.

Restoring Spinal Noradrenergic Inhibitory Tone Attenuates Pain Hypersensitivity
in a Rat Model of Parkinson's Disease.

Cao LF(1), Peng XY(2), Huang Y(3), Wang B(3), Zhou FM(3), Cheng RX(3), Chen
LH(4), Luo WF(1), Liu T(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Soochow University,
Suzhou, Jiangsu 215004, China.
(2)Department of Neurology, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Soochow University,
Suzhou, Jiangsu 215004, China; Suqian First Hospital, Suqian, Jiangsu 223800,
China.
(3)Institute of Neuroscience, Soochow University, Suzhou, Jiangsu 215123, China.
(4)Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Preventive and Translational Medicine for Geriatric 
Diseases, School of Public Health, Soochow University, Suzhou, Jiangsu 215123,
China.

In the present study, we investigated whether restoring descending noradrenergic 
inhibitory tone can attenuate pain in a PD rat model, which was established by
stereotaxic infusion of 6-hydroxydopamine (6-OHDA) into the bilateral striatum
(CPu). PD rats developed thermal and mechanical hypersensitivity at the 4th week 
after surgery. HPLC analysis showed that NE content, but not dopamine or 5-HT,
significantly decreased in lumbar spinal cord in PD rats. Additional
noradrenergic depletion by injection of
N-(2-chloroethyl)-N-ethyl-2-bromobenzylamine (DSP-4) aggravated pain
hypersensitivity in PD rats. At the 5th week after injection of 6-OHDA, systemic 
treatment with pharmacological norepinephrine (NE) precursor droxidopa (L-DOPS)
or α2 adrenoceptor agonist clonidine significantly attenuated thermal and
mechanical pain hypersensitivity in PD rats. Furthermore, application of
norepinephrine (NE) and 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT) reuptake inhibitors
duloxetine, but not 5-HT selective reuptake inhibitors sertraline, significantly 
inhibited thermal and mechanical pain hypersensitivity in PD rats. Systemic
administration of Madopar (L-DOPA) or the D2/D3 agonist pramipexole slightly
inhibited the thermal, but not mechanical, hypersensitivity in PD rats. Thus, our
study revealed that impairment of descending noradrenergic system may play a key 
role in PD-associated pain and restoring spinal noradrenergic inhibitory tone may
serve as a novel strategy to manage PD-associated pain.

DOI: 10.1155/2016/6383240 
PMCID: PMC5056271
PMID: 27747105 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors state no conflict of interests.


11. Cell Mol Neurobiol. 2017 Apr;37(3):499-509. doi: 10.1007/s10571-016-0387-7. Epub 
2016 Jun 2.

Caffeoylquinic Acid Derivatives Protect SH-SY5Y Neuroblastoma Cells from Hydrogen
Peroxide-Induced Injury Through Modulating Oxidative Status.

Jiang XW(1)(2), Bai JP(2), Zhang Q(2), Hu XL(2), Tian X(2), Zhu J(2), Liu J(2),
Meng WH(1), Zhao QC(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy, General Hospital of Shenyang Military Area Command,
Shenyang, 110840, China.
(2)Department of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Shenyang Pharmaceutical
University, Shenyang, 110016, China.
(3)Department of Pharmacy, General Hospital of Shenyang Military Area Command,
Shenyang, 110840, China. zhaoqingchun1967@163.com.

Erratum in
    Cell Mol Neurobiol. 2017 Apr;37(3):511-512.

Oxidative stress has been confirmed as a contribution to the pathogenesis and
pathophysiology of many neurological disorders such as Alzheimer's disease and
Parkinson's disease. Caffeoylquinic acids (CQAs) are considered to have
anti-oxidative stress ability in a previous study, but the structure-activity
relationships (SARs) of CQAs in neuroprotective effects are still unclear. In the
present study, we primarily expound the SARs of CQAs in counteracting
H2O2-induced injury in SH-SY5Y cells. We found that CQAs (1-10) represented the
protection of SH-SY5Y cells against H2O2-induced injury in varying degrees and
malonyl groups could obviously increase the anti-oxidative stress ability of
CQAs. Intensive studies of 4,5-O-dicaffeoyl-1-O-(malic acid methyl ester)-quinic 
acid (MDCQA) indicated that the mechanisms could potentially involve activation
of endogenous antioxidant enzymes and the regulation of the phosphorylation of
MAPKs and AKT. In conclusion, MDCQA could serve as a neuroprotective agent with a
potential to attenuate oxidative stress.

DOI: 10.1007/s10571-016-0387-7 
PMID: 27255971  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Fitoterapia. 2016 Jun;111:109-23. doi: 10.1016/j.fitote.2016.04.013. Epub 2016
Apr 20.

Novel multifunctional pharmacology of lobinaline, the major alkaloid from Lobelia
cardinalis.

Brown DP(1), Rogers DT(2), Pomerleau F(3), Siripurapu KB(4), Kulshrestha M(5),
Gerhardt GA(6), Littleton JM(7).

Author information: 
(1)College of Medicine, Department of Anatomy & Neurobiology, University of
Kentucky Chandler Medical Center, 138 Leader Avenue, Lexington, KY 40536-9983,
USA.
(2)Naprogenix™, UK-AsTeCC, 145 Graham Avenue, Lexington, KY 40506-0286, USA.
Electronic address: dennistrogers@gmail.com.
(3)College of Medicine, Department of Anatomy & Neurobiology, University of
Kentucky Chandler Medical Center, 138 Leader Avenue, Lexington, KY 40536-9983,
USA; College of Medicine, Parkinson's Disease Translational Research Center for
Excellence, University of Kentucky Chandler Medical Center, 138 Leader Avenue,
Lexington, KY 40536-9983, USA; College of Medicine, Center for Microelectrode
Technology, University of Kentucky Chandler Medical Center, 138 Leader Avenue,
Lexington, KY 40536-9983, USA.
(4)College of Arts and Sciences, Department of Psychology, University of
Kentucky, Kastle Hall, Lexington, KY 40506-0044, USA.
(5)College of Agriculture, Department of Biosystems & Agricultural Engineering,
University of Kentucky, 1100 S. Limestone, Lexington, KY 40546-0091, USA.
(6)College of Medicine, Department of Anatomy & Neurobiology, University of
Kentucky Chandler Medical Center, 138 Leader Avenue, Lexington, KY 40536-9983,
USA; College of Medicine, Department of Neurology, University of Kentucky
Chandler Medical Center, 138 Leader Avenue, Lexington, KY 40536-9983, USA;
College of Medicine, Department of Psychiatry, University of Kentucky Chandler
Medical Center, 138 Leader Avenue, Lexington, KY 40536-9983, USA; College of
Medicine, Department of Neurosurgery, University of Kentucky Chandler Medical
Center, 138 Leader Avenue, Lexington, KY 40536-9983, USA; College of Medicine,
Parkinson's Disease Translational Research Center for Excellence, University of
Kentucky Chandler Medical Center, 138 Leader Avenue, Lexington, KY 40536-9983,
USA; College of Medicine, Center for Microelectrode Technology, University of
Kentucky Chandler Medical Center, 138 Leader Avenue, Lexington, KY 40536-9983,
USA.
(7)Naprogenix™, UK-AsTeCC, 145 Graham Avenue, Lexington, KY 40506-0286, USA;
College of Arts and Sciences, Department of Psychology, University of Kentucky,
Kastle Hall, Lexington, KY 40506-0044, USA.

In screening a library of plant extracts from ~1000 species native to the
Southeastern United States, Lobelia cardinalis was identified as containing
nicotinic acetylcholine receptor (nicAchR) binding activity which was relatively 
non-selective for the α4β2- and α7-nicAchR subtypes. This nicAchR binding profile
is atypical for plant-derived nicAchR ligands, the majority of which are highly
selective for α4β2-nicAchRs. Its potential therapeutic relevance is noteworthy
since agonism of α4β2- and α7-nicAchRs is associated with anti-inflammatory and
neuroprotective properties. Bioassay-guided fractionation of L. cardinalis
extracts led to the identification of lobinaline, a complex binitrogenous
alkaloid, as the main source of the unique nicAchR binding profile. Purified
lobinaline was a potent free radical scavenger, displayed similar binding
affinity at α4β2- and α7-nicAchRs, exhibited agonist activity at nicAchRs in
SH-SY5Y cells, and inhibited [(3)H]-dopamine (DA) uptake in rat striatal
synaptosomes. Lobinaline significantly increased fractional [(3)H] release from
superfused rat striatal slices preloaded with [(3)H]-DA, an effect that was
inhibited by the non-selective nicAchR antagonist mecamylamine. In vivo
electrochemical studies in urethane-anesthetized rats demonstrated that
lobinaline locally applied in the striatum significantly prolonged clearance of
exogenous DA by the dopamine transporter (DAT). In contrast, lobeline, the most
thoroughly investigated Lobelia alkaloid, is an α4β2-nicAchR antagonist, a poor
free radical scavenger, and is a less potent DAT inhibitor. These previously
unreported multifunctional effects of lobinaline make it of interest as a lead to
develop therapeutics for neuropathological disorders that involve free radical
generation, cholinergic, and dopaminergic neurotransmission. These include
neurodegenerative conditions, such as Parkinson's disease, and drug abuse.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.fitote.2016.04.013 
PMCID: PMC5299595
PMID: 27105955  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Dr. Littleton functions as the Chief Scientific
Officer at Naprogenix™ and owns stock in the company. Dr. Rogers is an employee
of Naprogenix™. The remaining authors have no conflict of interest to disclose.


13. Neuromodulation. 2016 Dec;19(8):872-876. doi: 10.1111/ner.12432. Epub 2016 Apr
21.

Non-Infectious Peri-Electrode Edema and Contrast Enhancement Following Deep Brain
Stimulation Surgery.

Arocho-Quinones EV(1)(2), Pahapill PA(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs Medical
Center, Milwaukee, WI, USA.
(2)Department of Neurosurgery, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI, USA.

BACKGROUND: Dramatic radiographic abnormalities seen after electrode placement
(DRAAEP) in deep brain stimulation (DBS) surgery is rare and it has not been
associated with infection or hemorrhage. It has consisted of peri-electrode
low-attenuation signals on CT scans and extensive T2-hyperintense signals without
associated contrast enhancement (CE) on MRI scans.
OBJECTIVE: Report on the management of a patient with Parkinson's disease (PD)
presenting with a seizure and findings of DRAAEP with positive CE 12 days after
the placement of a subthalamic nucleus (STN) DBS electrode.
METHODS: Head CT and contrasted brain MRI scans were completed on presentation.
Standard laboratory work up was obtained to evaluate for infection. Operative
exploration deep to the burr-hole site surrounding the electrode was performed
and cultures were obtained. Serial contrasted MRI scans were completed to
determine the abnormal signal duration.
RESULTS: A MRI revealed extensive T2-hyperintensity and positive CE concentrated 
around the burr-hole site surrounding the electrode. Intraoperative exploration
revealed no evidence of infection and electrode revision was avoided. There was
near resolution of the abnormal T2 signal and CE at six weeks from detection. The
patient remained without signs of intracranial infection and responded well to
DBS.
CONCLUSION: To our knowledge, this is the first reported case of DRAAEP with
positive gadolinium enhancement. Despite the extensive contrast enhancement,
these DRAAEP appear to remain benign transient events that, in the absence of
clinical signs of infection or neurologic decline, may warrant no further
aggressive intervention such as hardware removal.

© 2016 International Neuromodulation Society.

DOI: 10.1111/ner.12432 
PMID: 27098925  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Neurobiol Dis. 2016 Jul;91:47-58. doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2016.02.019. Epub 2016 Feb
24.

Optogenetic activation of striatal cholinergic interneurons regulates
L-dopa-induced dyskinesias.

Bordia T(#)(1), Perez XA(#)(1), Heiss J(1), Zhang D(1), Quik M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Bioscience Division, SRI International, 333 Ravenswood Ave, Menlo Park, CA
94025.
(#)Contributed equally

L-dopa-induced dyskinesias (LIDs) are a serious complication of L-dopa therapy
for Parkinson's disease. Emerging evidence indicates that the nicotinic
cholinergic system plays a role in LIDs, although the pathways and mechanisms are
poorly understood. Here we used optogenetics to investigate the role of striatal 
cholinergic interneurons in LIDs. Mice expressing cre-recombinase under the
control of the choline acetyltransferase promoter (ChAT-Cre) were lesioned by
unilateral injection of 6-hydroxydopamine. AAV5-ChR2-eYFP or AAV5-control-eYFP
was injected into the dorsolateral striatum, and optical fibers implanted. After 
stable virus expression, mice were treated with L-dopa. They were then subjected 
to various stimulation protocols for 2h and LIDs rated. Continuous stimulation
with a short duration optical pulse (1-5ms) enhanced LIDs. This effect was
blocked by the general muscarinic acetylcholine receptor (mAChR) antagonist
atropine indicating it was mAChR-mediated. By contrast, continuous stimulation
with a longer duration optical pulse (20ms to 1s) reduced LIDs to a similar
extent as nicotine treatment (~50%). The general nicotinic acetylcholine receptor
(nAChR) antagonist mecamylamine blocked the decline in LIDs with longer optical
pulses showing it was nAChR-mediated. None of the stimulation regimens altered
LIDs in control-eYFP mice. Lesion-induced motor impairment was not affected by
optical stimulation indicating that cholinergic transmission selectively
regulates LIDs. Longer pulse stimulation increased the number of c-Fos expressing
ChAT neurons, suggesting that changes in this immediate early gene may be
involved. These results demonstrate that striatal cholinergic interneurons play a
critical role in LIDs and support the idea that nicotine treatment reduces LIDs
via nAChR desensitization.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nbd.2016.02.019 
PMCID: PMC4860059
PMID: 26921469 


15. Neurochem Int. 2016 Mar;94:74-81. doi: 10.1016/j.neuint.2016.02.008. Epub 2016
Feb 18.

α4 nicotinic acetylcholine receptor modulated by galantamine on nigrostriatal
terminals regulates dopamine receptor-mediated rotational behavior.

Inden M(1), Takata K(2), Yanagisawa D(3), Ashihara E(2), Tooyama I(3), Shimohama 
S(4), Kitamura Y(5).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Medical Therapeutics and Molecular Therapeutics, Gifu
Pharmaceutical University, Gifu, Japan.
(2)Department of Clinical and Translational Physiology, Kyoto Pharmaceutical
University, Kyoto, Japan.
(3)Molecular Neuroscience Research Center, Shiga University of Medical Science,
Shiga, Japan.
(4)Department of Neurology, Sapporo Medical University, Sapporo, Japan.
(5)Department of Clinical and Translational Physiology, Kyoto Pharmaceutical
University, Kyoto, Japan; Pharmacology and Neurobiology Laboratory, College of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Ritsumeikan University, Shiga, Japan. Electronic
address: yo-kita@fc.ritsumei.ac.jp.

Galantamine, an acetylcholine esterase (AChE) inhibitor used to treat dementia
symptoms, also acts as an allosteric potentiating ligand (APL) at nicotinic
acetylcholine receptors (nAChRs). This study was designed to evaluate the
allosteric effect of galantamine on nAChR regulation of nigrostrial dopaminergic 
neuronal function in the hemiparkinsonian rat model established by unilateral
nigral 6-hydroxydopamine (6-OHDA) injection. Methamphetamine, a dopamine
releaser, induced ipsilateral rotation, whereas dopamine agonists apomorphine (a 
non-selective dopamine receptor agonist), SKF38393 (a selective dopamine D1
receptor agonist), and quinpirole (a selective dopamine D2 receptor agonist)
induced contralateral rotation. When 6-OHDA-injected rats were co-treated with
nomifensine, a dopamine transporter inhibitor, a more pronounced and a remarkable
effect of nicotine and galantamine was observed. Under these conditions, the
combination of nomifensine with nicotine or galantamine induced the ipsilateral
rotation similar to the methamphetamine-induced rotational behavior, indicating
that nicotine and galantamine also induce dopamine release from striatal
terminals. Both nicotine- and galantamine-induced rotations were significantly
blocked by flupenthixol (an antagonist of both D1 and D2 dopamine receptors) and 
mecamylamine (an antagonist of nAChRs), suggesting that galantamine modulation of
nAChRs on striatal dopaminergic terminals regulates dopamine receptor-mediated
movement. Immunohistochemical staining showed that α4 nAChRs were highly
expressed on striatal dopaminergic terminals, while no α7 nAChRs were detected.
Pretreatment with the α4 nAChR antagonist dihydroxy-β-erythroidine significantly 
inhibited nicotine- and galantamine-induced rotational behaviors, whereas
pretreatment with the α7 nAChR antagonist methyllycaconitine was ineffective.
Moreover, the α4 nAChR agonist ABT-418 induced ipsilateral rotation, while the α7
nAChR agonist PNU282987 had no significant effect on rotational behavior. These
results suggest that galantamine can enhance striatal dopamine release through
allosteric modulation of α4 nAChRs on nigrostriatal dopaminergic terminals.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuint.2016.02.008 
PMID: 26911419  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


16. J Neurotrauma. 2016 Jun 15;33(12):1150-60. doi: 10.1089/neu.2015.4037. Epub 2016 
Mar 30.

Production of Dopamine by Aromatic l-Amino Acid Decarboxylase Cells after Spinal 
Cord Injury.

Ren LQ(1)(2), Wienecke J(1)(3), Hultborn H(1)(2), Zhang M(1)(4).

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Neuroscience and Pharmacology, University of Copenhagen ,
Copenhagen, Denmark .
(2)2 Laboratory of Spinal Injury and Rehabilitation, Chengde Medical University ,
Chengde, China .
(3)3 Department of Nutrition, Exercise, and Sports, University of Copenhagen ,
Copenhagen, Denmark .
(4)4 Neuronano Research Center, Department of Experimental Medical Sciences, Lund
University , Lund, Sweden .

Aromatic l-amino acid decarboxylase (AADC) cells are widely distributed in the
spinal cord, and their functions are largely unknown. We have previously found
that AADC cells in the spinal cord could increase their ability to produce
serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine) from 5-hydroxytryptophan after spinal cord injury
(SCI). Because AADC is a common enzyme catalyzing 5-hydroxytryptophan to
serotonin and l-3,4-dihydroxyphenylalanine (l-dopa) to dopamine (DA), it seems
likely that the ability of AADC cells using l-dopa to synthesize DA is also
increased. To prove whether or not this is the case, a similar rat sacral SCI
model and a similar experimental paradigm were adopted as that which we had used 
previously. In the chronic SCI rats (> 45 days), no AADC cells expressed DA if
there was no exogenous l-dopa application. However, following administration of a
peripheral AADC inhibitor (carbidopa) with or without a monoamine oxidase
inhibitor (pargyline) co-application, systemic administration of l-dopa resulted 
in ∼94% of AADC cells becoming DA-immunopositive in the spinal cord below the
lesion, whereas in normal or sham-operated rats none or very few of AADC cells
became DA-immunopositive with the same treatment. Using tail electromyography,
spontaneous tail muscle activity was increased nearly fivefold over the baseline 
level. When pretreated with a central AADC inhibitor (NSD-1015), further
application of l-dopa failed to increase the motoneuron activity although the
expression of DA in the AADC cells was not completely inhibited. These findings
demonstrate that AADC cells in the spinal cord below the lesion gain the ability 
to produce DA from its precursor in response to SCI. This ability also enables
the AADC cells to produce 5-HT and trace amines, and likely contributes to the
development of hyperexcitability. These results might also be implicated for
revealing the pathological mechanisms underlying l-dopa-induced dyskinesia in
Parkinson's disease.

DOI: 10.1089/neu.2015.4037 
PMID: 26830512 


17. Pharm Biol. 2016;54(6):1071-6. doi: 10.3109/13880209.2015.1102949. Epub 2016 Jan 
25.

The monoamine oxidase inhibitory activity of essential oils obtained from
Eryngium species and their chemical composition.

Klein-Júnior LC(1), dos Santos Passos C(1), Tasso de Souza TJ(1), Gobbi de
Bitencourt F(1), Salton J(1), de Loreto Bordignon SA(2), Henriques AT(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Laboratory of Pharmacognosy and Quality Control of Phytomedicines, Faculty
of Pharmacy , Universidade Federal Do Rio Grande Do Sul , Porto Alegre , Brazil ;
(2)b Laboratory of Applied Biology, Centro Universitário La Salle - UNILASALLE , 
Canoas , Brazil.

CONTEXT: Monoamine oxidase (MAO) inhibitors are used in the treatment of
depression, anxiety disorders, and the symptomatic treatment of Parkinson's
disease. Eryngium, the most representative of the Apiaceae family, is well known 
for the presence of essential oils (EOs), which have already demonstrated MAO
inhibitory potential.
OBJECTIVE: The objective of this study is to evaluate the MAO inhibitory capacity
of the EOs obtained from Eryngium floribundum Cham. & Schlecht. (EF), E.
eriophorum Cham. & Schlecht. (EE), E. nudicaule Lam. (EN), E. horridum Malme
(EH), and E. pandanifolium Cham. & Schlecht. (EP).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: EOs were obtained from fresh whole plants by
hydrodistillation (3 h). Chemical analyses were performed by GC/MS using apolar
and polar columns, with oven temperature from 60 to 300 °C at 3 °C/min. The MAO-A
and -B activities were evaluated in vitro by an end-point method using kynuramine
as the substrate and mitochondrial suspension or human recombinant enzymes as the
enzymatic source. DMSO 2%, clorgyline 10(-7) M, and pargyline 10(-6) M were used 
as controls.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION: EFEO, EEEO, ENEO, EHEO, and EPEO GC/MS analysis showed
(E)-caryophyllene (4.9-10.8%), germacrene D (0.6-35.1%), bicyclogermacrene
(10.4-17.2), spathulenol (0.4-36.0%), and globulol (1.4-18.6%) as main
constituents. None of the EOs inhibited MAO-A activity (4 and 40 μg/mL). However,
EHEO inhibited MAO-B activity with an IC50 value of 5.65 μg/mL (1-200 μg/mL).
Pentadecane (10 μM), its major constituent (53.5%), did not display significant
MAO-B inhibition.
CONCLUSION: The study demonstrates the promising application of Eryngium species 
as a source of potential central nervous system bioactive secondary metabolites, 
specially related to neurodegenerative disorders.

DOI: 10.3109/13880209.2015.1102949 
PMID: 26810928  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Neurobiol Aging. 2015 Dec;36(12):3306-13. doi:
10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2015.08.027. Epub 2015 Sep 7.

Impact of glucocerebrosidase mutations on motor and nonmotor complications in
Parkinson's disease.

Oeda T(1), Umemura A(1), Mori Y(1), Tomita S(1), Kohsaka M(1), Park K(1), Inoue
K(2), Fujimura H(2), Hasegawa H(3), Sugiyama H(1), Sawada H(4).

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Research Center and Department of Neurology, Utano National Hospital,
Kyoto, Japan.
(2)Department of Neurology, Toneyama National Hospital, Osaka, Japan.
(3)Department of Neurology, Minami-Kyoto National Hospital, Kyoto, Japan.
(4)Clinical Research Center and Department of Neurology, Utano National Hospital,
Kyoto, Japan. Electronic address: sawada@unh.hosp.go.jp.

Homozygous mutations of the glucocerebrosidase gene (GBA) cause Gaucher disease
(GD), and heterozygous mutations of GBA are a major risk factor for Parkinson's
disease (PD). This study examined the impact of GBA mutations on the longitudinal
clinical course of PD patients by retrospective cohort design. GBA-coding regions
were fully sequenced in 215 PD patients and GD-associated GBA mutations were
identified in 19 (8.8%) PD patients. In a retrospective cohort study, time to
develop dementia, psychosis, wearing-off, and dyskinesia were examined. Survival 
time analysis followed a maximum 12-year observation (median 6.0 years),
revealing that PD patients with GD-associated mutations developed dementia and
psychosis significantly earlier than those without mutations (p < 0.001 and p =
0.017, respectively). Adjusted hazard ratios of GBA mutations were 8.3 for
dementia (p < 0.001) and 3.1 for psychosis (p = 0.002). No statistically
significant differences were observed for wearing-off and dyskinesia between the 
groups. N-isopropyl-p[(123)I] iodoamphetamine single-photon emission tomography
pixel-by-pixel analysis revealed that regional cerebral blood flow was reduced in
the bilateral parietal cortex, including the precuneus of GD-associated mutant PD
patients, compared with matched PD controls without mutations.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2015.08.027 
PMID: 26422360  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Mol Biosyst. 2015 Nov;11(11):3059-67. doi: 10.1039/c5mb00497g.

SILAC-based quantitative proteomics identified lysosome as a fast response target
to PDT agent Gd-N induced oxidative stress in human ovarian cancer IGROV1 cells.

Qi D(1), Wang Q, Li H, Zhang T, Lan R, Kwong DW, Wong WK, Wong KL, Li S, Lu F.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Chemical Genomics, School of Chemical Biology & Biotechnology,
Peking University Shenzhen Graduate School, Shenzhen 518055, China.
lufei@pkusz.edu.cn.

Biological systems have developed an intact network and strategies in response to
various environmental pressures such as irradiation, viral invasion and oxidative
stress. Therefore, elucidation of the cellular response mechanism toward
oxidative stress can contribute to the knowledge of redox regulation. By using a 
newly developed gadolinium based photodynamic therapy (PDT) agent Gd-N and SILAC 
quantified proteomic analysis, we observed 485 proteins dysregulated in
expression, 106 in phosphorylation and 1050 in oxidation. Interestingly, lysosome
was discovered as the main organelle affected by Gd-N induced singlet oxygen,
along with the down regulation of a majority of lysosomal acid hydrolases and
proton pump complex ATP6V/TCIRG1. Besides, phosphorylation sites with sequence
patterns "TP" or "SP" were enriched in dysregulated phosphoproteins. Protein
oxidation also shows sequence patterns in target proteins with "M.D" or "KM"
taking methionine as the central residue. Oxidized proteins were most enriched in
the pathways of Parkinson's disease, an oxidative stress closely related
neurodegenerative disease. In conclusion, our study reveals new insights into the
cellular mechanism to oxidative stress and may contribute to the discovery of new
targets and development of novel PDT agents.

DOI: 10.1039/c5mb00497g 
PMID: 26331702  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


20. J Neurol Sci. 2015 Oct 15;357(1-2):264-9. doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2015.08.003. Epub
2015 Aug 6.

Convection-enhanced delivery of MANF--volume of distribution analysis in porcine 
putamen and substantia nigra.

Barua NU(1), Bienemann AS(1), Woolley M(2), Wyatt MJ(1), Johnson D(2), Lewis
O(2), Irving C(2), Pritchard G(2), Gill S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Functional Neurosurgery Research Group, University of Bristol, UK.
(2)Neurological Applications Division, Renishaw PLC., Gloucs., UK.
(3)Functional Neurosurgery Research Group, University of Bristol, UK. Electronic 
address: annub@bristol.ac.uk.

Mesencephalic astrocyte-derived neurotrophic factor (MANF) is a 20kDa human
protein which has both neuroprotective and neurorestorative activity on
dopaminergic neurons and therefore may have application for the treatment of
Parkinson's Disease. The aims of this study were to determine the translational
potential of convection-enhanced delivery (CED) of MANF for the treatment of PD
by studying its distribution in porcine putamen and substantia nigra and to
correlate histological distribution with co-infused gadolinium-DTPA using
real-time magnetic resonance imaging. We describe the distribution of MANF in
porcine putamen and substantia nigra using an implantable CED catheter system
using co-infused gadolinium-DTPA to allow real-time MRI tracking of infusate
distribution. The distribution of gadolinium-DTPA on MRI correlated well with
immunohistochemical analysis of MANF distribution. Volumetric analysis of MANF
IHC staining indicated a volume of infusion (Vi) to volume of distribution (Vd)
ratio of 3 in putamen and 2 in substantia nigra. This study confirms the
translational potential of CED of MANF as a novel treatment strategy in PD and
also supports the co-infusion of gadolinium as a proxy measure of MANF
distribution in future clinical studies. Further study is required to determine
the optimum infusion regime, flow rate and frequency of infusions in human
trials.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jns.2015.08.003 
PMID: 26276514  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Eur J Neurosci. 2015 Nov;42(10):2761-71. doi: 10.1111/ejn.13044. Epub 2015 Sep
18.

Magnetic resonance imaging as a tool to image neuroinflammation in a rat model of
Parkinson's disease--phagocyte influx to the brain is promoted by
bilberry-enriched diet.

Virel A(1), Rehnmark A(1), Orädd G(2), Olmedo-Díaz S(1), Faergemann E(1),
Strömberg I(1).

Author information: 
(1)Integrative Medical Biology, Umeå University, SE 901 87, Umeå, Sweden.
(2)Department of Radiation Sciences, Umeå University, SE 901 87 Umeå, Sweden.

Neuroinflammation is a chronic event in neurodegenerative disorders. In the rat
model of Parkinson's disease, including a striatal injection of the neurotoxin
6-hydroxydopamine (6-OHDA), antioxidant treatment affects the inflammatory
process. Despite a heavy accumulation of microglia early after the injury,
dopamine nerve fibre regeneration occurs. It remains unclear why this heavy
accumulation of microglia is found early after the lesion in antioxidant-treated 
animals, or even more, what is the origin of these microglia. In this study
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was used to elucidate whether the inflammatory
response was generated from the blood or from activated brain microglia.
Superparamagnetic iron oxide (SPIO) nanoparticles were injected intravenously
prior to a striatal 6-OHDA injection to tag phagocytes in the blood. Rats were
fed either with bilberry-enriched or control diet. T2*-weighted MRI scans were
performed 1 week after the lesion, and hypointense areas were calculated from
T2*-weighted images, to monitor the presence of SPIO particles. The results
revealed that feeding the animals with bilberries significantly promoted
accumulation of blood-derived immune cells. Gadolinium-enhanced MRI demonstrated 
no difference in leakage of the blood-brain barrier independent of diets. To
conclude, bilberry-enriched diet promotes an influx of periphery-derived immune
cells to the brain early after injury.

© 2015 Federation of European Neuroscience Societies and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/ejn.13044 
PMID: 26273789  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Sci Signal. 2015 May 12;8(376):ra45. doi: 10.1126/scisignal.2005965.

Activation of MyD88-dependent TLR1/2 signaling by misfolded α-synuclein, a
protein linked to neurodegenerative disorders.

Daniele SG(1), Béraud D(2), Davenport C(1), Cheng K(3), Yin H(4), Maguire-Zeiss
KA(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Georgetown University Medical Center, Washington, 
DC 20057, USA.
(2)Department of Neuroscience, Georgetown University Medical Center, Washington, 
DC 20057, USA. Interdisciplinary Program in Neuroscience, Georgetown University
Medical Center, Washington, DC 20057, USA.
(3)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry and BioFrontiers Institute,
University of Colorado Boulder, Boulder, CO 80309, USA. Center of Basic Molecular
Science, Department of Chemistry, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China.
(4)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry and BioFrontiers Institute,
University of Colorado Boulder, Boulder, CO 80309, USA. Center of Basic Molecular
Science, Department of Chemistry, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China.
km445@georgetown.edu hubert.yin@colorado.edu.
(5)Department of Neuroscience, Georgetown University Medical Center, Washington, 
DC 20057, USA. Interdisciplinary Program in Neuroscience, Georgetown University
Medical Center, Washington, DC 20057, USA. km445@georgetown.edu
hubert.yin@colorado.edu.

Synucleinopathies, such as Parkinson's disease and diffuse Lewy body disease, are
progressive neurodegenerative disorders characterized by selective neuronal
death, abnormal accumulation of misfolded α-synuclein, and sustained microglial
activation. In addition to inducing neuronal toxicity, higher-ordered oligomeric 
α-synuclein causes proinflammatory responses in the brain parenchyma by
triggering microglial activation, which may exacerbate pathogenic processes by
establishing a chronic neuroinflammatory milieu. We found that higher-ordered
oligomeric α-synuclein induced a proinflammatory microglial phenotype by directly
engaging the heterodimer TLR1/2 (Toll-like receptor 1 and 2) at the cell
membrane, leading to the nuclear translocation of NF-κB (nuclear factor κB) and
the increased production of the proinflammatory cytokines TNF-α (tumor necrosis
factor-α) and IL-1β (interleukin-1β) in a MyD88-dependent manner. Blocking
signaling through the TLR1/2 heterodimer with the small-molecule inhibitor
CU-CPT22 reduced the nuclear translocation of NF-κB and secretion of TNF-α from
cultured primary mouse microglia. Candesartan cilexetil, a drug approved for
treating hypertension and that inhibits the expression of TLR2, reversed the
activated proinflammatory phenotype of primary microglia exposed to oligomeric
α-synuclein, supporting the possibility of repurposing this drug for
synucleinopathies.

Copyright © 2015, American Association for the Advancement of Science.

DOI: 10.1126/scisignal.2005965 
PMCID: PMC4601639
PMID: 25969543  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Neuropharmacology. 2015 Aug;95:215-25. doi: 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2015.03.008.
Epub 2015 Mar 25.

Modulation of L-DOPA's antiparkinsonian and dyskinetic effects by
α2-noradrenergic receptors within the locus coeruleus.

Ostock CY(1), Hallmark J(1), Palumbo N(1), Bhide N(1), Conti M(1), George JA(1), 
Bishop C(2).

Author information: 
(1)Behavioral Neuroscience Program, Department of Psychology, Binghamton
University, Binghamton, NY, USA.
(2)Behavioral Neuroscience Program, Department of Psychology, Binghamton
University, Binghamton, NY, USA. Electronic address: cbishop@binghamton.edu.

Long-term l-DOPA use for Parkinson's disease (PD) is frequently complicated by
the emergence of a debilitating motor side effect known as l-DOPA-induced
dyskinesia (LID). Accumulating evidence has implicated the norepinephrine (NE)
system in the pathogenesis of LID. Here we used the unilateral 6-hydroxydopamine 
rat model of PD to determine the role of the α2-adrenoceptors (α2R) in l-DOPA's
therapeutic and detrimental motor-inducing effects. First, we characterized the
effects of systemic α2R stimulation with clonidine, or blockade with atipamezole,
on LID using the rodent abnormal involuntary movements scale, and l-DOPA's
therapeutic effects using the forepaw adjusting steps test and locomotor activity
chambers. The anatomical locus of action of α2R in LID was investigated by
directly infusing clonidine or atipamezole into the locus coeruleus prior to
systemic l-DOPA administration. Results showed systemic clonidine treatment
reduced LID and locomotor activity but did not interfere with l-DOPA's
antiparkinsonian benefits. Conversely, systemic atipamezole pretreatment
prolonged LID and locomotor activity but did not modulate l-DOPA's
antiparkinsonian benefits. Intra-LC infusions of clonidine and atipamezole
mirrored systemic effects where clonidine reduced, and atipamezole increased,
LID. Collectively, these results demonstrate that α2R play an important
modulatory role in l-DOPA-mediated behaviors and should be further investigated
as a potential therapeutic target.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2015.03.008 
PMCID: PMC4466080
PMID: 25817388  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Neuroscience. 2015 Jun 4;295:187-97. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2015.03.040.
Epub 2015 Mar 24.

Evidence for a role for α6(∗) nAChRs in l-dopa-induced dyskinesias using
Parkinsonian α6(∗) nAChR gain-of-function mice.

Bordia T(1), McGregor M(1), McIntosh JM(2), Drenan RM(3), Quik M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Health Sciences, SRI International, Menlo Park, CA 94025, USA.
(2)George E. Wahlen Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Department of Psychiatry,
University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84148, USA; Department of Biology,
University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84148, USA.
(3)Department of Medicinal Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Purdue
University, West Lafayette, IN 47907, USA.
(4)Center for Health Sciences, SRI International, Menlo Park, CA 94025, USA.
Electronic address: maryka.quik@sri.com.

l-Dopa-induced dyskinesias (LIDs) are a serious side effect of dopamine
replacement therapy for Parkinson's disease. The mechanisms that underlie LIDs
are currently unclear. However, preclinical studies indicate that nicotinic
acetylcholine receptors (nAChRs) play a role, suggesting that drugs targeting
these receptors may be of therapeutic benefit. To further understand the
involvement of α6β2(∗) nAChRs in LIDs, we used gain-of-function α6(∗) nAChR
(α6L9S) mice that exhibit a 20-fold enhanced sensitivity to nAChR agonists.
Wildtype (WT) and α6L9S mice were lesioned by unilateral injection of
6-hydroxydopamine (6-OHDA, 3μg/ml) into the medial forebrain bundle. Three to 4wk
later, they were administered l-dopa (3mg/kg) plus benserazide (15mg/kg) until
stably dyskinetic. l-dopa-induced abnormal involuntary movements (AIMs) were
similar in α6L9S and WT mice. WT mice were then given nicotine in the drinking
water in gradually increasing doses to a final 300μg/ml, which resulted in a 40% 
decline AIMs. By contrast, there was no decrease in AIMs in α6L9S mice at a
maximally tolerated nicotine dose of 20μg/ml. However, the nAChR antagonist
mecamylamine (1mg/kg ip 30min before l-dopa) reduced l-dopa-induced AIMs in both 
α6L9S and WT mice. Thus, both a nAChR agonist and antagonist decreased AIMs in WT
mice, but only the antagonist was effective in α6L9S mice. Since nicotine appears
to reduce LIDs via desensitization, hypersensitive α6β2(∗) nAChRs may desensitize
less readily. The present data show that α6β2(∗) nAChRs are key regulators of
LIDs, and may be useful therapeutic targets for their management in Parkinson's
disease.

Copyright © 2015 IBRO. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2015.03.040 
PMCID: PMC4408268
PMID: 25813704  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


25. ACS Chem Neurosci. 2015 Apr 15;6(4):508-21. doi: 10.1021/cn500363g. Epub 2015 Feb
24.

The implications of angiotensin-converting enzymes and their modulators in
neurodegenerative disorders: current and future perspectives.

Kaur P, Muthuraman A, Kaur M.

Angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) is a dipeptidyl peptidase transmembrane bound
enzyme. Generally, ACE inhibitors are used for the cardiovascular disorders. ACE 
inhibitors are primary agents for the management of hypertension, so these cannot
be avoided for further use. The present Review focuses on the implications of
angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors in neurodegenerative disorders such as
dementia, Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, Huntington's disease,
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, stroke, and diabetic neuropathy. ACE inhibitors
such as ramipril, captopril, perindopril, quinapril, lisinopril, enalapril, and
trandolapril have been documented to ameliorate the above neurodegenerative
disorders. Neurodegeneration occurs not only by angiotensin II, but also by other
endogenous factors, such as the formation of free radicals, amyloid beta, immune 
reactions, and activation of calcium dependent enzymes. ACE inhibitors interact
with the above cellular mechanisms. Thus, these may act as a promising factor for
future medicine for neurological disorders beyond the cardiovascular actions.
Central acting ACE inhibitors can be useful in the future for the management of
neuropathic pain due to following actions: (i) ACE-2 converts angiotensinogen to 
angiotensin(1-7) (hepatapeptide) which produces neuroprotective action; (ii) ACE 
inhibitors downregulate kinin B1 receptors in the peripheral nervous system which
is responsible for neuropathic pain. However, more extensive research is required
in the field of neuropathic pain for the utilization of ACE inhibitors in human.

DOI: 10.1021/cn500363g 
PMID: 25680080  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Neurosci Lett. 2015 Mar 17;590:134-7. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2015.01.064. Epub
2015 Jan 28.

The serotonin aldehyde, 5-HIAL, oligomerizes alpha-synuclein.

Jinsmaa Y(1), Cooney A(1), Sullivan P(1), Sharabi Y(2), Goldstein DS(3).

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Neurocardiology Section, Clinical Neurosciences Program, Division of 
Intramural Research, National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892 USA.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Chaim Sheba Medical Center, Tel-HaShomer,
Israel.
(3)Clinical Neurocardiology Section, Clinical Neurosciences Program, Division of 
Intramural Research, National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892 USA. Electronic address:
goldsteind@ninds.nih.gov.

In Parkinson's disease (PD) alpha-synuclein oligomers are thought to be
pathogenic, and 3,4-dihydroxyphenylacetaldehyde (DOPAL), an obligate aldehyde
intermediate in neuronal dopamine metabolism, potently oligomerizes
alpha-synuclein. PD involves alpha-synuclein deposition in brainstem raphe
nuclei; however, whether 5-hydroxyindoleacetaldehyde (5-HIAL), the aldehyde of
serotonin, oligomerizes alpha-synuclein has been unknown. In this study we tested
whether 5-HIAL oligomerizes alpha-synuclein in vitro and in PC12 cells
conditionally over-expressing alpha-synuclein. Alpha-synuclein oligomers were
quantified by western blotting after incubation of alpha-synuclein with serotonin
and monoamine oxidase-A (MAO-A) to generate 5-HIAL or dopamine to generate DOPAL.
Oligomerization of alpha-synuclein in PC12 cells over-expressing the protein was 
compared between vehicle-treated cells and cells incubated with levodopa to
generate DOPAL or 5-hydroxytryptophan to generate 5-HIAL. Monoamine aldehyde
mediation of the oligomerization was assessed using the MAO inhibitor, pargyline.
Dopamine and serotonin incubated with MAO-A both strongly oligomerized
alpha-synuclein (more than 10 times control); pargyline blocked the
oligomerization. In synuclein overexpressing PC12 cells, levodopa and
5-hydroxytryptophan elicited pargyline-sensitive alpha-synuclein oligomerization.
5-HIAL oligomerizes alpha-synuclein both in vitro and in synuclein-overexpressing
PC12 cells, in a manner similar to DOPAL. The findings may help explain loss of
serotonergic neurons in PD.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neulet.2015.01.064 
PMCID: PMC4755587
PMID: 25637699  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


27. J Neurosurg. 2015 May;122(5):1173-9. doi: 10.3171/2014.11.JNS131888. Epub 2015
Jan 16.

Accuracy of direct magnetic resonance imaging-guided placement of drug infusion
cannulae.

Chittiboina P(1), Heiss JD, Lonser RR.

Author information: 
(1)Surgical Neurology Branch, National Institute of Neurological Disorders and
Stroke, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland; and.

An intraoperative MRI (iMRI)-compatible system has been developed for direct
placement of convection-enhanced delivery (CED) cannulae using real-time imaging.
To establish the precision and feasibility of this technology, the authors
analyzed findings in patients who underwent direct iMRI CED cannula placement.
Three consecutive patients underwent iMRI-guided placement of CED infusion
cannulae (6 cannulae) for treatment of diffuse intrinsic brainstem glioma (2
patients) or Parkinson's disease (1 patient). Convective infusion cannulae were
guided to the target using the ClearPoint iMRI-based navigation platform (MRI
Interventions, Inc.). Placement accuracy was analyzed. Real-time iMRI during
infusion cannula insertion allowed for monitoring of trajectory accuracy during
placement. During cannula insertion, no reinsertions or changes due to errors in 
targeting were necessary. The mean radial error was 1.0 ± 0.5 mm (± SD). There
was no correlation between the total length of the planned trajectory and the
radial error (Pearson's coefficient: -0.40; p = 0.5). The mean anteroposterior
and lateral errors were 0.9 ± 0.5 and 0.3 ± 0.2 mm, respectively. The mean
in-plane distance error was 1.0 ± 0.4 mm. The mean tip error (scalar distance
between the planned target and actual tip) was 1.9 ± 0.9 mm. There was no
correlation between the length of the planned trajectory and any of the measured 
errors. No complications were associated with cannula placement. Real-time
iMRI-based targeting and monitoring of infusion cannula placement is a safe,
effective, and accurate technique that should enable more selective perfusion of 
brain regions.

DOI: 10.3171/2014.11.JNS131888 
PMCID: PMC5121928
PMID: 25594325  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Brain Stimul. 2015 Jan-Feb;8(1):27-35. doi: 10.1016/j.brs.2014.09.002. Epub 2014 
Sep 15.

Interaction of noradrenergic pharmacological manipulation and subthalamic
stimulation on movement initiation control in Parkinson's disease.

Albares M(1), Thobois S(2), Favre E(2), Broussolle E(2), Polo G(3), Domenech
P(4), Boulinguez P(1), Ballanger B(5).

Author information: 
(1)Université de Lyon, F-69622, Lyon, France; Université Lyon 1, Villeurbanne,
France; CNRS, UMR5229, Centre de Neuroscience Cognitive, Bron, France.
(2)Université de Lyon, F-69622, Lyon, France; Université Lyon 1, Villeurbanne,
France; CNRS, UMR5229, Centre de Neuroscience Cognitive, Bron, France; Hôpital
Neurologique Pierre Wertheimer, Hospices Civils de Lyon, France.
(3)Hôpital Neurologique Pierre Wertheimer, Hospices Civils de Lyon, France.
(4)Laboratoire de Neurosciences Cognitives, ENS/INSERM-U960, Paris, France;
Innovation Thérapeutique Fonctionnelle, Service de Neurochirurgie, CHU Henri
Mondor, Creteil, France.
(5)Université de Lyon, F-69622, Lyon, France; Université Lyon 1, Villeurbanne,
France; CNRS, UMR5229, Centre de Neuroscience Cognitive, Bron, France. Electronic
address: benedicte.ballanger@isc.cnrs.fr.

BACKGROUND: Slowness in movement initiation (akinesia) is a cardinal feature of
Parkinson's disease (PD), which is still poorly understood. Notably, akinesia is 
restored by subthalamic nucleus deep brain stimulation (STN-DBS) but not fully
reversed by current dopaminergic treatments. It was recently suggested that this 
disorder is of executive nature (related to inhibitory control of response) and
of non-dopaminergic origin (possibly noradrenergic).
OBJECTIVE: To test the double hypothesis that: 1) the ability to control movement
initiation is modified by noradrenergic neurotransmission modulation, and 2) this
effect is mediated by the regulation of STN activity.
METHODS: Sixteen STN-DBS PD patients were enrolled in a placebo-controlled study 
investigating the effects of noradrenergic attenuation by clonidine
(∝2-adrenergic receptor agonist). Movement initiation latency was assessed by
means of a cue-target reaction time task. Patients, who remained on their chronic
dopaminergic medication, were tested on four sessions: two with placebo (ON- or
OFF-DBS), and two with a 150 μg oral dose of clonidine (ON- or OFF-DBS).
RESULTS: In the OFF stimulation condition, patients were locked into a mode of
control maintaining inappropriate response inhibition. This dysfunctional
executive setting was overcome by STN-DBS. Clonidine, however, was found to
impair specifically the ability to release inhibitory control in the ON-DBS
state.
CONCLUSIONS: Overall our results suggest an important implication of the
noradrenergic system in the pathophysiology of akinesia in PD. Reducing the
noradrenergic "tonus" may even block the positive action of STN-DBS on akinesia, 
suggesting, at least by part, a noradrenergic-dependent STN-DBS efficiency.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.brs.2014.09.002 
PMID: 25284704  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Neural Regen Res. 2014 Feb 1;9(3):276-9. doi: 10.4103/1673-5374.128221.

Vascular changes caused by deep brain stimulation using double-dose
gadolinium-enhanced brain MRI.

Choi BS(1), Kim YH(2), Jeon SR(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurological Surgery, Haeundae Paik Hospital, Inje University
College of Medicine, Busan, Korea.
(2)Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Notre Dame,
Notre Dame, IN, USA.
(3)Department of Neurological Surgery, Asan Medical Center, University of Ulsan
College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

We retrospectively analyzed the clinical data of 32 patients with medically
intractable idiopathic Parkinson's disease who had undergone staged bilateral
deep brain stimulation of the subthalamic nuclei from January 2007 to May 2011.
The vascularture of the patients who received two deep brain stimulations was
detected using double-dose gadolinium-enhanced brain MRI. The dimensions of
straight sinus, superior sagittal sinus, ipsilateral internal cerebral vein in
the thalamic branch and ipsilateral anterior caudate vein were reduced. These
findings demonstrate that bilateral deep brain stimulation of the subthalamic
nuclei affects cerebral venous blood flow.

DOI: 10.4103/1673-5374.128221 
PMCID: PMC4146139
PMID: 25206812 


30. Exp Neurol. 2014 Nov;261:720-32. doi: 10.1016/j.expneurol.2014.08.019. Epub 2014 
Aug 23.

Angiotensin type 1 receptor blockage reduces l-dopa-induced dyskinesia in the
6-OHDA model of Parkinson's disease. Involvement of vascular endothelial growth
factor and interleukin-1β.

Muñoz A(1), Garrido-Gil P(1), Dominguez-Meijide A(1), Labandeira-Garcia JL(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Neuroanatomy and Experimental Neurology, Dept. of Morphological 
Sciences, CIMUS, University of Santiago de Compostela, Santiago de Compostela,
Spain; Networking Research Center on Neurodegenerative Diseases (CIBERNED),
Spain.
(2)Laboratory of Neuroanatomy and Experimental Neurology, Dept. of Morphological 
Sciences, CIMUS, University of Santiago de Compostela, Santiago de Compostela,
Spain; Networking Research Center on Neurodegenerative Diseases (CIBERNED),
Spain. Electronic address: joseluis.labandeira@usc.es.

Non-neuronal factors such as angiogenesis and neuroinflammation may play a role
in l-dopa induced dyskinesias (LID). Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)
and proinflammatory cytokines such as interleukin-1β (IL-1β) have been found to
be involved in LID. The renin-angiotensin system (RAS) is involved in the
inflammatory response and VEGF synthesis via type 1 (AT1) receptors. However, it 
is not known whether the RAS plays a role in LID and whether AT1 antagonists
could constitute a useful therapy against LID. In this study, we investigated
whether manipulation of brain RAS is effective in preventing LID. Blocking AT1
receptors with candesartan significantly reduces LID in the 6-OHDA rat model.
Chronic dopaminergic denervation induces an increase in striatal levels of VEGF
and IL-1β. Dyskinetic animals showed significantly higher levels of VEGF and
IL-1β in the lateral striatum and the substantia nigra, as revealed by western
blot and real time-PCR analyses. Interestingly, animals treated with both
candesartan and l-dopa displayed significantly lower levels of VEGF, IL-1β and
dyskinesia than those treated with l-dopa alone. The stimulatory effect of
angiotensin II (AII) on VEGF expression was confirmed by the addition of AII to
primary mesencephalic cultures and intraventricular administration of AII in
rats. The results of the present study reveal for the first time that blockage of
AT-1 receptors reduces LID. A candesartan-induced decrease in VEGF and IL-1β may 
be responsible for the beneficial effects, suggesting the brain RAS as a new
target for LID treatment in PD patients.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.expneurol.2014.08.019 
PMID: 25160895  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


31. BMC Neurosci. 2014 Jun 25;15:79. doi: 10.1186/1471-2202-15-79.

Mirtazapine has a therapeutic potency in
1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP)-induced mice model of
Parkinson's disease.

Kadoguchi N, Okabe S, Yamamura Y, Shono M, Fukano T, Tanabe A, Yokoyama H,
Kasahara J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology and Therapeutics, Institute of Health Bioscience,
Graduate School and Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, The University of
Tokushima, 1-78, Shoumachi, Tokushima 770-8505, Japan. awajiro@tokushima-u.ac.jp.

BACKGROUND: Mirtazapine, a noradrenergic and specific serotonergic antidepressant
(NaSSA), shows multiple pharmacological actions such as inhibiting presynaptic α2
noradrenaline receptor (NAR) and selectively activating 5-hydroxytriptamine
(5-HT) 1A receptor (5-HT1AR). Mirtazapine was also reported to increase dopamine 
release in the cortical neurons with 5-HT dependent manner. To examine whether
mirtazapine has a therapeutic potency in Parkinson's disease (PD), we examined
this compound in 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP)-treated mice
model of PD.
RESULTS: Male C57BL/6 mice were subjected to MPTP treatment to establish a PD
model. Mirtazapine was administered once a day for 3 days after MPTP treatment.
MPTP-induced motor dysfunction, assessed by beam-walking and rota-rod tests, was 
significantly improved by administration of mirtazapine. Biochemical examinations
by high performance liquid chromatography and western blot analysis suggested
mirtazapine facilitated utilization of dopamine by increasing turnover and
protein expression of transporters, without affecting on neurodegenerative
process by MPTP. These therapeutic effects of mirtazapine were reduced by
administration of WAY100635, an inhibitor for 5HT1AR, or of clonidine, a
selective agonist for α2-NAR, or of prazosin, an inhibitor for α1-NAR,
respectively.
CONCLUSION: Our results showed mirtazapine had a therapeutic potency against PD
in a mouse model. Because PD patients sometimes show depression together, it will
be a useful drug for a future PD treatment.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2202-15-79 
PMCID: PMC4076436
PMID: 24965042  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Jpn J Radiol. 2014 Jul;32(7):383-90. doi: 10.1007/s11604-014-0329-6. Epub 2014
May 17.

Computer-assisted system for diagnosing degenerative dementia using cerebral
blood flow SPECT and 3D-SSP: a multicenter study.

Ishii K(1), Ito K, Nakanishi A, Kitamura S, Terashima A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiology, Faculty of Medicine, Kinki University, 377-2
Osakasayama, Osaka, 589-8511, Japan, kishii@hbhc.jp.

PURPOSE: Due to increasing numbers of patients with dementia, more physicians who
do not specialize in brain nuclear medicine are being asked to interpret SPECT
images of cerebral blood flow. We conducted a multicenter study to determine
whether a computer-assisted diagnostic system Z-score summation analysis method
(ZSAM) using three-dimensional stereotactic surface projections (3D-SSP) can
differentiate Alzheimer's disease (AD)/dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) and
non-AD/DLB in institutions using various types of gamma cameras.
METHOD: We determined the normal thresholds of Z-sum (summed Z-score) within a
template region of interest for each single photon emission computed tomography
(SPECT) device and then compared them with the Z-sums of patients and calculated 
the accuracy of the differential diagnosis by ZSAM. We compared the diagnostic
accuracy between ZSAM and visual assessment.
PATIENTS: We enrolled 202 patients with AD (mean age, 76.8 years), 40 with DLB
(mean age 76.3 years) and 36 with non-AD/DLB (progressive supranuclear palsy, n =
10; frontotemporal dementia, n = 20; slowly progressive aphasia, n = 2 and one
each with idiopathic normal pressure hydrocephalus, corticobasal degeneration,
multiple system atrophy and Parkinson's disease) who underwent
N-isopropyl-p-[(123)I] iodoamphetamine cerebral blood flow SPECT imaging at each 
participating institution.
RESULTS: The ZSAM sensitivity to differentiate between AD/DLB and non-AD/DLB in
all patients, as well as those with mini-mental state examination scores of ≥24
and 20-23 points were 88.0, 78.0 and 88.4 %, respectively, with specificity of
50.0, 44.4 and 60.0 %, respectively. The diagnostic accuracy rates were 83.1,
72.9 and 84.2 %, respectively. The areas under receiver operating characteristics
curves for visual inspection by four expert raters were 0.74-0.84, 0.66-0.85 and 
0.81-0.93, respectively, in the same patient groups. The diagnostic accuracy
rates were 70.9-89.2 %, 50.9-84.8 % and 76.2-93.1 %, respectively.
CONCLUSION: The diagnostic accuracy of ZSAM to differentiate AD/DLB from other
types of dementia or degenerative diseases regardless of severity was equal to
that of visual assessment by expert raters even across several institutions.
These findings suggested that ZSAM could serve as a supplementary tool to help
expert evaluators who differentially diagnose dementia from SPECT images by
visual assessment.

DOI: 10.1007/s11604-014-0329-6 
PMID: 24838777  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


33. J Neurosurg. 2014 Jul;121(1):131-41. doi: 10.3171/2014.3.JNS131860. Epub 2014 May
16.

Neuronavigation using susceptibility-weighted venography: application to deep
brain stimulation and comparison with gadolinium contrast.

Bériault S(1), Sadikot AF, Alsubaie F, Drouin S, Collins DL, Pike GB.

Author information: 
(1)McConnell Brain Imaging Centre and.

Careful trajectory planning on preoperative vascular imaging is an essential step
in deep brain stimulation (DBS) to minimize risks of hemorrhagic complications
and postoperative neurological deficits. This paper compares 2 MRI methods for
visualizing cerebral vasculature and planning DBS probe trajectories: a single
data set T1-weighted scan with double-dose gadolinium contrast (T1w-Gd) and a
multi-data set protocol consisting of a T1-weighted structural,
susceptibility-weighted venography, and time-of-flight angiography (T1w-SWI-TOF).
Two neurosurgeons who specialize in neuromodulation surgery planned bilateral STN
DBS in 18 patients with Parkinson's disease (36 hemispheres) using each protocol 
separately. Planned trajectories were then evaluated across all vascular data
sets (T1w-Gd, SWI, and TOF) to detect possible intersection with blood vessels
along the entire path via an objective vesselness measure. The authors' results
show that trajectories planned on T1w-SWI-TOF successfully avoided the cerebral
vasculature imaged by conventional T1w-Gd and did not suffer from missing
vascular information or imprecise data set registration. Furthermore, with
appropriate planning and visualization software, trajectory corridors planned on 
T1w-SWI-TOF intersected significantly less fine vasculature that was not detected
on the T1w-Gd (p < 0.01 within 2 mm and p < 0.001 within 4 mm of the track
centerline). The proposed T1w-SWI-TOF protocol comes with minimal effects on the 
imaging and surgical workflow, improves vessel avoidance, and provides a safe
cost-effective alternative to injection of gadolinium contrast.

DOI: 10.3171/2014.3.JNS131860 
PMID: 24834941  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Nihon Hoshasen Gijutsu Gakkai Zasshi. 2013 Nov;69(11):1281-4.

[Detection of cerebral hypoperfusion using single photon emission computed
tomography image analysis and statistical parametric mapping in patients with
Parkinson's disease or progressive supranuclear palsy].

[Article in Japanese]

Harada K(1), Saeki H, Matsuya E, Okita I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiology, Hiroshima City Hospital.

PURPOSE: We carried out differential diagnosis of brain blood flow images using
single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) for patients with Parkinson's 
disease (PD) or progressive supranuclear paralysis (PSP) using statistical
parametric mapping (SPM) and to whom we had applied anatomical standardization.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We studied two groups and compared brain blood flow images
using SPECT (N-isopropyl-4-iodoamphetamine [(123)I] hydrochloride injection, 222 
MGq dosage i.v.). A total of 27 patients were studied using SPM: 18 with PD and 9
with PSP; humming bird sign on MRI was from moderate to medium.
RESULTS: The decline of brain bloodstream in the PSP group was more notable in
the midbrain, near the domain where the humming bird sign was observable, than in
the PD group.
CONCLUSIONS: The observable differences in brain bloodstream decline in the
midbrain of PSP and PD patients suggest the potential usefulness of this
technique's clinical application to distinction diagnosis.


PMID: 24256652  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Neurobiol Dis. 2014 Jan;61:55-71. doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2013.09.013. Epub 2013 Sep
27.

Development of allosteric modulators of GPCRs for treatment of CNS disorders.

Nickols HH(1), Conn PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neuropathology, Department of Pathology, Microbiology and
Immunology, Vanderbilt University, USA.

The discovery of allosteric modulators of G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs)
provides a promising new strategy with potential for developing novel treatments 
for a variety of central nervous system (CNS) disorders. Traditional drug
discovery efforts targeting GPCRs have focused on developing ligands for
orthosteric sites which bind endogenous ligands. Allosteric modulators target a
site separate from the orthosteric site to modulate receptor function. These
allosteric agents can either potentiate (positive allosteric modulator, PAM) or
inhibit (negative allosteric modulator, NAM) the receptor response and often
provide much greater subtype selectivity than orthosteric ligands for the same
receptors. Experimental evidence has revealed more nuanced pharmacological modes 
of action of allosteric modulators, with some PAMs showing allosteric agonism in 
combination with positive allosteric modulation in response to endogenous ligand 
(ago-potentiators) as well as "bitopic" ligands that interact with both the
allosteric and orthosteric sites. Drugs targeting the allosteric site allow for
increased drug selectivity and potentially decreased adverse side effects.
Promising evidence has demonstrated potential utility of a number of allosteric
modulators of GPCRs in multiple CNS disorders, including neurodegenerative
diseases such as Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, and Huntington's
disease, as well as psychiatric or neurobehavioral diseases such as anxiety,
schizophrenia, and addiction.

© 2013.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nbd.2013.09.013 
PMCID: PMC3875303
PMID: 24076101  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Int J Pharm. 2013 Nov 18;456(2):432-6. doi: 10.1016/j.ijpharm.2013.08.044. Epub
2013 Sep 2.

Formulation and in vitro/in vivo evaluation of levodopa transdermal delivery
systems.

Lee KE(1), Choi YJ, Oh BR, Chun IK, Gwak HS.

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmacy and Division of Life and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Ewha
Womans University, 52 Ewhayeodae-gil, Seodaemun-gu, Seoul 120-750, Republic of
Korea.

This study aims to investigate the feasibility of Levodopa transdermal delivery
systems (TDSs). Levodopa TDSs were formulated using various vehicles and
permeation enhancers, and in vitro permeation and in vivo pharmacokinetic studies
were carried out. In the in vitro study, ester-type vehicles showed relatively
high enhancing effects; propylene glycol monocaprylate and propylene glycol
monolaurate showed the highest permeation fluxes from both solution and pressure 
sensitive adhesive (PSA) TDS formulations. Lag time was dramatically shortened
with PSA TDS formulations as compared with solution formulations. In the in vivo 
study, the addition of fatty acids increased blood drug concentrations regardless
of the kind or concentration of fatty acid; the AUCinf increased up to 8.7 times 
as compared with propylene glycol (PG) alone. PSA TDS containing 10% linoleic
acid exhibited prolonged Tmax as compared with oral form. Total clearance of
L-dopa from PSA TDSs was significantly lower than from oral form (up to 86.8
times). Especially, PSA TDS containing 10% linoleic acid (LOA) revealed 76.2 fold
higher AUCinf than oral administration. Based on our results, the L-dopa PSA TDS 
containing PG with 10% LOA could be used as a good adjuvant therapy for
Parkinson's disease patients who experience symptom fluctuation by L-dopa oral
administration.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijpharm.2013.08.044 
PMID: 24008082  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Neuropharmacology. 2014 Jan;76 Pt A:156-68. doi:
10.1016/j.neuropharm.2013.07.016. Epub 2013 Aug 20.

Effect of chronic treatment with angiotensin type 1 receptor antagonists on
striatal dopamine levels in normal rats and in a rat model of Parkinson's disease
treated with L-DOPA.

Dominguez-Meijide A(1), Villar-Cheda B, Garrido-Gil P, Sierrra-Paredes G, Guerra 
MJ, Labandeira-Garcia JL.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Neuroanatomy and Experimental Neurology, Department of
Morphological Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, University of Santiago de
Compostela, Santiago de Compostela, Spain; Networking Research Center on
Neurodegenerative Diseases (CIBERNED), Spain.

Beneficial effects of angiotensin type-1 receptor (AT1) inhibition have been
observed in a number of brain processes mediated by oxidative stress and
neuroinflammation, including Parkinson's disease. However, important
counterregulatory interactions between dopamine and angiotensin systems have
recently been demonstrated in several peripheral tissues, and it is possible that
a decrease in dopamine levels due to AT1 inhibition may interfere with
neuroprotective strategies. The present experiments involving rats with normal
dopaminergic innervation indicate that chronic treatment with the AT1 antagonist 
candesartan does not significantly affect striatal levels of dopamine, serotonin 
or metabolites, as does not significantly affect motor behavior, as evaluated by 
the rotarod test. Interestingly, chronic administration of candesartan to normal 
rats induced a marked increase in dopamine D1 and a decrease in dopamine D2
receptor expression. In a rat model of Parkinson's disease treated with L-DOPA,
no differences in striatal dopamine and serotonin levels were observed between
candesartan-treated rats and untreated, which suggests that chronic treatment
with candesartan does not significantly affect the process of L-DOPA
decarboxylation and dopamine release in Parkinson's disease patients. Candesartan
did not induce any differences in the striatal expression of dopamine D1 and D2
and serotonin 5-HT1B receptors in 6ydroxydopamine-lesioned rats treated with
L-DOPA. The results suggest that chronic treatment with AT1 antagonists as a
neuroprotective strategy does not significantly affect striatal dopamine release 
or motor behavior. This article is part of the Special Issue entitled 'The
Synaptic Basis of Neurodegenerative Disorders'.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2013.07.016 
PMID: 23973568  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2013 Oct 1;23(19):5279-82. doi: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2013.08.007.
Epub 2013 Aug 11.

Design, synthesis and biological evaluation of peptide derivatives of L-dopa as
anti-parkinsonian agents.

Zhou T(1), Hider RC, Jenner P, Campbell B, Hobbs CJ, Rose S, Jairaj M,
Tayarani-Binazir KA, Syme A.

Author information: 
(1)School of Food Science and Biotechnology, Zhejiang Gongshang University,
Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310035, PR China. taozhou@zjgsu.edu.cn

A series of dipeptide derivatives of L-dopa were synthesized and investigated for
their pharmacological activity using the unilaterally 6-hydroxydopamine
(6-OHDA)-lesioned rat as an experimental model of Parkinson's disease. Among
them, (S)-isopropyl
2-(2-amino-2-methylpropanamido)-3-(3,4-dihydroxyphenyl)propanoate (4 g) was found
to be the most active compound, with 106% AUC activity and 149% peak activity of 
L-dopa after oral administration.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2013.08.007 
PMID: 23973169  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


39. J Parkinsons Dis. 2013;3(2):161-72. doi: 10.3233/JPD-120157.

The α7 nAChR agonist PNU-282987 reduces inflammation and MPTP-induced nigral
dopaminergic cell loss in mice.

Stuckenholz V(1), Bacher M, Balzer-Geldsetzer M, Alvarez-Fischer D, Oertel WH,
Dodel RC, Noelker C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Philipps-University of Marburg, Baldingerstrasse,
Marburg, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Parkinson's disease (PD) is associated with neurodegeneration of
dopaminergic neurons and an accompanying neuroinflammatory process in the
substantia nigra (SN). The cholinergic anti-inflammatory signalling pathway
allows the autonomic nervous system to modulate immunologic stimuli and
inflammatory processes. A major component of this pathway is the α7 nicotinic
acetylcholine receptor (α7 nACh receptor), which is expressed on immune cells
such as microglia.
OBJECTIVE: To determine the role of this cholinergic anti-inflammatory signalling
pathway, we investigated the effects of the selective α7 nACh agonist PNU-282987 
and of the non-competitive nACh antagonist mecamylamine on microglia-induced
neuroinflammation and toxin-induced degeneration of dopaminergic neurons in a
mouse model of PD.
METHODS: PNU-282987, mecamylamine or placebo administration was started one day
before MPTP intoxication and repeated daily until sacrifice after MPTP
intoxication. C57Bl/6 mice were injected intraperitoneally four times at 2 h
intervals with either 20 mg/kg MPTP-HCl or a corresponding volume of saline. Two 
or seven days after the end of the MPTP intoxication, the animals were killed and
their brains were processed for further analysis.
RESULTS: Treatment with PNU-282987 resulted in an attenuation of
neuroinflammation in the MPTP-lesioned SN. Furthermore, PNU-282987 attenuated
MPTP-induced dopaminergic cell loss in the SN and reduced striatal dopamine
depletion. Unexpectedly, mecamylamine lowered neuroinflammation as well, though
it did not show a neuroprotective potential at the nigral level.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results demonstrate the therapeutic potential of the selective
α7 nicotinic acetylcholine agonist PNU-282987 in attenuating neuroinflammation
and toxin-induced loss of dopaminergic neurons in the acute MPTP mouse model of
PD.

DOI: 10.3233/JPD-120157 
PMID: 23938346  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


40. J Neurosci Methods. 2013 Sep 30;219(1):169-75. doi:
10.1016/j.jneumeth.2013.07.013. Epub 2013 Jul 30.

Convection enhanced delivery of different molecular weight tracers of
gadolinium-tagged polylysine.

Hardy PA(1), Keeley D, Schorn G, Forman E, Ai Y, Venugopalan R, Zhang Z, Bradley 
LH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy & Neurobiology, University of Kentucky College of
Medicine, Lexington, KY, USA. Peter.Hardy@uky.edu

Convection enhanced delivery (CED) is a powerful method of circumventing the
blood-brain barrier (BBB) to deliver therapeutic compounds directly to the CNS.
While inferring the CED distribution of a therapeutic compound by imaging a
magnetic resonance (MR)-sensitive tracer has many advantages, however how the
compound distribution is affected by the features of the delivery system, its
target tissue, and its molecular properties, such as its binding characteristics,
charge, and molecular weight (MW) are not fully understood. We used MR imaging of
gadolinium diethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid (Gd-DTPA)-tagged polylysine
compounds of various MW, in vitro and in vivo, to measure the dependence of
compounds MW on CED distribution. For the in vitro studies, the correlation
between volume of distribution (Vd) as a function of MW was determined by
measuring the T1 of the infused tracers, into 0.6% agarose gels through a
multiport catheter. The compounds distributed in the gels inversely proportional 
to their MW, consistent with convection and unobstructed diffusion through a
porous media. For the in vivo studies, Gd-DTPA tagged compounds were infused into
the non-human primate putamen, via an implanted multiport catheter connected to a
MedStream™ pump, programmed to deliver a predetermined volume with alternating
on-off periods to take advantage of the convective and diffusive contributions to
Vd. Unlike the gel studies, the higher MW polylysine-tracer infusions did not
freely distribute from the multiport catheter in the putamen, suggesting that
distribution was impeded by other properties that should also be considered in
future tracer design and CED infusion protocols.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jneumeth.2013.07.013 
PMID: 23912025  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Neurosci Lett. 2013 Aug 26;548:50-5. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2013.06.008. Epub 2013
Jun 14.

Inhibition of endoplasmic reticulum stress is involved in the neuroprotective
effects of candesartan cilexitil in the rotenone rat model of Parkinson's
disease.

Wu L(1), Tian YY, Shi JP, Xie W, Shi JQ, Lu J, Zhang YD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Nanjing First Hospital, Nanjing Medical University,
Nanjing, Jiangsu Province, PR China.

Recent studies indicated that angiotensin II (Ang II) receptor blockers could
reduce neurotoxins-induced dopaminergic (DA) cell death, but the underlying
mechanisms are still unclear. Given that endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress plays 
a major role in rotenone-induced neuronal apoptosis, we investigated whether
candesartan cilexetil, a selective and high-affinity Ang II receptor antagonist, 
could protect the DA neuron via reducing ER stress in a chronic rotenone rat
model for Parkinson's disease (PD). Our data showed that candesartan cilexetil
could ameliorate the descent latency in catalepsy tests, and decrease
rotenone-induced DA neuron apoptosis. Moreover, candesartan cilexetil has been
found to play a protective role via down-regulating the expression of activating 
transcription factor 4 (ATF4), the CCAAT-enhancer-binding protein (C/EBP)
homologous protein (CHOP), and p53 upregulated modulator of apoptosis (Puma).
Thus, our experiments strongly suggest that administration of candesartan
cilexetil protects DA neuron involving blocking ER stress, possibly via
inhibiting activation of the ATF4-CHOP-Puma pathway, which could provide new
insight into clinical therapeutics for PD.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neulet.2013.06.008 
PMID: 23774475  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


42. J Med Chem. 2013 Jun 13;56(11):4798-810. doi: 10.1021/jm4005175. Epub 2013 May
30.

Antagonists for the orphan G-protein-coupled receptor GPR55 based on a coumarin
scaffold.

Rempel V(1), Volz N, Gläser F, Nieger M, Bräse S, Müller CE.

Author information: 
(1)PharmaCenter Bonn, Pharmaceutical Institute, Pharmaceutical Chemistry I,
University of Bonn, An der Immenburg 4, D-53121 Bonn, Germany.

The orphan G-protein-coupled receptor GPR55, which is activated by
1-lysophosphatidylinositol and interacts with cannabinoid (CB) receptor ligands, 
has been proposed as a new potential drug target for the treatment of diabetes,
Parkinson's disease, neuropathic pain, and cancer. We applied β-arrestin assays
to identify 3-substituted coumarins as a novel class of antagonists and performed
an extensive structure-activity relationship study for GPR55. Selectivity versus 
the related receptors CB1, CB2, and GPR18 was assessed. Among the 7-unsubstituted
coumarins selective, competitive GPR55 antagonists were identified, such as
3-(2-hydroxybenzyl)-5-isopropyl-8-methyl-2H-chromen-2-one (12, PSB-SB-489, IC50 =
1.77 μM, pA2 = 0.547 μM). Derivatives with long alkyl chains in position 7 were
potent, possibly allosteric GPR55 antagonists which showed ancillary CB receptor 
affinity. 7-(1,1-Dimethyloctyl)-5-hydroxy-3-(2-hydroxybenzyl)-2H-chromen-2-one
(69, PSB-SB-487, IC50 = 0.113 μM, KB = 0.561 μM) and
7-(1,1-dimethylheptyl)-5-hydroxy-3-(2-hydroxybenzyl)-2H-chromen-2-one (67,
PSB-SB-1203, IC50 = 0.261 μM) were the most potent GPR55 antagonists of the
present series.

DOI: 10.1021/jm4005175 
PMID: 23679955  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Carbohydr Polym. 2013 Jun 5;95(1):9-15. doi: 10.1016/j.carbpol.2013.02.035. Epub 
2013 Feb 26.

The antioxidant activities and neuroprotective effect of polysaccharides from the
starfish Asterias rollestoni.

Zhang W(1), Wang J, Jin W, Zhang Q.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Oceanology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Qingdao 266071, PR
China.

After the starfish was defatted with isopropyl alcohol and ethanol, crude
polysaccharide was extracted by 0.15 mol/L HCl. Anion exchange chromatography was
performed to fractionate the sample into two fractions, SF-1 and SF-2. Chemical
analysis showed that the major component of SF-1 was a glucan consisting of a
backbone of 1→3 linked β-D-glucopyranose residues, and it had a minor glucan
component containing a backbone of 1→3 linked α-D-glucopyranose residues. SF-2
was a mannoglucan sulfate. SF-2 displayed the highest antioxidant activity among 
the polysaccharides. Moreover, SF-1 and SF-2 exhibited neuroprotective activities
in a neurotoxicity model of Parkinson's disease (PD).

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.carbpol.2013.02.035 
PMID: 23618233  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Mol Pharmacol. 2013 Jun;83(6):1176-89. doi: 10.1124/mol.113.084863. Epub 2013 Mar
29.

Nicotine-induced structural plasticity in mesencephalic dopaminergic neurons is
mediated by dopamine D3 receptors and Akt-mTORC1 signaling.

Collo G(1), Bono F, Cavalleri L, Plebani L, Mitola S, Merlo Pich E, Millan MJ,
Zoli M, Maskos U, Spano P, Missale C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Translational Medicine, University of Brescia,
Brescia, Italy. collo@med.unibs.it

Although long-term exposure to nicotine is highly addictive, one beneficial
consequence of chronic tobacco use is a reduced risk for Parkinson's disease. Of 
interest, these effects both reflect structural and functional plasticity of
brain circuits controlling reward and motor behavior and, specifically,
recruitment of nicotinic acetylcholine receptors (nAChR) in mesencephalic
dopaminergic neurons. Because the underlying cellular mechanisms are poorly
understood, we addressed this issue with use of primary cultures of mouse
mesencephalic dopaminergic neurons. Exposure to nicotine (1-10 μM) for 72 hours
in vitro increased dendritic arborization and soma size in primary cultures.
These effects were blocked by mecamylamine and dihydro-β-erythroidine, but not
methyllycaconitine. The involvement of α4β2 nAChR was supported by the lack of
nicotine-induced structural remodeling in neurons from α4 null mutant mice (KO). 
Challenge with nicotine triggered phosphorylation of the extracellular
signal-regulated kinase (ERK) and the thymoma viral proto-oncogene (Akt),
followed by activation of the mammalian target of rapamycin complex 1
(mTORC1)-dependent p70 ribosomal S6 protein kinase. Upstream pathway blockade
using the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase inhibitor LY294002
[2-(4-morpholinyl)-8-phenyl-4H-1-benzopyran-4-one hydrochloride] resulted in
suppression of nicotine-induced phosphorylations and structural plasticity. These
effects were dependent on functional DA D3 receptor (D3R), because nicotine was
inactive both in cultures from D3R KO mice and after pharmacologic blockade with 
D3R antagonist trans-N-4-2-(6-cyano-1,2,3,
4-tetrahydroisoquinolin-2-yl)ethylcyclohexyl-4-quinolinecarboxamide (SB-277011-A)
(50 nM). Finally, exposure to nicotine in utero (5 mg/kg/day for 5 days) resulted
in increased soma area of DAergic neurons of newborn mice, effects not observed
in D3 receptor null mutant mice mice. These findings indicate that
nicotine-induced structural plasticity at mesencephalic dopaminergic neurons
involves α4β2 nAChRs together with dopamine D3R-mediated recruitment of
ERK/Akt-mTORC1 signaling.

DOI: 10.1124/mol.113.084863 
PMID: 23543412  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


45. 1-(2-[(18)F]Fluoro-3-pyridyl)-4-(2-isopropyl-1-oxo-isoindoline-5-yl)-5-methyl-1H-
1,2,3-triazole.

Leung K(1).
In: Molecular Imaging and Contrast Agent Database (MICAD) [Internet]. Bethesda
(MD): National Center for Biotechnology Information (US); 2004-2013.
2012 Nov 15.

Author information: 
(1)National Center for Biotechnology Information, NLM, NIH

Glutamate is a major excitatory neurotransmitter at neuronal synapses in the
central nervous system (CNS) (1, 2). Glutamate produces excitatory effects by
acting on cell-surface ionotropic glutamate or metabotropic glutamate receptors
(mGluRs). The mGluRs are GTP-binding protein (G-protein)–coupled receptors that
play important roles in regulating the activity of many synapses in the CNS, and 
many neuronal projection pathways contain mGluRs. There are eight mGluR subtypes,
which are further subdivided into groups I, II, and III. The group I receptors
include mGluR1 and mGluR5, and they are found predominantly in postsynaptic
locations. mGluR1 is found in moderate to high density in the cerebellum,
caudate, putamen, thalamus, cingulate cortex, and hippocampus, with low density
in the pons. mGluR5 is usually found in moderate to high density in the frontal
cortex, caudate, putamen, nucleus accumbens, olfactory tubercle, and hippocampus,
with low density in the cerebellum. mGluR1 and mGluR5 are positively coupled to
phospholipase C in the regulation of neuronal excitability (3). Dysfunction of
mGluR1 and mGluR5 is implicated in a variety of diseases in the CNS, including
anxiety, depression, schizophrenia, Parkinson’s disease, and drug addiction or
withdrawal (2, 4). Positron emission tomography (PET) and single-photon emission 
tomography of radioligands targeting mGluR1 can visualize and analyze mGluR1
expression in normal physiological and pathological conditions. Several
radioligands have been studied for in vivo imaging of mGluR1 in the brain.
1-(2-Fluoro-3-pyridyl)-4-(2-isopropyl-1-oxo-isoindoline-5-yl)-5-methyl-1H-1,2,3-t
riazole (FPIT) was shown to be a selective mGluR1 with nanomolar affinity (5.4
nM) with little inhibition to mGluR5 (5). Fujinaga et al. (6) prepared and
evaluated
1-(2-[(18)F]Fluoro-3-pyridyl)-4-(2-isopropyl-1-oxo-isoindoline-5-yl)-5-methyl-1H-
1,2,3-triazole ([(18)F]FPIT) for use with in vivo PET imaging of mGluR1
distribution in the brain with small animals and monkeys.

PMID: 23487869 


46. Expert Opin Emerg Drugs. 2013 Mar;18(1):39-53. doi: 10.1517/14728214.2013.766168.
Epub 2013 Feb 1.

Emerging drugs for autonomic dysfunction in Parkinson's disease.

Perez-Lloret S(1), Rey MV, Pavy-Le Traon A, Rascol O.

Author information: 
(1)University of Toulouse III, University Hospital, Department of Clinical
Pharmacology and Neuroscience, Toulouse, France. splloret@fleni.org.ar

INTRODUCTION: Autonomic dysfunction, including orthostatic hypotension (OH),
sialorrhea, sexual dysfunction, urinary dysfunction and constipation is a common 
feature of Parkinson's disease (PD). Even though its treatment has been
recognized as a major unmet need in PD, there is a paucity of clinical trials to 
assess their treatment.
AREAS COVERED: Evidence about the efficacy and safety of available treatments for
autonomic dysfunction is summarized. Potential targets for upcoming therapies are
then discussed in light of what is currently known about the physiopathology of
each disorder in PD. Proof-of-concept trials and circumstantial evidence about
treatments for autonomic dysfunction as well as upcoming clinical trials are
discussed. Finally, critical aspects of clinical trials design are considered.
EXPERT OPINION: Botulinum toxin (BTX) or glycopyrrolate might be used for
sialorrhea whereas macrogol could be useful in constipation. There is preliminary
evidence suggesting that fludrocortisone, domperidone, droxidopa or fipamezole
may be effective for the treatment of OH. Tropicamide, clonidine or radiotherapy 
are under development for sialorrhea. Sildenafil may be effective for the
treatment of erectile dysfunction; BTX or behavioral therapy for urinary
incontinence and lubiprostone and probiotics for constipation. Sound clinical
trials are needed in order to allow firm evidence-based recommendations about
these treatments.

DOI: 10.1517/14728214.2013.766168 
PMID: 23373820  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Neurol Med Chir (Tokyo). 2012;52(12):865-72.

Preoperative regional cerebral blood flow and postoperative clinical improvement 
in patients with Parkinson's disease undergoing subthalamic nucleus deep brain
stimulation.

Nagai T(1), Kajita Y, Maesawa S, Nakatsubo D, Yoshida K, Kato K, Wakabayashi T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Nagoya University, Graduate School of Medicine,
Nagoya, Aichi.

Preoperative regional cerebral blood flow (rCBF) was measured in 92 patients with
Parkinson's disease (PD) by iodine-123 N-isopropyl-p-iodoamphetamine
single-photon emission computed tomography. Quantitative mapping of rCBF was
performed using the stereotactic extraction estimation method. The clinical
features of the patients were assessed according to the Unified Parkinson Disease
Rating Scale (UPDRS). The correlation between rCBF and improvement in the UPDRS
score following surgery was examined. rCBF in the fusiform gyrus, superior and
inferior parietal gyri, middle occipital gyrus, superior frontal gyrus, and
middle temporal gyrus of the Talairach Daemon Level 3 was significantly
correlated with UPDRS part II (off stage) and III (on stage) scores (p < 0.05).
rCBF in the middle temporal gyrus (p = 0.00147), medial frontal gyrus (p =
0.00713), and cerebellum (p = 0.048) of the Talairach Daemon Level 3 was
significantly greater in 47 patients with >60% improvement of UPDRS part III (off
stage) score than in 37 patients with 40-60% improvement. The cutoff value of
rCBF, which indicated that >40% improvement in the surgical outcome could be
expected, was 38.8 ± 6.2 ml/100 g/min in the frontal lobe. This study indicated
that rCBF in patients with PD might be related to their clinical features,
suggesting that quantitative mapping of rCBF may be useful for predicting
surgical outcome.


PMID: 23269040  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Neuropharmacology. 2013 Apr;67:243-51. doi: 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2012.11.010.
Epub 2012 Nov 27.

L-dopa-induced dopamine synthesis and oxidative stress in serotonergic cells.

Stansley BJ(1), Yamamoto BK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosciences, University of Toledo, College of Medicine, 3000
Arlington Avenue, Mail Stop 1007, Toledo, OH 43614, USA.

L-dopa is a precursor for dopamine synthesis and a mainstay treatment for
Parkinson's disease. However, l-dopa therapy is not without side effects that may
be attributed to non-dopaminergic mechanisms. Synthesized dopamine can be
neurotoxic through its enzymatic degradation by monoamine oxidase (MAO) to form
the reactive byproduct, hydrogen peroxide and hydroxyl radicals or through
auto-oxidation to form highly reactive quinones that can bind proteins and render
them non-functional. Since l-dopa could be decarboxylated by aromatic amino acid 
decarboxylase (AADC) present within both dopamine and serotonin neurons, it was
hypothesized that serotonin neurons convert l-dopa into dopamine to generate
excessive reactive oxygen species and quinoproteins that ultimately lead to
serotonin neuron death. To examine the effects of l-dopa on serotonin neurons,
the RN46A-B14 cell line was used. These immortalized serotonergic cell cultures
were terminally differentiated and then incubated with varying concentrations of 
l-dopa. Results show that RN46A-B14 cells contain AADC and can synthesize
dopamine after incubation with l-dopa. Furthermore, l-dopa dose-dependently
increased intracellular reactive oxygen species (ROS) and cell death. Dopamine,
ROS production and cell death were attenuated by co-incubation with the AADC
inhibitor, NSD-1015. The MAO inhibitor, pargyline, also attenuated cell death and
ROS after l-dopa treatment. Lastly, quinoprotein formation was enhanced
significantly by incubation with l-dopa. Taken together, these data illustrate
that serotonergic cells can produce dopamine and that the accumulation of
dopamine after l-dopa and its subsequent degradation can lead to ROS production
and death of RN46A-B14 serotonergic cells.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2012.11.010 
PMCID: PMC3638241
PMID: 23196068  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Neurol Sci. 2013 May;34(5):621-7. doi: 10.1007/s10072-012-1251-2. Epub 2012 Nov
30.

Arterial hypertension, a tricky side of Parkinson's disease: physiopathology and 
therapeutic features.

Mazza A(1), Ravenni R, Antonini A, Casiglia E, Rubello D, Pauletto P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Santa Maria Della Misericordia Hospital,
Rovigo, Italy. mazza.alberto@azisanrovigo.it

The role of arterial hypertension (HT) as risk factor for Parkinson's disease
(PD) is still debated. Case-control and retrospective studies do not support an
association between HT and PD and the risk of PD seems to be lower in
hypertensive than in normotensive subjects. In addition, the use of
calcium-channel blockers (CCBs) and angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors
seems to have a protective effect on the risk of developing PD. In clinical
practice, a crucial finding in subjects with PD is the high supine systolic blood
pressure (SBP) coupled with orthostatic hypotension (OH). It is not clear whether
this SBP load could be a risk factor for target organ damage as this load can be 
largely due to the drugs used to treat OH (i.e., fludrocortisone acetate,
midodrine) or PD itself (i.e., monoamine oxidase inhibitors, dopamine D2-receptor
antagonists). This blood pressure (BP) load is largely independent of medications
as the 40 % of subjects with PD have a non-dipping pattern of BP during 24 h
ambulatory monitoring (24-h ABPM). In PD, nocturnal HT is usually asymptomatic
and 24-h ABPM should be used to track both supine HT and OH. Treatment of HT in
PD is difficult because the reduction of supine BP could worsen OH. To avoid
this, short-acting dihydropyridine CCBs, clonidine or nitrates are recommended,
assuming between meals, in late afternoon or in the evening in avoiding an
aggravation in the post-prandial hypotension characteristic of PD.

DOI: 10.1007/s10072-012-1251-2 
PMID: 23192440  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


50. J Appl Physiol (1985). 2012 Dec 15;113(12):1810-20. doi:
10.1152/japplphysiol.00755.2012. Epub 2012 Oct 25.

Short-term complexity indexes of heart period and systolic arterial pressure
variabilities provide complementary information.

Porta A(1), Castiglioni P, Di Rienzo M, Bari V, Bassani T, Marchi A, Takahashi
AC, Tobaldini E, Montano N, Catai AM, Barbic F, Furlan R, Cividjian A, Quintin L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences for Health, Galeazzi Orthopedic Institute,
University of Milan, Milan, Italy. alberto.porta@unimi.it

It is unclear whether the complexity of the variability of the systolic arterial 
pressure (SAP) provides complementary information to that of the heart period
(HP). The complexity of HP and SAP variabilities was assessed from short
beat-to-beat recordings (i.e., 256 cardiac beats). The evaluation was made during
a pharmacological protocol that induced vagal blockade with atropine or a
sympathetic blockade (beta-adrenergic blockade with propranolol or central
sympathetic blockade with clonidine) alone or in combination, during a graded
head-up tilt, and in patients with Parkinson's disease (PD) without orthostatic
hypotension undergoing orthostatic challenge. Complexity was quantified according
to the mean square prediction error (MSPE) derived from univariate autoregressive
(AR) and multivariate AR (MAR) models. We found that: 1) MSPE(MAR) did not
provide additional information to that of MSPE(AR); 2) SAP variability was less
complex than that of HP; 3) because HP complexity was reduced by either vagal
blockade or vagal withdrawal induced by head-up tilt and was unaffected by
beta-adrenergic blockade, HP was under vagal control; 4) because SAP complexity
was increased by central sympathetic blockade and was unmodified by either vagal 
blockade or vagal withdrawal induced by head-up tilt, SAP was under sympathetic
control; 5) SAP complexity was increased in patients with PD; and 6) during
orthostatic challenge, the complexity of both HP and SAP variabilities in
patients with PD remained high, thus indicating both vagal and sympathetic
impairments. Complexity indexes derived from short HP and SAP beat-to-beat series
provide complementary information and are helpful in detecting early autonomic
dysfunction in patients with PD well before circulatory symptoms become
noticeable.

DOI: 10.1152/japplphysiol.00755.2012 
PMID: 23104699  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Age (Dordr). 2013 Oct;35(5):1675-90. doi: 10.1007/s11357-012-9470-2. Epub 2012
Sep 18.

Dopaminergic degeneration is enhanced by chronic brain hypoperfusion and
inhibited by angiotensin receptor blockage.

Rodriguez-Perez AI(1), Dominguez-Meijide A, Lanciego JL, Guerra MJ,
Labandeira-Garcia JL.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Neuroanatomy and Experimental Neurology, Department of
Morphological Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, University of Santiago de
Compostela, 15782, Santiago de Compostela, Spain.

The possible interaction between brain hypoperfusion related to aging and/or
vascular disease, vascular parkinsonism and Parkinson's disease, as well as the
possible contribution of aging-related chronic brain hypoperfusion in the
development or severity of Parkinson's disease are largely unknown. We used a rat
model of chronic cerebral hypoperfusion to study the long-term effects of
hypoperfusion on dopaminergic neurons and the possible synergistic effects
between chronic hypoperfusion and factors that are deleterious to dopaminergic
neurons, such as the dopaminergic neurotoxin 6-hydroxydopamine. Chronic
hypoperfusion induced significant loss of dopaminergic neurons and striatal
dopaminergic terminals and a reduction in striatal dopamine levels. Furthermore, 
intrastriatal administration of 6-hydroxydopamine in rats subjected to chronic
hypoperfusion induced a significantly greater loss of dopaminergic neurons than
in sham-operated control rats. The dopaminergic neuron loss was significantly
reduced by oral treatment with angiotensin type 1 receptor antagonist candesartan
(3 mg/kg/day). The levels of angiotensin type 2 receptors were lower and the
levels of angiotensin type 1 receptors, interleukin-1 β and nicotinamide adenine 
dinucleotide phosphate oxidase activity were higher in the substantia nigra of
rats subjected to chronic hypoperfusion than in control rats; this was
significantly reduced by treatment with candesartan. The results suggest that
early treatment of vascular disease should be considered in the treatment of aged
Parkinson's disease patients and Parkinson's disease patients with
cerebrovascular risk factors. The findings also suggest that inhibition of brain 
renin-angiotensin activity may be useful as a neuroprotective strategy.

DOI: 10.1007/s11357-012-9470-2 
PMCID: PMC3776095
PMID: 22986582  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


52. 2-(2-[[O-(11)C]Tolyl)vinyl]-4,5-dihydro-1H-imidazole.

Leung K(1).
In: Molecular Imaging and Contrast Agent Database (MICAD) [Internet]. Bethesda
(MD): National Center for Biotechnology Information (US); 2004-2013.
2012 Feb 24.

Author information: 
(1)National Center for Biotechnology Information, NLM, NIH, Bethesda, MD

Two major imidazoline binding sites (I1R and I2R) have been identified (1, 2).
The I1R and I2R exhibit high affinities for clonidine and idazoxan, respectively.
Clonidine and its analogs mediate effects independent of α2-adrenoceptorat the IR
receptors. IR receptors are widely distributed in the central and peripheral
nervous systems and in various organs such as the pancreas, liver, kidney, lung, 
and heart (3-6). I1R is associated with hypertension (7), whereas I2R is
associated with depression (8), Alzheimer’s disease (9), Parkinson’s disease
(10), Huntington’s disease (10), and glial cell tumors (11). High densities of
I2R have been observed in the arcuate nucleus, interpeduncular nucleus, pineal
gland, and ventricles in human brain (12). The I2R gene has not been identified. 
Tesson et al. (13) showed that I2R is localized to the mitochondrial outer
membrane of the human and rabbit liver. Pigini et al. (14) showed that
2-(2-[O-tolyl)vinyl]-4,5-dihydro-1H-imidazole (metrazoline) has a high and
selective affinity for I2R. 2-(2-[[o-(11)C]Tolyl)vinyl]-4,5-dihydro-1H-imidazole 
([(11)C]metrazoline) was evaluated as a PET probe for imaging of I2R in the
peripheral tissues (15).

PMID: 22741184 


53. 2-[2-([O-(11)C]Tolyl)ethyl]-4,5-dihydro-1H-imidazole.

Leung K(1).
In: Molecular Imaging and Contrast Agent Database (MICAD) [Internet]. Bethesda
(MD): National Center for Biotechnology Information (US); 2004-2013.
2012 Feb 22.

Author information: 
(1)National Center for Biotechnology Information, NLM, NIH, Bethesda, MD

Two major imidazoline binding sites (I1R and I2R) have been identified (1, 2).
The I1R and I2R exhibit high affinities for clonidine and idazoxan, respectively.
Clonidine and its analogs mediate effects independent of α2-adrenoceptor at the
IR receptors. IR receptors are widely distributed in the central and peripheral
nervous systems and in various organs such as the pancreas, liver, kidney, lung, 
and heart (3-6). I1R is associated with hypertension (7), whereas I2R is
associated with depression (8), Alzheimer’s disease (9), Parkinson’s disease
(10), Huntington’s disease (10), and glial cell tumors (11). High densities of
I2R have been observed in the arcuate nucleus, interpeduncular nucleus, pineal
gland, and ventricles in human brain (12). The I2R gene has not been identified. 
Tesson et al. (13) showed that I2R is localized to the mitochondrial outer
membrane of the human and rabbit liver. Gentili et al. (14) showed that
2-[2-(O-tolyl)ethyl]-4,5-dihydro-1H-imidazole (TEIMD) has a high and selective
affinity for I2R. 2-[2-([o-(11)C]Tolyl)ethyl]-4,5-dihydro-1H-imidazole
([(11)C]TEIMD) was evaluated as a PET probe for imaging of I2R in the peripheral 
tissues (15).

PMID: 22741181 


54. 2-(3-Fluoro-[4-(11)C]tolyl)-4,5-dihydro-1H-imidazole.

Leung K(1).
In: Molecular Imaging and Contrast Agent Database (MICAD) [Internet]. Bethesda
(MD): National Center for Biotechnology Information (US); 2004-2013.
2012 Feb 19.

Author information: 
(1)National Center for Biotechnology Information, NLM, NIH, Bethesda, MD

Two major imidazoline binding sites (I1R and I2R) have been identified (1, 2).
The I1R and I2R exhibit high affinities for clonidine and idazoxan, respectively.
Clonidine and its analogs mediate effects independent of α2-adrenoceptor at the
IR receptors. IR receptors are widely distributed in the central and peripheral
nervous systems and in various organs such as the pancreas, liver, kidney, lung, 
and heart (3-6). I1R is associated with hypertension (7), whereas I2R is
associated with depression (8), Alzheimer’s disease (9), Parkinson’s disease
(10), Huntington’s disease (10), and glial cell tumors (11). High densities of
I2R have been observed in the arcuate nucleus, interpeduncular nucleus, pineal
gland, and ventricles in human brain (12). The I2R gene has not been identified. 
Tesson et al. (13) showed that I2R is localized to the mitochondrial outer
membrane of the human and rabbit liver. Anastassiadou et al. (14) showed that
2-(3-fluoro-4-tolyl)-4,5-dihydro-1H-imidazole (FTIMD) has a high and selective
affinity for I2R. Kawamura et al. (15) evaluated [(11)C]FTIMD as a positron
emission tomography (PET) agent for the noninvasive study of I2R in the brain and
peripheral organs.

PMID: 22675744 


55. Neurobiol Dis. 2012 Sep;47(3):322-30. doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2012.05.019. Epub 2012
Jun 2.

Activation of subthalamic alpha 2 noradrenergic receptors induces motor deficits 
as a consequence of neuronal burst firing.

Delaville C(1), Zapata J, Cardoit L, Benazzouz A.

Author information: 
(1)Univ. de Bordeaux, Institut des Maladies Neurodégénératives, UMR 5293,
Bordeaux, France.

The subthalamic nucleus (STN) plays a key role in the pathophysiology of
Parkinson's disease. This was demonstrated by the fact that STN neurons express
more bursts in animal models of the disease and by the ability of STN
inactivation to alleviate motor deficits. However, the origin of the bursts and
the causal link between STN bursts and motor deficits remain unknown. The present
study aimed to investigate the role of noradrenergic receptor modulation on the
firing activity of STN neurons and the impact of this modulation on locomotor
activity in sham and 6-hydroxydopamine-lesioned rats. Using selective agonists
and antagonists of α1- and α2-adrenergic receptors (AR), we show that local
infusion of clonidine, an α2-AR agonist, induced a switch from tonic to bursty
pattern without changing the firing rate. This change in the pattern was
prevented by the local infusion of idazoxan, an α2-AR antagonist. Furthermore,
clonidine injection into the STN reduced locomotor activity in sham and
6-hydroxydopamine-lesioned rats. In contrast, local injection of phenylephrine,
an α1-AR agonist, increased the firing rate of STN neurons without changing the
firing pattern. In parallel, phenylephrine did not change locomotor activity.
This is the first evidence showing the implication of α1-ARs in the modulation of
firing rate and α2-ARs in the modulation of the firing pattern of STN neurons.
Furthermore, our data provide also evidence that activation of the STN α2-ARs
plays a key role in the genesis of subthalamic burst activity, which may be at
the origin of motor deficits.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nbd.2012.05.019 
PMID: 22668781  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


56. J Neural Transm (Vienna). 2013 Jan;120(1):31-6. doi: 10.1007/s00702-012-0818-7.
Epub 2012 May 17.

The effect of piribedil on L-DOPA-induced dyskinesias in a rat model of
Parkinson's disease: differential role of α(2) adrenergic mechanisms.

Gerlach M(1), Halley P, Riederer P, van den Buuse M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, Psychosomatics and
Psychotherapy, University of Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany.
manfred.gerlach@uni-wuerzburg.de

Piribedil is a non-ergoline, dopamine D(2)/D(3) receptor agonist with α(2)
adrenoceptor antagonist properties that has been used in the treatment of
Parkinson's disease (PD). Noradrenergic neurotransmission may be involved in the 
pathogenesis of dyskinesias induced by chronic treatment with L-DOPA
(3,4-dihydroxyphenylalanine, levodopa), but its role in the in vivo action of
piribedil or on different subclasses of abnormal involuntary movements (AIMs)
remains unclear. The aims of this study were therefore (1) to investigate the
anti-dyskinetic effects of piribedil on L-DOPA-induced contralateral turning
behaviour, locomotive dyskinesias (LD), axial dystonia (AD), orolingual
dyskinesia (OD) and forelimb dyskinesia (FD) and (2) to compare these effects to 
the α(2) adrenoceptor antagonist, idazoxan, or the α(2) adrenoceptor agonist,
clonidine. Rats were unilaterally lesioned with 6-hydroxydopamine (6-OHDA) and
injected intraperitoneally twice daily with L-DOPA methylester (12.5 mg/kg) and
benserazide (3.25 mg/kg). After 3 weeks, the effects of piribedil (5, 15, 40
mg/kg), clonidine (0.15 mg/kg), idazoxan (10 mg/kg) and combinations of these
drugs were scored during 2 h. Pre-treatment with 5 and 40 mg/kg, but not 15
mg/kg, of piribedil reduced turning behaviour and AD, OD and FD, but piribedil
increased LD at the 40 mg/kg doses compared to the L-DOPA group. Idazoxan induced
similar effects as piribedil (40 mg/kg), except that it had no effect on LD.
Idazoxan blocked the effect of piribedil on AD and FD. Clonidine reduced all AIMs
except OD, possibly because of its sedative effect. Clonidine blocked the effect 
of piribedil on AD, OD and FD. These data suggest a differential involvement of
α(2) adrenergic receptors in the action of piribedil on different subclasses of
L-DOPA-induced dyskinesias.

DOI: 10.1007/s00702-012-0818-7 
PMID: 22592937  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Brain Res. 2012 Jun 6;1458:67-75. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2012.03.064. Epub 2012 
Apr 4.

Positive allosteric modulation of α4β2 nAChR agonist induced behaviour.

Rode F(1), Munro G, Holst D, Nielsen EØ, Troelsen KB, Timmermann DB, Rønn LC,
Grunnet M.

Author information: 
(1)NeuroSearch A/S, Pederstrupvej 93, DK-2750 Ballerup, Denmark.

Neuronal cholinergic transmission is a prerequisite for proper CNS function.
Consequently, disturbance of this system is associated with a number of
pathophysiological conditions such as Parkinson's disease, Alzheimer's disease,
schizophrenia and ADHD. Consequently, drug discovery efforts have spurred
considerable research endeavours into identifying specific compounds for this
system. Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors (nAChR) are ligand gated ion channels
involved in cholinergic transmission. nAChRs are homo- or heteromeric pentamers
with α4β2 receptors being the most abundant heteromer. The stoichiometry of α4β2 
receptors can be either (α4)(3)(β2)(2) or (α4)(2)(β2)(3) representing channels
with low (LS) or high (HS) sensitivity, respectively, to endogenous ligands. In
the present study we applied the partial nAChR α4β2 LS and HS agonist NS3956 and 
the LS selective positive allosteric modulator NS9283 to investigate the role of 
α4β2 in Parkinson and pain models. In 6-OHDA lesioned rats, NS3956 increased
rotational behaviour when rats were co-treated with nomifensine. This effect was 
absent in the presence of mecamylamine. In contrast, co-treatment with NS3956 and
NS9283 reduced rotational behaviour in the animals. In a rat formalin pain model 
NS3956 induced an analgesic response that was strongly potentiated by NS9283.
Finally in vitro experiments were applied to determine dopamine release from
striatal minces. NS3956 induced a concentration dependent release while NS9283
was unable to potentiate agonist induced release. Together these results
emphasize involvement of α4β2 nAChR in rotational and analgesic responses and
confirm striatal α4β2 receptors to be of the HS form.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.brainres.2012.03.064 
PMID: 22552114  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Neurotox Res. 2012 Aug;22(2):177-80. doi: 10.1007/s12640-012-9326-7. Epub 2012
Apr 12.

Protective effects of nicotine against aminochrome-induced toxicity in substantia
nigra derived cells: implications for Parkinson's disease.

Muñoz P(1), Huenchuguala S, Paris I, Cuevas C, Villa M, Caviedes P,
Segura-Aguilar J, Tizabi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular & Clinical Pharmacology, Faculty of Medicine, ICBM,
University of Chile, Santiago, Chile.

Erratum in
    Neurotox Res. 2012 Oct;22(3):249.

Parkinson's disease is a debilitating progressive neurodegenerative disorder that
results from the loss of or damage to dopaminergic cells containing neuromelanin 
in the substantia nigra (SN). The underlying neurodegenerative mechanism(s),
however, remain elusive. Aminochrome, the precursor of neuromelanin is an
endogenous substance capable of inducing selective neurotoxicity to dopaminergic 
neurons in SN. Nicotine, on the other hand, may offer protective effects against 
dopaminergic cell damage induced by various neurotoxins including MPTP and
salsolinol. In this study, we sought to determine whether nicotine may also
protect against aminochrome-induced toxicity in SN derived RCSN-3 cells. Exposure
of RCSN-3 cells to a combination of aminochrome (50 μM) and dicoumarol (50 μM)
for 48 h induced approximately 70 % cell death. Pretreatment with nicotine,
dose-dependently blocked this toxicity. The effects of nicotine in turn were
dose-dependently blocked by mecamylamine, a non-selective nicotinic receptor
antagonist. These results suggest involvement of nicotinic receptors in
protective effects of nicotine against aminochrome-induced toxicity and provide
further evidence for possible therapeutic effects of nicotine or nicotinic
agonists in Parkinson's disease.

DOI: 10.1007/s12640-012-9326-7 
PMCID: PMC3671757
PMID: 22528249  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


59. J Neuroinflammation. 2012 Feb 22;9:38. doi: 10.1186/1742-2094-9-38.

Involvement of PPAR-γ in the neuroprotective and anti-inflammatory effects of
angiotensin type 1 receptor inhibition: effects of the receptor antagonist
telmisartan and receptor deletion in a mouse MPTP model of Parkinson's disease.

Garrido-Gil P(1), Joglar B, Rodriguez-Perez AI, Guerra MJ, Labandeira-Garcia JL.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Neuroanatomy and Experimental Neurology, Department of
Morphological Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, University of Santiago de
Compostela, Santiago de Compostela, Spain.

BACKGROUND: Several recent studies have shown that angiotensin type 1 receptor
(AT1) antagonists such as candesartan inhibit the microglial inflammatory
response and dopaminergic cell loss in animal models of Parkinson's disease.
However, the mechanisms involved in the neuroprotective and anti-inflammatory
effects of AT1 blockers in the brain have not been clarified. A number of studies
have reported that AT1 blockers activate peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor gamma (PPAR γ). PPAR-γ activation inhibits inflammation, and may be
responsible for neuroprotective effects, independently of AT1 blocking actions.
METHODS: We have investigated whether oral treatment with telmisartan (the most
potent PPAR-γ activator among AT1 blockers) provides neuroprotection against
dopaminergic cell death and neuroinflammation, and the possible role of PPAR-γ
activation in any such neuroprotection. We used a mouse model of parkinsonism
induced by the dopaminergic neurotoxin
1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP) and co-administration of the 
PPAR-γ antagonist GW9662 to study the role of PPAR-γ activation. In addition, we 
used AT1a-null mice lesioned with MPTP to study whether deletion of AT1 in the
absence of any pharmacological effect of AT1 blockers provides neuroprotection,
and investigated whether PPAR-γ activation may also be involved in any such
effect of AT1 deletion by co-administration of the PPAR-γ antagonist GW9662.
RESULTS: We observed that telmisartan protects mouse dopaminergic neurons and
inhibits the microglial response induced by administration of MPTP. The
protective effects of telmisartan on dopaminergic cell death and microglial
activation were inhibited by co-administration of GW9662. Dopaminergic cell death
and microglial activation were significantly lower in AT1a-null mice treated with
MPTP than in mice not subjected to AT1a deletion. Interestingly, the protective
effects of AT1 deletion were also inhibited by co-administration of GW9662.
CONCLUSION: The results suggest that telmisartan provides effective
neuroprotection against dopaminergic cell death and that the neuroprotective
effect is mediated by PPAR-γ activation. However, the results in AT1-deficient
mice show that blockage of AT1, unrelated to the pharmacological properties of
AT1 blockers, also protects against dopaminergic cell death and
neuroinflammation. Furthermore, the results show that PPAR-γ activation is
involved in the anti-inflammatory and neuroprotective effects of AT1 deletion.

DOI: 10.1186/1742-2094-9-38 
PMCID: PMC3298706
PMID: 22356806  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Acta Neurol Scand. 2012 Sep;126(3):210-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0404.2012.01652.x. 
Epub 2012 Feb 10.

Cerebral blood flow and freezing of gait in Parkinson's disease.

Imamura K(1), Okayasu N, Nagatsu T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Okazaki City Hospital, Aichi, Japan.
neurology@okazakihospital.jp

OBJECTIVE: We investigated the relationship between freezing of gait (FOG)
severity in Parkinson's disease (PD) and regional cerebral blood flow (rCBF)
using single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) and evaluated the effect
of selegiline therapy.
METHOD: We evaluated 54 patients with PD (FOG positive: 21 patients, and FOG
negative: 33 patients) with N-isopropyl-p-[I-123] iodoamphetamine ((123) I-IMP)
SPECT and the Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale (UPDRS) part III,
Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE), and Beck Depression Inventory. [Correction 
added on 18 April 2012, after online publication: In the preceding statement, 55 
instead of 54 patients with PD were evaluated, and FOG negative consisted of 34
instead of 33 patients] Furthermore, we examined rCBF in FOG-negative patients
treated with levodopa with or without selegiline.
RESULTS: Z-values of bilateral Brodmann areas (BA) 10 and 11 and left BA32 showed
significant increases in the FOG-positive group compared with the FOG-negative
group. [Correction added on 18 April 2012, after online publication: In the
preceding statement, Z-values was changed to Z-scores] There were significantly
positive correlations between Z-values of these areas and FOG score, especially
on both sides of BA11. [Correction added on 18 April 2012, after online
publication: In the preceding statement, Z-values was changed to Z-scores] An
increase in Z-values in bilateral BA10 and 11 and left BA32 in the
levodopa-selegiline treatment group after 1 year was significantly inhibited
compared with the levodopa treatment group. [Correction added on 18 April 2012,
after online publication: In the preceding statement, left BA32 was changed to
right BA32, and Z-values was changed to Z-scores]
CONCLUSION: There was a close relationship between FOG severity in PD and an
increase in rCBF in BA 10, 11 and 32. Furthermore, selegiline's FOG prevention
effect may be related to maintaining rCBF in these same areas.

© 2012 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-0404.2012.01652.x 
PMID: 22324564  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Brain. 2012 Jan;135(Pt 1):124-38. doi: 10.1093/brain/awr320. Epub 2011 Dec 20.

Dopaminergic neuroprotection of hormonal replacement therapy in young and aged
menopausal rats: role of the brain angiotensin system.

Rodriguez-Perez AI(1), Valenzuela R, Villar-Cheda B, Guerra MJ, Labandeira-Garcia
JL.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Neuroanatomy and Experimental Neurology, Department of
Morphological Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, University of Santiago de
Compostela, 15782 Santiago de Compostela, Spain.

There is a lack of consensus about the effects of the type of menopause (surgical
or natural) and of oestrogen replacement therapy on Parkinson's disease. The
effects of the timing of replacement therapy and the female's age may explain the
observed differences in such effects. However, the mechanisms involved are poorly
understood. The renin-angiotensin system mediates the beneficial effects of
oestrogen in several tissues, and we have previously shown that dopaminergic cell
loss is enhanced by angiotensin via type 1 receptors, which is activated by
ageing. In rats, we compared the effects of oestrogen replacement therapy on
6-hydroxydopamine-induced dopaminergic degeneration, nigral renin-angiotensin
system activity, activation of the nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate
oxidase complex and levels of the proinflammatory cytokine interleukin-1β in
young (surgical) menopausal rats and aged menopausal rats. In young surgically
menopausal rats, the renin-angiotensin system activity was higher (i.e. higher
angiotensin converting enzyme activity, higher angiotensin type-1 receptor
expression and lower angiotensin type-2 receptor expression) than in surgically
menopausal rats treated with oestrogen; the nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide
phosphate oxidase activity and interleukin-1β expression were also higher in the 
first group than in the second group. In aged menopausal rats, the levels of
nigral renin-angiotensin and nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate oxidase 
activity were similar to those observed in surgically menopausal rats. However,
oestrogen replacement therapy significantly reduced 6-hydroxydopamine-induced
dopaminergic cell loss in young menopausal rats but not in aged rats. Treatment
with oestrogen also led to a more marked reduction in nigral renin-angiotensin
and nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate oxidase activity in young
surgically menopausal rats (treated either immediately or after a period of
hypo-oestrogenicity) than in aged menopausal rats. Interestingly, treatment with 
the angiotensin type-1 receptor antagonist candesartan led to remarkable
reduction in renin-angiotensin system activity and dopaminergic neuron loss in
both groups of menopausal rats. This suggests that manipulation of the brain
renin-angiotensin system may be an efficient approach for the prevention or
treatment of Parkinson's disease in oestrogen-deficient females, together with or
instead of oestrogen replacement therapy.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awr320 
PMID: 22189567  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Indian J Pharmacol. 2011 Sep;43(5):492-501. doi: 10.4103/0253-7613.84947.

Inverse agonism and its therapeutic significance.

Khilnani G(1), Khilnani AK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, RNT Medical College, Udaipur, India.

A large number of G-protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) show varying degrees of
basal or constitutive activity. This constitutive activity is usually minimal in 
natural receptors but is markedly observed in wild type and mutated (naturally or
induced) receptors. According to conventional two-state drug receptor interaction
model, binding of a ligand may initiate activity (agonist with varying degrees of
positive intrinsic activity) or prevent the effect of an agonist (antagonist with
zero intrinsic activity). Inverse agonists bind with the constitutively active
receptors, stabilize them, and thus reduce the activity (negative intrinsic
activity). Receptors of many classes (α-and β-adrenergic, histaminergic,
GABAergic, serotoninergic, opiate, and angiotensin receptors) have shown basal
activity in suitable in vitro models. Several drugs that have been conventionally
classified as antagonists (β-blockers, antihistaminics) have shown inverse
agonist effects on corresponding constitutively active receptors. Nearly all H(1)
and H(2) antihistaminics (antagonists) have been shown to be inverse agonists.
Among the β-blockers, carvedilol and bucindolol demonstrate low level of inverse 
agonism as compared to propranolol and nadolol. Several antipsychotic drugs (D(2)
receptors antagonist), antihypertensive (AT(1) receptor antagonists),
antiserotoninergic drugs and opioid antagonists have significant inverse
agonistic activity that contributes partly or wholly to their therapeutic value. 
Inverse agonism may also help explain the underlying mechanism of beneficial
effects of carvedilol in congestive failure, naloxone-induced withdrawal syndrome
in opioid dependence, clozapine in psychosis, and candesartan in cardiac
hypertrophy. Understanding inverse agonisms has paved a way for newer drug
development. It is now possible to develop agents, which have only desired
therapeutic value and are devoid of unwanted adverse effect. Pimavanserin
(ACP-103), a highly selective 5-HT(2A) inverse agonist, attenuates psychosis in
patients with Parkinson's disease with psychosis and is devoid of extrapyramidal 
side effects. This dissociation is also evident from the development of
anxioselective benzodiazepines devoid of habit-forming potential. Hemopressin is 
a peptide ligand that acts as an antagonist as well as inverse agonist. This
agent acts as an antinociceptive agent in different in vivo models of pain.
Treatment of obesity by drugs having inverse agonist activity at CB(1/2)
receptors is also underway. An exciting development is evaluation of β-blockers
in chronic bronchial asthma-a condition akin to congestive heart failure where
β-blockade has become the standard mode of therapy. Synthesis and evaluation of
selective agents is underway. Therefore, inverse agonism is an important aspect
of drug-receptor interaction and has immense untapped therapeutic potential.

DOI: 10.4103/0253-7613.84947 
PMCID: PMC3195115
PMID: 22021988 


63. Int Rev Neurobiol. 2011;100:65-84. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-386467-3.00004-2.

The pharmacology of selegiline.

Magyar K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacodynamics, Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary.

Selegiline, the R-optical enantiomer of deprenyl
(phenyl-isopropyl-methyl-propargylamine), was almost exclusively used MAO-B
inhibitor during the past decades to treat Parkinson's disease. Oral treatment
prolongs the need of levodopa administration. Selegiline is rapidly metabolized
by the microsomal enzymes to amphetamine, methamphetamine, and
desmethyl-deprenyl. In addition, the flavin-containing monooxigenase is
synthesizing deprenyl-N-oxide. Selegiline in rather low concentrations
(10⁻⁹-10⁻¹³ M), does not influence MAO-B, but it has an antiapoptotic activity in
tissue culture. The neuroprotective effect of selegiline has a biphasic
character. In higher concentrations than 10⁻⁷ M increases the rate of apoptosis
(proapoptotic activity). The metabolites are also taking part in the complex
pharmacological activity of selegiline. The simultaneous presence of the pro- and
antiapoptotic effects of selegiline and its metabolites frequently hindered its
clinical usage. During the past years rasagiline has been introduced to replace
selegiline in clinical application. MAO-B inhibitors beside their effect on the
enzyme MAO-B could hold different spectrum of pharmacological activities.
Selegiline is administered orally and it possesses an intensive "first pass"
metabolism. To circumvent the "first pass" metabolism, parenteral administration 
of the drug might lead to different distribution and pharmacological activity of 
selegiline.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-12-386467-3.00004-2 
PMID: 21971003  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Eur J Neurosci. 2011 Oct;34(7):1141-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1460-9568.2011.07840.x.
Epub 2011 Sep 21.

The neuroprotective action of candesartan is related to interference with the
early stages of 6-hydroxydopamine-induced dopaminergic cell death.

Mertens B(1), Varcin M, Michotte Y, Sarre S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry and Drug Analysis, Center for
Neuroscience, Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Laarbeeklaan, Brussels, Belgium.

Several studies have revealed that manipulation of the renin angiotensin system
results in reduced progression of nigrostriatal damage in different animal models
of Parkinson's disease. In the present work, the effect of daily treatment of
rats with the angiotensin II (Ang II) type 1 (AT(1) ) receptor antagonist
candesartan (3 mg/kg per day, s.c.) initiated 7 days before the intrastriatal
injection of 6-hydroxydopamine (6-OHDA) was investigated by means of tyrosine
hydroxylase-positive cell counts in the substantia nigra, and dopamine and
3,4-dihydroxyphenylacetic acid measurements in the striatum. In this experimental
set-up, candesartan protected dopaminergic neurons of the nigrostriatal tract
against the neurotoxin-induced cell death. However, the beneficial effects of
AT(1) receptor blockade were not confirmed when treatment was started 24 h after 
the lesion, suggesting that candesartan interferes with the early events of the
6-OHDA-induced cell death. Stimulation of the AT(1) receptor with Ang II
increased the formation of hydroxyl radicals in the striatum of intact rats as
measured by the in vivo microdialysis salicylate trapping technique. This Ang
II-induced production of reactive oxygen species was suppressed by candesartan
perfusion. Furthermore, the Ang II-induced production of reactive oxygen species 
was nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate - oxidase and protein kinase C
dependent as it could be blocked in the presence of apocynin, an nicotinamide
adenine dinucleotide phosphate - oxidase inhibitor, and chelerythrine, an
inhibitor of protein kinase C. Together, these data further support the
hypothesis that Ang II might contribute in an early stage to the neurotoxicity of
6-OHDA by reinforcing the cascade of oxidative stress.

© 2011 The Authors. European Journal of Neuroscience © 2011 Federation of
European Neuroscience Societies and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1460-9568.2011.07840.x 
PMID: 21936877  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Neuroscience. 2011 Nov 10;195:138-44. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2011.08.041.
Epub 2011 Aug 23.

Dopamine oxidation facilitates rotenone-dependent potentiation of
N-methyl-D-aspartate currents in rat substantia nigra dopamine neurons.

Wu YN(1), Johnson SW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Oregon Health and Science University, Portland, OR
97239, USA.

Rotenone is a mitochondrial poison that causes dopamine cell death and is used as
a model of Parkinson's disease in rodents. Recently, we showed that rotenone
augments currents evoked by N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) by relieving
voltage-dependent Mg(2+) block in rat substantia nigra compacta (SNC) dopamine
neurons. Because rotenone is well known to generate reactive oxygen species
(ROS), we conducted the present experiments to evaluate the role of ROS in
mediating the effect of rotenone on NMDA current augmentation. Using patch
pipettes to record whole-cell currents from SNC neurons in slices of rat brain,
we found that the ability of rotenone (100 nM) to increase NMDA (3-30 μM) current
was antagonized by the antioxidant agent n-acetylcysteine (1 mM). In contrast,
mercaptosuccinate (1 mM), which blocks glutathione peroxidase and raises tissue
levels of H(2)O(2), mimicked rotenone by augmenting inward currents evoked by
NMDA. Because oxidation of dopamine can also generate ROS, we explored the role
of dopamine on this action of rotenone. We prepared dopamine-depleted midbrain
slices from rats that had been pretreated with reserpine (5 mg/kg ip) and
alpha-methyl-para-tyrosine (AMPT, 250 mg/kg ip). Dopamine depletion blocked the
ability of rotenone (100 nM) to increase inward current evoked by NMDA (30 μM).
Rotenone-dependent augmentation of NMDA current was also blocked by the monoamine
oxidase inhibitor pargyline (100 μM) in slices prepared from normal rats. In
contrast, the dopamine precursor levodopa potentiated the action of rotenone on
NMDA current. These results suggest that ROS and/or dopamine oxidation products
mediate the ability of rotenone to potentiate NMDA currents. Because excessive
NMDA receptor stimulation can produce excitotoxicity, our results suggest that
oxidative metabolism of dopamine might facilitate the neurotoxicity of rotenone.

Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2011.08.041 
PMID: 21884756  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


66. CNS Drugs. 2011 Sep 1;25(9):783-99. doi: 10.2165/11587820-000000000-00000.

Targeting progressive neuroaxonal injury: lessons from multiple sclerosis.

Bar-Or A(1), Rieckmann P, Traboulsee A, Yong VW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology and Neurosurgery and Microbiology and Immunology,
McGill University, Neuroimmunology Unit, Montreal, QC, Canada.

Neurodegenerative diseases, such as Alzheimer's disease (AD), Parkinson's disease
(PD) and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), are characterized by progressive
neuroaxonal injury, suggesting a common pathophysiological pathway.
Identification and development of neuroprotective therapies for such diseases has
proven a major challenge, particularly because of an already substantial
neuroaxonal compromise at the time of initial onset of clinical symptoms. Methods
for early identification of neurodegeneration are therefore vital to ensure that 
neuroprotective therapies are applied as early as possible. Recent investigations
have enhanced our understanding of the role of neuroaxonal injury in multiple
sclerosis (MS). As MS generally manifests earlier in life and can be diagnosed
much earlier in the course of the disease than the above-mentioned 'classic'
neurodegenerative diseases, it is possible that MS could be used as a model
disease to study degeneration and regeneration of the CNS. The mechanism of
neuroaxonal injury in MS is believed to be inflammation-led neurodegeneration;
however, the reverse may also be true (i.e. neuroaxonal degeneration may precede 
inflammation). Animal models of PD, AD and ALS have shown that it is likely that 
most cases of disease are due to initial inflammation, followed by a degenerative
process, providing a parallel between MS and the classic neurodegenerative
diseases. Other common factors between MS and the neurodegenerative diseases
include iron and mitochondrial dysregulation, abnormalities in α-synuclein and
tau protein, and a number of immune mediators. Conventional MRI techniques, using
markers such as T2-weighted lesions, gadolinium-enhancing lesions and T1-weighted
hypointensities, are readily available and routinely used in clinical practice;
however, the utility of these MRI measures to predict disease progression in MS
is limited. More recently, MRI techniques that provide more pathology-specific
data have been applied in MS studies, including magnetic resonance spectroscopy, 
magnetization transfer ratio and myelin water imaging. Optical coherence
tomography (OCT) is a non-MRI technique that quantifies optic nerve integrity and
retinal ganglion cell loss as markers of neuroaxonal injury; more research is
needed to evaluate whether information obtained from OCT is a reliable marker of 
axonal injury and long-term disability in MS. Using these advanced techniques, it
may become possible to follow degeneration and regeneration longitudinally in
patients with MS and to better differentiate the effects of drugs under
investigation. Currently available immune-directed therapies that are approved by
the US FDA for the first-line treatment of MS (interferon-β and glatiramer
acetate) have been shown to decelerate the inflammatory process in MS; however,
such therapy is less effective in preventing the progression of the disease and
neuroaxonal injury. The use of MS as a clinical model to study modulation of
neuroaxonal injury in the brain could have direct implications for the
development of treatment strategies in neurodegenerative diseases such as AD, PD 
and ALS.

DOI: 10.2165/11587820-000000000-00000 
PMID: 21870889  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Mol Neurodegener. 2011 Aug 16;6(1):58. doi: 10.1186/1750-1326-6-58.

Renin angiotensin system and gender differences in dopaminergic degeneration.

Rodriguez-Perez AI(1), Valenzuela R, Joglar B, Garrido-Gil P, Guerra MJ,
Labandeira-Garcia JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Morphological Sciences, Networking Research Center on
Neurodegenerative Diseases (CIBERNED), University of Santiago de Compostela,
Santiago de Compostela, E-15782 Spain. joseluis.labandeira@usc.es.

BACKGROUND: There are sex differences in dopaminergic degeneration. Men are
approximately two times as likely as premenopausal women of the same age to
develop Parkinson's disease (PD). It has been shown that the local renin
angiotensin system (RAS) plays a prominent role in sex differences in the
development of chronic renal and cardiovascular diseases, and there is a local
RAS in the substantia nigra and dopaminergic cell loss is enhanced by angiotensin
via type 1 (AT1) receptors.
RESULTS: In the present study, we observed that intrastriatal injection of
6-hydroxydopamine induced a marked loss of dopaminergic neurons in the substantia
nigra of male rats, which was significantly higher than the loss induced in
ovariectomized female rats given estrogen implants (i.e. rats with estrogen).
However, the loss of dopaminergic neurons was significantly lower in male rats
treated with the AT1 antagonist candesartan, and similar to that observed in
female rats with estrogen. The involvement of the RAS in gender differences in
dopaminergic degeneration was confirmed with AT1a-null mice lesioned with the
dopaminergic neurotoxin MPTP. Significantly higher expression of AT1 receptors,
angiotensin converting enzyme activity, and NADPH-oxidase complex activity, and
much lower levels of AT2 receptors were observed in male rats than in female rats
with estrogen.
CONCLUSIONS: The results suggest that brain RAS plays a major role in the
increased risk of developing PD in men, and that manipulation of brain RAS may be
an efficient approach for neuroprotective treatment of PD in men, without the
feminizing effects of estrogen.

DOI: 10.1186/1750-1326-6-58 
PMCID: PMC3169490
PMID: 21846363 


68. Nicotinic Receptor Antagonists in Rats.

Roegge CS(3), Levin ED(3).
In: Levin ED(1), Buccafusco JJ(2), editors. Animal Models of Cognitive
Impairment. Boca Raton (FL): CRC Press/Taylor & Francis; 2006. Chapter 3.
Frontiers in Neuroscience.

Author information: 
(1)Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC
(2)Medical College of Georgia, August, GA
(3)Duke University Medical Center

Nicotinic acetylcholine-receptor systems are critical neural components of
cognitive functions. Nicotine and nicotinic agonists have been shown to improve
cognition in rats in numerous studies [13–15, 27, 31, 59]. Similarly,
nicotinic-receptor antagonists — the subject of this chapter — can cause
cognitive impairments in rats. The use of nicotinic-receptor antagonists in an
animal model of cognitive impairment has clinical relevance because it models the
functional effect of nicotinic-receptor loss. Studies have shown that patients
with Alzheimer’s disease suffer a dramatic reduction in hippocampal and cortical 
nicotine-receptor density that parallels the cognitive decline associated with
this disease [56–58]. Significant nicotinic-receptor loss also occurs in
Parkinson’s disease [9], and postmortem studies in schizophrenics show a decrease
in the number of α7 nicotinic receptors in the brain [8, 19]. Both of these
diseases can also include cognitive decline. Thus animal studies wherein
nicotinic receptors are blocked with antagonists can be useful in developing
animal models of how these diseases — Alzheimer’s, Parkinson’s, and schizophrenia
— affect cognition. The predominant nicotinic-receptor antagonist used in
cognitive studies with rats is mecamylamine, a noncompetitive antagonist that is 
not selective for particular nicotinic-receptor-subtype recognition sites.
Mecamylamine has been shown to impair cognitive function on a variety of tasks,
and this chapter reviews the effects of mecamylamine on task performance. In
addition, a small number of studies have examined other nonspecific nicotinic
antagonists, including chlorisondamine and d-tubocurarine, and the
receptor-subunit-specific α4β2 (dihydro-β-erythroidine hydrobromide [DHβE]) and
α7 (methyllycaconitine [MLA]) antagonists, and these will also be discussed. In
addition, many studies use the peripheral nicotinic blocker hexamethonium to show
the specificity of mecamylamine effects to the central nervous system (CNS).

PMID: 21204359 


69. Neurobiol Aging. 2012 Jan;33(1):204.e1-11. doi:
10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2010.08.006. Epub 2010 Oct 2.

Aging-related changes in the nigral angiotensin system enhances proinflammatory
and pro-oxidative markers and 6-OHDA-induced dopaminergic degeneration.

Villar-Cheda B(1), Valenzuela R, Rodriguez-Perez AI, Guerra MJ, Labandeira-Garcia
JL.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Neuroanatomy and Experimental Neurology, Department of
Morphological Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, University of Santiago de
Compostela, Santiago de Compostela, Spain.

An age-related proinflammatory, pro-oxidant state in the nigra may increase the
vulnerability of dopaminergic neurons to additional damage. Angiotensin II, via
type 1 (AT1) receptors, is one of the most important known inflammation and
oxidative stress inducers. However, it is not known if there are age-related
changes in the nigral angiotensin system. In aged rats, we observed increased
activation of the nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate-oxidase (NADPH
oxidase) complex and increased levels of the proinflammatory cytokines
interleukin (IL)-1β and tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α, which indicate
pro-oxidative, proinflammatory state in the nigra. We also observed enhanced
6-hydroxydopamine (6-OHDA)-induced dopaminergic cell death in aged rats. This is 
associated with increased expression of AT1 receptors and decreased expression of
AT2 receptors in aged rats, and is reduced by treatment with the AT1 antagonist
candesartan. The present results indicate that brain angiotensin is involved in
changes that may increase the risk of Parkinson's disease with aging.
Furthermore, the results suggest that manipulation of the brain angiotensin
system may constitute an effective neuroprotective strategy against aging-related
risk of dopaminergic degeneration.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2010.08.006 
PMID: 20888078  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Mol Pharmacol. 2010 Nov;78(5):971-80. doi: 10.1124/mol.110.067561. Epub 2010 Aug 
23.

α6ß2* and α4ß2* nicotinic receptors both regulate dopamine signaling with
increased nigrostriatal damage: relevance to Parkinson's disease.

Perez XA(1), Bordia T, McIntosh JM, Quik M.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Health Sciences, SRI International, 333 Ravenswood Ave, Menlo Park,
California 94025, USA.

Nicotinic receptors (nAChRs) are important modulators of dopaminergic
transmission in striatum, a region critical to Parkinson's disease. The nAChRs
mainly involved are the α6β2* and α4β2* subtypes. Lesion studies show that the
α6β2* receptor is decreased to a much greater extent with nigrostriatal damage
than the α4β2* subtype raising the question whether this latter nAChR population 
is more important with increased nigrostriatal damage. To address this, we
investigated the effect of varying nigrostriatal damage on α6β2* and α4β2*
receptor-modulated dopamine signaling using cyclic voltammetry. This approach
offers the advantage that changes in dopamine release can be observed under
different neuronal firing conditions. Total single-pulse-evoked dopamine release 
decreased in direct proportion to declines in the dopamine transporter and
dopamine uptake. We next used α-conotoxinMII and mecamylamine to understand the
role of the α4β2* and α6β2* subtypes in release. Single-pulse-stimulated α6β2*
and α4β2* receptor dopamine release decreased to a similar extent with increasing
nigrostriatal damage, indicating that both subtypes contribute to the control of 
dopaminergic transmission with lesioning. Total burst-stimulated dopamine release
also decreased proportionately with nigrostriatal damage. However, the role of
the α4β2* and α6β2* nAChRs varied with different degrees of lesioning, suggesting
that the two subtypes play a unique function with burst firing, with a somewhat
more prominent and possibly more selective role for the α6β2* subtype. These data
have important therapeutic implications because they suggest that drugs directed 
to both α4β2* and α6β2* nAChRs may be useful in the treatment of neurological
disorders such as Parkinson's disease.

DOI: 10.1124/mol.110.067561 
PMCID: PMC2981368
PMID: 20732972  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Anti-ICAM-1 antibody-conjugated paramagnetic liposomes.

Zhang H(1).
In: Molecular Imaging and Contrast Agent Database (MICAD) [Internet]. Bethesda
(MD): National Center for Biotechnology Information (US); 2004-2013.
2008 Jan 03.

Author information: 
(1)National Center for Biotechnology Information, NLM, NIH, Bethesda, MD, Email: 
micad@ncbi.nlm.nih.gov

ICAM-1 (CD54) is a cell-surface glycoprotein belonging to the immunoglobulin
superfamily of cell adhesion molecules (CAMs) (1). Upregulated by inflammatory
mediators, ICAM-1 is expressed on various cells including leukocytes, epithelial 
cells, endothelial cells, and fibroblasts (2). The predominant function of ICAM-1
is the recruitment and trafficking of leukocytes through interactions with
leukocyte-expressed integrins (2). Therefore, ICAM-1 plays a critical role in the
development of the central nervous system (CNS), in immune and inflammatory
responses, and in embryonic development (1). Many cerebrovascular and
neurological diseases such as multiple sclerosis and its animal model (i.e.,
experimental allergic encephalomyelitis (EAE)), Alzheimer’s disease, and
Parkinson’s disease have neuroinflammatory responses involving the migration of
leukocytes into damaged or infected tissues (3). EAE, which is an ascending
encephalomyelitis, is characterized by an intense perivascular inflammatory
process in the white matter of the CNS, primarily on the spinal cord, brainstem, 
and cerebellum, which facilitates the attachment of leukocytes to inflamed
endothelium (4). For example, a 10-fold increase in ICAM-1 expression has been
found on the endothelium of capillaries and venules throughout the CNS at an
early stage of EAE (4). Thus, ICAM-1 has been an attractive target for imaging
the early and specific upregulation of vascular CAMs in diseases (4). Amphiphiles
are made from molecules containing both a hydrophobic (non-polar tail) and a
hydrophilic (polar head) section. Amphiphiles can self-associate into multiple
concentric lipid bilayers (called lamellae) in different sizes and geometries
(5). Liposomes are generally formed by a variety of modified amphiphiles and can 
deliver a substantial amount of encapsulated therapeutic or diagnostic agents to 
targeted sites (6). Traditional liposomes suffer from the drawbacks of fast
elimination from blood and easy capture by the reticulo-endothelial system (7).
As an alternative to traditional liposomes, paramagnetic polymerized liposomes
(PPLs) are composed of a mixture of lipids with different functional groups on
the aqueous exposed surface and a polymerizable group (diacetylene) in the lipid 
tail (8). A typical formulation consists of gadolinium III–diethylenetriamine
pentaacetic acid (Gd-DTPA)–based lipids, amphiphilic carrier lipids, and
biotinylated amphiphiles (9). PPLs possess increased physical stability, unique
spectroscopic properties, and chemical modification durability (9). The
diacetylene triple bonds in the PPLs are located in the fatty acyl chains. The
polymerization of the triple bonds between lipids can be carried out by simple
ultraviolet (UV) radiation to form a polydiacetylene backbone of alternating
eneyne groups (8). A short polyethylene glycol (PEG) segment is covalently linked
to the polar head of PPLs (9). The hydrophilicity of PEG allows for sterical
stabilization of PPLs and protects against interactions with other molecular and 
biological components in blood stream, such as undesired lipid exchange or lipid 
fusion (9). Both polymerization and PEGylization prolong the in vivo circulation 
time of PPLs in blood. For instance, the half-life time of the PPLs is found to
be ~19 h in rats (4). Because easy access to bulky water, the attachment of
Gd-DTPA chelates on the surface of PPLs allows for greater relaxivity enhancement
compared to Gd chelates entrapped in the traditional liposomes. The multiple Gd
chelates on the surface of the liposomes further increase the sensitivity to
detection by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). The biotin groups in the PPLs
allow for conjugation of biotinylated antibodies via an avidin-biotin linkage
procedure (10). Avidin, a tetrameric protein with a molecular mass of 68 KDa, is 
capable of strongly binding four biotins (Ka = 1.7 × 10(15) M(-1)) (10). Thus,
avidins serve as a bridge between a biotinylated antibody against neural CAM
(NCAM-1) and a biotinylated group on PPLs to form a NCAM-1–specific MRI contrast 
agent, anti-NCAM antibody-conjugated PPLs (ACPLs) (4).

PMID: 20641750 


72. Exp Neurol. 2010 Aug;224(2):517-26. doi: 10.1016/j.expneurol.2010.05.015. Epub
2010 May 24.

Estrogen and angiotensin interaction in the substantia nigra. Relevance to
postmenopausal Parkinson's disease.

Rodriguez-Perez AI(1), Valenzuela R, Villar-Cheda B, Guerra MJ, Lanciego JL,
Labandeira-Garcia JL.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Neuroanatomy and Experimental Neurology, Department of
Morphological Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, University of Santiago de
Compostela, Santiago de Compostela, Spain.

Epidemiological studies have reported that the incidence of Parkinson's disease
(PD) is higher in postmenopausal than in premenopausal women of similar age.
Several laboratory observations have revealed that estrogen has protective
effects against dopaminergic toxins. The mechanism by which estrogen protects
dopaminergic neurons has not been clarified, although estrogen-induced
attenuation of the neuroinflammatory response plays a major role. We have
recently shown that activation of the nigral renin-angiotensin system (RAS), via 
type 1 (AT1) receptors, leads to NADPH complex and microglial activation and
induces dopaminergic neuron death. In the present study we investigated the
effect of ovariectomy and estrogen replacement on the nigral RAS and on
dopaminergic degeneration induced by intrastriatal injection of 6-OHDA. We
observed a marked loss of dopaminergic neurons in ovariectomized rats treated
with 6-OHDA, which was significantly reduced by estrogen replacement or treatment
with the AT1 receptor antagonist candesartan. We also observed that estrogen
replacement induces significant downregulation of the activity of the angiotensin
converting enzyme as well as downregulation of AT1 receptors, upregulation of AT2
receptors and downregulation of the NADPH complex activity in the substantia
nigra in comparison with ovariectomized rats. The present results suggest that
estrogen-induced down-regulation of RAS and NADPH activity may be associated with
the reduced risk of PD in premenopausal women, and increased risk in conditions
causing early reduction in endogenous estrogen, and that manipulation of brain
RAS system may be an efficient approach for the prevention or coadjutant
treatment of PD in estrogen-deficient women.

(c) 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.expneurol.2010.05.015 
PMID: 20580712  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Int J Neuropsychopharmacol. 2011 Mar;14(2):187-200. doi:
10.1017/S146114571000043X. Epub 2010 Apr 29.

Locus coeruleus and dorsal raphe neuron activity and response to acute
antidepressant administration in a rat model of Parkinson's disease.

Miguelez C(1), Grandoso L, Ugedo L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry, University of
the Basque Country, Leioa, Vizcaya, Spain.

In addition to noradrenergic and serotonergic systems, dopaminergic
neurotransmission seems to play an important role in the aetiopathogenesis of,
and recovery from, depression. Moreover, the incidence of depression is higher in
patients affected by diseases where the dopaminergic system is highly impaired,
such us Parkinson's disease. Here, we investigated the effects of dopamine
degeneration on the activity and response to antidepressants of locus coeruleus
(LC) noradrenergic and dorsal raphe nucleus (DRN) serotonergic neurons. To this
end, single-unit extracellular recordings were performed in control and
6-hydroxydopamine (6-OHDA)-lesioned animals. In this latter group, LC neurons
showed a lower basal firing rate as well as less sensitivity to the
administration of the serotonin reuptake inhibitor, fluoxetine. The rest of
electrophysiological parameters and the response to the administration of the
α2-adrenoceptor agonist, clonidine and the noradrenaline reuptake inhibitor,
reboxetine remained unaltered. In the DRN, dopamine depletion did not modify the 
basal electrophysiological characteristics and the response to clonidine or
fluoxetine administration. In contrast, the administration of reboxetine more
efficiently induced an inhibitory effect in the lesioned group. In additional
analyses it was observed that while in control animals, LC and DRN basal firing
rate was significantly correlated, this relationship was lost after the 6-OHDA
lesion. In conclusion, dopaminergic degeneration alters LC neuron basal activity,
the relationship/synteny between both nuclei, and their response to
antidepressants. These findings shed fresh light on our understanding of the role
of dopamine in depression and the mechanism action of antidepressants.

DOI: 10.1017/S146114571000043X 
PMID: 20426885  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


74. J Neurol. 2010 Sep;257(9):1486-91. doi: 10.1007/s00415-010-5556-x. Epub 2010 Apr 
20.

The comparison of clonidine, arginine and both combined: a growth hormone
stimulation test to differentiate multiple system atrophy from idiopathic
Parkinson's disease.

Zhang K(1), Zeng Y, Song C, Fu Y, Wan Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical
University, Nanjing, China.

This study was aimed at comparing the diagnostic accuracy of the growth hormone
(GH) response to clonidine, arginine and both combined in order to establish a
more reliable test to differentiate parkinsonism type multiple system atrophy
(MSA-p) from Parkinson's disease (PD). Twenty-four patients with MSA-p and 26
cases with PD entered the study. They were submitted to treatments of clonidine, 
arginine and a combination of the two in a random manner on three different
nonconsecutive days. The GH peak in serum at different times was evaluated and
used as a primary variable for analysis of the stimulation test. By ROC analysis,
we compared the sensitivity and specificity of tests of clonidine, arginine and
both combined. After clonidine administration, the maximal average was
significantly lower in patients with MSA-p than in those with PD (3.62 +/- 0.81
vs. 6.91 +/- 1.13; P < 0.05) with a sensitivity and specificity of 82.61 and
76.92%. After arginine administration, the maximal average GH concentration in
serum at 30 min was also significantly lower in patients with MSA-p than in those
with PD (4.07 +/- 0.80 vs. 7.89 +/- 1.29; P < 0.05) with a sensitivity and
specificity of 78.26 and 73.08%. The sensitivity and specificity in
differentiating MSA-p from PD was higher in the clonidine GH stimulation test
than in the arginine GH stimulation test. However, when the clonidine and
arginine were applied combined, the contrast of the maximal average GH
concentration in serum in two groups was markedly increased (5.02 +/- 1.12 vs.
10.75 +/- 1.11; P < 0.05) with a sensitivity and specificity of 73.91 and 92.31%,
and the specificity was notably increased in the combined GH stimulation test.
Compared to the arginine GH stimulation test, the clonidine GH stimulation
displayed a higher sensitivity and specificity; combined GH stimulation test of
clonidine plus arginine could significantly enhance the specificity in
differential diagnosis of MSA-p from PD.

DOI: 10.1007/s00415-010-5556-x 
PMID: 20405138  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Behav Brain Res. 2010 Aug 25;211(2):236-9. doi: 10.1016/j.bbr.2010.03.040. Epub
2010 Mar 27.

Clonidine improves attentional and memory components of delayed response
performance in a model of early Parkinsonism.

Schneider JS(1), Tinker JP, Decamp E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Anatomy and Cell Biology, Thomas Jefferson
University, Philadelphia, PA 19107, United States. jay.schneider@jefferson.edu

Cognitive deficits, including attention and working memory deficits, are often
described in Parkinson's disease (PD) patients even during the early stages of
the disease. However, cognitive deficits associated with PD have proven difficult
to treat and often do not respond well to the dopaminergic therapies used to
treat the motor symptoms of the disease. Chronic administration of low doses of
the neurotoxin 1-methy,4-phenyl,1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP) can induce
cognitive dysfunction in non-human primates, including impaired performance on a 
variable delayed response (VDR) task with attentional and memory components.
Since alpha-2 adrenergic receptor agonists have been suggested to improve
attention and working memory in a variety of conditions, the present study
assessed the extent to which the alpha-2 noradrenergic agonist clonidine might
influence VDR performance in early Parkinsonian non-human primates. Clonidine
(0.02-0.10 mg/kg) improved performance on both attentional and memory components 
of the task, performed in a modified Wisconsin General Test Apparatus, in a
dose-dependent manner and the cognition enhancing effects of clonidine were
blocked by co-administration of the alpha-2 noradrenergic antagonist idazoxan
(0.10 mg/kg). These data suggest that clonidine or drugs of this class, perhaps
with greater receptor subtype selectivity and low sedation liability, might be
effective therapeutics for cognitive dysfunction associated with PD.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbr.2010.03.040 
PMCID: PMC2862872
PMID: 20347876  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


76. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2010 Jun;333(3):929-38. doi: 10.1124/jpet.109.162396. Epub 
2010 Mar 3.

Nicotinic receptor-mediated reduction in L-DOPA-induced dyskinesias may occur via
desensitization.

Bordia T(1), Campos C, McIntosh JM, Quik M.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Health Sciences, SRI International, Menlo Park, California 94025,
USA.

L-DOPA-induced dyskinesias in Parkinson's disease are a significant clinical
problem for which few therapies are available. We recently showed that nicotine
reduces L-DOPA-induced abnormal involuntary movements (AIMs) in parkinsonian
animals, suggesting it may be useful for the treatment of L-DOPA-induced
dyskinesias. The present experiments were performed to understand the mechanisms 
whereby nicotine reduces L-DOPA-induced AIMs. We used a well established model of
dyskinesias, L-DOPA-treated unilateral 6-hydroxydopamine-lesioned rats.
Dose-ranging studies showed that injection of 0.1 mg/kg nicotine once or twice
daily for 4 or 10 days most effectively reduced AIMs, with no worsening of
parkinsonism. Importantly, a single nicotine injection did not reduce AIMs,
indicating that nicotine's effect is caused by long-term rather than short-term
molecular changes. Administration of the metabolite cotinine did not reduce AIMs,
suggesting a direct effect of nicotine. Experiments with the nicotinic receptor
(nAChR) antagonist mecamylamine were done to determine whether nicotine acted via
a receptor-mediated mechanism. Unexpectedly, several days of mecamylamine
injection (1.0 mg/kg) alone significantly ameliorated dyskinesias to a comparable
extent as nicotine. The decline in AIMs with combined nicotine and mecamylamine
treatment was not additive, suggesting that nicotine exerts its effects via a
nAChR interaction. This latter finding, combined with data showing that
mecamylamine reduced AIMs to a similar extent as nicotine, and that nicotine or
mecamylamine treatment both decreased alpha6beta2* and increased alpha4beta2*
nAChR expression, suggests that the nicotine-mediated improvement in
L-DOPA-induced AIMs may involve a desensitization block. These data have
important implications for the treatment of L-DOPA-induced dyskinesias in
Parkinson's disease.

DOI: 10.1124/jpet.109.162396 
PMCID: PMC2879940
PMID: 20200117  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Eur J Pharmacol. 2010 May 25;634(1-3):89-94. doi: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2010.02.030.
Epub 2010 Feb 23.

Increase in locomotor activity after acute administration of the nicotinic
receptor agonist 3-bromocytisine in rats.

Abin-Carriquiry JA(1), Urbanavicius J, Scorza C, Rebolledo-Fuentes M, Wonnacott
S, Cassels BK, Dajas F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurochemistry, Instituto de Investigaciones Biológicas Clemente
Estable, Montevideo, Uruguay. abin@adinet.com.uy

Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors influence striatal dopaminergic activity and
its outcome on motor behavior. For these reasons, nicotinic receptors have been
considered as therapeutically relevant targets for Parkinson's disease, in which 
a dramatic loss of dopamine affects motor functions. The aim of the present work 
was to compare the effects on locomotor activity induced by the nicotinic agonist
cytisine and two brominated derivatives, 5- and 3-bromocytisine (5-BrCy and
3-BrCy) using nicotine for comparison. After acute systemic administration of the
agonists only 3-BrCy induced an increase in locomotor activity. To study the
mechanism of action involved in this increase we co-administered 3-BrCy with the 
nicotinic antagonist mecamylamine and also examined 3-BrCy's effects in rats
pre-treated with the long acting nicotinic antagonist chlorisondamine,
administered directly in the dorsal and ventral striatum. We studied the role of 
the dopaminergic system by co-administration of the D2 dopamine receptor
antagonist, haloperidol. The results indicate that the increase in motor activity
elicited by 3-BrCy was mediated by nicotinic receptors in the dorsal and ventral 
striatum and depends on the interaction of nicotinic receptors with the
dopaminergic system. We conclude that 3-BrCy might be a new tool to study the
modulation of the dopaminergic system by nicotinic receptors and their behavioral
implications.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2010.02.030 
PMID: 20184877  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Eur J Pharmacol. 2010 Mar 10;629(1-3):47-52. doi: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2009.12.012.
Epub 2009 Dec 21.

Electrophysiological characterization of harmane-induced activation of mesolimbic
dopamine neurons.

Arib O(1), Rat P, Molimard R, Chait A, Faure P, de Beaurepaire R.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Psychopharmacologie, Centre Hospitalier Paul Guiraud, 54 avenue
de la République, 94806 Villejuif, France.

It has been suggested that the beta-carbolines harmane and norharmane may be
involved in the pathophysiology of Parkinson's disease, psychosis and addiction, 
but the mechanisms of these possible effects remain to be elucidated. In the
present study, the effects of the two compounds were examined by using in vivo
extracellular recordings of ventral tegmental dopamine neurons. The effects of
harmane (2mg/kg) and norharmane (2mg/kg), were compared to those of nicotine
(11microg/kg), of cotinine (0.5mg/kg), of the monoamine-oxidase-A inhibitor
befloxatone (0.12mg/kg), and of the monoamine-oxidase-B inhibitor selegiline
(0.5mg/kg). The effects of harmane were also tested after pre-treatment with the 
nicotine receptor antagonist mecamylamine. The results show that all substances, 
except befloxatone, activate the firing and/or burst activity of dopamine
neurons. The increase in firing rate produced by harmane was approximately 18
times greater than that produced by nicotine. Such powerful excitation of
dopamine neurons by harmane may in part explain its involvement in neurotoxicity,
psychosis and addiction. The absence of effect of befloxatone supports the
hypothesis that the effect of harmane is not related to its monoamine-oxidase-A
inhibitory properties. Mecamylamine inhibited by approximately 80% the activity
of harmane, indicating that the activating effect of harmane on dopamine neurons 
involves several mechanisms, among which activation of nicotinic receptors likely
has a prominent importance. The results of the present study support the
hypothesis that harmane could be a tobacco (or smoke) component other than
nicotine involved in tobacco dependence.

Copyright (c) 2009 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2009.12.012 
PMID: 20026027  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Neurol Med Chir (Tokyo). 2009 Nov;49(11):507-13.

Changes in regional blood flow induced by unilateral subthalamic nucleus
stimulation in patients with Parkinson's disease.

Tanei T(1), Kajita Y, Nihashi T, Kaneoke Y, Takebayashi S, Nakatsubo D,
Wakabayashi T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Nagoya University Graduate School of Medicine,
Nagoya, Aichi.

Changes in regional cerebral blood flow (rCBF) induced by unilateral deep brain
stimulation (DBS) of the subthalamic nucleus (STN) were investigated in 7
consecutive patients with Parkinson's disease, 4 men and 3 women (mean age 62.3
+/- 8.1 years), who underwent rCBF measurement by
N-isopropyl-p-(iodine-123)-iodoamphetamine single photon emission computed
tomography at rest before and after unilateral STN DBS preoperatively in the
on-drug condition, and postoperatively in the on-drug and on-stimulation
condition. Statistical parametric mapping was used to identify significant
changes in rCBF from the preoperative to the postoperative conditions. rCBF was
increased in the bilateral cingulate cortices and bilateral cerebellar
hemispheres. rCBF was decreased in the bilateral medial frontal cortices and left
superior temporal cortex. Unilateral STN DBS produced rCBF changes in the
bilateral cingulate cortices, cerebellar hemispheres, and medial frontal
cortices. These findings indicate that unilateral STN DBS affects rCBF in both
hemispheres.


PMID: 19940398  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


80. J Neurol Sci. 2010 Jan 15;288(1-2):88-91. doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2009.09.033. Epub
2009 Oct 24.

Hypoperfusion of the motor cortex associated with parkinsonism in dementia with
Lewy bodies.

Takahashi R(1), Ishii K, Shimada K, Ohkawa S, Nishimura Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Nishi-Kobe Medical Center, Kobe, Hyogo, Japan.
ryuichi59@yahoo.co.jp

OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to investigate the impact of parkinsonism on regional
cerebral blood flow (rCBF) in dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB).
METHOD: Forty-four probable DLB patients, comprising 13 patients without
parkinsonism and 31 patients with parkinsonism, and 16 normal controls were
selected for this study. We evaluated the rCBF in each group by means of
N-isopropyl-p-[(123)I] iodoamphetamine (IMP) and single photon emission computed 
tomography (SPECT). The rCBF in the different groups was compared using
voxel-by-voxel Statistical Parametrical Mapping (SPM).
RESULT: Patients with DLB showed low rCBF in the frontal, temporal, and occipital
cortex with relative sparing of the paracentral region. DLB patients with
parkinsonism (DLB-P) had lower rCBF in the primary motor cortex (M1) and left
supplementary motor area (SMA) than DLB patients without parkinsonism (DLB-nonP).
DLB-nonP patients showed decreased rCBF in the left temporo-occipital region.
CONCLUSION: This study suggests that two distinct clinical entities are involved 
in DLB. In addition, CBF changes in the M1 and SMA are seen in the early stages
of Parkinson's disease. This result would help in diagnosing DLB in the context
of Lewy body (LB) disease.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jns.2009.09.033 
PMID: 19854452  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Neurotox Res. 2009 Oct;16(3):194-204. doi: 10.1007/s12640-009-9040-2. Epub 2009
Mar 20.

Additive protective effects of donepezil and nicotine against salsolinol-induced 
cytotoxicity in SH-SY5Y cells.

Das JR(1), Tizabi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, College of Medicine, Howard University, 520 W
Street NW, Washington, DC 20059, USA.

Although the etiology of Parkinson's disease (PD) remains elusive, a number of
toxins including elevated salsolinol, an endogenous metabolite of dopamine may
contribute to its pathology. It was reported recently that nicotine may have
protective effects against salsolinol-induced toxicity in human neuroblastoma
derived SH-SY5Y cells and that these effects of nicotine are mediated by
nicotinic receptors. Donepezil (Aricept) is a reversible non-competitive
acetylcholinesterase inhibitor that is approved for use in mild to moderate
Alzheimer's disease. The increase in acetylcholine concentrations is believed to 
be the major contributory factor in donepezil's therapeutic efficacy. However,
cholinesterase inhibitors may also directly interact with nicotinic receptors and
possess neuroprotective properties. In this study, we sought to determine whether
donepezil may have protective effects against salsolinol-induced toxicity in
SH-SY5Y cells and whether the combination of donepezil and nicotine may result in
additive protection. Moreover, it was of interest to elucidate the role of
nicotinic receptors as well as cell cycle and apoptosis in mechanism of action of
these compounds. SH-SY5Y cells were exposed to 0.6 mM salsolinol with and without
various drug pretreatments for 48 h. Nicotine (50 muM) resulted in approximately 
54% protection and donepezil (5 muM) resulted in approximately 40% protection,
and the combination of the two resulted in an additive (approximately 93%)
protection against salsolinol-induced toxicity. Salsolinol caused an arrest of
the cells in G(1)-phase of cell cycle and an increase in apoptotic indices that
were blocked by the combination of donepezil and nicotine. Mecamylamine, a
non-selective nicotinic receptor antagonist completely blocked the effects of
nicotine and partially attenuated the effects of donepezil. A combination of
atropine, a muscarinic receptor antagonist and mecamylamine completely blocked
the effects of donepezil, indicating involvement of both nicotinic and muscarinic
receptors in donepezil's actions. The findings suggest a therapeutic potential
for the combination of donepezil and nicotine in PD.

DOI: 10.1007/s12640-009-9040-2 
PMID: 19526284  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Neurosci Res. 2008 Dec;62(4):254-61. doi: 10.1016/j.neures.2008.09.003. Epub 2008
Sep 20.

Synergistic effect of galantamine on nicotine-induced neuroprotection in
hemiparkinsonian rat model.

Yanagida T(1), Takeuchi H, Kitamura Y, Takata K, Minamino H, Shibaike T, Tsushima
J, Kishimoto K, Yasui H, Taniguchi T, Shimohama S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, 21st Century COE Program, Kyoto Pharmaceutical
University, Kyoto 607-8414, Japan.

Recent studies have reported that smokers tend to be less susceptible to
Parkinson's disease (PD) and the stimulation of nicotinic acetylcholine receptor 
(nAChR) is considered to confer a neuroprotective effect. Galantamine is an
acetylcholinesterase inhibitor and an allosteric potentiating ligand for nAChRs. 
However, the effects of galantamine and nicotine on dopaminergic neurons remain
unclear. This study evaluated the neuroprotective effects of galantamine and
nicotine in a rat 6-hydroxydopamine (6-OHDA)-induced hemiparkinsonian model.
6-OHDA with or without galantamine and/or nicotine were injected into unilateral 
substantia nigra of rats. Although methamphetamine-stimulated rotational behavior
and dopaminergic neuronal loss induced by 6-OHDA were not inhibited by
galantamine alone, those were moderately inhibited by nicotine alone. In
addition, 6-OHDA-induced neuronal loss and rotational behavior were
synergistically inhibited by co-injection of galantamine and nicotine. These
protective effects were abolished by mecamylamine, an nAChR antagonist. We
further found that alpha7 nAChR was expressed on both tyrosine hydroxylase
(TH)-immunopositive and TH-immunonegative neurons in the SNpc. A combination of
galantamine and nicotine greatly suppressed 6-OHDA-induced reduction of
TH-immunopositive/alpha7 nAChR-immunopositive neurons. These results suggest that
galantamine synergistically enhances the neuroprotective effect of nicotine
against 6-OHDA-induced dopaminergic neuronal loss through an allosteric
modulation of alpha7 nAChR activation.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neures.2008.09.003 
PMID: 18845194  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Eur J Neurosci. 2008 Aug;28(3):569-76. doi: 10.1111/j.1460-9568.2008.06354.x.

Dopamine release in organotypic cultures of foetal mouse mesencephalon: effects
of depolarizing agents, pargyline, nomifensine, tetrodotoxin and calcium.

Larsen TR(1), Rossen S, Gramsbergen JB.

Author information: 
(1)Anatomy & Neurobiology, Institute of Medical Biology, University of Southern
Denmark, Odense, Denmark.

Organotypic mesencephalic cultures provide an attractive in vitro alternative to 
study development of the nigrostriatal system and pathophysiological mechanisms
related to Parkinson's disease. However, dopamine (DA) release mechanisms have
been poorly characterized in such cultures. We report here endogenous DA release 
(assessed by high-performance liquid chromatography) in organotypic cultures of
foetal mouse (E12) midbrain following single or multiple challenges (1-h
incubations) with high K(+) or veratridine in the presence or absence of
pargyline, nomifensine, calcium and/or tetrodotoxin (TTX). Basal (i.e.
spontaneous) DA release was only detected in the presence of pargyline and
nomifensine (PN), and was highly dependent on calcium and sensitive to TTX. Basal
DA release increased 2.4-fold between week 3 (1st DA release experiment) and week
4 in vitro (3rd DA release experiment), DA tissue levels increased 1.6-fold and
DA release expressed as a percentage of total DA (medium + tissue contents)
increased from 20% to 34% during this growth period in vitro. Co-treatments with 
high K(+) or veratridine did not cause major changes in percentages of DA
release. Tyrosine hydroxylase activity was increased by high K(+), but not by the
other drug treatments. The acute (single or multiple) treatments with
depolarizing agents did not affect the survival of dopaminergic neurons, but
chronic low-level veratridine treatments were toxic.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1460-9568.2008.06354.x 
PMID: 18702728  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Brain Res. 2008 Oct 9;1234:16-24. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2008.07.063. Epub 2008 
Jul 28.

Pharmacological characterization of
(S)-(2)-5-ethynyl-3-(1-methyl-2-pyrrolidinyl)pyridine HCl (SIB-1508Y,
Altinicline), a novel nicotinic acetylcholine receptor agonist.

Rao TS(1), Adams PB, Correa LD, Santori EM, Sacaan AI, Reid RT, Cosford ND.

Author information: 
(1)Merck Research Laboratories, 3535 General Atomics Court, San Diego, CA 92121, 
USA. trao@kalypsys.com

(S)-(2)-5-ethynyl-3-(1-methyl-2-pyrrolidinyl)pyridine HCl (SIB-1508Y,
Altinicline), is a subtype-selective neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine receptor
(nAChR) agonist. In rodents, SIB-1508Y exhibited antidepressant activity,
reversed age-related decrements in vigilance, and improved motor and cognitive
function in primate models of Parkinson's disease. The goal of the study was to
explore neurochemical effects of SIB-1508Y and its isomer, SIB-1680WD. In vitro, 
SIB-1508Y increased dopamine (DA) release from slices of rat striatum, nucleus
accumbens (NAc), olfactory tubercles (OT) and prefrontal cortices (PFC) in a
concentration-dependent manner. Relative to its robust effects on DA release from
various brain regions, SIB-1508Y was minimally effective at increasing NE release
from hippocampus or PFC, and 5-HT release from PFC. SIB-1680WD was less potent
and efficacious than SIB-1508Y, but did not act as a partial agonist.
Subcutaneous injection of SIB-1508Y (10 mg/kg) increased striatal DA release and 
this release was sensitive to blockade by the non-competitive nAChR antagonist,
mecamylamine (Mec). SIB-1508Y also increased hippocampal ACh release selectively 
without affecting striatal ACh release. Hippocampal ACh release evoked by
SIB-1508Y was attenuated by nAChR antagonists Mec and Dihydro-beta-erythroidine
(DHbetaE), and also by the DA D1 receptor antagonist, SCH-23390. These results
are consistent with previously established pharmacology of nAChR regulation of
hippocampal ACh release. Repeated administration of SIB-1508Y did not result in
an enhanced striatal DA release or hippocampal ACh release. In summary, the
abilities of SIB-1508Y to release multiple neurotransmitters in distinct brain
regions may contribute to its behavioral profile.

DOI: 10.1016/j.brainres.2008.07.063 
PMID: 18692487  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Neurol Res. 2008 Sep;30(7):751-60. doi: 10.1179/174313208X298020. Epub 2008 May
21.

Angiotensin II type 1 receptors may not influence response of spinal autonomic
neurons to axonal damage.

Tang H(1), Pavel J, Saavedra JM, Brimijoin S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, Mayo
Foundation, Rochester, MN 55905, USA.

OBJECTIVES: Angiotensin II can promote cell stress, and the expression of its AT1
receptor is characteristic of neuronal populations that die off in multiple
systems atrophy and Parkinson's disease. To explore the possible significance of 
these facts, we undertook to: (1) clarify the distribution of AT(1) in rat
neurons; (2) use selective antagonists as a means of determining whether AT1
activation predisposes stressed neurons to die.
METHODS: AT1-expression was examined by immunohistochemistry and by
autoradiography for [125I]-sarcosine1-angiotensin II binding in sensory, motor
and autonomic neurons. To induce cell loss in a specific neuronal population,
rats were given systemic i.v. injection of anti-acetylcholinesterase antibodies, 
which cause a delayed death of pre-ganglionic sympathetic neurons in the
intermediolateral nucleus (IML). As pharmacologic intervention, some
immunolesioned rats were treated with the selective AT1 antagonist, Candesartan.
RESULTS: Immunohistochemistry and autoradiography revealed AT1 expression in
dorsal root ganglia, superior cervical ganglion. In the dorsal horn of the spinal
cord, AT1 immunostainining and angiotensin binding were both prominent. In
ventral horn and IML, immunoreactivity for AT1 and choline acetyltransferase
co-localized in pre-ganglionic sympathetic and somatic motor neurons.
Immunolesion caused over 50% loss of IML perikarya within 3 months. Concurrent
treatment with the AT1 antagonist, Candesartan, did not affect the outcome.
DISCUSSION: AT1 expression is surprisingly widespread in sensory, autonomic and
somatic motor neurons of the rat. This expression may be important to the normal 
physiology of these systems. Present data, however, do not support the concept
that AT1 activation contributes to the loss of autonomic neurons after axonal
damage.

DOI: 10.1179/174313208X298020 
PMCID: PMC2682715
PMID: 18498681  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Physiol Behav. 2007 Dec 5;92(5):1002-9. Epub 2007 Aug 8.

Weaver mutant mice exhibit long-term learning deficits under several measures of 
instrumental behavior.

Derenne A(1), Arsenault ML, Austin DP, Weatherly JN.

Author information: 
(1)University of North Dakota, United States. adam.derenne@und.nodak.edu

Homozygous weaver mutant mice (wv/wv) exhibit symptoms that parallel Parkinson's 
disease, including motor deficits and the destruction of dopaminergic neurons as 
well as degeneration in the cerebellum and hippocampus. To develop a more
complete behavioral profile of these organisms, groups of wv/wv, wv/+ mice and
C57BL/6 mice were observed on a within-subjects basis under a fixed-interval
schedule of reinforcement, a differential-reinforcement-of-low-rate-of-responding
schedule, and a discrimination task in which a saccharin solution and tap water
were concurrently available from two food cups. Under both reinforcement
schedules, the wv/wv mice responded as frequently as the comparison subjects, but
they responded in a manner that was inappropriate to the contingencies. Rather
than respond with increasing frequency as the upcoming reinforcer became
temporally proximate, wv/wv mice responded with decreasing probability as a
function of the time since the previous reinforcer. Under the discrimination
task, the wv/wv mice, unlike the controls, obtained saccharin over tap water at
the level of chance. The findings suggest that weaver mutant mice express
learning deficits similar to those found in other dopamine-deficient organisms.

DOI: 10.1016/j.physbeh.2007.07.015 
PMID: 17826805  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Neurotox Res. 2007 Jul;12(1):61-9.

Antiapoptotic effects of nicotine in its protection against salsolinol-induced
cytotoxicity.

Copeland RL Jr(1), Das JR, Kanaan YM, Taylor RE, Tizabi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, College of Medicine, Howard University,
Washington, DC 20059, USA.

Salsolinol (1-methyl-6,7-dihydroxy-1,2,3,4-tetrahydroisoquinoline), a metabolite 
of dopamine, may act as an endogenous neurotoxin and contribute to the etiology
of Parkinson's disease (PD). The inverse relationship between smoking and PD
prompted our previous investigation and the report of protective effects of
nicotine against salsolinol-induced toxicity in cultured SH-SY5Y cells (Copeland 
et al., Neurotox. Res. 8:289, 2005). These cells, derived from human
neuroblastoma cells, express dopaminergic activity and are used as a model of
nigral dopaminergic cells, the major site of pathology in PD. The purpose of the 
current study was to investigate whether apoptotic or antiapoptotic mechanisms
were responsible for the observed effects of salsolinol and nicotine,
respectively. Moreover, it was of interest to determine whether the actions of
nicotine are mediated through nicotinic receptors. SH-SY5Y cells were exposed to 
0.4 or 0.7 mM salsolinol with and without pretreatment in combination of 0.1 mM
nicotine and 0.1 mM mecamylamine and were exposed for 24 and 48 h. Various
parameters including cell cycle perturbations (reflected in propidium iodide DNA 
staining); cell cycle regulator retinoblastoma protein (reflected in the Western 
blot), apoptosis (reflected in annexin V/propidium iodide staining followed by
flow cytometry) were analyzed. Salsolinol caused an arrest of the cells in
G1-phase of cell cycle and an increase in apoptotic indices, whereas pretreatment
with nicotine attenuated or completely blocked the effects of salsolinol.
Nicotine effects in turn, were totally blocked by mecamylamine (0.1 mM). The
results suggest that apoptosis is a major mechanism for salsolinol-induced
toxicity and that antiapoptotic effects of nicotine, mediated by nicotinic
receptors, may play a primary role in its neuroprotective effects. Hence,
nicotinic agonists in combination with other antiapoptotic agents may be of
substantial benefit in at least a subpopulation of Parkinson patients.


PMID: 17513200  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Curr Drug Targets. 2007 May;8(5):603-20.

AMPA receptor potentiators: application for depression and Parkinson's disease.

O'Neill MJ(1), Witkin JM.

Author information: 
(1)Eli Lilly & Co. Ltd., Lilly Research Centre, Erl Wood Manor, Windlesham,
Surrey, UK. Oneill_Michael_J@Lilly.com

Alpha-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazole-propionic acid (AMPA) receptors
mediate most of the excitatory neurotransmission and play a key role in synaptic 
plasticity in the mammalian central nervous system (CNS). In recent years several
classes of AMPA receptor potentiators have been reported in the literature,
including pyrrolidones (piracetam, aniracetam), benzothiazides (cyclothiazide),
benzylpiperidines (CX-516, CX-546) and biarylpropylsulfonamides (LY392098,
LY404187, LY450108, LY451395 and LY503430). Clinical and preclinical data have
suggested that positive modulation of AMPA receptors may be therapeutically
effective in the treatment of cognitive deficits. However, recent evidence has
shown that in addition to modulating fast synaptic plasticity and memory
processes, AMPA receptor potentiators alter downstream signalling pathways and
may thereby have utility in other CNS disorders. The present review summarises
studies into the effects of AMPA receptor potentiators (with a focus on the
biarylpropylsulfonamides) in rodent models of depression and Parkinson's disease.


PMID: 17504104  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Behav Brain Res. 2007 Apr 16;179(1):76-89. Epub 2007 Jan 23.

Modulation of L-DOPA-induced abnormal involuntary movements by clinically tested 
compounds: further validation of the rat dyskinesia model.

Dekundy A(1), Lundblad M, Danysz W, Cenci MA.

Author information: 
(1)In vivo Pharmacology, Preclinical Research and Development, Merz
Pharmaceuticals GmbH, Eckenheimer Landstrasse 100, D-60318 Frankfurt am Main,
Germany. andrzej.dekundy@merz.de

L-DOPA-induced dyskinesia (LID) is a major complication of the pharmacotherapy of
Parkinson's Disease. A model of LID has recently been described in rats with
unilateral 6-hydroxydopamine (6-OHDA) lesions. In the present study, the model
was used in order to compare the efficacies of some clinically available
compounds that have shown antidyskinetic effects in nonhuman primate models of
LID and/or in patients, namely, amantadine (20 and 40 mg/kg), buspirone (1, 2 and
4 mg/kg), clonidine (0.01, 0.1 and 1 mg/kg), clozapine (4 and 8 mg/kg),
fluoxetine (2.5 and 5 mg/kg), propranolol (5, 10 and 20mg/kg), riluzole (2 and 4 
mg/kg), and yohimbine (2 and 10 mg/kg). Rats were treated for 3 weeks with L-DOPA
for an induction and monitoring of abnormal involuntary movements (AIMs) prior to
the drug screening experiments. The antidyskinetic drugs or their vehicles were
administered together with L-DOPA, and their effects were evaluated according to 
a randomized cross-over design both on the AIM rating scale and on the rotarod
test. Most of the compounds under investigation attenuated the L-DOPA-induced
axial, limb and orolingual AIM scores. However, the highest doses of many of
these substances (but for amantadine and riluzole) had also detrimental motor
effects, producing a reduction in rotarod performance and locomotor scores. Since
the present results correspond well to existing clinical and experimental data,
this study indicates that axial, limb and orolingual AIMs possess predictive
validity for the preclinical screening of novel antidyskinetic treatments.
Combining tests of general motor performance with AIMs ratings in the same
experiment allows for selecting drugs that specifically reduce dyskinesia without
diminishing the anti-akinetic effect of L-DOPA.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbr.2007.01.013 
PMID: 17306893  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Neurosci Lett. 2007 Mar 30;415(3):200-4. Epub 2007 Jan 14.

Effects of desensitized nicotinic receptors on rotational behavior in a
6-hydroxydopamine model of Parkinson's disease.

Han F(1), Wang H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Pharmacology, Beijing Institute of Pharmacology
and Toxicology, Beijing 100850, PR China.

The purpose of this study was to investigate the effects of desensitized
nicotinic acetylcholine receptors (nAChRs) on rotational behavior in the
unilateral 6-hydroxydopamine (6-OHDA) model of Parkinson's disease (PD). When
rats were treated with different doses of nicotine, nAChRs were observed in
activated, subacute desensitized, acute desensitized, and chronic desensitized
states. The rotational behavior of the hemiparkinsonian rats was determined when 
nAChRs were in the activated or different desensitized states. The results showed
that hemiparkinsonian rats exhibited no significant changes in
apomorphine-induced rotation when brain nAChRs were in an activated state.
However, hemiparkinsonian rats displayed a significant reduction in
apomorphine-induced rotational behavior when brain nAChRs were in subacute,
acute, or chronic desensitized states induced by repeated administration of
nicotine. When nAChRs were blocked by the nAChR antagonist mecamylamine, the
behavior of the hemiparkinsonian rats worsened. These results suggest that
desensitized nAChRs can lead to behavioral improvement in the 6-OHDA rat model of
PD.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neulet.2007.01.027 
PMID: 17270346  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Clin Med Res. 2006 Dec;4(4):322-5.

Growth hormone stimulation tests in the differential diagnosis of Parkinson's
disease.

Pellecchia MT(1), Pivonello R, Colao A, Barone P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurological Sciences, University Federico II, Via Pansini 5,
80131 Naples, Italy. pellec3@hotmail.com

Comment in
    Clin Med Res. 2006 Dec;4(4):246-7.

Idiopathic Parkinson's disease (IPD) is a common neurodegenerative disorder whose
differential diagnosis from other forms of atypical parkinsonism, for instance
multiple system atrophy (MSA) or progressive supranuclear palsy, may be
difficult, especially in the early stages. Growth hormone stimulation tests have 
been recently reported to be useful in the differential diagnosis between IPD and
MSA. Both clonidine, an alpha(2)-adrenoceptor agonist, and arginine, an amino
acid activating the cholinergic system, have been used to assess growth hormone
response in patients with IPD and MSA. This review summarizes the results of
several studies and discusses the validity of these tests in the differential
diagnosis of parkinsonisms.


PMCID: PMC1764807
PMID: 17210980  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Mov Disord. 2006 Dec;21(12):2140-4.

Hypoperfusion of the visual pathway in parkinsonian patients with visual
hallucinations.

Matsui H(1), Nishinaka K, Oda M, Hara N, Komatsu K, Kubori T, Udaka F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Sumitomo Hospital, Kita-ku, Osaka, Japan.
matsui-hideaki@sumitomo-hp.or.jp

Little is known about the developing mechanisms of visual hallucinations in
Parkinson's disease. This study aimed to investigate perfusion changes in
parkinsonian patients with visual hallucinations using
n-isopropyl-p-[123I]iodoamphetamine ([123I]IMP) single photon emission computed
tomography imaging. A total of 70 consecutive patients, including 31 patients
with visual hallucinations, and 39 patients without hallucinations, participated 
in this study. Patients with severe cognitive impairment (Mini-Mental State
Examination score < 20), nonvisual hallucinations, or confusion were excluded. We
compared brain perfusion changes between the two groups. We found that
hallucinatory patients had significant perfusion reductions in the bilateral
inferior parietal lobule, inferior temporal gyrus, precuneus gyrus, and occipital
cortex compared to nonhallucinatory patients. These results suggested that
hypoperfusion of the visual pathway was closely related to visual hallucinations 
in Parkinson's disease.

Copyright 2006 Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.21140 
PMID: 17029272  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Mov Disord. 2006 Dec;21(12):2165-9.

Hypoperfusion of the auditory and prefrontal cortices in Parkinsonian patients
with verbal hallucinations.

Matsui H(1), Nishinaka K, Oda M, Hara N, Komatsu K, Kubori T, Udaka F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Sumitomo Hospital, Kita-ku, Osaka, Japan.
matsui-hideaki@sumitomo-hp.or.jp

We examined patients with and without auditory hallucinations, using
n-isopropyl-p-[123I]iodoamphetamine single photon emission computed tomographic
imaging. We assessed verbal hallucinations in the present study: patients with
nonverbal auditory hallucinations were excluded. A total of 11 patients with
verbal and visual hallucinations and 17 patients with visual hallucinations only 
were enrolled. Patients with both verbal and visual hallucinations revealed
significant hypoperfusion in the bilateral prefrontal cortex and right superior
temporal gyrus compared to patients with visual hallucinations only. There were
no significant hyperperfusion in patients with verbal plus visual hallucinations.
These results may support the release hallucination theory in verbal
hallucinations of Parkinson's disease, although another explanations may be more 
appropriate and further studies are required.

Copyright 2006 Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.21147 
PMID: 17029260  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


94. J Chromatogr B Analyt Technol Biomed Life Sci. 2006 Dec 5;844(2):283-91. Epub
2006 Aug 7.

Simultaneous determination of selegiline and desmethylselegiline in human body
fluids by headspace solid-phase microextraction and gas chromatography-mass
spectrometry.

Kuriki A(1), Kumazawa T, Lee XP, Hasegawa C, Kawamura M, Suzuki O, Sato K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Legal Medicine, Showa University School of Medicine, 1-5-8
Hatanodai, Shinagawaku, Tokyo 142-8555, Japan.

A method for the simultaneous determination of selegiline and its metabolite,
desmethylselegiline, in human whole blood and urine is presented. The method,
which combines a fiber-based headspace solid-phase microextraction (SPME)
technique with gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC-MS), required
optimization of various parameters (e.g., salt additives, extraction
temperatures, extraction times and the extraction properties of the SPME fiber
coatings). Pargyline was used as the internal standard. Extraction efficiencies
for both selegiline and desmethylselegiline were 2.0-3.4% for whole blood, and
8.0-13.2% for urine. The regression equations for selegiline and
desmethylselegiline extracted from whole blood were linear (r(2)=0.996 and 0.995)
within the concentration ranges 0.1-10 and 0.2-20 ng/ml, respectively. For urine,
the regression equations for selegiline and desmethylselegiline were linear
(r(2)=0.999 and 0.998) within the concentration ranges 0.05-5.0 and 0.1-10 ng/ml,
respectively. The limit of detection for selegiline and desmethylselegiline was
0.01-0.05 ng/ml for both samples. The lower and upper limits of quantification
for each compound were 0.05-0.2 and 5-20 ng/ml, respectively. Intra- and
inter-day coefficients of variation for selegiline and desmethylselegiline in
both samples were not greater than 8.7 and 11.7%, respectively. The determination
of selegiline and desmethylselegiline concentrations in Parkinson's disease
patients undergoing continuous selegiline treatment is presented and is shown to 
validate the present methodology.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jchromb.2006.07.019 
PMID: 16893687  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Brain Res. 2006 Jun 6;1093(1):12-9. Epub 2006 May 16.

Nicotine modulates expression of amyloid precursor protein and amyloid
precursor-like protein 2 in mouse brain and in SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma cells.

Gutala R(1), Wang J, Hwang YY, Haq R, Li MD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatric Medicine, Section of Neurobiology, University of
Virginia, 1670 Discovery Drive, Suite 110, Charlottesville, VA 22911, USA.

Epidemiological studies indicate that tobacco smoking can be protective against
neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer's disease (AD) and Parkinson's
disease (PD). The objective of the present study was to examine the changes in
gene expression induced by chronic oral nicotine administration (100 mug/ml in 2%
saccharin for 14 days), with special emphasis on amyloid precursor protein (APP) 
and its homologue, amyloid precursor-like protein 2 (APLP2), in different brain
regions of C57BL/6 mice using a pathway-focused microarray. Our results revealed 
that nicotine stimulated mRNA expression of APP in the amygdala (64%; P = 0.003) 
and hippocampus (32%; P = 0.034) and of APLP2 in the amygdala (39%; P = 0.002).
These results were verified by quantitative real-time RT-PCR except that
expression of APLP2 was also significantly upregulated by nicotine in the
hippocampus. In addition, in vitro nicotine treatment of SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma
cells resulted in a significant increase in expression of APP protein, soluble
APP, and APLP2, whereas co-treatment with mecamylamine (an antagonist of
nicotinic acetylcholine receptors) attenuated the stimulating effect of nicotine 
on APP and APLP2 expression. These findings suggest that nicotine treatment
facilitates the increase in the expression of mRNA and protein of the APP and
APLP2 genes in rat brain and SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma cells.

DOI: 10.1016/j.brainres.2006.03.100 
PMID: 16707114  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


96. J Geriatr Psychiatry Neurol. 2006 Mar;19(1):41-5.

Frontal assessment battery and brain perfusion image in Parkinson's disease.

Matsui H(1), Udaka F, Miyoshi T, Hara N, Tamura A, Oda M, Kubori T, Nishinaka K, 
Kameyama M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Sumitomo Hospital, Osaka, Japan.
matsui-hideaki@sumitomo-hp.or.jp.

The objective was to compare brain perfusion image using 3-dimensional
stereotactic surface projection analysis of N-isopropyl-p-123I iodoamphetamine
single photon emission computed tomography between Parkinson's disease patients
with a high frontal assessment battery score and those with a low frontal
assessment battery score. Thirty nondemented patients with Parkinson's disease
were studied. Patients were divided into 2 groups: a high-scoring group whose
frontal assessment battery score was 12 or more and a low-scoring group whose
frontal assessment battery score was 11 or less. The high-scoring group included 
21 patients, and the low-scoring group included 9 patients. They underwent
N-isopropyl-p-123I iodoamphetamine single photon emission computed tomography,
and we analyzed the data by the 3-dimensional stereotactic surface projection
method. Results showed that left inferior parietal lobule and left supramarginal 
gyrus perfusion of the low-scoring group were significantly decreased compared
with the high-scoring group. It is concluded that patients with Parkinson's
disease may have frontal lobe dysfunction, but the decreased frontal assessment
battery score may be caused not by progressed frontal lobe dysfunction but by
parietal lobe dysfunction added to their preexisting frontal lobe impairment.

DOI: 10.1177/0891988705284714 
PMID: 16449760  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Med Hypotheses. 2006;66(5):985-90. Epub 2006 Jan 9.

Nicotinic cholinergic antagonists: a novel approach for the treatment of autism.

Lippiello PM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Preclinical Research, Targacept, Inc., Winston-Salem, NC 27101, USA.
Lippiello@Targacept.com

Evidence supports the hypothesis that normalization of cholinergic tone by
selective antagonism of neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine receptors (NNRs) may
ameliorate the core symptoms of autism. As often is the case, epidemiology has
provided the first important clues. It is well recognized that psychiatric
patients are significantly more often smokers than the general population. The
only known exceptions are obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), catatonic
schizophrenia and interestingly, autism. In this regard, clinical studies with
nicotine have demonstrated amelioration of symptoms of a number of diseases and
disorders, including Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, ADHD and
Tourette's syndrome. Nicotine's agonist properties at CNS NNRs have been
implicated in these effects and support the concept of self-medication as a
strong motivation for smoking in cognitively compromised individuals. On the
other hand, the inverse correlation between autism and smoking suggests that
smoking does not provide symptomatic relief and may actually be indicative of an 
active avoidance of nicotine's agonist effects in this disorder. Neuroanatomical 
evidence is consistent with this idea based on the presence of hypercholinergic
architecture in the autistic brain, particularly during the first few years of
development, making the avoidance of further stimulation of an already
hyperactive cholinergic system plausible. This may also explain why stimulants
(known to increase dopamine levels as do NNR agonists) appear to aggravate
autistic symptoms and why studies with cholinesterase inhibitors that increase
acetylcholine levels in the brain have yielded variable effects in autism. Taken 
together, the evidence suggests the possibility that nicotinic cholinergic
antagonism may in fact be palliative. Pharmacological evidence supports this
hypothesis. For example, antidepressants, many of which are now known to be
non-competitive NNR antagonists, have been used successfully to treat a number of
autistic symptoms. More specifically, there is anecdotal evidence from at least
one medical practitioner that mecamylamine, a non-selective NNR antagonist, is
effective in treating many autistic symptoms, particularly those that are
refractory to most other treatments. Clearly there is a need for carefully
controlled clinical studies with novel selective NNR antagonists to explore their
potential as a new and exciting approach for the treatment of autism.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mehy.2005.11.015 
PMID: 16406687  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Ont Health Technol Assess Ser. 2006;6(22):1-79. Epub 2006 Dec 1.

Functional brain imaging: an evidence-based analysis.

Health Quality Ontario.

OBJECTIVE: The objective of this analysis is to review a spectrum of functional
brain imaging technologies to identify whether there are any imaging modalities
that are more effective than others for various brain pathology conditions. This 
evidence-based analysis reviews magnetoencephalography (MEG), magnetic resonance 
spectroscopy (MRS), positron emission tomography (PET), and functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI) for the diagnosis or surgical management of the
following conditions: Alzheimer's disease (AD), brain tumours, epilepsy, multiple
sclerosis (MS), and Parkinson's disease (PD).
CLINICAL NEED: TARGET POPULATION AND CONDITION Alzheimer's disease is a
progressive, degenerative, neurologic condition characterized by cognitive
impairment and memory loss. The Canadian Study on Health and Aging estimated that
there will be 97,000 incident cases (about 60,000 women) of dementia (including
AD) in Canada in 2006. In Ontario, there will be an estimated 950 new cases and
580 deaths due to brain cancer in 2006. Treatments for brain tumours include
surgery and radiation therapy. However, one of the limitations of radiation
therapy is that it damages tissue though necrosis and scarring. Computed
tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) may not distinguish between 
radiation effects and resistant tissue, creating a potential role for functional 
brain imaging. Epilepsy is a chronic disorder that provokes repetitive seizures. 
In Ontario, the rate of epilepsy is estimated to be 5 cases per 1,000 people.
Most people with epilepsy are effectively managed with drug therapy; but about
50% do not respond to drug therapy. Surgical resection of the seizure foci may be
considered in these patients, and functional brain imaging may play a role in
localizing the seizure foci. Multiple sclerosis is a progressive, inflammatory,
demyelinating disease of the central nervous system (CNS). The cause of MS is
unknown; however, it is thought to be due to a combination of etiologies,
including genetic and environmental components. The prevalence of MS in Canada is
240 cases per 100,000 people. Parkinson's disease is the most prevalent movement 
disorder; it affects an estimated 100,000 Canadians. Currently, the standard for 
measuring disease progression is through the use of scales, which are subjective 
measures of disease progression. Functional brain imaging may provide an
objective measure of disease progression, differentiation between parkinsonian
syndromes, and response to therapy.
THE TECHNOLOGY BEING REVIEWED: FUNCTIONAL BRAIN IMAGING: Functional brain imaging
technologies measure blood flow and metabolism. The results of these tests are
often used in conjunction with structural imaging (e.g., MRI or CT). Positron
emission tomography and MRS identify abnormalities in brain tissues. The former
measures abnormalities through uptake of radiotracers in the brain, while the
latter measures chemical shifts in metabolite ratios to identify abnormalities.
The potential role of functional MRI (fMRI) is to identify the areas of the brain
responsible for language, sensory and motor function (sensorimotor cortex),
rather than identifying abnormalities in tissues. Magnetoencephalography measures
magnetic fields of the electric currents in the brain, identifying aberrant
activity. Magnetoencephalography may have the potential to localize seizure foci 
and to identify the sensorimotor cortex, visual cortex and auditory cortex. In
terms of regulatory status, MEG and PET are licensed by Health Canada. Both MRS
and fMRI use a MRI platform; thus, they do not have a separate licence from
Health Canada. The radiotracers used in PET scanning are not licensed by Health
Canada for general use but can be used through a Clinical Trials Application.
REVIEW STRATEGY: The literature published up to September 2006 was searched in
the following databases: MEDLINE, MEDLINE In-Process & Other Non-Indexed
Citations, EMBASE, Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, CENTRAL, and
International Network of Agencies for Health Technology Assessment (INAHTA). The 
database search was supplemented with a search of relevant Web sites and a review
of the bibliographies of selected papers. General inclusion criteria were applied
to all conditions. Those criteria included the following: Full reports of
systematic reviews, randomized controlled trials (RCTs), cohort-control studies, 
prospective cohort studies (PCS'), and retrospective studies.Sample sizes of at
least 20 patients (≥ 10 with condition being reviewed).English-language
studies.Human studies.Any age.STUDYING AT LEAST ONE OF THE FOLLOWING: fMRI, PET, 
MRS, or MEG.Functional brain imaging modality must be compared with a clearly
defined reference standard.MUST REPORT AT LEAST ONE OF THE FOLLOWING OUTCOMES:
sensitivity, specificity, accuracy, positive predictive value (PPV), receiver
operating characteristic curve, outcome measuring impact on diagnostic testing,
treatment, patient health, or cost.
SUMMARY OF FINDINGS: There is evidence to indicate that PET can accurately
diagnose AD; however, at this time, there is no evidence to suggest that a
diagnosis of AD with PET alters the clinical outcomes of patients. The addition
of MRS or O-(2-(18)F-Fluoroethyl)-L-Tyrosine (FET)-PET to gadolinium
(Gd)-enhanced MRI for distinguishing malignant from benign tumours during primary
diagnosis may provide a higher specificity than Gd-enhanced MRI alone. The
clinical utility of additional imaging in patients to distinguish malignant from 
benign tumours is unclear, because patients with a suspected brain tumour will
likely undergo a biopsy despite additional imaging results. The addition of MRS, 
FET-PET, or MRI T2 to Gd-enhanced MRI for the differentiation of recurrence from 
radiation necrosis may provide a higher specificity than Gd-enhanced MRI alone.
The clinical utility of additional imaging in patients with a suspected
recurrence is in the monitoring of patients. Based on the evidence available, it 
is unclear if one of the imaging modalities (MRS, FET-PET, or MRI T2) offers
significantly improved specificity over another. There may be a role for fMRI in 
the identification of surgical candidates for tumour resection; however, this
requires further research. Based on the studies available, it is unclear if MEG
has similar accuracy in localizing seizure foci to intracranial
electroencephalogram (ICEEG). More high-quality research is needed to establish
whether there is a difference in accuracy between MEG and ICEEG. The results of
the studies comparing PET to noninvasive electroencephalogram (EEG) did not
demonstrate that PET was more accurate at localizing seizure foci; however, there
may be some specific conditions, such as tuberous sclerosis, where PET may be
more accurate than noninvasive EEG. There may be some clinical utility for MEG or
fMRI in presurgical functional mapping; however, this needs further investigation
involving comparisons with other modalities. The clinical utility of MRS has yet 
to be established for patients with epilepsy. Positron emission tomography has
high sensitivity and specificity in the diagnosis of PD and the differential
diagnosis of parkinsonian syndromes; however, it is unclear at this time if the
addition of PET in the diagnosis of these conditions contributes to the treatment
and clinical outcomes of patients. There is limited clinical utility of
functional brain imaging in the management of patients with MS at this time.
Diagnosis of MS is established through clinical history, evoked potentials, and
MRI. Magnetic resonance imaging can identify the multifocal white lesions and
other structural characteristics of MS.


PMCID: PMC3379170
PMID: 23074493 


99. Neurotox Res. 2005 Nov;8(3-4):289-93.

Neuroprotective effects of nicotine against salsolinol-induced cytotoxicity:
implications for Parkinson's disease.

Copeland RL Jr(1), Leggett YA, Kanaan YM, Taylor RE, Tizabi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Department of Microbiology, College of
Medicine, Howard University, Washington, DC 20059, USA.

Parkinson's disease is associated with degeneration of dopaminergic cell bodies
in the substantia nigra. It has been suggested that salsolinol, an endogenous
metabolite of dopamine, may be involved in this process. An inverse relationship 
between Parkinson's disease and smoking (nicotine intake) has been observed in
epidemiological studies. Moreover, neuroprotective effects of nicotine in various
experimental models have been observed. In this study we sought to determine
whether salsolinol-induced cytotoxicity in SH-SY5Y human neuroblastoma cells, a
cloned cell line which expresses dopaminergic activity, could also be prevented
by nicotine pretreatment, and if so, which nicotinic receptors may mediate the
actions of nicotine. Exposure of SH-SY5Y cells to 0.8 mM salsolinol for 24 hours 
resulted in approximately 80% cell death as determined by
3,[4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl]-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) assay.
Pretreatment of cells with 0.1 mM nicotine resulted in inhibition of
salsolinol-induced cytotoxicity. The effects of nicotine were blocked by
mecamylamine, a non-selective nicotinic antagonist as well as conotoxins with
selective antagonism against alpha3-containing nicotinic receptor subunits. The
effects of nicotine were not affected by dihydro-beta-erythroidine or
methyllycaconitine, selective antagonists against alpha4-beta2 or alpha7
nicotinic receptors, respectively. It is suggested that selective nicotinic
agonists may be of therapeutic potential in at least a subpopulation of
Parkinsonian patients.


PMID: 16371323  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


100. J Neurol Sci. 2006 Feb 15;241(1-2):67-72. Epub 2005 Dec 13.

Brain SPECT analysis by 3D-SSP and phenotype of Parkinson's disease.

Mito Y(1), Yoshida K, Yabe I, Makino K, Tashiro K, Kikuchi S, Sasaki H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Asahikawa Red Cross Hospital, 1-1, Akebono,
Asahikawa, Hokkaido, 070-8530, Japan. mito@asahikawa-rch.gr.jp

OBJECTIVES: We hypothesize that the regional pattern of blood flow reduction in
the brain is different between tremor-dominant Parkinson's disease (PD) and
postural instability gait difficulty (PIGD)-dominant PD. We therefore
investigated the association of phenotypes in untreated PD with brain perfusion
on SPECT using three-dimensional stereotactic surface projection (3D-SSP)
technique.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Thirty-three patients who had PD without dementia (12 men
and 21 women with a mean age of 67.1+/-6.4 years) were included in this study.
Their symptoms were rated using the Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale
(UPDRS). Patients were grouped in two phenotypes: tremor and PIGD-dominant groups
based on UPDRS components. Around the same time, all patients were examined by
N-isopropyl-p[123I] iodoamphetamine single photon emission computed tomography
(123I-IMP SPECT), and obtained images were analyzed with 3D-SSP using an
image-analysis software, NEUROSTAT. Data on brain surface perfusion extracted by 
3D-SSP analysis were compared between the PD patients and the normal control
group. The same comparisons were made for subgroups of PD patients.
RESULTS: Cerebral perfusion was decreased at the anterior cingulate cortex and
primary visual cortex of the PD patients, and especially by the pixel-by-pixel
comparison, perfusion was significantly decreased at the right anterior cingulate
cortex compared with the normal controls. In the PIGD-dominant group, more severe
hypoperfusion was seen at the same regions. In the tremor-dominant group,
significant hypoperfusion was not seen compared with the normal controls.
CONCLUSIONS: The regional pattern of blood flow reduction in the brain was found 
to be different between tremor-dominant PD and PIGD-dominant PD. These regional
differences were considered to suggest different and disease-specific
combinations of underlying pathophysiological and neurochemical processes.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jns.2005.10.017 
PMID: 16352310  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Intern Med. 2005 Oct;44(10):1046-50.

N-isopropyl-p- 123I iodoamphetamine single photon emission computed tomography
study of Parkinson's disease with dementia.

Matsui H(1), Udaka F, Miyoshi T, Hara N, Tamura A, Oda M, Kubori T, Nishinaka K, 
Kameyama M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Sumitomo Hospital, Osaka.

BACKGROUND: Intellectual deterioration occurs in 10-40% of patients with
Parkinson's disease. However, there are many conflicting studies on its relation 
with brain perfusion and the nature of this dementing process remains
controversial.
OBJECTIVE: To compare cortical perfusion by SPECT using (123)I-IMP between
Parkinson's disease patients with dementia and those without dementia and to
investigate the correlation between dementia in Parkinson's disease and brain
perfusion in various areas.
METHODS: Fifty-two cases of Parkinson's disease and 10 control cases were
studied. The Parkinson's disease with dementia group included 30 cases and the
Parkinson's disease without dementia group included 22 cases.
RESULTS: By multiple logistic regression method, we demonstrated significant
hypoperfusion in the occipital cortex in Parkinson's disease with dementia.
CONCLUSIONS: The cause of dementia in Parkinson's disease may vary. We
demonstrated that occipital hypoperfusion was closely correlated to dementia in
Parkinson's disease compared to frontal, parietal and temporal perfusion.


PMID: 16293914  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Mov Disord. 2006 Mar;21(3):390-4.

Camptocormia associated with focal myositis in multiple-system atrophy.

Diederich NJ(1), Goebel HH, Dooms G, Bumb A, Huber F, Kompoliti K, Meinck HM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Centre Hospitalier de Luxembourg, Luxembourg,
Luxembourg. diederich.nico@chl.lu

Camptocormia (CC) or pronounced forward flexion of the trunk is a common symptom 
of Parkinson's disease. We describe 2 patients with probable, respectively
possible multiple-system atrophy and CC. Magnetic resonance imaging of the
erector trunci showed focal patchy hyperintensities with gadolinium enhancement
and muscle biopsy was indicative of variably pronounced focal myositis. CC was
progressive and the major handicap for both patients after 1 and 1.5 years of
follow-up, respectively. The therapeutic response was poor. Similarities with the
dropped-head syndrome suggest that the muscle pathology may be either the primary
cause of CC, a focal reaction to the CC posture, or a coincident syndrome of old 
age.

(c) 2005 Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.20686 
PMID: 16211611  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Biomaterials. 2006 Feb;27(6):937-46. Epub 2005 Aug 22.

A delivery strategy for rotenone microspheres in an animal model of Parkinson's
disease.

Huang J(1), Liu H, Gu W, Yan Z, Xu Z, Yang Y, Zhu X, Li Y.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Materia Medica, Shanghai Institute for Biological Sciences,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 201203, China.

In order to study the pathogenesis of Parkinson's disease (PD), and explore
therapeutic drug or approaches, the accurate animal model of PD with inexpensive,
biocompatible and convenient administration was necessary. The aim of the present
work was to investigate a delivery strategy for rotenone microspheres in an
animal model of PD. The rotenone microspheres were prepared by solvent
evaporation technique. The rotenone microspheres showed high entrapment
efficiency (97.4+/-2.2%) with particle size about 100 microm. In vitro release of
rotenone microspheres demonstrated different profiles from medium with different 
pH or concentration of isopropyl alcohol. The most consistent medium with in vivo
rotenone levels in rat plasma was PBS (pH 5.8) with 20% isopropyl alcohol, and
the cumulated release amount of rotenone over 30 days was 95.4% in it. The
rotenone microspheres (9 mg/kg) produced typical PD symptoms in rats, for
example, the cataleptic behavior test demonstrated a obviously prolonged descent 
latency compared with control animals after administration, and the tyrosine
hydroxylase (TH) immunohistochemistry tests showed typical histological evidence 
of selective degeneration of the nigrostriatal dopaminergic system (striatum and 
substantia nigra) in rotenone microspheres-treated rats. In addition, this
delivery system for rotenone model showed many noticeable advantages such as
inexpensive, biocompatible and expedient administration by direct subcutaneous
injection. This information suggested that rotenone microspheres as a delivery
strategy for setting up an ideal animal model of PD was feasible.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2005.07.005 
PMID: 16118017  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Clin Neurol Neurosurg. 2005 Aug;107(5):396-403. Epub 2005 Jan 19.

Brain 3D-SSP SPECT analysis in dementia with Lewy bodies, Parkinson's disease
with and without dementia, and Alzheimer's disease.

Mito Y(1), Yoshida K, Yabe I, Makino K, Hirotani M, Tashiro K, Kikuchi S, Sasaki 
H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Asahikawa Red Cross Hospital,1-1, Akebono, Asahikawa,
Hokkaido 070-8530, Japan. mito@asahikawa-rch.gr.jp

OBJECTIVES: Cerebral blood flow was compared among patients with dementia with
Lewy bodies (DLB), Parkinson's disease with dementia (PDD), Parkinson's disease
without dementia (PD), and Alzheimer's disease (AD) using three-dimensional
stereotactic surface projection (3D-SSP) analysis.
PURPOSE: We attempt to clarify the difference of reduction pattern on SPECT among
patients having DLB, PDD, PD, AD.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Six patients with DLB, 7 patients with PDD who were matched
with the DLB patients for age, unified Parkinson's disease rating scale-III
(UPDRS-III) score, and degree of cognitive function disorders, 21 patients with
PD who were matched with the DLB patients for age, UPDRS-III score, 12 patients
with AD who were matched with the DLB patients for age and degree of cognitive
function disorders, and 12 control subjects. All patients were examined by
N-isopropyl-p[123I] iodoamphetamine single photon emission computed tomography
(123I-IMP SPECT), and obtained images were analyzed with 3D-SSP using an
image-analysis software, iSSP ver. 3.5.
RESULTS: Although DLB and PDD showed similar cerebral perfusion reduction pattern
at the lateral parietal association and lateral temporal association and
precuneus on SPECT by the pixel-by-pixel comparison, greater perfusion reduction 
was observed in DLB than in PDD. Cerebral perfusion was decreased at the
occipital lobe of the DLB patients compared with the AD patients.
CONCLUSIONS: The regional pattern of blood flow reduction in the brain was found 
to be different among DLB, PD, and AD. Greater blood flow reduction was observed 
in DLB, although DLB and PDD showed similar reduction pattern. These regional
differences were considered to suggest different and disease-specific
combinations of underlying pathological and neurochemical processes.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clineuro.2004.12.005 
PMID: 16023534  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Naunyn Schmiedebergs Arch Pharmacol. 2005 Jun;371(6):480-91. Epub 2005 Jul 13.

The effect of nicotine in combination with various dopaminergic drugs on
nigrostriatal dopamine in rats.

Janhunen S(1), Mielikäinen P, Paldánius P, Tuominen RK, Ahtee L, Kaakkola S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Faculty of Pharmacy, University of
Helsinki, P.O. Box 56, 00014 Helsinki, Finland.

It is well established that nicotine activates brain dopaminergic systems and in 
addition has neuroprotective actions. Thus, nicotinic acetylcholine receptor
(nAChR) agonists might be beneficial in the treatment of Parkinson's disease, and
it is important to study the interactions of nicotine with drugs affecting the
nigrostriatal dopaminergic pathway. We used brain microdialysis to study the
effects of nicotine on extracellular levels of dopamine (DA) and its metabolites 
in the rat dorsal striatum in combination with drugs inhibiting either DA uptake 
(nomifensine), catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT; tolcapone), monoamine oxidase 
B (MAO-B; selegiline) or DA receptors (haloperidol). Nicotine (0.5 mg/kg, s.c.)
modestly increased DA output, and this effect was antagonised by mecamylamine but
not by hexamethonium. Nomifensine (3 mg/kg, i.p.) substantially further enhanced 
the nicotine-induced increase in DA output and nomifensine+nicotine also evoked a
strong mecamylamine-sensitive ipsilateral rotational behaviour in
6-hydroxydopamine lesioned rats. Tolcapone (10 mg/kg, i.p.) did not alter DA
output, but markedly decreased homovanillic acid (HVA) and increased
3,4-dihydroxyphenylacetic acid (DOPAC). Selegiline pretreatment (5 x 1 mg/kg,
i.p.) significantly increased extracellular DA and decreased DOPAC and HVA.
Haloperidol (0.1 mg/kg, s.c.) slightly increased DA output and more clearly DOPAC
and HVA. Tolcapone, selegiline or haloperidol did not enhance the
nicotine-induced DA output. These results indicate that the activation of
nigrostriatal nAChRs induces a significant DA release in the striatum, which is
potentiated by DA uptake inhibition but not by COMT, MAO-B or presynaptic DA
receptor inhibition. Our findings therefore agree with the notion that the
termination of the effect of DA in the synapse mainly occurs via neuronal
reuptake. Thus, selective nAChR agonists, possibly in combination with a DA
uptake inhibitor, might improve dopaminergic transmission in Parkinson's disease.

DOI: 10.1007/s00210-005-1066-2 
PMID: 16012872  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Mov Disord. 2005 Oct;20(10):1272-7.

Three-dimensional stereotactic surface projection study of freezing of gait and
brain perfusion image in Parkinson's disease.

Matsui H(1), Udaka F, Miyoshi T, Hara N, Tamaura A, Oda M, Kubori T, Nishinaka K,
Kameyama M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Sumitomo Hospital, Osaka, Japan.
matsui-hideaki@sumitomo-hp.or.jp

Gait disturbance is a cardinal symptom in patients with Parkinson's disease.
Among the gait disturbances, freezing of gait is a unique and troublesome
symptom, but its mechanism is unclear. We compared brain perfusion images using
three-dimensional stereotactic surface projection analysis of N-isopropyl-p-123I 
iodoamphetamine single photon emission computed tomography between Parkinson's
disease patients with freezing of gait and those without. Twenty-four cases
(freezing of gait group) with Parkinson's disease with freezing of gait, and 31
Hoehn and Yahr stage-matched cases (no freezing of gait group) with Parkinson's
disease without freezing of gait were studied. Bilateral Brodmann area 11
perfusion of the freezing of gait group decreased significantly compared to that 
of the no freezing of gait group. The Brodmann area 11 may play important roles
in gait, and impairment in this region may have a close relationship with
freezing of gait in Parkinson's disease.

Copyright (c) 2005 Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.20520 
PMID: 16007622  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Acta Neurol Scand. 2005 Jul;112(1):36-41.

Three-dimensional stereotactic surface projection study of orthostatic
hypotension and brain perfusion image in Parkinson's disease.

Matsui H(1), Udaka F, Miyoshi T, Hara N, Tamura A, Oda M, Kubori T, Nishinaka K, 
Kameyama M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Sumitomo Hospital, Nakanoshima, Kita-ku, Osaka,
Japan. matsui-hideaki@sumitomo-hp.or.jp

OBJECTIVE: To compare brain perfusion image using three-dimensional stereotactic 
surface projection (3D-SSP) analysis of N-isopropyl-p-123I iodoamphetamine
(123I-IMP) single photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) between patients
with Parkinson's disease with orthostatic hypotension and those without
orthostatic hypotension.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Fifteen patients with Parkinson's disease and orthostatic 
hypotension and 13 patients with Parkinson's disease without orthostatic
hypotension were studied. We compared brain perfusion image between the two
groups by 3D-SSP.
RESULTS: Bilateral anterior cingulate gyrus perfusion of the patients with
orthostatic hypotension was significantly decreased compared to that of the
patients without orthostatic hypotension.
CONCLUSIONS: The disorder of anterior cingulate gyrus may participate in the
autonomic failure in Parkinson's disease.

Copyright Blackwell Munksgaard 2005.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-0404.2005.00427.x 
PMID: 15932354  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 2005 Apr;62(4):428-33.

Growth hormone response to arginine test distinguishes multiple system atrophy
from Parkinson's disease and idiopathic late-onset cerebellar ataxia.

Pellecchia MT(1), Pivonello R, Salvatore E, Faggiano A, Barone P, De Michele G,
Lombardi G, Colao A, Filla A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurological Sciences, Federico II University, 80131 Naples,
Italy. colao@unima.it

OBJECTIVE: Multiple system atrophy (MSA) is difficult to distinguish from
idiopathic Parkinson's disease (PD) and idiopathic late-onset cerebellar ataxia
(ILOCA). This study aimed to evaluate GH response to three different GH
stimulation tests in order to establish a reliable test to differentiate these
degenerative disorders.
DESIGN: Twelve patients with MSA, 10 with PD, eight with ILOCA and 30 healthy
controls entered the study. They were submitted to clonidine, arginine, and
GH-releasing-hormone (GHRH) + arginine tests in a random manner on three
different nonconsecutive days. The peak serum GH response was used as a primary
variable for analysis of stimulation tests. By ROC analysis, the optimum cut-off 
level was considered as the cut-off with the maximal sum of sensitivity and
specificity.
RESULTS: After clonidine administration, GH peak was significantly lower in
patients with MSA than in those with ILOCA (P < 0.05) and in the controls (P <
0.001). At the optimum cut-off level of 5 mU/l, the clonidine test distinguished 
patients with MSA from those with PD with a sensitivity and specificity of 78%.
Moreover, this test distinguished patients with MSA from those with ILOCA with a 
sensitivity of 100% and a specificity of 75% at a cut-off level of 5 mU/l, and
with a sensitivity of 75% and a specificity of 100% at the cut-off level of 7.6
mU/l. After arginine administration, the GH peak was significantly lower in
patients with MSA than in those with ILOCA (P = 0.001) and in controls (P <
0.001). At the optimum cut-off level of 5 mU/l, the arginine test distinguished
patients with MSA from those with PD with a sensitivity and a specificity of
100%. At a GH peak cut-off value of 3.6 mU/l the arginine test distinguished
patients with MSA from those with ILOCA with a sensitivity and specificity of
100%. After GHRH + arginine administration, a significant GH increase was found
in all groups of patients and controls.
CONCLUSIONS: The GH response to arginine administration is impaired in MSA.
Therefore, the arginine test showed the highest diagnostic accuracy to
distinguish MSA from both PD and ILOCA, and could be used in the clinical
practice of these neurodegenerative diseases.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2265.2005.02237.x 
PMID: 15807873  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Neurochem Int. 2005 Mar;46(4):329-35. Epub 2005 Jan 17.

Inhibition of vesicular monoamine transporter enhances vulnerability of
dopaminergic cells: relevance to Parkinson's disease.

Choi HJ(1), Lee SY, Cho Y, Hwang O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Ulsan College 
of Medicine, 388-1 Pungnap-dong, Songpa-ku, Seoul 138-736, South Korea.

Parkinson's disease is a neurodegenerative disorder associated with progressive
loss of dopaminergic cells in the substantia nigra. Oxidative stress has been
implicated in the pathogenesis of the disease, and dopamine has been suggested as
a contributing factor that generates reactive oxygen species due to its unstable 
catechol moiety. We have previously shown that tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4), an
obligatory cofactor for dopamine synthesis, also contributes to the vulnerability
of dopamine-producing cells by generating oxidative stress. This study shows that
the presence of dopamine in the cytosol enhances the cell's vulnerability to BH4.
Upon exposure to ketanserin, a vesicular monoamine transporter inhibitor,
BH4-induced dopaminergic cell death is exacerbated, accompanied by increased
lipid peroxidation and protein bound quinone. While intracellular amount of DOPAC
is elevated by ketanserin, the monoamine oxidase inhibitor pargyline showed no
significant protection. Instead, the thiol agent N-acetylcysteine and quinone
reductase inducer dimethyl fumarate abolish BH4/ketanserin-induced cell death,
suggesting that quinone production plays an important role. Therefore, it can be 
concluded that the presence of dopamine in the cytosol seems to contribute to the
cells' vulnerability to BH4 and that vesicular monoamine transporter plays a
protective role in dopaminergic cells by sequestering dopamine not only from
monoamine oxidase but also from BH4-induced oxidative stress.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuint.2004.10.009 
PMID: 15707697  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Eur Neuropsychopharmacol. 2005 Jan;15(1):57-67.

Effect of angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor perindopril on interneurons in 
MPTP-treated mice.

Kurosaki R(1), Muramatsu Y, Kato H, Watanabe Y, Imai Y, Itoyama Y, Araki T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics, Tohoku University
Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Science and Medicine, Sendai, Japan.

We examined the effects of perindopril on the dopaminergic system in mice after
1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP) treatment. The mice received 
four intraperitoneal injections of MPTP at 1-h intervals. Administration of
perindopril showed dose-dependent neuroprotective effects against striatal
dopamine and 3,4-dihydroxyphenylacetic acid (DOPAC) and homovanillic acid (HVA)
depletion 3 days after MPTP treatment. Our immunohistochemical study showed that 
MPTP can severe damage in tyrosine hydroxylase (TH)-immunoreactive neurons after 
MPTP treatment. The administration of perindopril significantly attenuated
MPTP-induced substantia nigra and striatal damage. The present study also showed 
that the immunoreactivity of parvalbumin (PV)- or neuronal nitric oxide synthase 
(nNOS)-positive cells in the substantia nigra was decreased 7 days after MPTP
treatment, whereas no significant changes were observed in these cells of the
striatum throughout the experiments. The administration of perindopril
significantly attenuated MPTP-induced decrease of the PV- or
nNOS-immunoreactivity in the nigral cells. In double-labeled immunostaining with 
anti-PV and anti-nNOS antibody, PV-immunoreactive cell bodies and fibers were not
double-labeled for nNOS-immunoreactive cell bodies and fibers in both the
striatum and substantia nigra after MPTP treatment. Furthermore, PV- or
nNOS-immunoreactive cell bodies and fibers in both the striatum and substantia
nigra were not double-labeled for TH-immunoreactive cell bodies and fibers. These
results demonstrate that the ACE inhibitor perindopril has a dose-dependent
protective effect against MPTP-induced striatal dopamine, DOPAC and HVA depletion
in mice. The present study also demonstrates that perindopril is effective
against MPTP-induced degeneration of the nigral neurons and interneurons.
Furthermore, our immunohistochemical study suggests that PV-immunoreactive cells 
and nNOS-immunoreactive cells are different interneurons in both the striatum and
substantia nigra. Thus, our results provide further evidence that the ACE
inhibitor perindopril may offer a novel therapeutic strategy for Parkinson's
disease (PD).

DOI: 10.1016/j.euroneuro.2004.05.007 
PMID: 15572274  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Free Radic Biol Med. 2004 Sep 15;37(6):839-49.

The cytotoxic activity of lactoperoxidase: enhancement and inhibition by
neuroactive compounds.

Everse J(1), Coates PW.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Biology and Biochemistry, Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center,
Lubbock, TX 79430, USA. Johannes.Everse@ttuhsc.edu

Neuronal death associated with Parkinson's disease is commonly believed to be
caused by oxygen- and nitrogen-derived free radical species. Some years ago,
however, we showed that peroxidase from the midbrain of dogs is able to kill
various cell types, including neuroblastoma cells (M. B. Grisham et al., J.
Neurochem. 48: 876-882: 1987). We postulated that a nigral peroxidase may play a 
significant role in the degeneration of dopaminergic neurons in Parkinson's
disease. To further establish proof of principle, we recently performed a series 
of experiments using horseradish peroxidase and lactoperoxidase. We showed that
the cytotoxic activity of lactoperoxidase is fully inhibited by physiological
concentrations of dopamine, reduced glutathione, and L-cysteine, as well as by
micromolar concentrations of apomorphine, desferal, aspirin, and uric acid.
l-Methyl-4-phenyl-1,2-dihydropyridine (MPDP) and l-methyl-4-phenylpyridinium
(MPP+) augment the cytotoxic activity, whereas
l-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine, deprenyl, and pargyline had minimal
or no effect. We also showed that horseradish peroxidase catalyzes the oxidation 
of MPDP to MPP+. Thus, contrary to the generally accepted theory that the in vivo
oxidation of MPDP occurs spontaneously, this reaction may be catalyzed by a brain
peroxidase. These observations lend further support to the suggestion that a
brain peroxidase may play an important role in the metabolic events associated
with Parkinson's disease.


PMID: 15384204  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Neurol Res. 2004 Sep;26(6):644-57.

Neuroprotective effect of the angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor perindopril
in MPTP-treated mice.

Kurosaki R(1), Muramatsu Y, Imai Y, Kato H, Araki T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Drug Metabolism and Therapeutics, Graduate School and Faculty of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Tokushima, Tokushima, Japan.

The angiotensin -converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitor perindopril has been shown to 
exert beneficial effects on the dopaminergic system. Here, we investigated the
effects of perindopril on the dopaminergic system in mice after
1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP) treatment, in comparison with
a Ca(2+) antagonist, amlodipine. Administration of perindopril showed
dose-dependent neuroprotective effects against MPTP-induced striatal dopamine and
3,4-dihydroxyphenylacetic acid (DOPAC) depletion. However, administration of
amlodipine showed no significant effects on striatal dopamine depletion after
MPTP treatment. In our immunohistochemical studies with antibodies against
tyrosine hydroxylase (TH), microtubule-associated protein 2a, b (MAP2), dopamine 
transporter (DAT), parvalbumin (PV), glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) and
Cu/Zn-superoxide dismutase (Cu/Zn-SOD), the administration of perindopril
significantly attenuated MPTP-induced substantia nigra and striatal damage. This 
drug also blocked the increases in GFAP-positive astrocytes in the striatum and
substantia nigra after MPTP treatment. Furthermore, the administration of
perindopril showed a protective effect against the intense Cu/Zn-SOD
immunoreactivity in the neurons and glial cells in both the striatum and
substantia nigra after MPTP treatment. These results indicated that the ACE
inhibitor perindopril can protect against MPTP-induced striatal dopamine and
DOPAC depletion in mice. The protective effect may be, at least in part, caused
by the reduction of free radicals caused by MPTP. The present study also
demonstrated that perindopril is effective against MPTP-induced neurodegeneration
of the nigro-striatal dopaminergic pathway. Furthermore, our results provided
further evidence that free radical scavengers may be effective in the treatment
of neurodegenerative diseases such as Parkinson's disease.

DOI: 10.1179/016164104225015949 
PMID: 15327754  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Curr Drug Targets CNS Neurol Disord. 2004 Jun;3(3):181-94.

AMPA receptor potentiators for the treatment of CNS disorders.

O'Neill MJ(1), Bleakman D, Zimmerman DM, Nisenbaum ES.

Author information: 
(1)Eli Lilly and Co. Ltd., Lilly Research Centre, Erl Wood Manor, Windlesham,
Surrey GU20 6PH, UK. Oneill_Michael_J@Lilly.com

Glutamate alpha-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazole-propionic acid (AMPA)
receptors mediate most of the excitatory neurotransmission in the mammalian
central nervous system and also participate in forms of synaptic plasticity
thought to underlie memory and learning, and the formation of neural networks
during development. Molecular cloning techniques have shown that the AMPA
receptor family is composed of four different subunits named GluR1-4 or GluRA-D
(newly termed as Glu(A1)-Glu(A4)) and native AMPA receptors are most likely
tetramers generated by the assembly of one or more of these subunits, yielding
homomeric or heteromeric receptors. Additional complexity among AMPA receptors is
conferred by alternative splicing of RNA for each subunit giving rise to flip and
flop variants. Clinical and experimental data have suggested that positive
modulation of AMPA receptors may be therapeutically effective in the treatment of
cognitive deficits. Several classes of AMPA receptor potentiators have been
reported, including pyrroliddones (piracetam, aniracetam), benzothiazides
(cyclothiazide), benzylpiperidines (CX-516, CX-546) and more recently
biarylpropylsulfonamides (LY392098, LY404187 and LY503430). These molecules
enhance cognitive function in rodents, which appears to correlate with increased 
hippocampal activity. In addition, clinical studies have suggested that AMPA
receptor modulators enhance cognitive function in elderly subjects, as well as
patients suffering from neurological and psychiatric disorders. Several
independent studies have suggested that AMPA receptors can increase BDNF
expression by both calcium-dependent and independent pathways. For example,
recent studies have shown that AMPA receptors interact with the protein tyrosine 
kinase, Lyn. Activation of Lyn can recruit the mitogen-activated protein kinase
(MAPK) signalling pathway and increase the expression of BDNF. Therefore, in
addition to directly enhancing glutamatergic synaptic transmission, AMPA receptor
activation can increase the expression of BDNF in vitro and in vivo. This may
account for activity of AMPA receptor potentiators in rodent models predictive of
antidepressant activity (forced swim and tail suspension tests). The increase in 
neurotrophin expression also may contribute to the functional, neuroprotective
and neurotrophic actions of LY404187 and LY503430 after infusion of 6-OHDA into
the substantia nigra. In conclusion, several potent, selective and systemically
active AMPA receptor potentiators have been reported. Data indicate that these
molecules modulate glutamatergic transmission, enhance synaptic transmission,
long-term potentiation (LTP) and increase neurotrophin expression. Therefore,
these AMPA receptor potentiators offer an exciting new class of drugs with
potential for treating (1) cognitive impairment associated with Alzheimer's
disease and schizophrenia, (2) depression, (3) slowing the progression and
potentially enhancing recovery from Parkinson's disease.


PMID: 15180479  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Expert Rev Cardiovasc Ther. 2004 May;2(3):393-403.

Pharmacology of orthostatic hypotension in Parkinson's disease: from
pathophysiology to management.

Pathak A(1), Senard JM.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Pharmacologie Médicale et Clinique, INSERM U586, 37 allées
Jules Guesde, 31073 Toulouse cedex, France.

Orthostatic hypotension is highly prevalent in the elderly, and affects up to 20%
of patients with Parkinson's disease. Pharmacological approaches help to
demonstrate that Parkinson's disease is a primary autonomic failure with
involvement of the peripheral autonomic nervous system as shown by decreased
[(123)I] meta-iodobenzylguanidine cardiac uptake and preserved growth hormone
response to clonidine. No specific clinical trial has evaluated efficacy of
antihypotensive drugs in Parkinson's disease. End point of treatment should be a 
reduction in postural symptoms. Midodrine (Proamatin), Roberts Pharmaceutical), a
vasoconstrictor and fludrocortisone (Florinef), Bristol-Myers Squibb), a volume
expander are first choice drugs. No data are available on their effects on
orthostatic hypotension-related morbidity. The usefulness of other drugs remains 
to be demonstrated. This review will highlight the importance of
nonpharmacological measures in the management of orthostatic hypotension in
Parkinson's disease.

DOI: 10.1586/14779072.2.3.393 
PMID: 15151485  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Neurol Neurochir Pol. 2003;37 Suppl 5:263-74.

[Regional cerebral blood flow single photon emission tomography (SPECT) and
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) may be useful in the diagnosis of patients with 
cortico-basal degeneration, progressive supranuclear palsy and multiple system
atrophy].

[Article in Polish]

Lass P(1), Sławek J, Derejko M, Dubaniewicz M.

Author information: 
(1)Zakład Medycyny Nuklearnej, Akademia Medyczna w Gdańsku.

Differential diagnosis of idiopathic Parkinson's Disease is still very difficult.
Even in movement disorders centers 25% of patients with clinical diagnosis of
Parkinson's disease is misdiagnosed with other neurodegenerative disorders.
Clinical symptoms of so called atypical parkinsonian disorders may emerge late in
the course of the disease, not at the same time and good or moderate response to 
levodopa at early stages may be a source of misdiagnosis. Most difficult to
differentiate seems to be Progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP), corticobasal
degeneration (CBD) and multiple system atrophy (MSA). Authors present in selected
cases usefulness of neuroimaging with rCBF SPECT and MRI in clinical diagnosis of
these disorders. For PSP typical (although not pathognomonic) is decrease of
metabolism and flow in frontal lobes (hypofrontalism), and in CBD asymmetrical,
contralateral to the side of dominating symptoms cerebral (frontal, parietal,
temporal and within striatum) atrophy. In MSA more useful (but not seen in all
cases) is MRI examination with hyperintensities in putamen, pons and cerebellum
or cerebellar atrophy. Due to low sensitivity of clinical criteria other tests
(EMG of anal sphincter or clonidine test) with specially neuroimaging examination
may be helpful in establishing of the diagnosis.


PMID: 15098354  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Neurochem Int. 2004 Jul;45(1):103-16.

Autoxidation and MAO-mediated metabolism of dopamine as a potential cause of
oxidative stress: role of ferrous and ferric ions.

Hermida-Ameijeiras A(1), Méndez-Alvarez E, Sánchez-Iglesias S, Sanmartín-Suárez
C, Soto-Otero R.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Bioquímica y Biología Molecular, Grupo de Neuroquímica,
Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de Santiago de Compostela, San Francisco 1,
E-15782 Santiago de Compostela, Spain.

The autoxidation and monoamine oxidase (MAO)-mediated metabolism of dopamine
(3-hydroxytyramine; DA) cause a continuous production of hydroxyl radical (*OH), 
which is further enhanced by the presence of iron (ferrous iron, Fe(2+) and
ferric ion, Fe(3+)). The accumulation of hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) in the presence
of Fe(2+) appears to discard the involvement of the Fenton reaction in this
process. It has been found that the presence of DA significantly reduces the
formation of thiobarbituric acid reagent substances (TBARS), which under
physiological conditions takes place in mitochondrial preparations. The presence 
of DA is also able to reduce TBARS formation in mitochondrial preparations even
in the presence of iron (Fe(2+) and Fe(3+)). However, DA boosted the carbonyl
content of mitochondrial proteins, which was further increased in the presence of
iron (Fe(2+) and Fe(3+)). This latter effect is also accompanied by a significant
reduction in thiol content of mitochondrial proteins. It has also been observed
how the pre-incubation of mitochondria with pargyline, an acetylenic MAO
inhibitor, reduces the production of *OH and increases the formation of TBARS.
Although, the MAO-mediated metabolism of DA increases MAO-B activity, the
presence of iron inhibits both MAO-A and MAO-B activities. Consequently, DA has
been shown to be a double-edged sword, because it displays antioxidant properties
in relation to both the Fenton reaction and lipid peroxidation and exhibits
pro-oxidant properties by causing both generation *OH and oxidation of
mitochondrial proteins. Evidently, these pro-oxidant properties of DA help
explain the long-term side effects derived from l-DOPA treatment of Parkinson's
disease and its exacerbation by the concomitant use of DA metabolism inhibitors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuint.2003.11.018 
PMID: 15082228  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Eur Neuropsychopharmacol. 2004 Mar;14(2):93-104.

Protective effects of neuronal nitric oxide synthase inhibitor in mouse brain
against MPTP neurotoxicity: an immunohistological study.

Watanabe H(1), Muramatsu Y, Kurosaki R, Michimata M, Matsubara M, Imai Y, Araki
T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics, Tohoku University
Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Science and Medicine, Aoba-yama, Aoba-ku,
Sendai 980-8578, Japan.

We recently reported that neuronal nitric oxide synthase (nNOS) inhibitor,
7-nitroindazole, can protect against 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine
(MPTP) neurotoxicity in mice. It protected against both dopamine depletions and
tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) positive neuron decreases in the mouse brain. In the
present study, we further examined whether 7-nitroindazole can also protect
against the alterations of TH-, microtubule-associated protein 2a,b (MAP2)-,
glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP)-, parvalbumin (PV)-, dopamine transporter 
(DAT)-, nNOS- or endothelial NOS (eNOS)-positive cells, in comparison with
pargyline as a relatively selective inhibitor of the monoamine oxidase-B (MAO-B).
The present study showed that nNOS inhibitor as well as MAO-B inhibitor has a
dose-dependent protective effect against MPTP-induced striatal dopamine and DOPAC
depletion in mice. Furthermore, the present study revealed that 7-nitroindazole
and pargyline can protect the alterations of immunohistochemical changes in the
striatum and substantia nigra after MPTP treatment. These protective effects may 
be, at least in part, produced by the reduction of neuronally derived NO and
peroxynitrite caused by MPTP. Our results also demonstrate that MPTP can cause
functional damage of interneurons in the substantia nigra. These results suggest 
the possibility that nNOS inhibitors as well as MAO-B inhibitors may be
therapeutically useful in neurodegenerative diseases such as Parkinson's disease.
Thus our present results provide valuable information for the pathogenesis of
degeneration of the nigrostriatal dopaminergic neuronal pathway.

DOI: 10.1016/S0924-977X(03)00065-8 
PMID: 15013024  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Neurotox Res. 2003;5(1-2):147-55.

A possible physiological role for cerebral tetrahydroisoquinolines.

Vetulani J(1), Antkiewicz-Michaluk L, Nalepa I, Sansone M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pharmacology, P.A.N., Smetna 12, 31-343 Kraków, Poland.
nfvetula@cyf-kr.edu.pl

Tetrahydroisoquinolines present in the mammalian brain,
1,2,3,4-tetrahydroisoquinoline (TIQ) and salsolinol, suspected to cause
neurodegeneration leading to Parkinson's disease, were investigated to find their
possible physiological role. To this aim their behavioral and receptor effects
induced after a single dose were tested in mice and rats. Both compounds do not
affect significantly the basal locomotor activity, very effectively block
hyperactivity induced by apomorphine (rats) and amphetamine (mice), only
partially block hyperactivity induced by scopolamine, do not affect locomotor
stimulation induced by cocaine, and strongly augment the running fit induced by
morphine (mice). They do not produce extrapyramidal symptoms and do not
potentiate haloperidol-induced catalepsy (rats). TIQ and salsolinol do not
displace antagonists of several receptors (including D(1) and D(2)) from their
binding sites, but displace the agonists of Alpha(2)-adrenoceptors,
[(3)H]clonidine and of dopamine receptors, [(3)H]apomorphine. The results
indicate that salsolinol and TIQ act as specific antagonists of agonistic
conformation of dopamine receptors, and owing to that may play a role of
endogenous feed-back regulators of the dopaminergic system. Those properties make
tetrahydroisoquinolines potential antidopaminergic drugs devoid of extrapyramidal
effects, with possible application in substance addiction disorder as
anti-craving agents.


PMID: 12832229  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Mol Pharmacol. 2003 May;63(5):1169-79.

Differential declines in striatal nicotinic receptor subtype function after
nigrostriatal damage in mice.

Quik M(1), Sum JD, Whiteaker P, McCallum SE, Marks MJ, Musachio J, McIntosh JM,
Collins AC, Grady SR.

Author information: 
(1)The Parkinson's Institute, Sunnyvale, California 94089-1605, USA.
mquik@parkinsonsinstitute.org

Nigrostriatal damage leads to a reduction in striatal nicotinic acetylcholine
receptors (nAChRs) in rodents, monkeys, and patients with Parkinson's disease.
The present studies were undertaken to investigate whether these nAChR declines
are associated with alterations in striatal nAChR function and, if so, to
identify the receptor subtypes involved. To induce nigrostriatal damage, mice
were injected with the selective dopaminergic toxin
1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP). We measured [(125)I]3
beta-(4-iodophenyl)tropane-2 beta-carboxylic acid isopropyl ester (RTI-121,
dopamine transporter), (125)I-alpha-conotoxin MII (putative alpha 6-containing
sites in the central nervous system), (125)I-epibatidine (multiple sites),
5-[(125)I]iodo-3-[2(S)-azetidinylmethoxy]pyridine-2HCl ([(125)I]A85380;
beta2-containing sites), and (125)I-alpha-bungarotoxin (alpha 7-containing sites)
binding in brains from control and MPTP-treated mice, as well as nAChR function
by [(3)H]dopamine release, [(3)H]GABA release, and [(86)Rb(+)] efflux. After MPTP
treatment, declines were observed in striatal dopamine transporter levels, both
binding and functional measures of striatal alpha-conotoxin MII-sensitive nAChRs,
and selected measures of striatal alpha-conotoxin MII-resistant nAChRs. In
contrast, (125)I-alpha-bungarotoxin binding sites were not altered after
nigrostriatal damage. The changes in striatal nAChRs were selective, with no
declines in cortex, thalamus, or septum. Those striatal binding and functional
measures of nAChRs that decreased with MPTP treatment correlated with dopamine
transporter declines, an observation suggesting that the binding and functional
changes in nAChRs are limited to dopaminergic terminals. The present results are 
the first to demonstrate differential alterations in nAChR subtype function after
nigrostriatal damage, with a close correspondence between changes in receptor
binding sites and function. These data suggest that the declines in nAChR sites
observed in Parkinson's disease brains may be of functional significance.


PMID: 12695545  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


120. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2003 Apr;74(4):419-22.

Occipital hypoperfusion in Parkinson's disease without dementia: correlation to
impaired cortical visual processing.

Abe Y(1), Kachi T, Kato T, Arahata Y, Yamada T, Washimi Y, Iwai K, Ito K,
Yanagisawa N, Sobue G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Nagoya University School of Medicine, Nagoya, Japan. 
yujiabe@chubu-nh.go.jp

Comment in
    J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2004 Mar;75(3):511.

OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this study was to analyse changes in regional cerebral 
blood flow (rCBF) in Parkinson's disease (PD) without dementia.
METHODS: Twenty eight non-demented patients with PD and 17 age matched normal
subjects underwent single photon emission computed tomography with
N-isopropyl-p-[(123)I]iodoamphetamine to measure rCBF. The statistical parametric
mapping 96 programme was used for statistical analysis.
RESULTS: The PD patients showed significantly reduced rCBF in the bilateral
occipital and posterior parietal cortices (p<0.01, corrected for multiple
comparison p<0.05), when compared with the control subjects. There was a strong
positive correlation between the score of Raven's coloured progressive matrices
(RCPM) and the rCBF in the right visual association area (p<0.01, corrected for
multiple comparison p<0.05) among the PD patients.
CONCLUSIONS: This study showed occipital and posterior parietal hypoperfusion in 
PD patients without dementia. Furthermore, it was demonstrated that occipital
hypoperfusion is likely to underlie impairment of visual cognition according to
the RCPM test, which is not related to motor impairment.


PMCID: PMC1738406
PMID: 12640053  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Mov Disord. 2003 Mar;18(3):241-53.

Changes of GABA receptors and dopamine turnover in the postmortem brains of
parkinsonians with levodopa-induced motor complications.

Calon F(1), Morissette M, Rajput AH, Hornykiewicz O, Bédard PJ, Di Paolo T.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Endocrinology and Oncology Research Center, Laval University Medical
Center (CHUL), Laval University, 2705 Laurier Boulevard, Québec, PQ G1V 4G2,
Canada.

Brain samples from 14 Parkinson's disease patients, 10 of whom developed motor
complications (dyskinesias and/or wearing-off) on dopaminomimetic therapy, and 11
controls were analyzed. Striatal
3beta-(4-(125)I-iodophenyl)tropane-2beta-carboxylic acid isopropyl ester
([(125)I]RTI-121) -specific binding to dopamine transporter and concentration of 
dopamine were markedly decreased, but no association between level of denervation
and development of motor complications was observed. The homovanillic
acid/dopamine ratio of concentrations was higher in putamen of patients with
wearing-off compared to those without. Striatal (35)S-labeled
t-butylbicyclophosphorothionate ([(35)S]TBPS) and [(3)H]flunitrazepam binding to 
GABA(A) receptors were unchanged in patients with Parkinson's disease, whereas
[(125)I]CGP 64213 -specific binding to GABA(B) receptors was decreased in the
putamen and external segment of the globus pallidus of parkinsonian patients
compared with controls. [(3)H]Flunitrazepam binding was increased in the putamen 
of patients with wearing-off compared to those without. [(35)S]TBPS-specific
binding was increased in the ventral internal globus pallidus of dyskinetic
subjects. These data suggest altered dopamine metabolism and increased GABA(A)
receptors in the putamen related to the pathophysiology of wearing-off. The
present results also suggest that an up-regulation of GABA(A) receptors in the
internal globus pallidus is linked to the pathogenesis of levodopa-induced
dyskinesias.

Copyright 2002 Movement Disorder Society

DOI: 10.1002/mds.10343 
PMID: 12621627  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Exp Neurol. 2003 Feb;179(2):159-66.

Proton magnetic resonance imaging and spectroscopy identify metabolic changes in 
the striatum in the MPTP feline model of parkinsonism.

Podell M(1), Hadjiconstantinou M, Smith MA, Neff NH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences, The Ohio State University,
Columbus, OH 43210, USA.

We administered 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP) to adult,
male cats to model Parkinson's disease (PD), and utilized proton magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) and spectroscopy (MRS) at a field strength of 1.5 T to
identify metabolic degenerative changes in the striatum in vivo. Neurologic
status and somatosensory-evoked potentials in vivo, as well as postmortem
striatal histopathological and immunohistochemical parameters, were examined.
Nine cats were equally divided into three groups and treated daily for 10 days as
follows: saline, MPTP, and pargyline (a monoamine oxidase inhibitor) plus MPTP.
The MPTP-treated cats displayed bradykinesia, head tremor, and reduced
oculovestibular reflex activity. MRI showed a diffuse increase of the T2-weighted
signal in the striatum of two MPTP-treated cats. Analysis of the MRS spectra
indicated significantly lower N-acetylaspartate/creatine (CR) and
glutamine-glutamate complex/CR ratios than the control baseline. Two MPTP-treated
cats had low choline-containing compounds/CR ratio, whereas a lactate peak was
present in all MPTP-treated cats. In the striatum of the MPTP-treated cats, there
was a significant decline of tyrosine hydroxylase immunoreactivity and
histological evidence for a diffuse cytotoxic reaction. Pretreatment with
pargyline attenuated the MPTP-induced clinical signs, MRI and MRS changes, and
the histopathological and immunoreactivity alterations. We conclude that proton
MRI/MRS is a sensitive, noninvasive measure of neural toxicity and biochemical
alteration of the striatum in a feline model of PD.


PMID: 12618122  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Neurologia. 2003 Jan-Feb;18(1):2-6.

[Treatment of sialorrhea in Parkinson's disease patients with clonidine.
Double-blind, comparative study with placebo].

[Article in Spanish]

Serrano-Dueñas M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Neurología, Hospital Carlos Andrade Marín (Instituto Ecuatoriano
de Seguridad Social), Quito, Ecuador. serranom@pi.pro.ec

BACKGROUND: sialorrhea is one of the common nonmotor, non-neuropsychiatric
symptoms in Parkinson's disease and its pre-sence can cause limitation in the
patient's social life. The traditional treatment with anticholinergic medication 
is capable of triggering important neuropsychiatric complications.
OBJECTIVES: this is a prospective, double-blind, placebo compared study, which
follow-up Parkinson's disease patients for 3 months.
METHODS: we measured the efficacy of clonidine in the management of sialorrhea.
The study was performed in 32 patients (20 males and 12 females), with a mean age
of 70.75 years and mean duration of the disease of 8.84 years. Randomly, 17
patients received clonidine 0.15 mg/day and the remaining 15 patients received
placebo. Both groups were made up of subjects with similar characteristics, age, 
years of illness, sex, stage of disease (H and Y), disability (S and C) and motor
score (UPDRS). Likewise, salivation affected both groups in the same intensity.
We used the variable analysis and there was a p < 0.05 significance.
RESULTS: the group which received clonidine showed a significant improvement of
the salivation symptoms both at one month as well as at 3 months of treatment (p 
< 0.00001, respectively). There was no evidence of worsening of the stage of the 
disease, incapacity or motor score. The side effects were found only in the group
that received clonidine (4 patients) without showing statistically significant.
CONCLUSION: the use of clonidine can be useful in the management and treatment of
sialorrhea in patients with Parkinsońs disease.


PMID: 12590375  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Neurotoxicology. 2003 Jan;24(1):137-47.

The role of glycolysis and gluconeogenesis in the cytoprotection of neuroblastoma
cells against 1-methyl 4-phenylpyridinium ion toxicity.

Mazzio E(1), Soliman KF.

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Florida A & M University,
Tallahassee, FL 32307, USA.

1-Methyl-4-phenylpyridinium (MPP+) is a mitochondrial Complex I inhibitor and is 
frequently used to investigate the pathological degeneration of neurons
associated with Parkinson's disease (PD). In vitro, extracellular concentration
of glucose is one of the most critical factors in establishing the vulnerability 
of neurons to MPP+ toxicity. While glucose is the primary energy fuel for the
brain, central nervous system (CNS) neurons can also take up and utilize other
metabolic intermediates for energy. In this study, we compared various
monosaccharides, disaccharides, nutritive/non-nutritive sugar alcohols,
glycolytic and gluconeogenic metabolic intermediates for their cytoprotection
against MPP+ in murine brain neuroblastoma cells. Several monosaccharides were
effective against MMP+ (500 microM) including glucose, fructose and mannose,
which restored cell viability to 109 +/- 5%, 70 +/- 5%, 99 +/- 3% of live
controls, respectively. Slight protective effects were observed in the presence
of 3-phosphoglyceric acid and glucose-6-phosphate; however, no protective effects
were exhibited by galactose, sucrose, sorbitol, mannitol, glycerol or various
gluconeogenic and ketogenic amino acids. On the other hand, fructose 1,6
bisphosphate and gluconeogenic energy intermediates [pyruvic acid, malic acid and
phospho(enol)pyruvate (PEP)] were neuroprotective against MPP+. The gluconeogenic
intermediates elevated intracellular levels of ATP and reduced propidium iodide
(PI) nucleic acid staining to live controls, but did not alter the MPP(+)-induced
loss of mitochondrial O2 consumption. These data indicate that malic acid,
pyruvic acid and PEP contribute to anaerobic substrate level phosphorylation. The
use of hydrazine sulfate to impede gluconeogenesis through PEP carboxykinase
(PEPCK) inhibition heightened the protective effects of energy substrates
possibly due to attenuated ATP demands from pyruvate carboxylase (PC) activity
and pyruvate mitochondrial transport. It was concluded from these studies that
several metabolic intermediates are effective in fueling anaerobic glycolysis
during mitochondrial inhibition by MPP+.


PMID: 12564389  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Mov Disord. 2002 Nov;17(6):1242-7.

Diagnosing multiple system atrophy with greater accuracy: combined analysis of
the clonidine-growth hormone test and external anal sphincter electromyography.

Lee EA(1), Kim BJ, Lee WY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University
School of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

The clonidine-growth hormone test (CGHT) has been proposed as a means of
differentiating multiple system atrophy (MSA) from idiopathic Parkinson's disease
(PD). However, it is controversial whether the CGHT is valid. We sought to
confirm the validity of the CGHT and to compare the diagnostic accuracy of the
CGHT with that of external anal sphincter electromyelography (Sph-EMG) for MSA.
We performed the CGHT and the Sph-EMG on 21 PD patients, 23 patients with
probable MSA of parkinsonian type (MSA-p), and 22 patients with probable MSA of
cerebellar type (MSA-c). We compared the sensitivity, specificity, and positive
and negative predictive values (PPV and NPV) of CGHT, Sph-EMG, and a combination 
of the two tests. We also evaluated the correlations of Unified Parkinson's
Disease Rating Scale (UPDRS) scores with the results of the two tests. There was 
no significant difference between the UPDRS scores for the PD and MSA-p groups.
Serum growth hormone concentrations after clonidine significantly increased in PD
(mean increase +/- SEM, 4.19 +/- 0.92 ng/ml; P < 0.0001), but remained unchanged 
in both MSA-p (0.83 +/- 0.61 ng/ml) and MSA-c (1.45 +/- 0.58 ng/ml). The growth
hormone responses to clonidine in MSA-p were significantly different from those
in PD (P < 0.05). Abnormal, denervated Sph-EMG was observed in 95.7% of MSA-p,
86.4% of MSA-c, and 33.3% of PD patients. Compared to Sph-EMG, the CGHT was less 
sensitive but more specific in both MSA-p and MSA-c. The result of neither test
correlated with the severity of parkinsonism. Interestingly, combining the
results of the CGHT and Sph-EMG markedly increased the specificity (85.7% in the 
CGHT and 66.7% in Sph-EMG vs. 95.2% in the combination study) and the PPV in both
MSA-p (85.7% and 75.9% vs. 94.4%) and MSA-c (82.4% and 73.1% vs. 91.7%). We
confirm that the CGHT can distinguish MSA-p from PD. Its sensitivity is lower and
its specificity higher than Sph-EMG. Compared to either test alone, combined
testing with the CGHT and Sph-EMG increased specificity and PPV, thereby
enhancing accuracy in the diagnosis of MSA.

Copyright 2002 Movement Disorder Society

DOI: 10.1002/mds.10225 
PMID: 12465063  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Neurol Res. 2002 Oct;24(7):655-62.

Role of nitric oxide synthase against MPTP neurotoxicity in mice.

Kurosaki R(1), Muramatsu Y, Michimata M, Matsubara M, Kato H, Imai Y, Itoyama Y, 
Araki T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics, Tohoku University
Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Science and Medicine, Sendai, Japan.

1-Methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP) causes nigrostriatal
dopaminergic pathway injury similar to that observed in Parkinson's disease. Many
hypotheses have been proposed to explain the mechanisms underlying MPTP
neurotoxicity. Previous work showed that the inhibitor of neuronal nitric oxide
synthase (nNOS) might produce protection against MPTP-induced dopaminergic
toxicity. To exactly test the role of NO in MPTP neurotoxicity, we examined the
effect of nNOS inhibitor 7-nitroindazole, in comparison with that of nonselective
NOS inhibitor (L-NAME), immunosuppressant (FK-506), monoamine oxidase (MAO)
inhibitors (clorgyline and pargyline), N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor antagonist
(MK-801) and Ca2+ antagonist (amlodipine). Among seven compounds, 7-nitroindazole
produced dose-dependent protection against MPTP-induced depletion of striatal
dopamine and its metabolite 3,4-dihydroxyphenyl acetic acid (DOPAC) in mice.
Clorgyline and pargyline also showed a significant effect on MPTP-induced
dopamine depletion in the mouse striatum. However, both compounds did not protect
against MPTP-induced depletion of striatal DOPAC Our immunohistological study
with tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) and microtuble-associated protein 2 (MAP 2) showed
that 7-nitroindazole or pargyline can protect against MPTP-induced depletion of
TH and MAP 2 immunostained neurons in the substantia nigra. Furthermore, these
compounds reduced a marked increase in GFAP-positive astrocytes of the mouse
striatum after MPTP treatments. The present study demonstrates that nNOS
inhibitor 7-nitroindazole as well as MAO inhibitors clorgyline and pargyline can 
produce dose-dependent neuroprotection against the dopaminergic neurotoxicity of 
MPTP. However, nonselective NOS inhibitor L-NAME, immunosuppressant FK-506, NMDA 
receptor antagonist MK-801 and Ca2+ antagonist amlodipine did not show a
beneficial effect on MPTP neurotoxicity.

DOI: 10.1179/016164102101200717 
PMID: 12392201  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Metab Brain Dis. 2002 Sep;17(3):169-82.

Therapeutic effect of neuronal nitric oxide synthase inhibitor (7-nitroindazole) 
against MPTP neurotoxicity in mice.

Muramatsu Y(1), Kurosaki R, Mikami T, Michimata M, Matsubara M, Imai Y, Kato H,
Itoyama Y, Araki T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics, Tohoku University
Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Science and Medicine, Sendai, Japan.

Effects of neuronal nitric oxide synthase (nNOS) inhibitor (7-nitroindazole),
nonselective NOS inhibitor (N(G)-nitro-L-arginine methyl ester; L-NAME), and
monoamine oxidase inhibitor (pargyline) were studied on
1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP)-treated mice. The mice
received four intraperitoneal injections of MPTP at 1-h intervals. A significant 
depletion in dopamine and DOPAC concentration was observed in the striatum from 1
day after MPTP treatment. The pretreatment of 7-nitroindazole and pargyline, but 
not L-NAME, dose-dependently protected against MPTP-induced depletion in dopamine
content 3 days after MPTP treatment. Our histochemical study also showed that
7-nitroindazole and pargyline can prevent a marked decrease in the nigral cells
and a marked increase in astrocytes in striatum 7 days after MPTP treatment. The 
protective effect of 7-nitroindazole against MPTP-induced dopamine and DOPAC
depletion in the striatum was not attenuated by intraperitoneal pretreatment with
L-arginine. Furthermore, the posttreatment of 7-nitroindazole or pargyline
protected against MPTP-induced depletion of dopamine content. These results
demonstrate that the protective mechanism by which 7-nitroindazole counteracts
MPTP neurotoxicity in mice may be due not only to inhibition of nNOS, but also to
MAO-B inhibition. Furthermore, our study suggests that the posttreatment of
7-nitroindazole and pargyline can prevent a significant decrease in dopamine
levels in the striatum of MPTP-treated mice. These findings have important
implications for the therapeutic time window and choice of nNOS or MAO inhibitors
in patients with Parkinson's disease.


PMID: 12322787  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


128. J Neurol. 2002 Sep;249(9):1206-10.

Stimulation of growth-hormone release with clonidine does not distinguish
individual cases of idiopathic Parkinson's disease from those with striatonigral 
degeneration.

Strijks E(1), van't Hof M, Sweep F, Lenders JW, Oyen WJ, Horstink MW.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Neurology, University Medical Center, PO Box 9101, 6500 HB Nijmegen, 
The Netherlands.

Multiple System Atrophy (MSA) and idiopathic Parkinson's disease (PD) can be
difficult to distinguish. There is an ongoing debate about the diagnostic value
of the growth-hormone response to clonidine (CGH-test) in PD and MSA. We
investigated whether the CGH-test can identify individual patients in the early
stages of PD (n = 21) and Striatonigral Degeneration (SND, n = 11), a particular 
variety of MSA. Patients were diagnosed on the basis of clinical criteria and
IBZM-SPECT. Clonidine induced a greater total serum growth-hormone production in 
PD than in SND (p = 0.01). However, taking the difference in prevalence of PD and
SND into account, and because of the low likelihood ratios of the test, an
increase of GH after clonidine increases the pre-test probability for PD by about
only 5 %, while an absent response of GH also increases the pre-test probability 
for SND by about 5 %. We conclude that the CGH-test discriminates between groups 
of patients with PD and SND, but has little practical diagnostic value for
identifying individual patients.

DOI: 10.1007/s00415-002-0809-y 
PMID: 12242540  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Pol J Pharmacol. 2002 Jan-Feb;54(1):19-25.

Role of noradrenergic system in the mechanism of action of endogenous neurotoxin 
1,2,3,4-tetrahydroisoquinoline: biochemical and functional studies.

Michaluk J(1), Krygowska-Wajs A, Karolewicz B, Antkiewicz-Michaluk L.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pharmacology, Polish Academy of Sciences, Kraków.

It is well recognized that 1,2,3,4-tetrahydroisoquinoline (TIQ) is a substance
capable of inducing in animals a syndrome, regarded as an animal model of
Parkinson's disease. This study was designed to evaluate the effect of the
endogenous neurotoxin TIQ on the brain noradrenaline (NA) metabolism in mice and 
on an arterial blood pressure in rats. It was shown for the first time that TIQ
significantly increased NA metabolism, induced NA release and raised the level of
its final metabolite, 3-methoxy-4-hydroxyphenylglycol (MHPG), in mouse brain. The
comparative biochemical studies using specific agonist (clonidine) and antagonist
(yohimbine) of alpha2-adrenergic receptors ligands have shown that observed
biochemical effects were similar to those produced by alpha2-adrenergic
antagonist, yohimbine. In functional studies, the systolic and diastolic blood
pressure was measured using a non-invasive blood pressure transducer. Both acute 
and multiple treatment with TIQ produced a strong hypotensive effect, having
decreased both systolic and diastolic blood pressure in rats. Development of
tolerance to the hypotensive effect was observed after multiple treatment with
TIQ. The data coming from these experimental studies apparently suggest an
important role of the noradrenergic system in the mechanism of action of
endogenous compounds from TIQ group. The results may also support the hypothesis 
assuming a causal relationship between noradrenergic dennervation, activity of
the nigrostriatal dopamine system, and some clinical manifestation of Parkinson's
disease.


PMID: 12020040  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Rinsho Shinkeigaku. 2001 Sep;41(9):582-7.

[Diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease using brain SPECT with three-dimensional
stereotactic surface projections].

[Article in Japanese]

Hanyu H(1), Asano T, Kogure D, Abe S, Iwamoto T, Takasaki M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Geriatric Medicine, Tokyo Medical University.

We compared the diagnostic usefulness of three-dimensional stereotactic surface
projection (3D-SSP) with that of standard transaxial images in brain SPECT in
patients with Alzheimer's disease (AD). The subjects consisted of 69 patients
with AD and 60 patients with non-AD, including vascular dementia, Parkinson's
disease with dementia, frontotemporal dementia, other dementing diseases and
neuropsychiatric diseases. Standard transaxial section and 3D-SSP SPECT images
with N-isopropyl-p-[123I] iodoamphetamine were blindly interpreted by three
examiners and were classified into the following three patterns: typical AD,
atypical AD, and not indicative AD patterns. The 3D-SSP images demonstrated
reductions of cerebral blood flow in the parieto-temporal association cortex and 
posterior cingulate gyrus more clearly and easily than the standard transaxial
images. The diagnostic sensitivity and specificity were 93% and 85% with 3D-SSP
and 83% and 82% with standard transaxial section respectively. 3D-SSP was
especially useful for early or atypical AD which showed no characteristic
perfusion abnormalities on standard transaxial images. These results suggest that
SPECT with 3D-SSP provides an sensitive as well as accurate tool for the
diagnosis of AD.


PMID: 11968741  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


131. J Neurol. 2002 Apr;249(4):488-9.

Is clonidine-growth hormone stimulation a good test to differentiate multiple
system atrophy from idiopathic Parkinson's disease?

Mathias CJ, Kimber J, Watson L, Muthane U.

Comment on
    J Neurol. 2000 Nov;247(11):853-6.

DOI: 10.1007/s004150200047 
PMID: 11967661  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Neuroreport. 2002 Jan 21;13(1):25-8.

N-methyl-norsalsolinol, a putative dopaminergic neurotoxin, passes through the
blood-brain barrier in vivo.

Thümen A(1), Behnecke A, Qadri F, Bäuml E, Thümen A, Behnecke CA, Qadri F, Bäuml 
E, Moser A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Institute of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Medical
University of Lübeck, Germany.

In earlier studies the dihydroxylated tetrahydroisoquinoline derivatives
salsolinol and 2(N)-methyl-norsalsolinol (NMNorsal), a 2(N)-analogue of
salsolinol, were identified as putative endogenous neurotoxins in patients with
Parkinson's disease. Since a prominent blood-brain barrier (BBB) was described to
exist for salsolinol, in the present study microdialysis experiments were
performed to investigate the penetration of NMNorsal through the BBB into the
caudate nucleus of the rat brain. After i.p. administration of NMNorsal (20
mg/kg), it could be detected in the dialysate of the caudate nucleus with a mean 
maximum after 40 min. There was no alteration in extracellular dopamine or
3,4-dihydroxyphenylacetic acid levels. Addition of the monoamine oxidase
inhibitor pargyline (10 microM) to the perfusate did not modify NMNorsal levels
in the caudate nucleus. To corroborate the microdialysis results, homogenates of 
the contralateral caudate nucleus were prepared and NMNorsal could also be
detected. These findings indicate that NMNorsal is indeed able to pass through
the blood-brain barrier of the rat brain.


PMID: 11924888  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Neurol Sci. 2001 Feb;22(1):79-80.

Stimulation of growth hormone release in multiple system atrophy, Parkinson's
disease and idiopathic cerebellar ataxia.

Pellecchia MT(1), Salvatore E, Pivonello R, Faggiano A, Barone P, De Michele G,
Colao AM, Filla A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurological Sciences, University Federico II, Naples, Italy.

Clonidine has been proposed to differentiate multiple system atrophy (MSA) from
idiopathic Parkinson's disease (IPD), as it does not increase growth hormone (GH)
release in MSA. We studied GH release in response to clonidine in 7 IPD patients,
6 MSA patients, 4 patients affected by idiopathic late-onset cerebellar ataxia
(ILOCA) and 8 healthy controls. In addition, we investigated the effects of GH
releasing hormone plus arginine (GHRH-Arg) on GH release in the same patients.
Both clonidine and GHRH-Arg raised serum GH levels in all groups examined.
Clonidine failed to differentiate MSA from IPD and ILOCA. GHRH-Arg showed a lower
increase of serum GH in MSA patients than in other groups, even if such
difference was not statistically significant. We suggest that stimulation of GH
release with GHRH-Arg rather than clonidine could differentiate MSA from IPD and 
ILOCA, but this hypothesis would need to be confirmed by further investigations.


PMID: 11487211  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Nihon Ronen Igakkai Zasshi. 2001 Mar;38(2):193-200.

[Memory function in patients with Parkinson's disease: in relation to
neuropsychological tests and cerebral blood flow].

[Article in Japanese]

Shibuya N(1), Tachibana H, Kawabata K, Sugita M.

Author information: 
(1)Fifth Department of Internal Medicine, Hyogo College of Medicine.

We conducted a neuropsychological comparison between Parkinson's disease (PD; n =
24) and healthy control subjects (n = 12) using Rey's auditory-verbal learning
test (RAVLT) and the Rey-Osterrieth complex figure test (RCFT) assessing memory
function. In addition, to determine the function of cortical and subcortical
areas, we measured the regional cerebral blood flow (rCBF) using
N-isopropyl-p[123I]-iodoamhetamine (123I-IMP) and single photon emission computed
tomography (SPECT) and analyzed the relationships between brain regions and
memory function. On the RAVLT, significant group differences in recall words were
found on all learning trials between patients with PD and control subjects,
whereas recognition, learning rate and forgetting rate were basically the same.
In addition, the primacy/recency effect was statistically equal for both groups. 
Results suggest faulty retrieval mechanisms in PD, whereas encoding and retention
procesess did not prove to be affected. There were significant correlations
between perfusion of the prefrontal and parietal cortices and total number of
free recall in five trials. On the RCFT, recalls after 30 sec and 30 min were
impaired in patients with PD although no significant difference in accuracy
scores obtained in copy was noted. A percent recall score calculated using the
formula 100 x [1 - (copy-recall)/copy] was also decreased in patients with PD.
There were significant correlations between perfusion of the occipital and
parietal cortices and percent recall score. Our data suggest that auditory memory
deficits based on the RAVLT in PD may be mainly related to frontal and parietal
cortical dysfunction, while visual recall deficits based on the RCFT may be
related to the parieto-occipital cortical dysfunction.


PMID: 11305033  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Neurosci Lett. 2001 Apr 20;302(2-3):65-8.

L-Deprenyl prevents the cell hypoxia induced by dopaminergic neurotoxins, MPP(+) 
and beta-carbolinium: a microdialysis study in rats.

Matsubara K(1), Senda T, Uezono T, Awaya T, Ogawa S, Chiba K, Shimizu K, Hayase
N, Kimura K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hospital Pharmacy and Pharmacology, Asahikawa Medical College,
Asahikawa, 078-8510, Japan. kmatsuba@asahikawa-med.ac.jp

N-Methyl-4-phenylpyridinium (MPP(+)) and 2,9-di-methyl-norharmanium
(2,9-Me2NH(+)), which is a beta-carbolinium proposed as an endogenous MPP(+)-like
toxin underlying Parkinson's disease, are strong mitochondrial toxins. We have
measured the extracellular lactate levels as a marker for the in vivo cell
hypoxia in the striatum of freely moving rats. The perfusions with MPP(+) and
2,9-Me2NH(+) increased extracellular lactate levels in a dose-dependent manner.
These increases in lactate levels were significantly prevented by the
co-perfusion with 10 microM L-deprenyl, a selective monoamine oxidase (MAO)-B
inhibitor, but not by pargyline, a non-specific MAO inhibitor. The increase in
extracellular lactate levels was considered to be the reflection of the cell
damage resulted from the impairment of mitochondrial function. The present
results suggested that L-deprenyl would rescue nerve cells from these toxins
through the direct influence on the mitochondrial electron transport.


PMID: 11290388  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Neuroscience. 2001;102(1):121-8.

Glutamate regulates the spontaneous and evoked release of dopamine in the rat
striatum.

Kulagina NV(1), Zigmond MJ, Michael AC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Pittsburgh, PA 15260, USA.

Resting and evoked extracellular dopamine levels in the striatum of the
anesthetized rat were measured by fast-scan cyclic voltammetry in conjunction
with carbon fiber microelectrodes. Identification of the substance detected in
vivo was achieved by inspection of background-subtracted voltammograms.
Intrastriatal microinfusion of kynurenate, a broad-spectrum antagonist of
ionotropic glutamate receptors, caused a decrease in the resting extracellular
level of dopamine. The kynurenate-induced decrease was unaffected by systemic
pretreatment with pargyline, an inhibitor of monoamine oxidase, but was
significantly attenuated by systemic pretreatment with alpha-methyl-p-tyrosine,
an inhibitor of tyrosine hydroxylase. Although glutamate by itself did not affect
resting extracellular dopamine levels, glutamate did attenuate the
kynurenate-induced decrease. Kynurenate decreased dopamine release in response to
electrical stimulation of the medial forebrain bundle, an effect that was also
attenuated by glutamate. These results suggest that both spontaneous and evoked
dopamine release in the rat striatum are under the local tonic excitatory
influence of glutamate. Interactions between central dopamine and glutamate
systems that have been implicated in the etiologies of Parkinson's disease,
schizophrenia, stress, and substance abuse. The precise nature of those
interactions, however, remains a matter of some controversy.


PMID: 11226675  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


137. J Neurol. 2000 Nov;247(11):853-6.

Is clonidine growth hormone stimulation a good test to differentiate multiple
system atrophy from idiopathic Parkinson's disease?

Tranchant C(1), Guiraud-Chaumeil C, Echaniz-Laguna A, Warter JM.

Author information: 
(1)Service des Maladies du Système Nerveux et du Muscle, Hôpitaux Universitaires,
1 Place de l'Hôpital, 67091 Strasbourg, France. christine
tranchant@chru-strasbourg.fr

Comment in
    J Neurol. 2002 Apr;249(4):488-9.

Clonidine, a centrally active alpha 2-adrenoreceptor agonist used to lower blood 
pressure, has been proposed to differentiate central from peripheral autonomic
deficits and multiple system atrophy (MSA) from untreated idiopathic Parkinson's 
disease (IPD). A lack of growth hormone (GH) increase after clonidine infusion is
found in patients with MSA, but not in those with IPD or with pure autonomic
failure. We studied 19 IPD and 7 MSA patients to assess whether this test could
be used in clinical practice to distinguish MSA from IPD, whatever the stage of
the disease. Serum GH levels were measured 15, 30, 45 and 60 min after a 10-min
infusion of 2 micrograms/kg clonidine. GH levels remained stable after clonidine 
infusion in all 7 MSA patients but increased in only 12 of the 19 IPD patients,
while remaining stable in the other 7. No correlation was found with the presence
of orthostatic hypotension. We conclude that the GH response to clonidine
infusion has a very high sensitivity (100% in our series and in previous studies)
for the diagnosis of MSA. However, this response cannot be used as a diagnostic
test because of its poor specificity.


PMID: 11151417  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


138. J Neural Transm Suppl. 2000;(58):111-21.

Involvement of endogenous N-methyl(R)salsolinol in Parkinson's disease: induction
of apoptosis and protection by (-)deprenyl.

Naoi M(1), Maruyama W, Takahashi T, Akao Y, Nakagawa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Brain Sciences, Institute of Applied Biochemistry, Mitake, Gifu,
Japan. mnaoi@quartz.ocn.ne.jp

An endogenous dopamine-derived N-methyl(R)salsolinol has been suggested to be
involved in the pathogenesis of Parkinson's disease. In Parkinson's disease, the 
level of N-methyl(R)salsolinol increased in cerebrospinal fluid and the high
activity of a synthesizing enzyme, (R)salsolinol N-methyltransferase, was
detected in lymphocytes. This isoquinoline induced apoptotic DNA damage in human 
dopaminergic neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y cells. Among catechol isoquinolines, only
N-methylsalsolinol induced apoptosis in the cells, and the scavengers of hydroxyl
radicals and antioxidants suppressed DNA damage, suggesting that reactive oxygen 
species initiate apoptosis. The isoquinoline activated caspase-3 like proteases
and a caspase-3 inhibitor protected the cells from DNA damage. (-)Deprenyl, but
neither clorgyline nor pargyline, prevented apoptotic cell death. The mechanism
of the protection was due to stabilization of mitochondrial membrane potential
reduced by the toxin. In Parkinson's disease apoptosis may be induced in dopamine
neurons by this endogenous neurotoxin, and (-)deprenyl may protect them from
apoptotic death process.


PMID: 11128601  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Rev Neurol. 2000 May 16-31;30(10):910-3.

[Acute pharmacological test with clonidine for the tremor in patients with
Parkinson disease].

[Article in Spanish]

Serrano-Dueñas M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Neurología, Hospital Carlos Andrade Marín (Instituto Ecuatoriano
de Seguridad Social), Facultad de Medicina, Pontífica Universidad Católica del
Ecuador, Quito, Ecuador. serranom@pi.pro.ec

INTRODUCTION: Idiopathic Parkinson's disease has a prevalence of 1/1,000 and in
70-75% of these patients tremor is the commonest symptom. Of all the typical
symptoms of this disease, the tremor is the most difficult to control. It is
therefore necessary to seek drugs to solve this serious problem.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the usefulness of clonidine in the acute treatment of
resting and postural tremor in patients with idiopathic Parkinson's disease.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Acute pharmacological test (administration of 0.3 mg of
clonidine chlorhydrate intramuscularly). The evaluation was done using a clinical
protocol before administration and 30, 60, 120 and 240 minutes afterwards.
Statistical comparison was done by variance analysis, taking a value of p <
0.0025 as significant. We included 28 patients (15 men and 13 women) of an
average age of 66.9 years, and average duration of the disease of 5.53 years.
Diagnosis followed the strict criteria of UKDDDSBB.
RESULTS: There was no difference in the evaluations before and after the first
dose of L-dopa. For both types of tremor, from 60 minutes onwards there were
significant differences, with the maximum 120 minutes after administration (p <
0.0001).
CONCLUSIONS: Clonidine is useful in the acute treatment of postural and intention
tremor in patients with idiopathic Parkinson's disease. Its action is that of
reducing the liberation of noradrenaline, synergically with the exciting
dopaminergic system. It also seems to reduce the activity of spontaneous
discharge at both thalamic and cortical levels.


PMID: 10919184  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2000;899:255-61.

Effect of MAO-B inhibitors on MPP+ toxicity in Vivo.

Wu RM(1), Chen RC, Chiueh CC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, National Taiwan University Hospital, College of
Medicine, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan. rmwu@ha.mc.ntu.edu.tw

l-Deprenyl (Selegiline), a selective and irreversible type B monoamine oxidase
inhibitor, has been used as an adjunct to levodopa therapy in Parkinson's
disease. Recently, it is proposed as a putative neuroprotective agent in delaying
the progression of cell death based on its capability of reducing the oxidative
stress derived from the MAO-B dependent metabolism of dopamine, and blocking the 
development of MPTP-parkinsonism. However, a variety of experimental models
suggest that l-deprenyl provides neuroprotection through multiple modes of
mechanism other than the inhibition of MAO-B. We have previously shown that
l-deprenyl protects midbrain dopamine neurons from MPP+ toxicity by a novel
antioxidant effect. In the present study we examined whether the protection
against MPP+ toxicity is also shared by other reversible or irreversible MAO-B
inhibitors including (+)-deprenyl, Ro16-6491 and pargyline. Our data show that
non of these MAO-B inhibitors changes the dopamine loss in the striatum induced
by intranigral injection of MPP+. Our result suggests that l-deprenyl may possess
a unique neuroprotective action on nigral neuron against MPP+ toxicity
independent of the MAO-B inhibition.


PMID: 10863544  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Aust N Z J Med. 2000 Feb;30(1):48-53.

The angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitor, perindopril, modifies the
clinical features of Parkinson's disease.

Reardon KA(1), Mendelsohn FA, Chai SY, Horne MK.

Author information: 
(1)Neurosciences Department, Monash Medical Centre, Melbourne, Vic.

BACKGROUND: Animal studies have demonstrated an interaction within the striatum
between the angiotensin and dopaminergic systems. In rats, the angiotensin
converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitor, perindopril, crosses the blood brain barrier
and increases striatal dopamine synthesis and release. In humans, angiotensin
type 1 receptors have been found on dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra 
and striatum. In Parkinson's disease, there is a marked reduction of these
receptors associated with the nigrostriatal dopaminergic neuron loss.
AIMS: We performed a double blind placebo controlled crossover pilot study in
seven patients to investigate the effect of the ACE inhibitor, perindopril on the
clinical features of moderately severe Parkinson's disease.
RESULTS: After a four week treatment period with perindopril, patients had a
faster onset in their motor response to L-dopa and a reduction in 'on phase' peak
dyskinesia, p=0.021 and p=0.014 respectively. Patients also reported more 'on'
periods during their waking day in their movement diary, p=0.007. Perindopril was
well tolerated without any significant postural hypotension or renal dysfunction.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that ACE inhibitors such as perindopril may
have a place in the management of motor fluctuations and dyskinesia in
Parkinson's disease and justify further study.


PMID: 10800878  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Br J Pharmacol. 1999 Dec;128(7):1577-85.

The adrenergic receptor agonist, clonidine, potentiates the anti-parkinsonian
action of the selective kappa-opioid receptor agonist, enadoline, in the
monoamine-depleted rat.

Hill MP(1), Brotchie JM.

Author information: 
(1)Manchester Movement Disorder Laboratory, 1.124 Division of Neuroscience,
School of Biological Sciences, University of Manchester, Manchester, M13 9PT.
m.hill@man.ac.uk

1. The treatment of Parkinson's disease relies predominantly upon dopamine
replacement therapy, usually with l-dihydroxyphenylalanine (L-DOPA). However,
side-effects of long-term treatment, such as L-DOPA-induced dyskinesias can be
more debilitating than the disease itself. Non-dopaminergic treatment strategies 
might therefore be advantageous. 2. The aim of this study was to investigate the 
potential anti-parkinsonian efficacy of the kappa-opioid receptor agonist,
enadoline, and the alpha-adrenoreceptor agonist, clonidine, both alone or in
combination, in the reserpine-treated rat model of Parkinson's disease. 3. Rats
were treated with reserpine (3 mg kg-1), and experiments carried out 18 h later, 
at which time they exhibited profound akinesia (normal animals 1251+/-228 mobile 
counts h-1, reserpine-treated animals 9+/-2 mobile counts h-1). Both enadoline
and clonidine increased locomotion in reserpine-treated rats in a dose-dependent 
manner. The maximum locomotor-stimulating effect of enadoline alone was seen at a
dose of 0.2 mg kg-1 (208+/-63 mobile counts h-1). The maximum effect of clonidine
was seen at a dose of 2 mg kg-1 (536+/-184 mobile counts h-1). 4.
Co-administration of enadoline (0.1 mg kg-1) and clonidine (0.01 - 0.1 mg kg-1)
at sub-threshold doses, synergistically increased locomotion. 5. The synergistic 
stimulation of locomotion in the reserpine-treated rat involved activation of
kappa-opioid receptors and a combination of both alpha1 and
alpha2-adrenoreceptors. 6. The results presented suggest a need for further
studies on the potential of stimulating kappa-opioid and/or alpha-adrenoreceptors
as a therapy for Parkinson's disease. Furthermore, the studies may offer
potential mechanistic explanations of the ability of alpha2-adrenergic receptor
antagonist to reduce L-DOPA-induced dyskinesia in Parkinson's disease.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.bjp.0702943 
PMCID: PMC1571785
PMID: 10602339  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


143. FEBS Lett. 1999 Nov 19;461(3):196-200.

1-Methyl-4-phenyl-2,3-dihydropyridinium is transformed by ubiquinone to the
selective nigrostriatal toxin 1-methyl-4-phenylpyridinium.

Shi H(1), Noguchi N, Xu Y, Niki E.

Author information: 
(1)Research Center for Advanced Science and Technology, University of Tokyo,
4-6-1 Komaba, Tokyo, Japan.

We have studied the interaction of coenzyme Q with
1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP) and its metabolites,
1-methyl-4-phenyl-2,3-dihydropyridinium (MPDP(+)) and 1-methyl-4-phenylpyridinium
(MPP(+)), the real neurotoxin to cause Parkinson's disease. Incubation of MPTP or
MPDP(+) with rat brain synaptosomes induced complete reduction of endogenous
ubiquinone-9 and ubiquinone-10 to corresponding ubiquinols. The reduction
occurred in a time- and MPTP/MPDP(+) concentration-dependent manner. The
reduction of ubiquinone induced by MPDP(+) went much faster than that by MPTP.
MPTP did not reduce liposome-trapped ubiquinone-10, but MPDP(+) did. The real
toxin MPP(+) did not reduce ubiquinone in either of the systems. The reduction by
MPTP but not MPDP(+) was completely prevented by pargyline, a type B monoamine
oxidase (MAO-B) inhibitor, in the synaptosomes. The results indicate that
involvement of MAO-B is critical for the reduction of ubiquinone by MPTP but that
MPDP(+) is a reductant of ubiquinone per se. It is suggested that ubiquinone
could be an electron acceptor from MPDP(+) and promote the conversion from
MPDP(+) to MPP(+) in vivo, thus accelerating the neurotoxicity of MPTP.


PMID: 10567696  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


144. J Clin Psychopharmacol. 1999 Oct;19(5):444-9.

Alpha2-adrenergic agonist clonidine for improving spatial working memory in
Parkinson's disease.

Riekkinen M(1), Riekkinen P Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology & Neuroscience, University Hospital and University of 
Kuopio, Finland.

The loss of dopaminergic cells during Parkinson's disease (PD) produces
"frontal"-like impairment in spatial working memory (SWM) and planning functions.
This study investigated whether an alpha2-adrenergic agonist, clonidine (0.5 or 2
microg/kg, orally), improves SWM, spatial short-term or spatial recognition
memory, and planning functions in PD patients. Clonidine 2 microg/kg decreased
errors in SWM, but a lower dose, 0.5 microg/kg, had no effect on performance.
Clonidine 0.5 and 2 microg/kg failed to improve the strategy used to solve the
SWM test. Clonidine 0.5 and 2 microg/kg had no effect on accuracy of performance 
in the other tests. These results showed that clonidine improves performance in a
test of SWM and that this is not due to improved spatial short-term or spatial
recognition memory or planning functions. The authors suggest that stimulation of
alpha2-adrenoceptors improves the mnemonic processing required for accurate SWM
performance in PD patients.


PMID: 10505586  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


145. J Neurochem. 1999 Sep;73(3):1127-37.

Dopamine oxidation alters mitochondrial respiration and induces permeability
transition in brain mitochondria: implications for Parkinson's disease.

Berman SB(1), Hastings TG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, University of Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15261, USA.

Both reactive dopamine metabolites and mitochondrial dysfunction have been
implicated in the neurodegeneration of Parkinson's disease. Dopamine metabolites,
dopamine quinone and reactive oxygen species, can directly alter protein function
by oxidative modifications, and several mitochondrial proteins may be targets of 
this oxidative damage. In this study, we examined, using isolated brain
mitochondria, whether dopamine oxidation products alter mitochondrial function.
We found that exposure to dopamine quinone caused a large increase in
mitochondrial resting state 4 respiration. This effect was prevented by GSH but
not superoxide dismutase and catalase. In contrast, exposure to dopamine and
monoamine oxidase-generated hydrogen peroxide resulted in a decrease in active
state 3 respiration. This inhibition was prevented by both pargyline and
catalase. We also examined the effects of dopamine oxidation products on the
opening of the mitochondrial permeability transition pore, which has been
implicated in neuronal cell death. Dopamine oxidation to dopamine quinone caused 
a significant increase in swelling of brain and liver mitochondria. This was
inhibited by both the pore inhibitor cyclosporin A and GSH, suggesting that
swelling was due to pore opening and related to dopamine quinone formation. In
contrast, dopamine and endogenous monoamine oxidase had no effect on
mitochondrial swelling. These findings suggest that mitochondrial dysfunction
induced by products of dopamine oxidation may be involved in neurodegenerative
conditions such as Parkinson's disease and methamphetamine-induced neurotoxicity.


PMID: 10461904  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Lancet. 1999 Jul 24;354(9175):339-40.

Clonidine-growth-hormone testing in Parkinson's disease.

Mathias CJ, Kimber JR.

Comment on
    Lancet. 1999 Apr 17;353(9161):1329-30.


PMID: 10440340  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Neuroscience. 1999;92(3):983-9.

The alpha2 agonist, clonidine, improves spatial working performance in
Parkinson's disease.

Riekkinen M(1), Jäkälä P, Kejonen K, Riekkinen P Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology and Neuroscience, University Hospital and University
of Kuopio, Finland.

Previous work has shown that the dopaminergic defect in Parkinson's disease is
involved, to some extent, in the "frontal"-like impairment in spatial working
memory and attentional set-shifting functions. We investigated whether an alpha2 
agonist, clonidine (0.5 and 2 microg/kg, per os), could alleviate spatial working
memory and attentional set-shifting defect in Parkinson's disease patients. We
observed that 2 microg/kg clonidine stimulated spatial working memory accuracy,
but had no effect on attentional set shifting or visual recognition memory.
Clonidine was also effective in stimulating spatial working memory after
withdrawal of dopaminergic drugs, and when this was done, its effect was greater 
in severe Parkinson's disease patients. In contrast, clonidine failed to
stimulate visual recognition memory. These results suggest that disrupted
activation of alpha2 adrenoceptors may contribute to the impairment of spatial
working memory in Parkinson's disease.


PMID: 10426538  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


148. J Neurochem. 1999 Jul;73(1):214-9.

Effect of chronic angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibition on striatal dopamine
content in the MPTP-treated mouse.

Jenkins TA(1), Wong JY, Howells DW, Mendelsohn FA, Chai SY.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Florey Institute of Experimental Physiology and Medicine, University of
Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria, Australia.

We have previously shown that chronic treatment with the angiotensin-converting
enzyme inhibitor perindopril increased striatal dopamine levels by 2.5-fold in
normal Sprague-Dawley rats, possibly via modulation of the striatal opioid or
tachykinin levels. In the present study, we investigated if this effect of
perindopril persists in an animal model of Parkinson's disease, the
1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP)-treated mouse. C57BL/6 mice
were treated with the neurotoxin (30 mg/kg/day intraperitoneally) for 4 days and 
then left for 3 weeks to allow the degeneration of striatal dopaminergic
terminals. At this time, the mice exhibited a 40% decrease in striatal dopamine
content and an accompanying 46% increase in dopamine D2 receptor levels compared 
with control untreated mice. The dopamine content returned to control levels, and
the increase in dopamine D2 receptor levels was attenuated in mice treated with
perindopril (5 mg/kg/day orally for 7 days) 2 weeks after the last dose of MPTP. 
When the angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor was administered (5 mg/kg/day
for 7 days) immediately after the cessation of the MPTP treatment, there was no
reversal of the effect of the neurotoxin in decreasing striatal dopamine content.
Our results demonstrate that perindopril is an effective agent in increasing
striatal dopamine content in an animal model of Parkinson's disease.


PMID: 10386973  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Lancet. 1999 Apr 17;353(9161):1329-30.

Failure of the clonidine growth hormone stimulation test to differentiate
multiple system atrophy from early or advanced idiopathic Parkinson's disease.

Clarke CE, Ray PS, Speller JM.

Comment in
    Lancet. 1999 Jul 24;354(9175):339-40.


PMID: 10218537  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


150. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 1999 Feb;288(2):798-804.

Effects of alpha-2 adrenoceptor agonists and antagonists on circling behavior in 
rats with unilateral 6-hydroxydopamine lesions of the nigrostriatal pathway.

Chopin P(1), Colpaert FC, Marien M.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Recherche Pierre Fabre, Castres Cedex, France.

The present study examined the influence of alpha-2 adrenoceptor ligands on
circling behavior in rats with unilateral 6-hydroxydopamine lesions of the
nigrostriatal pathway. The alpha-2 adrenoceptor agonists, clonidine and UK 14304,
inhibited both the ipsilateral rotation induced by the indirect dopaminergic
agonist, methylphenidate, and the contralateral circling induced by the direct
dopaminergic agonist, apomorphine. In contrast, the alpha-2 adrenoceptor
antagonists, idazoxan and (+/-)-efaroxan, enhanced the circling induced by either
methylphenidate or apomorphine. The facilitating activity of efaroxan was
stereoselective because the (+)-enantiomer mimicked the effect of (+/-)-efaroxan,
whereas the (-)-enantiomer was essentially inactive, thus indicating a mediation 
by alpha-2 adrenoceptors. Upon administration alone, the above-mentioned
compounds did not modify spontaneous circling behavior, except for UK 14304,
which decreased, and (+)-efaroxan, which slightly increased, the ipsilateral
rotation. We conclude that activation and antagonism of alpha-2 adrenoceptors
inhibit and enhance, respectively, the circling behavior evoked by both direct
and indirect dopaminergic agonists. Although a modulation of dopamine release may
be involved in some of these drug effects, the effects on apomorphine-induced
circling indicate an influence of alpha-2 adrenoceptor compounds on nigrostriatal
neurotransmission at sites downstream from the dopaminergic neurons themselves.
These findings support the notion of a potential benefit of alpha-2 adrenoceptor 
antagonists in the treatment of Parkinson's disease.


PMID: 9918591  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


151. J Neurochem. 1998 Dec;71(6):2439-46.

Nicotine prevents experimental parkinsonism in rodents and induces striatal
increase of neurotrophic factors.

Maggio R(1), Riva M, Vaglini F, Fornai F, Molteni R, Armogida M, Racagni G,
Corsini GU.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, University of Pisa, Italy.

The repeated finding of an apparent protective effect of cigarette smoking on the
risk of Parkinson's disease is one of the few consistent results in the
epidemiology of this disorder. Among the numerous substances that originate from 
tobacco smoke, nicotine is by far the most widely studied. Nicotine is a natural 
alkaloid that has considerable stimulatory effects on the CNS. Its effects on the
CNS are mediated by the activation of neuronal heteromeric acetylcholine-gated
ion channel receptors (nAChRs, also termed nicotinic acetylcholine receptors). In
the present study, we describe the neuroprotective effects of (-)-nicotine in two
animal models of parkinsonism: diethyldithiocarbamate-induced enhancement of
1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine toxicity in mice and
methamphetamine-induced neurotoxicity in rats and mice. The neuroprotective
effect of (-)-nicotine was very similar to that of the noncompetitive NMDA
receptor antagonist (+)-MK-801. In parallel experiments, we found that
(-)-nicotine induces the basic fibroblast growth factor-2 (FGF-2) and the
brain-derived neurotrophic factor in rat striatum. The effect of (-)-nicotine on 
the induction of FGF-2 was prevented by the nAChR antagonist mecamylamine. We
also found that (+)-MK-801 was able to induce FGF-2 in the striatum. As trophic
factors have been reported to be neuroprotective for dopaminergic cells, our data
suggest that the increase in neurotrophic factors is a possible mechanism by
which (-)-nicotine protects from experimental parkinsonisms.


PMID: 9832142  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Therapie. 1998 Jan-Feb;53(1):35-41.

[Pharmacologic approach to autonomic failure].

[Article in French]

Senard JM(1), Montastruc JL.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Pharmacologie Médicale et Clinique, INSERM U 317, Faculté de
Médecine, Toulouse, France.

Four different forms of primary autonomic failure (multiple system atrophy, pure 
autonomic failure, Parkinson's disease and dopamine beta-hydroxylase deficiency) 
have been described. The first part of the article will focus on the interest to 
pharmacology of elucidating pathophysiological mechanisms underlying autonomic
involvement at the central level (growth hormone response to clonidine acute
challenge), presynaptic level (plasma catecholamine levels after yohimbine
administration) and on post-synaptic receptors (binding studies, pressor
responses to noradrenaline). The second part will discuss efficacy and
side-effects of some of the many drugs which are currently proposed for the
treatment of one of the most disabling symptoms related to autonomic failure,
orthostatic hypotension. Special attention will be paid to drugs acting on blood 
composition (fludrocortisone, erythropoietin), on post-synaptic
alpha-adrenoceptors (midodrine and clonidine) and on noradrenaline spill-over
(yohimbine and L-Threo-DOPS).


PMID: 9773098  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Immunopharmacology. 1998 Jun;39(3):167-80.

Microglial and astrocytic involvement in a murine model of Parkinson's disease
induced by 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP).

Kohutnicka M(1), Lewandowska E, Kurkowska-Jastrzebska I, Członkowski A,
Członkowska A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental and Clinical Pharmacology, Medical Academy of
Warsaw, Poland.

We have studied the reaction of glial cells in mice treated with an
intraperitoneal administration of 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine
(MPTP), a selective neurotoxin of dopaminergic nigrostriatal neurons. Signs of
injury to the dopaminergic neurons started on the 1st day after MPTP
administration and progressed up to the end of the observation time (21st day). A
transient microglial reaction was demonstrated from the 1st until the 14th day in
the substantia nigra (SN) and striatum. The cells showed an increase in number
and changes in morphology. At the ultrastructural level, signs of phagocytosis
and features indicating the secretion of biologically active substances were
observed. Astrocytosis followed the microglial reaction by one day and was
noticed until the end of the observation time. Interleukin-6 immunoreactivity was
observed within microglia and astrocytes in the SN on days 2 and 3. There were no
signs of depletion of dopaminergic cells or glial activation after the
administration of MPTP simultaneously with pargyline, an inhibitor of monoamine
oxidase-B that prevents MPTP neurotoxicity. Our study indicates that microglia
and astrocytes are involved in the pathological process in the nigrostriatal
system following MPTP administration. MPTP alone is not responsible for glial
cell activation but its metabolite MPP+ and/or agents released by injured neurons
may participate in this process.


PMID: 9754903  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Eur J Neurosci. 1998 Apr;10(4):1429-35.

Reduction of noradrenaline impairs attention and dopamine depletion slows
responses in Parkinson's disease.

Riekkinen M(1), Kejonen K, Jäkälä P, Soininen H, Riekkinen P Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, University Hospital and University of Kuopio,
Finland.

We investigated the role dopamine and noradrenaline in the modulation of
attention in Parkinson's disease (PD) patients. We observed that PD patients with
mild and moderate motor disability did not differ in their attentional accuracy
in easy tests, but the severe PD group was slightly disrupted in a more arduous
test of attention. Attentional accuracy was not affected by withdrawal of
dopaminergic drugs in mild or severe PD patients. The movements of severe PD
patients were slower, and withdrawal of dopaminergic drugs aggravated motor
slowing more in severe PD patients. Clonidine (0.5 and 2 microg/kg) retarded
accuracy of performance in the most difficult attention test in mild PD patients,
but had no effect in the severe PD group. Clonidine had no effect on movement
times. These data suggest that a defect in noradrenaline release may contribute
to the impaired accuracy of attention in severe PD patients and that dopamine may
be important for maintaining rapid motor responding.


PMID: 9749797  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Psychopharmacology (Berl). 1998 Aug;138(3-4):217-30.

Nicotinic acetylcholine involvement in cognitive function in animals.

Levin ED(1), Simon BB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710,
USA. edlevin@acpub.duke.edu

Nicotinic cholinergic systems are involved with several important aspects of
cognitive function including attention, learning and memory. Nicotinic
cholinergic receptors are located in many regions of the brain, including areas
important for cognitive function such as the hippocampus and frontal cortex.
Nicotinic agonists have been found in rodent and non-human primate studies to
improve performance on a variety of memory tasks. In a complementary fashion,
nicotinic antagonists such as mecamylamine impair working memory function. In
humans, similar effects have been seen. Nicotinic agonist treatment can improve
attention, learning and memory and nicotinic antagonist treatment can cause
deficits. To define the neural substrates of nicotinic involvement in cognitive
function, three areas of investigation are underway. 1) Critical neuroanatomic
loci for nicotinic effects are beginning to be determined. The hippocampus,
frontal cortex and midbrain dopaminergic nuclei have been found to be important
sites of action for nicotinic involvement in memory function. 2) Nicotinic
receptor subtype involvement in cognitive function is being studied. There has
been considerable recent work identifying nicotinic receptor subunit conformation
including alpha and beta subunits. Nicotinic receptor subtypes appear to be
associated with different functional systems; however, much remains to be done to
determine the precise role each subtype plays in terms of cognitive function. 3) 
Nicotinic interactions with other transmitter systems are being assessed.
Nicotine receptors interact in important ways with other systems to affect
cognitive functioning, including muscarinic ACh, dopamine, norepinepherine,
serotonin, glutamate, and other systems. Nicotinic function in clinical
populations and potential for therapeutics has been investigated for Alzheimer's 
disease, Parkinson's disease, schizophrenia and attention deficit/hyperactivity
disorder. Areas which need to receive greater attention are the exact anatomical 
location and the specific receptor subtypes critically involved in nicotine's
effects. In addition, more work needs to be done to develop and determine the
efficacy and safety of novel nicotinic ligands for use in the long-term treatment
of human cognitive disorders.


PMID: 9725745  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 1998 May 30;844:166-77.

Noradrenergic modulation of methamphetamine-induced striatal dopamine depletion.

Fornai F(1), Alessandrì MG, Torracca MT, Bassi L, Scalori V, Corsini GU.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, University of Pisa, Italy.
ffornai@drugs.med.unipi.it

Noradrenergic (NE) neurons belonging to the locus coeruleus (LC), much more than 
the A1 and A2 areas, are lost in Parkinson's disease (PD). In this study, we
reproduced the selective pattern of NE loss involving axons arising from the LC
using the selective neurotoxin N-(-2-chloroethyl)-N-ethyl-2-bromobenzylamine
(DSP-4) (50 mg/kg). In these experimental conditions, we investigated whether NE 
loss potentiates methamphetamine-induced striatal dopamine (DA) depletion in mice
and rats. Administration of a moderate dose of methamphetamine to C57B1/6N mice
or Sprague-Dawley rats produced only a partial striatal DA depletion 7 days after
drug administration. Pre-treatment with DSP-4, in both animal species,
significantly enhanced methamphetamine-induced striatal DA depletion.
Administration of a lower dose of methamphetamine did not decrease striatal DA
levels when injected alone, but produced a significant decrease in striatal DA
when given to DSP-4-pretreated rodents. Moreover, we found that agents reducing
the noradrenergic activity (i.e., the alpha-2 agonist clonidine) enhanced,
whereas alpha-2 antagonists decreased, methamphetamine toxicity. Enhancement of
methamphetamine toxicity did not occur if the noradrenergic lesion was produced
12 hr after methamphetamine administration. By contrast, exacerbation of
methamphetamine toxicity in NE-depleted animals was accompanied by increased
extracellular DA levels measured with brain dialysis and by a more severe acute
DA depletion measured in striatal homogenates.


PMID: 9668674  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Br J Pharmacol. 1998 Jun;124(3):455-64.

Activation of midbrain presumed dopaminergic neurones by muscarinic cholinergic
receptors: an in vivo electrophysiological study in the rat.

Gronier B(1), Rasmussen K.

Author information: 
(1)Neuroscience Research, Lilly Research Laboratories, Lilly Corporate Center,
Indianapolis, IN 46285, USA.

1. Extracellular single-unit recording and iontophoresis were used to examine the
effects of different cholinoceptor agonists and antagonists on the firing rate
and firing pattern of A9 and A10 presumed dopaminergic neurones in the
anaesthetized rat. 2. Administration of low currents (1-5 nA) of the selective
muscarinic agonists oxotremorine M (Oxo M) and muscarine and of the non-selective
muscarinic/nicotinic agonist carbamylcholine (CCh) produced a dose-dependent
increase in firing rate in most of the A9 and A10 presumed dopaminergic neurones 
tested. Oxo M-induced activation could be completely blocked by iontophoretic
application of the muscarinic antagonist butyl-scopolamine or systemic
administration of the muscarinic antagonist scopolamine (300 microg kg(-1),
i.v.). 3. Iontophoretic application of the selective nicotinic agonist
methylcarbamylcholine (MCCh), but not nicotine, induced a consistent increase in 
firing rate. Surprisingly, the excitatory effect of MCCh was significantly
reduced by the selective muscarinic antagonist scopolamine (300 microg kg(-1),
i.v.), but not by the selective nicotinic antagonist mecamylamine (2.2 mg kg(-1),
i.v.). Mecamylamine (3 mg kg(-1), i.v.) was also ineffective in reducing the
CCh-induced activation of presumed dopamine neurones, suggesting that both CCh
and MCCh increased the activity of dopamine neurones via an interaction with
muscarinic receptors. 4. Iontophoretic application of the endogenous agonist
acetylcholine (ACh) had no or little effect on the firing activity of A10
presumed dopaminergic neurones. However, concomitant application of neostigmine, 
a potent cholinesterase inhibitor, with acetylcholine induced a substantial
activation of these neurones. This activation consisted of two components; one,
which was prevalent, was scopolamine (300 microg kg(-1), i.v.)-sensitive, and the
other was mecamylamine (2 mg kg(-1), i.v.)-sensitive. 5. In addition to their
effect on firing activity, Oxo M, muscarine and concomitant neostigmine/ACh
caused a significant increase in burst firing of A10 neurones, but not of A9
neurones. 6. These data suggest that dopamine cells, both in the A9 and A10
regions, possess functional muscarinic receptors, the activation of which can
increase their firing rate and, for A10 neurones, their amount of burst activity.
These cholinoceptors would be able to influence the activity of the midbrain
dopamine system greatly and may play a role in, and/or be a therapeutic target
for, brain disorders in which dopamine is involved (e.g., Parkinson's disease,
drug addiction and schizophrenia).

DOI: 10.1038/sj.bjp.0701850 
PMCID: PMC1565406
PMID: 9647468  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


158. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 1998 Feb;284(2):700-6.

Deprenyl and desmethylselegiline protect mesencephalic neurons from toxicity
induced by glutathione depletion.

Mytilineou C(1), Leonardi EK, Radcliffe P, Heinonen EH, Han SK, Werner P, Cohen
G, Olanow CW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, New York
10029, USA.

Oxidative stress is thought to play an important role in the pathogenesis of
Parkinson's disease (PD). Glutathione (GSH), a major cellular antioxidant, is
decreased in the substantia nigra pars compacta of PD patients. The aim of the
present study was to investigate whether deprenyl and its desmethyl metabolite,
putative neuroprotective agents in the treatment of PD, could protect cultured
rat mesencephalic neurons from cell death caused by GSH depletion due to
treatment with L-buthionine-(S,R)-sulfoximine (BSO). BSO (10 microM) caused
extensive cell death after 48 hr, as demonstrated by disruption of cellular
integrity and release of lactate dehydrogenase into the culture medium. Both
deprenyl and desmethylselegiline, at concentrations of 5 and 50 microM,
significantly protected dopaminergic neurons from toxicity without preventing the
BSO-induced loss in GSH. Protection was not associated with monoamine oxidase
type B inhibition in that pargyline, a potent MAO inhibitor, was ineffective and 
pretreatment with pargyline did not prevent the protective effects of deprenyl.
Protection was not associated with inhibition of dopamine uptake by deprenyl
because the dopamine uptake inhibitor mazindol did not diminish BSO toxicity. The
antioxidant ascorbic acid (200 microM) also protected against BSO-induced cell
death, suggesting that oxidative events were involved. This study demonstrates
that deprenyl and its desmethyl metabolite can diminish cell death associated
with GSH depletion.


PMID: 9454817  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Neuroscience. 1998 Apr;83(3):723-40.

Acute intermittent nicotine treatment produces regional increases of basic
fibroblast growth factor messenger RNA and protein in the tel- and diencephalon
of the rat.

Belluardo N(1), Blum M, Mudo G, Andbjer B, Fuxe K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden.

Several findings show a neuroprotective effect of nicotine treatment in different
experimental models, and a negative correlation has been observed between
cigarette smoking and the incidence of Parkinson's disease. It seems possible
that nicotine may in part exert its neuroprotective actions by favouring the
synthesis of neurotrophic factors. The aim of this study was to determine whether
the nicotine treatment could be associated with the induction of a neurotrophic
factor in brain regions with nicotinic receptors. Thus, we analysed by in situ
hybridization and RNAse protection assay the effects of (-)nicotine on basic
fibroblast growth factor messenger RNA and by immunocytochemistry fibroblast
growth factor-2 protein in the tel- and diencephalon of rats following single or 
acute intermittent (-)nicotine treatment. The present results showed that acute
intermittent (-)nicotine treatment (four i.p. injections at intervals of 30 min),
but not single injections, lead to a substantial and dose-related (0.1-2 mg/kg)
up-regulation of fibroblast growth factor-2 messenger RNA levels in the cerebral 
cortex, in the hippocampus, in the striatum and ventral midbrain. This induction 
of fibroblast growth factor-2 expression peaked 4 h after the first injection and
returned to normal levels within 24 h. The change of fibroblast growth factor-2
messenger RNA levels was associated with increased fibroblast growth factor-2
immunoreactivity mainly localized to nerve cells. The treatment was effective
also when repeated in the same animals three or five days after the first
injection. The pre-treatment with the non-competitive (-)nicotine receptor
antagonist mecamylamine blocked the (-)nicotine effects on fibroblast growth
factor-2 messenger RNA levels. In the above areas, no changes were observed in
the fibroblast growth factor-1, 2 and 3 receptor messenger RNA levels nor in
brain-derived neurotrophic factor messenger RNA levels. The present data indicate
an ability of intermittent (-)nicotine to increase fibroblast growth factor-2 in 
many tel- and diencephalic areas. In view of the trophic function of fibroblast
growth factor-2, the previously observed neuroprotective effects of (-)nicotine
may at least in part involve an activation of the neuronal fibroblast growth
factor-2 signalling, and open up new avenues for treatment of Parkinson's disease
and Alzheimer's disease based on the existence of nicotinic receptor subtypes
enhancing fibroblast growth factor-2 signalling in many regions of the tel- and
diencephalon.


PMID: 9483557  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Lancet. 1997 Jun 28;349(9069):1877-81.

Distinction of idiopathic Parkinson's disease from multiple-system atrophy by
stimulation of growth-hormone release with clonidine.

Kimber JR(1), Watson L, Mathias CJ.

Author information: 
(1)University Department of Clinical Neurology, National Hospital for Neurology
and Neurosurgery/Institute of Neurology, London, UK.

Comment in
    J Am Geriatr Soc. 2002 Sep;50(9):1609-10.

BACKGROUND: Idiopathic Parkinson's disease is a common neurodegenerative disease 
that is difficult to distinguish from other parkinsonian syndromes such as
multiple-system atrophy (MSA). In MSA, autonomic dysfunction is common and is
associated with either parkinsonian or cerebellar features, or both.
Differentiation of idiopathic Parkinson's disease from MSA is important because
prognosis, complications, and response to therapy vary according to disorder. Our
aim was to find out whether clonidine/growth hormone (GH) testing distinguishes
idiopathic Parkinson's disease from MSA.
METHODS: Clonidine is a centrally active alpha 2-adrenoceptor agonist that raises
concentrations of GH in serum in healthy people and those with pure autonomic
failure (with peripheral lesions), but not in those with MSA (with a central
autonomic deficit). We investigated the effects of clonidine on 14 people with
idiopathic Parkinson's disease (without autonomic deficits). 31 people with MSA
of the three different clinical forms (parkinsonian, cerebellar, and mixed), 19
people with pure autonomic failure, and 27 healthy participants. In nine people
with parkinsonian MSA (MSA-P), the GH response to levodopa was also assessed.
FINDINGS: Clonidine raised serum GH concentrations in patients with idiopathic
Parkinson's disease (median increase 8.98 [IQR 6.6-16.6] mU/L), normal
participants (13.2 [7.0-18.6] mU/L), and patients with pure autonomic failure
(12.5 [5.6-18.2] mU/L). In those with MSA who had central autonomic failure, GH
concentrations were unchanged (MSA-P; 0.41 [-0.30 to 2.09] mU/L and cerebellar
MSA [MSA-C] 1.67 [0-4.49] mU/L). The GH response to clonidine in idiopathic
Parkinson's disease was significantly different from that in MSA-P (p < 0.0002). 
In MSA-P, the dopamine precursor levodopa raised GH concentrations (from mean 2.7
[SE 1.0] mU/L to mean 18.2 [6.0] mU/L, p < 0.05) and GH-releasing hormone (GHRH) 
concentrations (from mean 20.6 [3.25] ng/L to mean 68.0 [10.6] ng/L, p < 0.05),
excluding dysfunction of pituitary somatotrophs or GHRH neurons as a cause for
the absent GH response to clonidine in MSA.
INTERPRETATION: The GH responses to clonidine clearly differentiated idiopathic
Parkinson's disease from MSA-C and MSA-P. Together with the levodopa studies they
indicated a specific alpha 2-adrenoceptor-hypothalamic deficit in MSA. The
clonidine-GH test may provide further insight into central neurotransmitter and
alpha 2-adrenoceptor-hypothalamic abnormalities in MSA.


PMID: 9217760  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Nihon Shinkei Seishin Yakurigaku Zasshi. 1997 Jun;17(3):123-7.

[Assessment of anti-tremorogenic drugs--nicotine-induced tail-tremor model].

[Article in Japanese]

Suemaru K(1), Kawasaki H, Gomita Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hospital Pharmacy, Okayama University Medical School, Japan.

The repeated administration of nicotine at small doses, which do not produce
whole body tremor or convulsion, causes tremor only in the tail (tail-tremor) of 
rats. The tremor is accompanied by locomotor hyperactivity without rigidity and
immobility of the whole body, suggesting that the nicotine-induced tail-tremor
model is useful for studying the mechanism underlying tremor associated with
movement. The tail-tremor induced by nicotine was suppressed by mecamylamine, a
nicotinic antagonist, but not by atropine or scopolamine, muscalinic antagonists.
Moreover, the tail-tremor was suppressed by the beta-blockers propranolol and
pindolol, as well as the benzodiazepines diazepam and clonazepam. Tremor at rest 
is observed only in Parkinson's disease, which is improved with anti-muscalinic
drugs. Essential tremor is one of the typical tremors connected with movement
(postural and kinetic tremor) and is improved with beta-blocker. These findings
and results suggest that nicotine-induced tail-tremor is useful for the study of 
essential tremor in animal models.


PMID: 9278937  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Stereotact Funct Neurosurg. 1997;69(1-4 Pt 2):46-53.

Sequential postoperative appearance of radiofrequency pallidotomy lesions on MRI.

Lim JY(1), De Salles AA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neurosurgery, University of California at Los Angeles, School of
Medicine, USA.

We analyzed 10 radiofrequency (RF) lesions over time in 9 patients who had
follow-up MRI 1 h to 43 weeks following stereotactic pallidotomies performed for 
medically intractable idiopathic Parkinson's disease. Pallidotomies were
performed under MRI guidance, microelectrode recording, and electrical
stimulation with neurological monitoring. We compared the MRI taken within 1 h
after surgery for each patient to their respective follow-up MRI to determine the
changes in size and signal characteristics of RF lesions over time. The
postoperative follow-up MRI of RF lesions roughly fell into 4 time periods: 1 h
(n = 10), 2 months (n = 3), 6 months (n = 3), and 10 months (n = 4). The average 
volume (+/- SD, mm3) of these lesions at each phase were as follows: 1 h = 124.35
+/- 58.48; 2 months = 50.5 +/- 30.71; 6 months = 32.36 +/- 21.07; 10 months =
53.19 +/- 28.91. The steep decline in the size of the lesion stabilizes by the
2-month period. Thereafter, the lesion size at 6 and 10 months remains stable.
Eventually, the center of coagulative necrosis completely disappears, and the
lesions persists as a cystic cavity. The contrast uptake of these RF lesions
appears to resolve by the 6-month period. Immediate postoperative images show
strong enhancement with gadolinium. There is a lesser degree of enhancement at 2 
months, and no appreciable enhancement by 6 months. Interestingly, the patients
with better outcome tended to have larger RF lesions. However, this difference
was not statistically significant.


PMID: 9711733  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


163. J Neurochem. 1997 Jan;68(1):33-9.

L-deprenyl protects mesencephalic dopamine neurons from glutamate
receptor-mediated toxicity in vitro.

Mytilineou C(1), Radcliffe P, Leonardi EK, Werner P, Olanow CW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, New York
10029, USA.

L-Deprenyl is a relatively selective inhibitor of monoamine oxidase (MAO)-B that 
delays the emergence of disability and the progression of signs and symptoms of
Parkinson's disease. Experimentally, deprenyl has also been shown to prevent
neuronal cell death in various models through a mechanism that is independent of 
MAO-B inhibition. We examined the effect of deprenyl on cultured mesencephalic
dopamine neurons subjected to daily changes of feeding medium, an experimental
paradigm that causes neuronal death associated with activation of the NMDA
subtype of glutamate receptors. Both deprenyl (0.5-50 microM) and the NMDA
receptor blocker MK-801 (10 microM) protected dopamine neurons from damage caused
by medium changes. The nonselective MAO inhibitor pargyline (0.5-50 microM) was
not protective, indicating that protection by deprenyl was not due to MAO
inhibition. Deprenyl (50 microM) also protected dopamine neurons from delayed
neurotoxicity caused by exposure to NMDA. Because deprenyl had no inhibitory
effect on NMDA receptor binding, it is likely that deprenyl protects from events 
occurring downstream from activation of glutamate receptors. As excitotoxic
injury has been implicated in neurodegeneration, it is possible that deprenyl
exerts its beneficial effects in Parkinson's disease by suppressing excitotoxic
damage.


PMID: 8978707  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Immunopharmacology. 1996 Nov;35(2):149-54.

Pargyline pretreatment prevents immunological changes induced by MPTP in mice.

Bieganowska K(1), Czonkowska A, Korlak J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Psychiatry and Neurology, Warsaw, Poland.

The relationship between the central dopaminergic and the immune system is poorly
understood. Experimental work suggest that damage of the nigrostriatal system may
influence immunity. Immunological abnormalities have been described in
Parkinson's disease and in a mouse model of this disorder induced by
1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP). In this report, we present
evidence that reduced numbers of L3T4 T cells in blood, and diminished primary
antibody response to sheep erythrocytes in MPTP treated mice can be restored by
pargyline pretreatment. Since pargyline prevents dopamine depletion in the
striatum in MPTP treated animals, our data extend previous experimental
observations and support a possible role for dopamine in immune regulation.


PMID: 8956978  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


165. J Pharm Pharmacol. 1996 Apr;48(4):429-32.

Catalepsy induced by manidipine, a calcium channel blocker, in mice.

Haraguchi K(1), Ito K, Sawada Y, Iga T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy, University of Tokyo Hospital, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Tokyo, Japan.

Manidipine, a calcium channel blocker, is a piperazine derivative similar to
flunarizine or cinnarizine, which are known to induce parkinsonism. Since it has 
been reported that manidipine can worsen parkinsonian symptoms in a patient with 
Parkinson's disease, we have evaluated catalepsy in manidipine-treated mice and
compared this with flunarizine-and haloperidol-induced catalepsy. The minimum
dose at which manidipine induced catalepsy was 200 times higher than that of
haloperidol whereas for flunarizine, the minimum dose was 50 times higher than
that for haloperidol. Manidipine, flunarizine and haloperidol occupied both
dopamine D1 and D2 receptors and D2-receptor occupancy was higher than
D1-receptor occupancy. These results suggest that the blockade of dopamine D1 and
D2 receptors by drugs and the drug-induced catalepsy are related to the structure
(piperazinyl substituent) of the drugs.


PMID: 8794996  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Exp Brain Res. 1996 Apr;109(1):179-84.

Foetal nigral cell suspension grafts influence dopamine release in the
non-grafted side in the 6-hydroxydopamine rat model of Parkinson's disease: in
vivo voltammetric data.

Earl CD(1), Reum T, Xie JX, Sautter J, Kupsch A, Oertel WH, Morgenstern R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Physiology, University of Munich, Germany.

The present study employed differential-pulse voltammetry to assess the influence
of foetal ventral mesencephalic grafts on dopamine overflow in the contralateral 
caudate putamen of the 6-hydroxydopamine rat model of Parkinson's disease. The
experimental design involved measurements of dopamine overflow in the grafted and
contralateral striatum. Control measurements of dopamine overflow were performed 
in 6-hydroxydopamine-lesioned rats only and the caudate putamen of normal control
rats. Cell suspensions of foetal rat ventral mesencephalic tissue were grafted
into the dopamine-depleted caudate putamen of unilaterally
6-hydroxydopamine-lesioned rats. At 6 weeks, animals with functional, mature
grafts (as assessed by amphetamine-amplified behavioural asymmetry), were
pretreated with pargyline (75 mg/kg i.p.), and both striatal sides were monitored
for dopamine overflow for 90 min following amphetamine sulphate administration (5
mg/kg i.p.). The time course of dopamine overflow inside the graft was similar to
that in the contralateral caudate putamen of the same animal, the normal control 
animal and the contralateral caudate putamen of 6-hydroxydopamine-lesioned
animals. However, in grafted animals the mean dopamine overflow detected in the
contralateral caudate putamen was approximately 34% lower than the concentration 
of dopamine detected in the contralateral caudate putamen of
6-hydroxydopamine-lesioned control animals and approximately 39% lower than the
concentration of dopamine detected in the caudate putamen of the normal control
animal. There was no statistical difference in the concentration of
amphetamine-induced dopamine overflow between the caudate putamen contralateral
to the 6-hydroxydopamine lesion and the caudate putamen of the normal control
animal. These data suggest that intrastriatal foetal ventral mesencephalic
suspension grafts reduce amphetamine-induced dopamine release in the
contralateral non-grafted caudate putamen.


PMID: 8740224  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


167. J Neural Transm Park Dis Dement Sect. 1995;10(2-3):79-89.

In vivo comparison of the effects of inhibition of MAO-A versus MAO-B on striatal
L-DOPA and dopamine metabolism.

Brannan T(1), Prikhojan A, Martínez-Tica J, Yahr MD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY, USA.

Utilizing the cerebral microdialysis technique, we have compared in vivo the
effects of selective MAO-A, MAO-B, and nonselective MAO inhibitors on striatal
extracellular levels of dopamine (DA) and DA metabolites (DOPAC and HVA). The
measurements were made in rats both under basal conditions and following L-DOPA
administration. Extracellular levels of dopamine were enhanced and DA metabolite 
levels strongly inhibited both under basal conditions and following L-DOPA
administration by pretreatment with the nonselective MAO inhibitor pargyline and 
the MAO-A selective inhibitors clorgyline and Ro 41-1049. The MAO-B inhibitor
deprenyl had no effect on basal DA, HVA, or DOPAC levels. Nevertheless, deprenyl 
significantly increased DA and decreased DOPAC levels following exogenous L-DOPA 
administration, a finding compatible with a significant glial metabolism of DA
formed from exogenous L-DOPA. We conclude that DA metabolism under basal
conditions is primarily mediated by MAO-A. In contrast, both MAO-A and MAO-B
mediate DA formation when L-DOPA is administered exogenously. The efficacy of
newer, reversible agents which lack the "cheese effect" such as Ro 41-1049 are
comparable to the irreversible MAO-A inhibitor clorgyline. The possible relevance
of these findings for the treatment of Parkinson's disease is discussed.


PMID: 9620056  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Ann Neurol. 1994 Sep;36(3):387-96.

Genetic linkage studies in autosomal dominant parkinsonism: evaluation of seven
candidate genes.

Gasser T(1), Wszolek ZK, Trofatter J, Ozelius L, Uitti RJ, Lee CS, Gusella J,
Pfeiffer RF, Calne DB, Breakefield XO.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Neurogenetics Unit, Massachusetts General Hospital, Charlestown.

Linkage studies were performed in three families (A, B, and C) with autosomal
dominantly inherited parkinsonism affecting multiple members in three
generations. Affected individuals exhibited the cardinal signs and symptoms of
Parkinson's disease, with a mean age of onset of 51, 62, and 61 years in Families
A, B, and C, respectively. Parkinsonian symptoms responded to L-dopa treatment,
and an [18F]6-fluoro-L-dopa positron emission tomography scan in 1 affected
member of Family B showed decreased striatal uptake typical of Parkinson's
disease. Ancestors of all three families were traced to a small region in
northern Germany and southern Denmark, suggesting the possibility of a common
mutation. Linkage studies were performed with polymorphic markers associated with
the following candidate genes: the genes for glutathione peroxidase (GPX1, 3q11),
tyrosine hydroxylase (TH, 11p15.5), brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF,
11p14), catalase (CAT, 11p13), amyloid precursor protein (APP, 21q21),
copper-zinc superoxide dismutase (SOD1, 21q21), and debrisoquin 4-hydroxylase
(CYP2D6, 22q13.1). Summed lod scores for all families excluded linkage to the
genes GPX1, TH, APP, SOD1, and CYP2D6, as well as to the chromosomal region
containing the genes CAT and BDNF. If families were analyzed individually,
exclusion was possible for two (Family A), six (Family B), and five (Family C) of
the seven candidate genes. There was strong evidence against linkage for the
remaining loci in all families analyzed individually, except for TH, which was
uninformative in Families A and B, and CYP2D6, which gave slightly positive
pairwise lod scores in Family A. Our results indicate that the candidate genes
investigated are not involved in the etiology of parkinsonism in these families.

DOI: 10.1002/ana.410360310 
PMID: 7915897  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Neuroradiology. 1994 May;36(4):276-80.

Three-dimensional surface display of brain perfusion with 123I-IMP in Parkinson's
disease.

Tachibana H(1), Kawabata K, Tomino Y, Sugita M, Fukuchi M.

Author information: 
(1)Fifth Department of Internal Medicine, Hyogo College of Medicine, Nishinomiya,
Japan.

We reconstructed three-dimensional (3D) surface images from single-photon
emission computed tomography (SPECT) data using
N-isopropyl-p[123I]-iodoamphetamine (123I-IMP) in 27 patients with Parkinson's
disease and 11 normal control subjects. The 3D reconstruction was performed using
distance-shaded methods at threshold levels with an interval of 5% from 45-80%.
Any area of decreased perfusion at each threshold level was visualised as a
defect area by the algorithm. In nondemented patients with Parkinson's disease,
perfusion defects were frequently found in the parietal cortex at a threshold
value of 65%. In demented patients, perfusion defects were frequently seen at
thresholds of 45-65%, and were more marked in the temporal and parietal cortex
bilaterally. This suggests that dementia in Parkinson's disease is related to a
reduction of perfusion in the temporoparietal cortex.


PMID: 8065570  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Rinsho Shinkeigaku. 1994 Apr;34(4):318-25.

[Three-dimensional surface display with 123I-IMP brain perfusion imaging in
patients with dementia].

[Article in Japanese]

Tomino Y(1), Tachibana H, Sugita M.

Author information: 
(1)Fifth Department of Internal Medicine, Hyogo College of Medicine.

We reconstructed three-dimensional (3D) surface images from single photon
emission computed tomography (SPECT) data with N-isopropyl-p
[123I]-iodo-amphetamine (123I-IMP) in 27 patients with Parkinson's disease, 16
patients with Alzheimer's disease, 9 patients with Binswanger's disease, and 11
elderly normal subjects. Three-D reconstruction was performed with Starcam 3000
XC/T using distance-shaded method at the threshold levels at intervals of 5% from
45% to 80%. In normal control subjects, no perfusion defects were found in any
region at threshold values below 60%, although the frontal and temporal cortices 
occasionally showed perfusion defects at threshold levels from 60% to 80%. In
patients with Parkinson's disease with dementia, perfusion defects were diffuse, 
particularly in the parietal and temporal cortices even at a threshold of 45%.
Patients with Alzheimer's disease also showed diffuse perfusion defects,
particularly in parietal and temporal cortices even at threshold levels as low as
45%. The primary visual cortex was less affected in these patients. The demented 
Parkinson's disease patients demonstrated perfusion defects similar to those of
patients with Alzheimer's disease, although perfusion defects were more prominent
in patients with Alzheimer's disease. In patients with Binswanger's disease,
patchy perfusion defects were found most frequently in the frontal region. In
addition, perfusion defects in the cerebellum and sensory motor cortex were more 
frequent in the Binswanger's disease patients than in patients with Alzheimer's
or Parkinson's disease and normal subjects. The demented Parkinson's disease
patients showed perfusion defects in the temporal and parietal cortices and
demonstrated a perfusion pattern similar to that of patients with Alzheimer's
disease.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)


PMID: 8026123  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Neuropsychopharmacology. 1994 Apr;10(2):93-107.

Age-related effects of the nicotinic antagonist mecamylamine on cognition and
behavior.

Newhouse PA(1), Potter A, Corwin J, Lenox R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of Vermont College of Medicine,
Burlington 05401.

Studies of the neurochemical pathology of Alzheimer's disease and Parkinson's
disease reveal a severe and specific loss of central nicotinic cholinergic
receptors. We have investigated the functional significance of this finding for
cognitive functioning by studying the effects of the centrally active nicotinic
antagonist mecamylamine. Single oral doses of mecamylamine were administered to
12 healthy young males and 15 healthy elderly subjects in doses of 5, 10, and 20 
mg in a placebo-controlled, double-blind study. In both groups, the 20-mg dose
caused a significant increase in errors in the learning condition of the Repeated
Acquisition Task, producing a slower acquisition curve. There was no effect of
drug on the performance component (retrieval of previously learned information). 
However, elderly subjects showed enhanced sensitivity to mecamylamine, with 10-mg
dose producing significant impairment of learning not seen in the young normals. 
On a recognition memory task, there was an age-associated shift in response bias,
with the elderly subjects becoming more liberal with increasing dose.
Reaction-time measures suggested a dose-related slowing of reaction time on
several tasks. Behavioral effects were minimal and physiologic effects were
consistent with dose-related ganglionic blockade. These results indicate that
acute blockade of nicotinic receptor function can produce measurable and
significant cognitive impairment similar to some deficits seen in dementing
illnesses, and that there is an age-related increase in sensitivity to nicotinic 
blockade.

DOI: 10.1038/npp.1994.11 
PMID: 8024677  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Clin Sci (Lond). 1994 Feb;86(2):149-58.

Dopamine beta-hydroxylase immunoreactivity in human cerebrospinal fluid:
properties, relationship to central noradrenergic neuronal activity and variation
in Parkinson's disease and congenital dopamine beta-hydroxylase deficiency.

O'Connor DT(1), Cervenka JH, Stone RA, Levine GL, Parmer RJ, Franco-Bourland RE, 
Madrazo I, Langlais PJ, Robertson D, Biaggioni I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of California, San Diego 92161.

1. Dopamine beta-hydroxylase is stored and released with catecholamines by
exocytosis from secretory vesicles in noradrenergic neurons and chromaffin cells.
Although dopamine beta-hydroxylase enzymic activity is measurable in
cerebrospinal fluid, such activity is unstable, and its relationship to central
noradrenergic neuronal activity in humans is not clearly established. To explore 
the significance of cerebrospinal fluid dopamine beta-hydroxylase, we applied a
homologous human dopamine beta-hydroxylase radioimmunoassay to cerebrospinal
fluid, in order to characterize the properties and stability of cerebrospinal
fluid dopamine beta-hydroxylase, as well as its relationship to central
noradrenergic neuronal activity and its variation in disease states such as
hypertension, renal failure, Parkinsonism and congenital dopamine
beta-hydroxylase deficiency. 2. Authentic, physically stable dopamine
beta-hydroxylase immunoreactivity was present in normal human cerebrospinal fluid
at a concentration of 31.3 +/- 1.4 ng/ml (range: 18.5-52.5 ng/ml), but at a 283
+/- 27-fold lower concentration than that found in plasma. Cerebrospinal fluid
and plasma dopamine beta-hydroxylase concentrations were correlated (r = 0.67, P 
= 0.001). Some degree of local central nervous system control of cerebrospinal
fluid dopamine beta-hydroxylase was suggested by incomplete correlation with
plasma dopamine beta-hydroxylase (with an especially marked dissociation in renal
disease) as well as the lack of a ventricular/lumbar cerebrospinal dopamine
beta-hydroxylase concentration gradient. 3. Cerebrospinal fluid dopamine
beta-hydroxylase was not changed by the central alpha 2-agonist clonidine at a
dose that diminished cerebrospinal fluid noradrenaline, nor did cerebrospinal
fluid dopamine beta-hydroxylase correspond between subjects to cerebrospinal
fluid concentrations of noradrenaline or methoxyhydroxyphenylglycol; thus,
cerebrospinal fluid dopamine beta-hydroxylase concentration was not closely
linked either pharmacologically or biochemically to central noradrenergic
neuronal activity. 4. Cerebrospinal fluid dopamine beta-hydroxylase was not
changed in essential hypertension. In Parkinson's disease, cerebrospinal fluid
dopamine beta-hydroxylase was markedly diminished (16.3 +/- 2.9 versus 31.3 +/-
1.4 ng/ml, P < 0.001) and rose by 58 +/- 21% (P = 0.02) after adrenal-to-caudate 
chromaffin cell autografts. In congenital dopamine beta-hydroxylase deficiency,
lack of detectable dopamine beta-hydroxylase immunoreactivity in cerebrospinal
fluid or plasma suggests absent enzyme (rather than a catalytically defective
enzyme) as the origin of the disorder. 5. We conclude that cerebrospinal fluid
dopamine beta-hydroxylase immunoreactivity, while not closely linked to central
noradrenergic neuronal activity, is at least in part derived from the central
nervous system, and that its measurement may be useful in both the diagnosis and 
treatment of neurological disease.


PMID: 8143425  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Mov Disord. 1994 Jan;9(1):106-7.

Temporary symptom worsening caused by manidipine hydrochloride in two patients
with Parkinson's disease.

Nakashima K, Shimoda M, Kuno N, Takahashi K.

Comment on
    Mov Disord. 1993;8(1):125.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.870090119 
PMID: 8139589  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


174. J Neural Transm Park Dis Dement Sect. 1994;7(2):133-42.

Potentiation of dopamine-dependent locomotion by clonidine in reserpine-treated
mice is restricted to D2 agonists.

Starr MS(1), Starr BS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, School of Pharmacy, London, United Kingdom.

Mice treated with reserpine (5 mg/kg IP), 24 h beforehand, were completely
akinetic. Fluent locomotion was reinstated with the D1-selective agonist SKF
38393 (3-30 mg/kg IP), the D2-selective agonist RU 24213 (0.5-5 mg/kg SC) and the
mixed D1/D2 agonist apomorphine (0.025-0.5 mg/kg SC). Clonidine (0.03125-1 mg/kg 
IP) caused a dose-dependent sedation in dopamine-intact mice, but had no effect
by itself on the locomotor activity of monoamine-depleted mice. In drug
interaction experiments, clonidine did not modify the motor stimulant action of
SKF 38393, but greatly enhanced the motor responses to RU 24213 and apomorphine. 
These results support the hypothesis that alpha-adrenoceptor agonists facilitate 
dopamine D2 but not dopamine D1 motor responding in the reserpine-treated mouse
model of Parkinson's disease.


PMID: 7710665  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Kaku Igaku. 1993 Nov;30(11):1341-51.

[Quantitative regional cerebral blood flow study with 123I-IMP in patients with
dementia and in patients with poor activities of daily living].

[Article in Japanese]

Iwamiya T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiology, Tottori University School of Medicine.

N-isopropyl-p[123I]iodoamphetamine (123I-IMP) SPECT and quantitative regional
cerebral blood flow (rCBF) studies were performed in 111 patients with cerebral
disorders. Continuous arterial blood sampling method based on the microsphere
model was used as a quantitative rCBF measurement. We evaluated rCBF in patients 
with dementia and also in patients with poor activities of daily living (ADL).
Patients with dementia showed significant reduction of mean CBF in contrast to
patients without dementia. Significant decrease of rCBF in the bilateral frontal 
cortex, parietal cortex and basal ganglia and the right temporal cortex were
found in demented patients. Although patients with vascular dementia showed
decreased rCBF in bilateral basal ganglia, demented patients with Parkinson's
disease showed no significant reduction of rCBF in any regions. Patients with
poor ADL showed decreased rCBF in all brain regions. And particularly frontal and
basal ganglionic defects were most pronounced. Patients with poor ADL resulted
from cerebral infarction showed significant decrease of rCBF in bilateral basal
ganglia. However, there was no significant correlation in Parkinson's disease
between ADL and rCBF. The rCBF measurement with 123I-IMP is useful for clinical
evaluation of demented patients and patients with poor ADL.


PMID: 8277596  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Dementia. 1993 Nov-Dec;4(6):334-41.

Brain perfusion imaging in Parkinson's disease and Alzheimer's disease
demonstrated by three-dimensional surface display with 123I-iodoamphetamine.

Tachibana H(1), Kawabata K, Tomino Y, Sugita M, Fukuchi M.

Author information: 
(1)Fifth Department of Internal Medicine, Hyogo College of Medicine, Nishinomiya,
Japan.

We reconstructed three-dimensional (3D) surface images from data from
single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) with
N-isopropyl-p[123I]-iodoamphetamine (123I-IMP) in 29 patients with Parkinson's
disease, 16 patients with Alzheimer's disease and 11 normal control subjects. In 
patients with nondementing Parkinson's disease, perfusion defects were frequently
found in the parietal cortical region at a threshold value of 65%. In demented
Parkinson's disease patients, perfusion defects were frequently noted at
threshold of 45-65%, and were more marked in the bilateral temporal and parietal 
cortices. In Alzheimer's disease, perfusion defects were similar to those found
in dementing Parkinson's disease. These results suggest that dementia in
Parkinson's disease is related to the perfusion reduction of the temporoparietal 
cortex, and may support the view that Parkinson's disease and Alzheimer's disease
overlap in some patients. A 3D display of an 123I-IMP brain tomogram may be
useful for detecting cortical lesions in patients with dementia or cognitive
impairment.


PMID: 8136897  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Kaku Igaku. 1993 Oct;30(10):1211-9.

[A new graphic method for evaluation of distribution volume on
N-isopropyl-p-[123I]iodoamphetamine (IMP) SPECT].

[Article in Japanese]

Odano I(1), Ohkubo M, Takahashi N, Ohtaki H, Noguchi E, Hatano M, Yamasaki Y,
Yokoi T, Nishihara M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiology, Niigata University School of Medicine.

We developed a new graphic method using N-isopropyl-p-[123I]iodoamphetamine (IMP)
and SPECT of the brain, the graph on which all three parameters, cerebral blood
flow, distribution volume (Vd) and delayed count to early count ratio
(Delayed/Early ratio), were able to be evaluated simultaneously. The kinetics of 
123I-IMP in the brain was analyzed by a 2-compartment model, and a standard input
function was prepared by averaging the time activity curves of 123I-IMP in
arterial blood on 6 patients with small cerebral infarction etc. including 2
normal controls. Being applied this method to the differential diagnosis between 
Parkinson's disease and progressive supranuclear palsy, we were able to
differentiate both with a glance, because the distribution volume of the frontal 
lobe significantly decreased in Parkinson's disease (Mean +/- SD; 26 +/- 6 ml/g).
This method was clinically useful. We think that the distribution volume of
123I-IMP may reflect its retention mechanism in the brain, and the values are
related to amine, especially to dopamine receptors and its metabolism.


PMID: 8264111  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Neuropharmacology. 1993 Sep;32(9):877-83.

Potentiation of MPTP by 4-phenylpyridine on the neuromuscular blockade in mouse
phrenic nerve-diaphragm.

Hsu KS(1), Lin-Shiau SY.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pharmacology, College of Medicine, National Taiwan University,
Taipei, R.O.C.

Potentiation by 4-phenylpyridine (a MAO-B inhibitor) on the neuromuscular
blocking action of 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP) was
studied in mouse phrenic nerve-diaphragm. MPTP blocked nerve-evoked twitches in a
concentration (1-200 microM)-dependent manner. 4-Phenylpyridine, but not
pargyline or tranylcypromine potentiated this inhibitory effect of MPTP.
Pretreatment with 50 microM 4-phenylpyridine, reduced IC50 (concentration for 50%
inhibition of twitch amplitude) values of MPTP from 53 to 18 microM and
d-tubocurarine from 0.7 to 0.3 microM, respectively. 4-Phenylpyridine also
enhanced the inhibitory action of MPTP and d-tubocurarine on acetylcholine (0.1
mM)-induced contracture of the denervated mouse diaphragm. The twitch inhibition 
induced by alpha-bungarotoxin and the specific binding of
[125I]alpha-bungarotoxin to the mouse diaphragm were potentiated by
4-phenylpyridine but the inhibitory action of MPTP and d-tubocurarine on
[125I]alpha-bungarotoxin binding were not significantly changed by pretreatment
with 4-phenylpyridine. Electrophysiological studies revealed that the inhibitory 
actions of MPTP and d-tubocurarine on the amplitudes of m.e.p.ps and e.p.ps were 
augmented by 4-phenylpyridine. These indicate that 4-phenylpyridine enhanced the 
neuromuscular blocking action of the MPTP and d-tubocurarine at the postsynaptic 
nicotinic acetylcholine receptors. The implication of this finding is that the
possible application of 4-phenylpyridine in the MPTP-induced Parkinson's disease 
is limited by its potentiation on the neuromuscular blocking action of MPTP.


PMID: 7901791  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


179. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 1993 Aug;266(2):790-5.

Development of fluorinated 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine analogs
with potent nigrostriatal toxicity for potential use in positron emission
tomography studies.

Harik SI(1), Riachi NJ, Hritz MA, Berridge MS, Sayre LM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine,
Cleveland, Ohio.

The discovery of 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP) toxicity
stimulated intense interest in neurotoxicology and in the possible toxic etiology
of Parkinson's disease. Better understanding of MPTP neurotoxicity may be
achieved by studies using 18F-radiolabeled MPTP analogs and positron emission
tomography in nonhuman primates. We synthesized three fluorinated analogs of
MPTP: 1-methyl-4-(2-fluorophenyl)-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (2'-F-MPTP),
1-methyl-4-[2-(trifluoromethyl)phenyl]-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (2'-CF3-MPTP)
and 1-methyl-4-[2-(fluoromethyl)phenyl]-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine
(2'-CH2F-MPTP), and developed a method for preparing the latter in 18F-labeled
form. We now studied the suitability of 2'-CH2F-MPTP and its hydrolysis products 
as substrates for monoamine oxidase (MAO) from mouse and monkey brain
preparations, and investigated the neurotoxic effect of 2'-CH2F-MPTP and
2'-F-MPTP on the nigrostriatal dopaminergic system in mice. We found that
2'-CH2F-MPTP is a better substrate for MAO and that both 2'-CH2F-MPTP and
2'-F-MPTP were more potent neurotoxins than MPTP. Like MPTP, 2'-F-MPTP was
exclusively oxidized by MAO-B and its toxicity blocked by pargyline or deprenyl
but not by clorgyline. In contrast, 2'-CH2F-MPTP was oxidized by both MAO-A and
MAO-B, and its toxicity was not blocked by pargyline, clorgyline or deprenyl when
given separately, but required clorgyline and deprenyl together.


PMID: 8355208  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Neurology. 1993 Jun;43(6):1181-7.

Beta-adrenoceptor expression on circulating mononuclear cells of idiopathic
Parkinson's disease and autonomic failure patients before and after reduction of 
central sympathetic outflow by clonidine.

Zoukos Y(1), Thomaides T, Pavitt DV, Cuzner ML, Mathias CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurochemistry, National Hospital for Neurology and
Neurosurgery, London, UK.

There is a short-term up-regulation of beta-adrenoceptors on peripheral blood
mononuclear cells (PBMC) after reduction of central sympathetic outflow by
clonidine in normal individuals. We have studied beta-adrenoceptor number and
affinity on PBMC in idiopathic Parkinson's disease (PD), pure autonomic failure
(PAF), and multiple system atrophy (MSA; Shy-Drager syndrome) patients and age-
and sex-matched normal controls (NC) before and after intravenous administration 
of clonidine, an alpha 2-adrenoceptor agonist which lowers blood pressure
predominantly by reducing CNS sympathetic outflow. Basal beta-adrenoceptor
density was high in PAF but within the normal range in PD and MSA patients. After
clonidine there was a decrease in plasma levels of noradrenaline (NA) and
adrenaline (Ad) in PD, MSA, and NC, and an increase in growth hormone (GH) in PD,
PAF, and NC. NC. In PAF, NA and Ad remained unchanged. In MSA, there was no
increase in GH levels. There was an up-regulation of beta-adrenoceptors on PBMC
at 30 and 60 minutes after clonidine administration, which returned to baseline
values after 2 hours, and the affinity of the receptors was decreased in NC and
PD patients. Intracellular production of cAMP after isoproterenol stimulation
demonstrated that the up-regulation was not functional. Up-regulation after
clonidine did not occur in PAF and MSA patients. The observed correlation of
plasma NA and sympathetic defect with basal and clonidine-induced up-regulation
of beta-adrenoceptors on PBMC may provide insight into beta-adrenoceptor changes 
in other tissues and also help in differentiating subgroups of autonomic failure 
patients.


PMID: 8170565  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Neurosci Lett. 1993 Feb 5;150(1):49-52.

MPTP neurotoxicity to cerebellar Purkinje cells in mice.

Takada M(1), Sugimoto T, Hattori T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Toronto, Ont., Canada.

The pyridine derivative 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP) is
recognized as a crucial neurotoxin which destroys nigrostriatal dopamine cells,
thereby inducing neurological signs relevant to idiopathic Parkinson's disease.
In the present study, we have revealed MPTP neurotoxicity to cerebellar Purkinje 
cells in mice. Systemic MPTP injections to mice resulted in a substantial loss of
Purkinje cells in a dose-dependent fashion. The MPTP-induced Purkinje cell loss
occurred markedly in the crus I and II ansiform lobules and the paraflocculus.
Such a neurotoxic effect was largely prevented by the monoamine oxidase B
inhibitors pargyline and deprenyl, and the dopamine uptake inhibitors mazindol
and benztropine.


PMID: 8469402  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Brain. 1992 Apr;115 ( Pt 2):521-37.

Cognitive function and regional cerebral blood flow in Parkinson's disease.

Jagust WJ(1), Reed BR, Martin EM, Eberling JL, Nelson-Abbott RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, University of California, Davis.

In order to investigate relationships between cognition and regional brain
function, we studied 20 non-demented patients with idiopathic Parkinson's disease
(PD), 21 mildly demented patients with Alzheimer's disease (AD) and 24 control
subjects using cognitive testing and single photon emission computerized
tomographic (SPECT) measurements of relative regional cerebral blood flow (rCBF).
Neuropsychological tests were grouped into clusters reflecting frontal lobe
executive abilities, perseveration, memory and visuospatial ability, with a
summary score summarizing performance in all four of these spheres. SPECT imaging
utilized the tracer [123I]N-isopropyl-p-iodoamphetamine with a relative measure
of regional tracer uptake normalized to occipital radiotracer uptake (rCBF
ratios). Patients with PD performed more poorly than controls in all cognitive
domains, and were intermediate to AD patients and controls in tests of memory and
overall cognitive functioning. Those PD patients who performed most poorly on
neuropsychological testing showed lowest rCBF ratios in left and right temporal
lobes. Using a stepwise multiple regression procedure, we examined patterns of
correlations between cognitive clusters and predictor variables, including rCBF
ratios, in the PD patients. We found that while patient age was a strong
determinant of performance on the memory cluster and the summary score,
dorsolateral frontal lobe perfusion and scores on a depression inventory
accounted for a greater proportion of the variance of the frontal lobe and
perseveration clusters than did age. These results imply that different neural
mechanisms are responsible for the different aspects of cognitive decline seen in
PD patients, with overall cognitive function closely related to age and temporal 
perfusion, while frontal lobe abilities are more linked to frontal perfusion and 
the presence of depression.


PMID: 1606480  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Rinsho Shinkeigaku. 1992 Apr;32(4):375-80.

[The effect of anticholinergic drugs on 123I-IMP SPECT in Parkinson's disease].

[Article in Japanese]

Mizuno T(1), Nishiyama K, Hitoshi S, Takeda K, Sakuta M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Japanese Red Cross Medical Center.

Several reports have suggested that anticholinergics have some associations with 
mental deterioration in Parkinson's disease (PD). We investigated the effect of
anticholinergics on regional cerebral uptake of tracer in PD patients using
N-isopropyl p-[I-123] iodoamphetamine SPECT. Sixteen pairs of region of interest 
(ROI) were located in the cortex, a pair in the basal ganglia, thalamus, and
cerebellum. The size of each ROI was about 16 mm x 16 mm. Regional cerebral
uptake ratio (rCUR) was calculated by the next equation: rCUR = (total count in
an ORI)/(mean of total count in the cerebellar ROIs). The comparison consisted of
two parts; (1) 7 PD patients (age 59-76 (65.4 +/- 6.7 mean +/- S.D.)) who had
been on chronic anticholinergic therapy underwent SPECT and Wechsler Adult
Intelligence Scale (WAIS) twice, for the first time when they were on
anticholinergics and second a month after discontinuation of anticholinergics.
All but two patients performed significantly better on WAIS after discontinuation
than when they were on anticholinergics. The improvement was about 10 points in
total IQ. (2) 11 PD patients (age 52-79 (64.5 +/- 8.6 mean +/- S.D.)) on chronic 
anticholinergic therapy including all but two patients mentioned above (group A) 
and 25 PD patients (age 52-88 (66.7 +/- 9.8 mean +/- S.D.)) not receiving
anticholinergics (group B) also underwent SEPCT. In the comparison (1), at all
but two ROIs was the mean rCUR higher after discontinuation than when they were
on anticholinergics and the difference was significant at 10 ROIs out of 32 ROIs 
in the cortex.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)


PMID: 1395322  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Rinsho Shinkeigaku. 1992 Jan;32(1):1-7.

[Analysis of cognitive function and regional cerebral blood flow in Parkinson's
disease by 123I-IMP SPECT].

[Article in Japanese]

Yamamoto K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Yamaguchi University School of Medicine.

Comment in
    Rinsho Shinkeigaku. 1992 Aug;32(8):893-4.

To investigate the relationship between the alterations of regional cerebral
blood flow (rCBF) and the cognitive impairment in parkinsonian patients, I
studied forty-one patients affected by Parkinson's disease (19 men and 22 women) 
using single photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) and N-isopropyl-p-[123I]
iodoamphetamine (123I-IMP) as a tracer. I evaluated the cognitive function with
the Mini-Mental State examination (MMS), the Hasegawa's Dementia Scale (HDS), the
Kana-pick up test (KT), and the figure drawing test (FDT). I evaluated the motor 
impairment with the Hoehn and Yahr stage. SPECT scanning was performed with a
rotating digital gamma camera TOSHIBA 901-A. A semiquantitative method of
assessing regional tracer uptake was used. Regions of interest (ROI; 3 x 3
pixels, 15.9 x 15.9 mm2) were drawn on the cerebellar hemispheres, cortical
regions (frontal, temporal, parietal and occipital), and basal ganglia
bilaterally. The RI count index was expressed as a ratio of activity in each ROI 
to mean counting rate over cerebellar regions. I considered the RI count index as
the index of rCBF in each ROI. There were strong positive correlations between
MMS and rCBF of frontal, parietal and occipital lobes (p less than 0.001). There 
were positive correlations between HDS and rCBF of frontal (p less than 0.01),
parietal (p less than 0.001) and occipital lobes (p less than 0.01). There were
positive correlations between KT and rCBF of frontal (p less than 0.01),
occipital (p less than 0.05).(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)


PMID: 1628430  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Brain Res. 1991 Oct 25;562(2):216-24.

Differential modulation of (+)-amphetamine-induced rotation in unilateral
substantia nigra-lesioned rats by alpha 1 as compared to alpha 2 agonists and
antagonists.

Mavridis M(1), Colpaert FC, Millan MJ.

Author information: 
(1)FONDAX, Groupe de Recherche Servier, Paris, France.

In rats sustaining unilateral 6-hydroxy-dopamine lesions of the substantia nigra 
(SN), the indirect dopaminergic agonist, (+)-amphetamine (AMPH), dose-dependently
induced robust, ipsilateral rotation: this could be dose-dependently abolished by
the dopamine (D2/D1) antagonist, haloperidol. The selective alpha 1 antagonist,
prazosin, dose-dependently attenuated the action of AMPH though rotation was not 
completely abolished. In the presence of a constant dose of prazosin, the
dose-response curve for induction of rotation by AMPH was shifted to the right.
The action of prazosin was mimicked by a further alpha 1 antagonist,
corynanthine. In contrast, the selective alpha 1 agonist, ST 587, potentiated the
rotation evoked by AMPH. The selective alpha 2 antagonist, idazoxan,
dose-dependently potentiated the action of AMPH and, in the presence of a
constant dose of idazoxan, the dose-response curve for AMPH was shifted to the
left. This effect of idazoxan was mimicked by a further alpha 2 antagonist,
yohimbine. In distinction, the selective alpha 2 agonist, UK 14,304,
dose-dependently attenuated the action of AMPH, an action mimicked by the alpha 2
partial agonist, clonidine. Upon administration alone, the above mentioned drugs 
did not induce rotation. The data indicate that activation and antagonism of
alpha 1 receptors enhance and inhibit rotation, respectively, whereas activation 
and antagonism of alpha 2 receptors inhibit and enhance rotation, respectively.
These findings demonstrate an opposite alpha 1 and alpha 2 receptor-mediated
control of rotation in this model. They suggest that an increase and decrease in 
noradrenergic tone, respectively, facilitate and inhibit locomotor activity
controlled via the nigro-striatal dopaminergic pathway. The possible relevance of
these findings to Parkinson's disease is discussed.


PMID: 1685341  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


186. J Geriatr Psychiatry Neurol. 1991 Oct-Dec;4(4):194-203.

Cerebral blood flow and dementia in Parkinson's disease.

Kawabata K(1), Tachibana H, Sugita M.

Author information: 
(1)Fifth Department of Internal Medicine, Hyogo College of Medicine, Nishinomiya,
Japan.

Regional cerebral blood flow (CBF) was examined in 27 patients with Parkinson's
disease using single-photon emission computed tomography and
N-isopropyl-p-[123I]iodoamphetamine as a tracer. Their CBF pattern was compared
with that of seven patients with Alzheimer's disease and nine age-matched
neurologically normal controls. Tracer activity was determined in seven bilateral
cerebellar, cortical, and subcortical regions and was expressed as the ratio of
activity in each region to the mean tracer activity in the cerebellar region.
Nineteen patients with nondemented Parkinson's disease showed significantly
decreased tracer activity ratio in the frontal and temporal cortices, basal
ganglia, and thalamus compared with that in controls. The eight demented
Parkinson's disease patients showed significantly decreased tracer activity ratio
in the temporal and parietal cortices compared with the patients without
dementia, and demonstrated CBF pattern similar to that of patients with
Alzheimer's disease. These findings suggest that in patients with Parkinson's
disease, the mechanism of CBF reduction of the frontal cortical region differs
from that in the temporoparietal cortical region and support the concept that
Parkinson's disease and Alzheimer's disease may overlap in some patients.


PMID: 1789907  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


187. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 1991 Oct;259(1):169-75.

Anti-inflammatory activity of pergolide, a dopamine receptor agonist.

Bendele AM(1), Spaethe SM, Benslay DN, Bryant HU.

Author information: 
(1)Rheumatology Research, Eli Lilly and Co., Indianapolis, Indiana.

Pergolide, a dopamine agonist effective in the treatment of Parkinson's disease, 
has been shown to have anti-inflammatory activity in the carrageenan paw edema
assay in rats at p.o. doses greater than or equal to 0.3 mg/kg. Studies were done
to investigate the mechanism of action and to determine the pharmacologic
significance of this finding. Because pergolide elevates circulating
glucocorticoids, the effect of pergolide on carrageenan-induced paw swelling was 
assessed in adrenalectomized rats. Pergolide retained its anti-inflammatory
activity in adrenalectomized carrageenan-injected rats, thus eliminating
corticosterone induction as a possible mechanism of action. Pergolide treatment
also did not decrease thromboxane B2, prostaglandin E2 or leukotriene B4
production, ruling out direct effects on arachnoid acid inflammatory mediators.
Interactions with the autonomic nervous system were suggested, in that an alpha
adrenergic agonist (clonidine) mimicked the activity of pergolide in the
carrageenan assay, and an alpha adrenergic antagonist (phenoxybenzamine) blocked 
the anti-inflammatory activity of pergolide in this assay. Dopamine receptor
antagonists (haloperidol or sulpiride) partially inhibited the effect of
pergolide in the carrageenan model. However, the peripherally restricted dopamine
antagonist, domperidone, was ineffective, suggesting that a central dopamine
receptor was involved in the effect. Experiments in chronic inflammation models
such as lipoidal-amine induced arthritis in rats and picryl chloride-induced
delayed type hypersensitivity in mice also revealed an anti-inflammatory effect
of pergolide. Activity in the carrageenan system and the lipoidalamine model
demonstrated that the anti-inflammatory effects of pergolide were separable from 
potential immunosuppressive effects. Multiple dose studies indicated that
tolerance might develop to the anti-inflammatory effect of pergolide.(ABSTRACT
TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)


PMID: 1681083  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Rinsho Shinkeigaku. 1991 Jun;31(6):597-602.

[Cerebral blood flow pattern in progressive supranuclear palsy].

[Article in Japanese]

Okada K(1), Kobayashi S, Yamashita K, Fukuda H, Suyama N.

Author information: 
(1)Third Division of Internal Medicine, Shimane Medical University.

It is known that progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP) shows subcortical dementia.
The diagnosis of PSP is sometimes difficult because this disorder mimics the
clinical features of parkinsonian syndrome. Several PET studies demonstrated
frontal hypo-metabolism in PSP patients. We studied the cerebral blood flow (CBF)
pattern by single-photon-emission-computed tomography (SPECT) using
123I-isopropyl-iodoamphetamine (IMP) in 5 patients of PSP including one autopsy
case. Five PSP patients were 3 men and 2 women, mean age of 67.6 years old.
Control groups were 3 normal controls (Normal), 7 patients of Parkinson's disease
(PD), 5 patients of olive-pontocerebellar atrophy (OPCA), and 4 patients of
dementia of Alzheimer's type (DAT). CBF was measured by 123I-IMP SPECT using 400 
AC/T Starcam (GE). CBF was measured by semi-quantitative methods. Regions of
Interest (ROI's) were located at cerebellar, basal ganglion, and lateral
ventricle levels. Each count of ROI was divided by the count of occipital ROI. In
all PSP patients, the ratio of relative blood flow to occipital lobe in the
frontal and fronto-temporal regions were most markedly affected, showing average 
reduction rates of 66.6% and 65.5%. These rates showed statistically significant 
differences to other control degenerative neurological diseases. Our these
results correspond to the former PET studies. Moreover, frontal hypoperfusion
progressed with advancing clinical stage. The results indicate that CBF study
with SPECT is useful to confirm the diagnosis of PSP. It is necessary to clarify 
the role of the damage in basal ganglia for frontal hypometabolic pattern.


PMID: 1934773  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Naunyn Schmiedebergs Arch Pharmacol. 1991 Jun;343(6):568-73.

Synergistic interactions between muscarinic antagonists, adrenergic agonists and 
NMDA antagonists with respect to locomotor stimulatory effects in
monoamine-depleted mice.

Carlsson M(1), Svensson A, Carlsson A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Göteborg, Sweden.

The purpose of the present investigation was to study the effects of simultaneous
manipulations of central cholinergic, adrenergic and glutamatergic systems on
locomotion in an animal model of Parkinson's disease. Mice were deprived of their
monoamine stores by pretreatment with the monoamine depleter reserpine and the
catecholamine synthesis inhibitor alpha-methyl-p-tyrosine, given 18 h and 60 min,
respectively, before the acute experiment. Traditionally, only dopaminergic
agonists have been shown to reverse the akinesia thus produced. However, in the
present study it is demonstrated that if a muscarine receptor antagonist
(atropine or biperiden) is combined with an alpha-adrenergic
agonist/alpha-adrenergic agonist precursor (clonidine or L-alpha-methyl-dopa), a 
marked locomotor stimulation can be achieved, although either agent given alone
is ineffective. Adding an NMDA antagonist (MK-801, ketamine or SDZ EAA 494) to
the combination biperiden + clonidine resulted in further potentiation of the
locomotor stimulatory effects.


PMID: 1682816  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Presse Med. 1990 May 19;19(20):947-9.

[Hydroxylation of debrisoquin in Parkinson's disease].

[Article in French]

Meillard MN(1), Bentué-Ferrer D, Brunet-Bourgin F, Morel G, Allain H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Pharmacologie Clinique, Faculté de Médecine, Rennes.

The accumulation of environmental substances, due to deficiency of liver
detoxication processes, is one of the hypotheses put forward in the search of the
cause of Parkinson's disease. The debrisoquine test was used to evaluate the
capacity for hydroxylation of twenty patients treated for Parkinson's disease. No
difference was found with the results obtained in non Parkinsonians: other
metabolic pathways, notably S-methylation, should be explored.


PMID: 2141131  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Pharmacol Biochem Behav. 1990 May;36(1):45-50.

Interfering with glutamatergic neurotransmission by means of NMDA antagonist
administration discloses the locomotor stimulatory potential of other transmitter
systems.

Carlsson M(1), Svensson A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Göteborg, Sweden.

In the present paper it is shown that when either of the noncompetitive NMDA
antagonists MK-801 or ketamine are combined with the alpha-adrenergic agonist
clonidine, a pronounced stimulation of locomotion is produced in
monoamine-depleted mice. Likewise, when a subthreshold dose of MK-801 is combined
with the muscarinic antagonist atropine, a forceful synergism with regard to
locomotor activity in monoamine-depleted mice is observed. Furthermore, the
present study shows that also in monoamine-depleted rats MK-801, as well as the
competitive NMDA antagonist AP-5 (DL-2-amino-5-phosphonovaleric acid), interact
synergistically with clonidine to enhance locomotor activity. Taken together, our
findings suggest that central glutamatergic systems exert a powerful inhibitory
influence on locomotion. Interfering with this inhibitory force by administration
of an NMDA antagonist promotes locomotion and discloses the activational
potential of other transmitter systems. The results are discussed in relation to 
1) the pathophysiology of schizophrenia, with emphasis on the glutamate
hypothesis of schizophrenia, and 2) implications for the treatment of Parkinson's
disease.


PMID: 2161545  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Synapse. 1990;5(2):104-12.

1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine-induced neurotoxicity in the rat:
characterization and age-dependent effects.

Jarvis MF(1), Wagner GC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, Rutgers State University, New Brunswick, New Jersey 
08903.

1-Methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP) is a potent dopaminergic
toxin that has been found to produce Parkinson's disease-like symptoms in humans 
and monkeys. The neurotoxic effects of MPTP appear to be reduced in rodents where
multiple dosing procedures are required to demonstrate long-lasting neuronal
deficits. In the present study, the neurotoxic effects of MPTP were further
characterized in the rat. Following the repeated administration of MPTP,
pronounced (60-80%) and dose-dependent depletions of striatal dopamine and
serotonin concentrations were found in the rat brain. Time-course studies
revealed that while striatal dopamine concentrations remained consistently
reduced for at least 8 weeks following MPTP treatment, striatal serotonin
depletions as well as MPTP-induced monoamine depletions in other brain regions
were transient in nature. Pretreatment with the MAO-B inhibitor pargyline
afforded a selective and complete protection of striatal dopamine levels without 
significantly affecting MPTP-induced striatal serotonin depletions. Similarly,
treatment with ascorbic acid was found to selectively attenuate MPTP-induced
dopamine depletions in rats. The neurotoxic effects of MPTP were also found to
increase in the developing rat. No significant brain monoamine depletions were
observed in neonatal rats following the repeated administration of MPTP. However,
MPTP-induced neurotoxicity progressively increased in older rats. The present
results indicate that when appropriate treatment procedures are used, a
pronounced, selective, age-dependent, and long-lasting MPTP-induced reduction in 
striatal dopamine concentrations can be observed in the rat brain. The present
results are discussed in reference to the putative mechanisms and species
differences of MPTP-induced neurotoxicity.

DOI: 10.1002/syn.890050204 
PMID: 2309157  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Neurosci Lett. 1990 Jan 1;108(1-2):213-8.

MPTP, MPDP+ and MPP+ cause decreases in dopamine content in mouse brain slices.

Wilson JA(1), Doyle TJ, Lau YS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Creighton University School of Medicine, Omaha, NE
68178.

MPTP causes a Parkinson's disease-like syndrome in which the dopamine content of 
the nigrostriatal system decreases. We have studied the relationship between
physiological changes and dopamine content using a brain slice preparation
developed for electrophysiological studies of corticostriate and nigrostriatal
synaptic transmission. We report that MPTP, MPDP+ and MPP+ cause significant
decreases in dopamine content of mouse brain slices. We also report that
compounds (pargyline and GBR-12909) which block MPTP's toxicity in vivo and
prevent non-reversible changes in synaptic transmission are not able to alter
MPTP's ability to decrease slice dopamine contents. This indicates that the
dopamine content in slices may not be causally related to the non-reversible
decrease in synaptic transmission or in vivo neurotoxicity.


PMID: 2304632  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Life Sci. 1990;47(19):1729-36.

The non-competitive NMDA antagonists MK-801 and PCP, as well as the competitive
NMDA antagonist SDZ EAA494 (D-CPPene), interact synergistically with clonidine to
promote locomotion in monoamine-depleted mice.

Carlsson M(1), Svensson A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Göteborg, Sweden.

The present study shows that high doses of the non-competitive NMDA antagonist
phencyclidine (PCP) as well as of the competitive NMDA antagonist SDZ EAA494
(D-CPPene) increase locomotion in monoamine-depleted mice. The pattern of
movement produced following treatment with these agents is very similar to that
previously observed following MK-801 administration to monamine-depleted mice.
When subthreshold doses of MK-801, PCP and SDZ EAA494 were combined with the
alpha-adrenergic agonist clonidine, a dramatic stimulation of locomotion was
observed in monoamine-depleted mice; the gross appearance of the animals was
similar with the three drug combinations. These results support our previous
conclusion that suppression of glutamatergic neurotransmission promotes the
locomotor stimulatory potential of other (e.g. adrenergic) transmitter systems.
The present findings may be of relevance for future treatment strategies in
(L-DOPA-resistant) Parkinson's disease.


PMID: 2147454  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Kaku Igaku. 1989 Nov;26(11):1405-15.

[Clinical evaluation of Parkinson's disease using 123I-IMP SPECT].

[Article in Japanese]

Hayashi H, Odano I, Nishihara M, Higuchi S, Sakai K, Ishikawa A.

N-isopropyl-p[123I]iodoamphetamine (123I-IMP) SPECT and regional cerebral blood
flow (rCBF) studies were performed in 20 patients with Parkinson's disease (PD)
and 8 normal subjects. RCBF was measured by the arterial blood sampling method
which used the microsphere model. We analyzed seven factors which might be
related to the rCBF in PD, i.e., age, stage, duration of the disease, cerebral
atrophy, severity of dementia, laterality of symptoms and motor disability score 
(MDS; the degree of akinesia, rigidity, tremor, gait disturbance, freezing and
pulsion sign). Compared with normal subjects, global CBF (supratentorial mean
rCBF) was reduced 21.8% in PD. In particular, rCBF in the basal ganglia and that 
of frontal cortex were reduced 25.3%, 24.8%, respectively. Distribution patterns 
of rCBF in PD were almost as same as those in normals except for cerebellum. The 
reduction of both rCBFs in the basal ganglia and parietal cortex significantly
correlated with MDS (p less than 0.05, respectively). Especially, akinesia was
closely correlated to the reduction of rCBF in the parietal cortex (p less than
0.02). Moreover, we observed a significant relationship between cerebral atrophy 
and reduction of rCBF in each region except for cerebellum. However, there was no
significant correlation between the severity of dementia and reduction of rCBF,
even in the frontal cortex or parietal cortex. These data show that the severity 
of dementia in PD may be connected with other factors except for rCBF. 123I-IMP
SPECT study is a useful method for clinical evaluation of PD.


PMID: 2615027  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Neurology. 1989 Jul;39(7):883-7.

Xenobiotic metabolism in Parkinson's disease.

Steventon GB(1), Heafield MT, Waring RH, Williams AC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Queen Elizabeth Medical Centre, Birmingham, UK.

We studied 68 patients with Parkinson's disease (PD) with probe drugs to
determine whether a defect in metabolism might be an etiologic factor and found
no difference between patients and controls in their ability to form the
4-hydroxy metabolite of debrisoquin. However, using S-carboxymethyl-L-cysteine,
63.2% (43/68) of PD patients had reduced S-oxidation capacity, while 35.3%
(24/68) produced no sulfoxides (controls, 35.2% and 2.5%). When we studied
acetaminophen (paracetamol) metabolism, only 29.6% of PD patients excreted
greater than 5% of the dose as the sulfate conjugate; the corresponding figure
for controls was 83.9%. These results suggest a deficiency in detoxication
pathways involving sulfur metabolism. PD patients may be unusually susceptible to
exogenous or even endogenous toxins.


PMID: 2739915  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


197. J Neural Transm Park Dis Dement Sect. 1989;1(4):317-22.

Marked locomotor stimulation in monoamine-depleted mice following treatment with 
atropine in combination with clonidine.

Carlsson M(1), Carlsson A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Göteborg, Sweden.

The present study demonstrates that the muscarinic antagonist atropine and the
alpha-adrenergic agonist clonidine, though ineffective when administered
separately, produced a pronounced locomotor stimulation in monoamine-depleted
mice when combined. The atropine + clonidine-induced locomotor stimulation was
counteracted by both the alpha 2-adrenoceptor antagonist idazoxan and the
acetylcholinesterase inhibitor physostigmine. Thus, it is clear that simultaneous
manipulations with cholinergic and adrenergic systems are as effective in
restoring locomotion in monoamine-depleted mice as increasing central
dopaminergic tone. This finding may have implications for the treatment of a
movement disorder like Parkinson's disease.


PMID: 2557047  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


198. J Neural Transm. 1989;77(1):65-71.

Dramatic synergism between MK-801 and clonidine with respect to locomotor
stimulatory effect in monoamine-depleted mice.

Carlsson M(1), Carlsson A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Göteborg, Sweden.

The present study corroborates previous findings showing that the selective,
non-competitive N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) antagonist MK-801
[(+)-5-methyl-10,11-dihydroxy-5H-dibenzo(a,d)-cyclohepten-5,10-imi ne] produces a
dose-dependent increase in locomotion in mice pretreated with a combination of
the monoamine-depleter reserpine and the catecholamine synthesis inhibitor
alpha-methyl-para-tyrosine. Moreover, the present investigation demonstrates a
synergistic interaction between MK-801 and the alpha-adrenergic agonist clonidine
in monoamine-depleted mice: MK-801 in a dose of 1 mg/kg and clonidine in a dose
of 2 mg/kg hardly affected locomotion when given separately, but when the two
drugs were combined a dramatic enhancement of motor activity was observed. This
effect was effectively antagonized by the alpha 2-adrenergic blockers idazoxan
and yohimbine, as well as by the "atypical" neuroleptic clozapine. Likewise, a
clear-cut synergism was observed when a low dose of the dopamine receptor agonist
apomorphine (0.1 mg/kg), which did not per se affect motor activity, was combined
with MK-801 (1.5 mg/kg); however, the synergism between apomorphine and MK-801
was less dramatic than that observed between MK-801 and clonidine. The results
may have important neuropsychiatric implications related to, e.g. the treatment
of Parkinson's disease and the pathogenesis of schizophrenia.


PMID: 2545813  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Cell Mol Neurobiol. 1988 Jun;8(2):171-9.

A new approach to biochemical evaluation of brain dopamine metabolism.

Kopin IJ(1), White JH, Bankiewicz K.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Neurological and Communicative Disorders and Stroke,
Bethesda, Maryland 20892.

1. Dopaminergic neurotransmission in brain is receiving increased attention
because of its known involvement in Parkinson's disease and new methods for the
treatment of this disorder and because of hypotheses relating several psychiatric
disorders to abnormalities in brain dopaminergic systems. 2. Chemical assessment 
of brain dopamine metabolism has been attempted by measuring levels of its major 
metabolite, homovanillic acid (HVA), in cerebrospinal fluid, plasma, or urine.
Because HVA is derived in part from dopamine formed in noradrenergic neurons,
plasma levels and urinary excretion rates of HVA do not adequately reflect solely
metabolism of brain dopamine. 3. Using debrisoquin, the peripheral contributions 
of HVA to plasma or urinary HVA can be diminished, but the extent of residual HVA
formation in noradrenergic neurons is unknown. By measuring the levels of
methoxy-hydroxyphenylglycol (MHPG) in plasma or of urinary norepinephrine
metabolites (total MHPG in monkeys; the sum of total MHPG and vanillyl mandelic
acid (VMA) in humans) along with HVA, it is possible to estimate the degree of
impairment by debrisoquin of HVA formation from noradrenergic neuronal dopamine
and thereby better assess brain dopamine metabolism. 4. This method was applied
to a monkey before and after destruction of the nigrostriatal pathway by the
administration of MPTP.


PMID: 3044592  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


200. J Neural Transm Suppl. 1988;27:141-60.

Continuous intracerebroventricular infusion of dopamine and dopamine agonists
through a totally implanted drug delivery system in animal models of Parkinson's 
disease.

de Yebenes JG(1), Fahn S, Jackson-Lewis V, Jorge P, Mena MA, Reiriz J.

Author information: 
(1)Centro Ramon y Cajal, Madrid, Spain.

We studied the effect of intracerebroventricular infusion of dopamine and
dopamine agonists in animal models of dopamine deficiency as an experimental
approach to the treatment of levodopa induced fluctuations in Parkinson's
disease. Dopamine deficiency was produced in rats by unilateral lesion of the
nigrostriatal pathway or by chronic treatment with reserpine. Monkeys were
lesioned by intravenous injection of MPTP. The animals were treated with
intracerebral infusions of dopamine (with or without associated intraperitoneal
administration or intracerebroventricular infusion of pargyline), lisuride and
pergolide. The intracerebroventricular infusion of these drugs was performed with
osmotic minipumps in rats and with infusaid pumps in the monkeys. The infusion of
dopamine or dopamine agonists in rats with unilateral lesions by 6-OH-dopamine
produced a persistent rotation contralateral to the lesioned and implanted side. 
The infusion of dopamine reversed reserpine-induced akinesia only when pargyline 
was associated. In the range of concentration used, maximum allowed by solubility
of compounds, the effects of dopamine were more potent than those of the
agonists. In spite of the stability of dopamine "in vitro" when dissolved in
antioxidants and at low pH, a pigment, product of autooxidation, was found in the
brains of the animals infused with dopamine. The monkeys were implanted with
infusaid pumps and infused for up to 3 weeks. The pump was not well tolerated due
to its huge size for the animals. One monkey showed reversal of the MPTP-induced 
akinesia while the other, whose catheter had moved from the correct implantation 
site, remained unchanged. In both monkeys there was evidence of autooxidation of 
dopamine. Intracerebral infusion of dopamine agonists may be a possible
experimental alternative to the treatment of levodopa induced fluctuations in
Parkinson's disease but stable and soluble dopamine agonists and suitable
delivery systems are needed.


PMID: 3165432  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Am J Physiol. 1987 Dec;253(6 Pt 1):G809-15.

Chronic alterations in jejunal myoelectric activity in rats due to MPTP.

Eaker EY(1), Bixler GB, Dunn AJ, Moreshead WV, Mathias JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, College of Medicine, University of Florida,
Gainesville 32610.

Parkinsonian patients may have symptoms consistent with intestinal
pseudo-obstruction, but a primary intestinal abnormality has not been shown.
1-Methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP), after conversion to a toxic 
metabolite via the monoamine oxidase system, can induce Parkinson's disease by
destroying dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra in humans and primates.
Rodents have some catecholamine depletion but much less so than primates. Using
chronic bipolar electrodes on the proximal jejunum of Wistar rats, we show
significant, chronic migrating myoelectric complex disruption (P less than 0.001)
and prolongation of irregular spike activity (P less than 0.001). Pargyline (a
monoamine oxidase inhibitor) pretreatment significantly blocked these myoelectric
changes. Sinemet (L-dopa and carbidopa), given after MPTP to replete dopamine,
decreased the MPTP-induced migrating myoelectric complex disruption. Jejunal
myenteric plexus dopamine levels were significantly decreased (to 61% of control)
after MPTP but after much higher doses than were required to disrupt migrating
myoelectric complex activity (180 mg/kg total vs. 30 mg/kg). Dopamine in the
central nervous system was not depleted. We conclude that MPTP causes intestinal 
myoelectric disruption (which can be blocked by pargyline and decreased by
Sinemet) possibly through enteric, but not central, nervous system effects.


PMID: 3501248  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Neuropharmacology. 1987 Sep;26(9):1431-40.

Pharmacological characteristics of tremor, rigidity and hypokinesia induced by
reserpine in rat.

Colpaert FC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychopharmacology, Janssen Pharmaceutica, Beerse, Belgium.

The experiments characterized the dose- and time-dependence of parkinsonian motor
signs induced by reserpine in rats and a standardized system of manipulation of
animals, evaluation of symptoms and analysis of data was devised. The assay
procedure yielded no more than 0.5, 4.5 and 0.0% false positives with the
evaluation of tremor, rigidity and hypokinesia, respectively. A dose-dependent
and often complete blockade of all three signs was obtained with L-DOPA plus
carbidopa (10:1) as well as with other classes of pharmacological agents that are
used in the treatment of Parkinson's disease, i.e. direct or indirect dopamine
(DA) agonists (amantadine, pergolide, lisuride) and inhibitors of monoamine
oxidase (MAO) (clorgyline, pargyline, deprenyl, tranylcypromine). The inhibitor
of the uptake of DA, nomifensine, and anticholinergics, 5-hydroxytryptamine
(5-HT) antagonists, histamine antagonists and tricyclic antidepressants exerted
little or no effect. The effects of putative agonists and antagonists at alpha 1-
and alpha 2-adrenoceptors were also examined. Yohimbine blocked tremor and
rigidity, but not hypokinesia, at 0.66 and 0.28 mg/kg, respectively. It is
suggested that alpha-adrenergic mechanisms and, in particular, alpha
2-adrenoceptors, may be involved in reserpine-induced tremor and rigidity.
Noradrenergic and dopaminergic systems can conceivably interact to progressively 
generate these different motor signs.


PMID: 3670563  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Exp Neurol. 1987 May;96(2):289-98.

Actions of MPTP and MPP+ on synaptic transmission in guinea-pig hippocampal
slices.

Galvan M, Kupsch A, ten Bruggencate G.

MPTP (1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine) causes a Parkinson's
disease-like syndrome in man, monkeys, and mice. We studied the effects of MPTP
and its metabolite, MPP+, on neuronal properties and synaptic transmission in
isolated slices of guinea-pig hippocampus using intra- and extracellular
recording methods. Addition of MPTP to the superfusate (50 to 100 microM)
produced the following effects: Excitatory postsynaptic potentials and
extracellularly recorded population spikes, evoked by stimulation of the Schaffer
collaterals were increased in amplitude during the application period (30 min).
Within 30 min of washing in normal solution, synaptic transmission was blocked,
although axonal population action potentials could still be elicited. The block
of synaptic transmission was prevented by prior incubation in pargyline, an
inhibitor of monoamine oxidase. The membrane potential and resistance of single
pyramidal neurons were virtually unaffected; action potentials elicited by
depolarizing intracellular current pulses were also unchanged. MPP+ (50 microM)
blocked synaptic transmission during the application period by a
pargyline-in-sensitive mechanism. These results suggest that MPP+ blocks synaptic
transmission in the hippocampus at a presynaptic site. This effect may be
relevant for the acute action of MPTP and may provide some insight into its
chronic action on nigrostriatal neurons.


PMID: 3032664  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Brain Res. 1986 Nov 12;397(2):341-4.

The effects of pyridinium salts, structurally related compounds of
1-methyl-4-phenylpyridinium ion (MPP+), on tyrosine hydroxylation in rat striatal
tissue slices.

Hirata Y, Sugimura H, Takei H, Nagatsu T.

We had previously reported that 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine
(MPTP), which produces Parkinson's disease in humans and animals, inhibited
tyrosine hydroxylation, the rate-limiting step of dopamine synthesis, in striatal
tissue slices after its conversion to 1-methyl-4-phenylpyridinium ion by
monoamine oxidase. In this report, structurally related compounds of
1-methyl-4-phenylpyridinium ion (MPP+) were synthesized and tested for their
ability to inhibit tyrosine hydroxylation in rat striatal tissue slices. The
following pyridinium salts showed inhibitory effect on tyrosine hydroxylation:
pyridinium salts that substituted the alkyl group for the methyl group of MPP+
(1-ethyl-, 1-propyl-, 1-isopropyl-4-phenylpyridinium ions); pyridinium salts that
changed the position of the phenyl group (1-methyl-2-phenyl-,
1-methyl-3-phenylpyridinium ions); pyridinium salts that modified the phenyl ring
at 4 position (1-methyl-4-tolylpyridinium ion,
1-methyl-4-(4'-methoxyphenyl)pyridinium ion); and N-methylisoquinolinium ion. In 
contrast, pyridinium salts in which the phenyl group was replaced with hydrogen, 
methyl or methoxycarbonyl group, paraquat (1,1'-dimethyl-4,4'-dipyridinium
chloride, one of bipyridinium compounds and a widely used herbicide), and
N-methylquinolinium ion, showed no inhibitory effect. Nomifensine, an inhibitor
of dopamine uptake, prevented the inhibition caused by
1-methyl-2-phenylpyridinium ion. The result suggests that the effective
pyridinium salts are taken up into dopaminergic neurons likewise MPP+ by the
dopamine transport system and inhibit tyrosine hydroxylation in striatal tissue
slices. N-methylisoquinolinium ion could be one of the candidates of endogenous
or environmental factors that produce Parkinson's disease.


PMID: 3099974  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Brain Res. 1986 Mar 19;368(2):357-60.

MPTP causes a non-reversible depression of synaptic transmission in mouse
neostriatal brain slice.

Wilson JA, Wilson JS, Weight FF.

MPTP (1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine) causes a Parkinson's
disease-like syndrome. The mechanism of MPTP's neurotoxicity is unknown; however,
one hypothesis is that MPP+ (1-methyl-4-phenylpyridinium), a product of MPTP's
oxidation, is the neurotoxic agent. Using a mouse brain slice preparation we
studied the effects of MPTP and MPP+ on synaptic transmission. We found MPTP
caused a decrease in amplitude of an excitatory synaptic response not reversed by
washing. This non-reversible action of MPTP was prevented by GBR-32 and
pargyline. MPP+s caused a decrease in synaptic transmission, but this decrease
was reversed by washing. The results suggest that the toxic effect of MPTP on
synaptic transmission is not accounted for by the action of MPP+.


PMID: 3008929  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Brain Res. 1986 Mar 5;367(1-2):8-13.

Manganese neurotoxicity: effects of L-DOPA and pargyline treatments.

Parenti M, Flauto C, Parati E, Vescovi A, Groppetti A.

Single, monolateral injection into rat substantia nigra of manganese chloride
produced within two weeks from its administration a loss of dopamine in the
striatum ipsilateral to the injected side. The effect was dose-dependent and was 
not extended to serotoninergic terminals present in this brain area, whose
content in serotonin and 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid was not affected. When L-DOPA
+ carbidopa or pargyline were given to these animals the decrease of striatal
dopamine was more marked. Moreover, rats treated two weeks before with a dose of 
manganese chloride that produced a 70-80% drop in striatal dopamine
concentrations, rotated ipsilaterally to the dopamine-depleted striatum when
injected with apomorphine, suggesting that in these animals the stimulatory
effects of apomorphine were more relevant in striatum where presynaptic
dopaminergic neurons were not affected by manganese chloride. These data indicate
that the alterations of dopaminergic postsynaptic receptors may be different in
parkinsonian and in manganese-intoxicated patients and that current therapy used 
for Parkinson's disease could be a hazard in treating manganese poisoning.


PMID: 2421838  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Life Sci. 1985 Aug 12;37(6):531-6.

Adrenergic receptors on cerebral microvessels in control and parkinsonian
subjects.

Cash R, Lasbennes F, Sercombe R, Seylaz J, Agid Y.

The binding of adrenergic ligands (3H-prazosin, 3H-clonidine,
3H-dihydroalprenolol) was studied on a preparation of cerebral microvessels in
the prefrontal cortex and putamen of control and Parkinsonian subjects. The
adrenergic receptor density in microvessels of control patients was less than
0.5% and 3.3% respectively of the total binding. A significant decrease in the
number of alpha-1 binding sites was observed on microvessels in the putamen of
patients with Parkinson's disease.


PMID: 2991685  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Life Sci. 1985 Jan 21;36(3):249-54.

Neurochemical and functional consequences following
1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,5,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP) and methamphetamine.

Jarvis MF, Wagner GC.

The neurochemical and functional consequences following MPTP administration to
the rat were evaluated and compared to similar effects following methamphetamine 
administration. It was observed that MPTP induced long lasting depletions of
striatal dopamine concentrations and this neurotoxic effect could be prevented by
pargyline pretreatment. The MPTP-induced neuronal damage produced a tolerance to 
the disruptive effects of amphetamine and a supersensitivity to the disruptive
effects of apomorphine in rats responding in a schedule controlled paradigm.
Methamphetamine, like MPTP, produced depletions of striatal dopamine but these
actions were potentiated by pargyline pretreatment. These observations are
discussed in reference to possible deleterious effects following the
administration of pargyline to patients with Parkinson's Disease.


PMID: 3871245  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Life Sci. 1985 Jan 21;36(3):243-7.

Central and peripheral catecholamine depletion by
1-methyl-4-phenyl-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP) in rodents.

Fuller RW, Steranka LR.

1-Methyl-4-phenyl-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP) given in single doses to rats
depleted norepinephrine concentration in heart and mesenteric artery but had
little effect on catecholamine concentration in brain. MPTP did not share with
amphetamine the ability to cause persistent depletion of striatal dopamine in
iprindole-treated rats. Administration of MPTP via osmotic minipumps implanted
s.c. for 24 hrs after a loading dose of MPTP in rats resulted in depletion of
striatal dopamine and its metabolites one week later. MPTP in vitro was a
reasonably potent, competitive and reversible inhibitor of MAO-A (monoamine
oxidase type A). MPTP appeared to inhibit MAO-A in rat brain in vivo as
determined by its antagonism of the inactivation of MAO-A by pargyline and by its
antagonism of the increase in dopamine metabolites resulting from the
administration of Ro 4-1284, a dopamine releaser. The inhibition of MAO-B by MPTP
in vitro was noncompetitive, time-dependent, and not fully reversed by dialysis, 
consistent with the findings of others that MPTP is acted upon by MAO-B. In mice,
four successive daily doses of MPTP is acted upon by MAO-B. In mice, four
successive daily doses of MPTP given s.c. resulted in marked depletion of
dopamine and its metabolites one week later, and the depletion of dopamine was
completely prevented by pretreatment with deprenyl, which inhibited MAO-B but not
MAO-A. These and other studies in rodents may help in elucidating the mechanisms 
involved in the destructive effects of MPTP on striatal dopamine neurons that
lead to symptoms of Parkinson's disease in humans and in monkeys.


PMID: 3871244  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Arch Mal Coeur Vaiss. 1984 Oct;77(11):1181-5.

[How do we explain the antihypertensive effect of bromocriptine? Clinical and
experimental contribution].

[Article in French]

Chamontin B, Montastruc JL, Rascol A.

The mechanism of the antihypertensive properties of bromocriptine was
investigated in dog and man. In anaesthetized dogs, bromocriptine induced a
decrease in the pressor responses to adrenaline or phenylephrine and reduced the 
hypotensive properties of clonidine. In 6 hypertensive patients with Parkinson's 
disease, chronic treatment with bromocriptine (46.4 +/- 12.0 mg/day) elicited
both a significant decrease in blood pressure and an improvement of
extrapyramidal symptoms. During bromocriptine therapy, domperidone (60 mg/day
during 1 month), a specific peripheral dopaminergic antagonist was introduced.
The drug did not change the levels of blood pressure (before domperidone: 150.8
+/- 22.5/79.9 +/- 8.9 mmHg after domperidone: 150 +/- 17.3/87.5 +/- 12.9 mmHg).
These results confirm the antihypertensive properties of bromocriptine and
demonstrate that, beside their dopaminergic properties, the drug also possesses
mixed alpha 1 and alpha 2 adrenolytic actions. These two properties may
contribute to the mechanism of the antihypertensive effects of bromocriptine.
These data also show that domperidone can be used in bromocriptine-treated
hypertensive parkinsonians without side effects on blood pressure.


PMID: 6151826  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


211. J Neural Transm Suppl. 1983;18:257-63.

Therapeutic potentials of centrally acting dopamine and alpha 2-adrenoreceptor
agonists.

Goldstein M, Engel J, Lieberman A, Regev I, Bystritsky A, Mino S.

The antiparkinsonian activity of several dopamine agonists was investigated in an
animal model and clinically in parkinsonian patients. The semisynthetic ergoline,
pergolide, the partial ergoline, LY 141865 and the 8-alpha-aminoergoline, CU
32-085 were found to be effective antitremor agents in monkeys with ventromedial 
tegmental lesions. The administration of pergolide or LY 141865 results in a
relief of tremor with a concomitant occurrence of severe abnormal involuntary
movements, while the administration of CU 32-085 results in a relief of tremor
with the occurrence of only minor abnormal involuntary movements. Clinical
studies have revealed that pergolide is an effective drug in patients with
advanced Parkinson's disease, and it reduces the "on-off" phenomena. The possible
regulation of dopamine neurotransmission by the norepinephrine neuronal systems
was reviewed. Preliminary data suggest that clonidine may interact with
presynaptic dopamine receptors.


PMID: 6135744  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Monogr Neural Sci. 1980;7:176-92.

Biochemical characterization of the active site of brain monoamine oxidase.

Youdim MB.

Until recently little was known concerning the chemical details of the mechanism 
of interaction of flavin-linked mitochondrial membrane bound monoamine oxidase
(MAO) with its substrates and inhibitors. Substrates which have enzymes as their 
targets have been valuable in elucidating active site residues and structural
features. Acetylenic amines as exemplified by clorgyline, deprenyl and pargyline 
are called 'suicide inhibitors' because an irreversible inhibitor is formed by
the action of MAO from a relatively innocuous compound which acts as a substrate.
These inhibitors can selectively inactivate MAO 'type A' and/or 'type B'. MAO
isolated in homogeneous form from liver or kidney contains 1 mole of covalently
bound coenzyme, cysteinyl-flavin, per mole enzyme. The flavin is bound to a
pentapeptide via the thio-ether of cysteine at the 8 alpha-position of the
isoalloxazine. A comparison of the inhibitory effects of clorgyline, deprenyl and
pargyline on liver enzyme preparations from bovine or rat have confirmed our
expectation that these irreversible inactivators form the same type of adduct
with the cysteinyl-flavin active site of MAO 'type A' and 'type B', and that
binding is stoichiometric at the N-5 of the covalently bound flavin in a
flavocyanine linkage. Substrates protect from inhibition. In contrast to the
reported observation of Tipton (39), pig brain mitochondrial MAO purified by two 
alternative methods contains cysteinyl-flavin in substantial amounts. The
turnover number of enzyme from brain per mole of cysterinyl-flavin in apparently 
homogeneous samples is nearly the same as that of highly purified kidney and
liver enzyme. Thus it is apparent that brain MAO also contains cysteinyl-flavin
at the active center and therefore it is expected that acetylenic as well as
hydrazine inhibitors form the same linkage with the flavin moiety as that formed 
with enzyme from peripheral tissues. A specific inhibitor for the deamination and
potentiation of dopamine formed in the brain of Parkinsonian patients after
treatment with L-Dopa has been regarded desirable. Deprenyl, a selective MAO
'type B inhibitor without the 'cheese effect', is the most potent inactivator of 
human brain MAO, and clinical results show that the drug is very useful in the
treatment of Parkinson's disease and depression.


PMID: 6785574  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


213. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 1973 Jun;36(3):321-8.

Quantitative study of the effect of L-dopa and phenoxybenzamine on the rigidity
of Parkinson's disease.

Andrews CJ, Burke D.

The static and dynamic components of the tonic stretch reflex and shortening
reactions have been studied in biceps brachii, triceps, hamstrings, and
quadriceps muscles of 19 patients with Parkinson's disease before and during
L-dopa therapy. Clinical improvement during L-dopa administration correlated with
a reduction in the dynamic component of the tonic stretch reflex in biceps,
triceps, and quadriceps but not the hamstrings muscle, and with the static
component of the tonic stretch reflex in biceps and triceps but not quadriceps
and hamstrings muscles. The only shortening reaction consistently reduced during 
the L-dopa treatment period was the dynamic shortening reaction of the triceps
muscle. The responses of the stretch reflexes to changes in muscle length were
not altered by L-dopa therapy. In severely disabled patients the hamstrings and
quadriceps stretch reflexes were maximal in a position of partial flexion of the 
knee joint and this response to muscle length was not altered in these patients
despite a dramatic lessening of rigidity in some patients. Shortening reactions
commonly remained in some patients after the stretch reflex of the antagonistic
muscle was abolished by L-dopa therapy. The administration of phenoxybenzamine to
patients being treated with L-dopa reduced the different components of rigidity
more than L-dopa alone, and the responses were consistent with phenoxybenzamine
suppressing predominantly the descending noradrenergic pathway.


PMCID: PMC494328
PMID: 4714094  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


214. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 1973 Feb;36(1):94-103.

Electromyographic study of the rigidospasticity of athetosis.

Andrews CJ, Neilson P, Knowles L.

The static and dynamic components of the tonic stretch reflex and shortening
reactions have been studied in 10 patients with athetosis. EMG activity could be 
recorded only from the biceps muscle when the patient was at rest. The dynamic
stretch reflex increased with the velocity of stretching in all muscles examined 
except the biceps. The biceps stretch reflex was found to be inhibited by
increasing muscle length, whereas the stretch reflexes of triceps, hamstrings,
and quadriceps muscles were facilitated by increasing muscle length.
Reinforcement increased resting activity in the biceps and the dynamic shortening
reaction of the triceps muscle. Both these effects were suppressed by the action 
of phenoxybenzamine. Although phenoxybenzamine was shown to reduce muscle tone in
a double-blind controlled trial, no corresponding improvement was detected in
involuntary movements or the patients' performance in a tracking test. The
differences between the pattern of hypertonus in athetosis, Parkinson's disease, 
spasticity, and activated normal subjects are presented in discussion.


PMCID: PMC494282
PMID: 4570905  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
