
1. COPD. 2016 Aug 11:1-7. [Epub ahead of print]

Efficacy and Safety of Indacaterol/Glycopyrronium (IND/GLY) Versus
Salmeterol/Fluticasone in Chinese Patients with Moderate-to-Severe Chronic
Obstructive Pulmonary Disease: The Chinese Cohort from the LANTERN Study.

Zhong N(1), Wang C(2), Zhou X(3), Zhang N(1), Humphries M(4), Wang L(4), Patalano
F(5), Banerji D(6).

Author information: 
(1)a State Key Laboratory of Respiratory Disease, National Clinical Research
Center for Respiratory Disease, Guangzhou Institute of Respiratory Disease, First
Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou Medical University , Guangzhou , Guangdong ,
China. (2)b Institute of Respiratory Disease, Xin Qiao Hospital, Third Military
Medical University , Chongqing City , Chongqing , China. (3)c Department of
Respiratory Medicine , Southwest Hospital, Third Military Medical University ,
Chongqing City , Chongqing , China. (4)d Beijing Novartis Pharma Co. Ltd. ,
Shanghai , China. (5)e Novartis Pharma AG , Basel , Switzerland. (6)f Novartis
Pharmaceuticals Corporation , East Hanover , New Jersey , USA.

Inhaled indacaterol/glycopyrronium fixed-dose combination (IND/GLY) is approved
in over 80 countries, including the EU, Japan, Australia and Switzerland and the 
US. The LANTERN study evaluated the efficacy of IND/GLY compared with inhaled
long-acting β2-agonist (LABA)/inhaled corticosteroid (ICS) or
salmeterol/fluticasone (SFC) in patients with moderate-to-severe COPD with a
history of ≤1 exacerbation in the previous year. Here we present the efficacy and
safety of IND/GLY versus SFC in the Chinese cohort from the LANTERN study.
LANTERN was a 26-week, multicenter, randomized, double-blind, double-dummy,
parallel-group study conducted in patients with moderate-to-severe COPD with a
history of ≤1 exacerbation in the previous year. The patients were randomized
(1:1) to once-daily IND/GLY (110/50 μg) or twice-daily SFC (50/500 μg). The
primary endpoint was non-inferiority of IND/GLY versus SFC in terms of trough
FEV1. Of the total 744 patients randomized in the LANTERN study, 598 (80.4%) were
from Mainland China and randomized to IND/GLY (n = 298) or SFC (n = 300), and 553
(92.5%) completed the study. IND/GLY showed superiority over SFC with a
statistically significant and clinically meaningful improvement in trough FEV1,
FEV1 AUC0-4h, peak FEV1 and trough forced vital capacity (FVC) change from the
baseline. Annualized rate of moderate or severe COPD exacerbations was
significantly lower (43%) with IND/GLY compared with SFC (rate ratio: 0.57, p =
0.015). Overall, adverse events were lower for IND/GLY (34.6%) versus SFC
(43.1%). IND/GLY was superior in achieving bronchodilation versus SFC in a
Chinese subgroup of patients from this study. Clinicaltrials.gov identifier:
NCT01709903.

DOI: 10.1080/15412555.2016.1182970 
PMID: 27715335  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2016 Sep 21;11:2341-2348. eCollection 2016.

Effectiveness using higher inhaled corticosteroid dosage in patients with COPD by
different blood eosinophilic counts.

Cheng SL(1), Lin CH(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Far Eastern Memorial Hospital, Taipei;
Department of Chemical Engineering and Materials Science, Yuan Ze University,
Zhongli, Taoyuan City. (2)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Chest
Medicine, Changhua Christian Hospital, Changhua; Department of Respiratory Care, 
College of Health Sciences, Chang Jung Christian University, Tainan; School of
Medicine, Chung Shan Medical University, Taichung City, Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: Blood eosinophil counts have been documented as a good biomarker for 
patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) using inhaled
corticosteroid (ICS) therapy. However, the effectiveness and safety of
prescribing high or medium dose of ICS for patients with different eosinophil
counts are unknown.
METHODS: A post hoc analysis of a previous prospective randomized study was
performed for COPD patients using higher dose (HD: Fluticasone 1,000 μg/day) or
medium dose (MD: Fluticasone 500 μg/day) of ICS combined with Salmeterol (100
μg/day). Patients were classified into two groups: those with high eosinophil
counts (HE ≥3%) and those with low eosinophil counts (LE <3%). Lung function was 
evaluated with forced expiratory volume in 1 second, forced vital capacity, and
COPD assessment test. Frequencies of acute exacerbation and pneumonia were also
measured.
RESULTS: Two hundred and forty-eight patients were studied and classified into
higher eosinophil (HE) (n=85, 34.3%) and lower eosinophil (LE) groups (n=163,
65.7%). The levels of forced expiratory volume in 1 second were significantly
increased in patients of HE group treated with HD therapy, compared with the
other groups (HE/HD: 125.9±27.2 mL vs HE/MD: 94.3±23.7 mL, vs LE/HD: 70.4±20.5
mL, vs LE/MD: 49.8±16.7 mL; P<0.05) at the end of the study. Quality of life
(COPD assessment test) markedly improved in HE/HD group than in MD/LE group
(HE/HD: 9±5 vs LE/MD: 16±7, P=0.02). The frequency of acute exacerbation was more
decreased in HE/HD group patients, compared with that in LE/MD group (HE/HD:
13.5% vs LE/MD: 28.7%, P<0.01). Pneumonia incidence was similar in the treatment 
groups (HE/HD: 3.2%, HE/MD: 2.6%, LE/HD: 3.5%, LE/MD 2.8%; P=0.38).
CONCLUSION: The study results support using blood eosinophil counts as a
biomarker of ICS response and show the benefits of greater improvement of lung
function, quality of life, and decreased exacerbation frequency in COPD patients 
with blood eosinophil counts higher than 3%, especially treated with higher dose 
of ICS.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S115132 
PMID: 27703344  [PubMed - in process]


3. Respir Med. 2016 Oct;119:115-121. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2016.09.006. Epub 2016 Sep 
4.

Randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, cross-over single dose study of the
bronchodilator duration of action of combination fluticasone furoate/vilanterol
inhaler in adult asthma.

Braithwaite I(1), Williams M(2), Power S(2), Pilcher J(2), Weatherall M(3),
Baines A(4), Moynihan J(5), Kempsford R(4), Beasley R(6); FF/VI Study Team.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Institute of New Zealand, Wellington, New Zealand. Electronic
address: Irene.Braithwaite@mrinz.ac.nz. (2)Medical Research Institute of New
Zealand, Wellington, New Zealand. (3)Rehabilitation Teaching and Research Unit,
University of Otago Wellington, Wellington, New Zealand. (4)Medicines Research
Centre, GlaxoSmithKline Research and Development, Stevenage, UK. (5)Synergy
Clinical, Langley, UK. (6)Medical Research Institute of New Zealand, Wellington, 
New Zealand; Capital and Coast District Health Board, Wellington, New Zealand.

BACKGROUND: Fluticasone furoate (FF)/vilanterol (VI) is a once-daily maintenance 
treatment for asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. The duration of
bronchodilation beyond 24 h has not been determined previously.
METHODS: Adults aged 18-65 (n = 32), with asthma and reversibility to salbutamol 
(≥15% and ≥200 mL increase in forced expiratory volume in 1 s [FEV1])
participated in a double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover study. Patients
were admitted to a clinical trials unit for 72 h, and inhaled, in random order,
placebo or FF/VI 100/25 mcg via ELLIPTA dry powder inhaler on two occasions 7-14 
days apart. FEV1 was measured at baseline, 15 and 30 min, 1, 2, 4, 12, 24, 36,
48, 60, and 72 h. The differences in change in FEV1 from baseline between
treatments and corresponding two-sided 95% confidence intervals (CI) were
calculated at each time point.
FINDINGS: FF/VI produced a rapid onset of bronchodilation (adjusted mean
difference in change from baseline in FEV1 versus placebo at 15 min, 252 mL [95% 
CI 182-322]). Maximum bronchodilation was observed at 12 h (adjusted mean
difference in the change from baseline in FEV1, 383 mL [95% CI 285-481]).
Bronchodilation was maintained throughout the 72-h assessment period (adjusted
mean difference in the change in FEV1 from baseline at 72 h, 108 mL (95% CI
15-200]). FF/VI was well tolerated and no serious side effects were reported.
INTERPRETATION: A single dose of FF/VI 100/25 mcg showed evidence of a 72-h
bronchodilator duration of action in adults with asthma.

Copyright © 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2016.09.006 
PMID: 27692131  [PubMed - in process]


4. Rev Med Chil. 2016 Jul;144(7):931-6. doi: 10.4067/S0034-98872016000700016.

[Cushing syndrome in a HIV patient using inhaled steroids. Report of one case].

[Article in Spanish]

Frías A(1), Ortiz A(2), Soto M(2), Muñoz F(3), Chacón C(3).

Author information: 
(1)Escuela de Postgrado, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad Católica del Maule,
Talca, Chile, afriasoyarzun@gmail.com. (2)Facultad de Medicina, Universidad
Católica del Maule, Talca, Chile. (3)Servicio de Medicina, Hospital Regional de
Talca, Talca, Chile.

We report a 41-year-old man with HIV and a chronic obstructive pulmonary disease,
treated for seven months with Fluticasone/Salmeterol and antiretroviral therapy
(Lamivudine, Tenofovir, Atazanavir and Ritonavir). While using these medications,
the patients developed a Cushing syndrome in a period of five months. After
performing laboratory and imaging tests, it was concluded that the most probable 
cause of the syndrome was the interaction of inhaled steroids with Ritonavir.
After discontinuing these medications the syndrome reverted in a period of 8
months.

DOI: 10.4067/S0034-98872016000700016 
PMID: 27661558  [PubMed - in process]


5. BMJ Open Respir Res. 2016 Sep 8;3(1):e000151. doi: 10.1136/bmjresp-2016-000151.
eCollection 2016.

Effect of inhaled corticosteroids on blood eosinophil count in steroid-naïve
patients with COPD.

Kreindler JL(1), Watkins ML(2), Lettis S(3), Tal-Singer R(1), Locantore N(1).

Author information: 
(1)GSK R&D , King of Prussia, Pennsylvania , USA. (2)GSK R&D , Research Triangle 
Park, North Carolina , USA. (3)GSK R&D , Uxbridge , UK.

INTRODUCTION: Sputum and blood eosinophil counts have attracted attention as
potential biomarkers in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). One
question regarding the use of blood eosinophils as a biomarker in COPD is whether
their levels are affected by the use of inhaled corticosteroids (ICS), which are 
commonly prescribed for COPD.
METHODS: We performed a retrospective analysis of peripheral blood leucocytes
from a previously completed clinical trial that examined effects of ICS in
steroid-naïve patients with COPD.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSION: The data show that the ICS-containing treatment arms
(containing fluticasone propionate) had a small effect on peripheral blood
eosinophils in steroid-naïve patients with COPD.
TRIAL REGISTRATION NUMBER: NCT00358358; Post-results.

DOI: 10.1136/bmjresp-2016-000151 
PMCID: PMC5020662
PMID: 27651909  [PubMed]


6. N Engl J Med. 2016 Sep 29;375(13):1253-60. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1608033. Epub 2016 
Sep 4.

Effectiveness of Fluticasone Furoate-Vilanterol for COPD in Clinical Practice.

Vestbo J(1), Leather D(1), Diar Bakerly N(1), New J(1), Gibson JM(1),
McCorkindale S(1), Collier S(1), Crawford J(1), Frith L(1), Harvey C(1),
Svedsater H(1), Woodcock A(1); Salford Lung Study Investigators.

Collaborators: Amin J, Austin M, Sharma M, Borg-Constanzi J, Browne N, Buch K,
Budden P, Chaudry A, Cheema L, Chennupati N, Coulson S, Cribbin L, Dillon D,
Farooq B, Finnegan N, Fletcher A, Addlestone L, Hope B, Khan M, White J,
Behardien J, Mafunga C, Malcolmson C, McCarthy D, Milligan H, Raj V, Salim R,
Singh H, Sultan M, Seaton R, Tankel J, Khan R, Tyrell N, Umeadi U, Wright S,
Gibbons C, Brunt C, Gill L, Archer R, Howard R, Breen G, Stratford-Smith P,
Wilson R, Wilkinson H, El-Kafrawy A, Patel P, Iles S, Frier S, Bakhat A, Smith N,
Herron D, Adams-Strump D, Acherakar N, Shah D, Kanumilli N, Afshar A, Stamp M,
Westwood C, Wright A, Richardson K, Jackson P, Jarvis M, Fink P, Lord N, Hughes
C, Ahuja A, Joshi V, Larah D, Levenson S, Malcomson C, Parveen R, Rahman A,
Kassamr N, Kwok S.

Author information: 
(1)From the Centre for Respiratory Medicine and Allergy, Manchester Academic
Health Sciences Centre, University of Manchester and University Hospital of South
Manchester NHS Foundation Trust (J.V., A.W.), Manchester Academic Health Sciences
Centre, University of Manchester and Salford Royal NHS Foundation Trust (J.M.G.),
and NIHR Clinical Research Network Greater Manchester (S.M.), Manchester; Global 
Respiratory Franchise (D.L.) and Respiratory Research and Development (S.C.,
J.C., L.F., H.S.), GlaxoSmithKline UK, Brentford; Salford Royal NHS Foundation
Trust (N.D.B., J.N., J.M.G.), NorthWest EHealth (J.N., J.M.G.), and NHS Salford
Clinical Commissioning Group (S.M.), Salford; and Global Clinical Safety and
Pharmacovigilance, Safety Evaluation and Risk Management, GlaxoSmithKline UK,
Uxbridge (C.H.) - all in the United Kingdom.

Background Evidence for the management of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD) comes from closely monitored efficacy trials involving groups of patients 
who were selected on the basis of restricted entry criteria. There is a need for 
randomized trials to be conducted in conditions that are closer to usual clinical
practice. Methods In a controlled effectiveness trial conducted in 75 general
practices, we randomly assigned 2799 patients with COPD to a once-daily inhaled
combination of fluticasone furoate at a dose of 100 μg and vilanterol at a dose
of 25 μg (the fluticasone furoate-vilanterol group) or to usual care (the
usual-care group). The primary outcome was the rate of moderate or severe
exacerbations among patients who had had an exacerbation within 1 year before the
trial. Secondary outcomes were the rates of primary care contact (contact with a 
general practitioner, nurse, or other health care professional) and secondary
care contact (inpatient admission, outpatient visit with a specialist, or visit
to the emergency department), modification of the initial trial treatment for
COPD, and the rate of exacerbations among patients who had had an exacerbation
within 3 years before the trial, as assessed in a time-to-event analysis. Results
The rate of moderate or severe exacerbations was significantly lower, by 8.4%
(95% confidence interval, 1.1 to 15.2), with fluticasone furoate-vilanterol
therapy than with usual care (P=0.02). There was no significant difference in the
annual rate of COPD-related contacts to primary or secondary care. There were no 
significant between-group differences in the rates of the first moderate or
severe exacerbation and the first severe exacerbation in the time-to-event
analyses. There were no excess serious adverse events of pneumonia in the
fluticasone furoate-vilanterol group. The numbers of other serious adverse events
were similar in the two groups. Conclusions In patients with COPD and a history
of exacerbations, a once-daily treatment regimen of combined fluticasone furoate 
and vilanterol was associated with a lower rate of exacerbations than usual care,
without a greater risk of serious adverse events. (Funded by GlaxoSmithKline;
Salford Lung Study ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT01551758 .).

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa1608033 
PMID: 27593504  [PubMed - in process]


7. J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract. 2016 Sep-Oct;4(5):884-9. doi:
10.1016/j.jaip.2016.07.006.

Comparative Analysis of Persistence to Treatment among Patients with Asthma or
COPD Receiving AirFluSal Forspiro or Seretide Diskus Salmeterol/Fluticasone
Propionate Combination Therapy.

Bender BG(1), Hernandez Vecino RA(2), McGrath K(3), Jones S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, National Jewish Health, Denver, Colo. Electronic
address: BenderB@NJHealth.org. (2)Global Medical Affairs, Sandoz International
GmbH, Holzkirchen, Germany. (3)Health Informatics, Healthcare at Home Ltd.,
Burton upon Trent, East Staffordshire, United Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: Low adherence and persistence to inhaled therapy result in poor
outcomes in patients with asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD). Although adherence has been widely studied, growing awareness of the
large number of patients who abandon their asthma treatment suggests that
persistence to treatment may be more relevant for longer term outcomes.
OBJECTIVE: The objective of this study was to compare persistence to
salmeterol/fluticasone propionate combination treatment as AirFluSal Forspiro
with persistence to Seretide Diskus in patients with asthma or COPD aged 12 years
and above.
METHODS: This study analyzed dispensing data from a large German pharmacy
database. Male and female patients who were prescribed AirFluSal Forspiro were
randomly paired with those who were prescribed Seretide Diskus controlling for
month of treatment initiation (to limit potential seasonality effects), age
groups, and gender. Matched patient pair analysis was conducted on a total of
11,774 patients (45.1% male) to compare persistence between the 2 products.
RESULTS: The survival probability estimates at 12 months were 0.229 (0.02
standard error) for AirFluSal Forspiro versus 0.105 (0.025 standard error) for
Seretide Diskus. The Renyi family of tests demonstrated a statistically
significant difference (P = .01) in persistence to AirFluSal Forspiro compared
with Seretide Diskus in the overall survival experience of the 2 populations.
CONCLUSIONS: In this large retrospective pharmacy database analysis, patients
using AirFluSal Forspiro were more likely to persist with treatment compared with
those using Seretide Diskus as demonstrated by the overall survival experience of
the 2 populations (12-month study period). These new data provide a basis for
further research to better understand persistence behavior and to develop
strategies to address poor persistence.

Copyright © 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaip.2016.07.006 
PMID: 27587319  [PubMed - in process]


8. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2016 Aug 22;11:1973-81. doi:
10.2147/COPD.S106142. eCollection 2016.

Daily home-based spirometry during withdrawal of inhaled corticosteroid in severe
to very severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Rodriguez-Roisin R(1), Tetzlaff K(2), Watz H(3), Wouters EF(4), Disse B(5),
Finnigan H(6), Magnussen H(3), Calverley PM(7).

Author information: 
(1)Respiratory Institute, Servei de Pneumologia, Hospital Clínic IDIBAPS-CIBERES,
Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain. (2)Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma GmbH &
Co. KG, Ingelheim, Germany; Department of Sports Medicine, University of
Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany. (3)Pulmonary Research Institute at Lung Clinic
Grosshansdorf, Airway Research Center North, German Center for Lung Research,
Grosshansdorf, Germany. (4)Department of Respiratory Medicine, University
Hospital Maastricht, Maastricht University, Maastricht, the Netherlands.
(5)Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma GmbH & Co. KG, Ingelheim, Germany. (6)Department
of Biostatistics and Data Sciences, Boehringer Ingelheim, Bracknell, UK.
(7)Institute of Ageing and Chronic Disease, Aintree University Hospital,
Liverpool, UK.

The WISDOM study (NCT00975195) reported a change in lung function following
withdrawal of fluticasone propionate in patients with severe to very severe COPD 
treated with tiotropium and salmeterol. However, little is known about the
validity of home-based spirometry measurements of lung function in COPD.
Therefore, as part of this study, following suitable training, patients recorded 
daily home-based spirometry measurements in addition to undergoing periodic
in-clinic spirometric testing throughout the study duration. We subsequently
determined the validity of home-based spirometry for detecting changes in lung
function by comparing in-clinic and home-based forced expiratory volume in 1
second in patients who underwent stepwise fluticasone propionate withdrawal over 
12 weeks versus patients remaining on fluticasone propionate for 52 weeks.
Bland-Altman analysis of these data confirmed good agreement between in-clinic
and home-based measurements, both across all visits and at the individual visits 
at study weeks 6, 12, 18, and 52. There was a measurable difference between the
forced expiratory volume in 1 second values recorded at home and in the clinic
(mean difference of -0.05 L), which may be due to suboptimal patient effort in
performing unsupervised recordings. However, this difference remained consistent 
over time. Overall, these data demonstrate that home-based and in-clinic
spirometric measurements were equally valid and reliable for assessing lung
function in patients with COPD, and suggest that home-based spirometry may be a
useful tool to facilitate analysis of changes in lung function on a day-to-day
basis.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S106142 
PMCID: PMC5001655
PMID: 27578972  [PubMed - in process]


9. Appl Health Econ Health Policy. 2016 Oct;14(5):579-94. doi:
10.1007/s40258-016-0256-z.

Cost Effectiveness of the Long-Acting β2-Adrenergic Agonist (LABA)/Long-Acting
Muscarinic Antagonist Dual Bronchodilator Indacaterol/Glycopyrronium Versus the
LABA/Inhaled Corticosteroid Combination Salmeterol/Fluticasone in Patients with
Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease: Analyses Conducted for Canada, France,
Italy, and Portugal.

Reza Maleki-Yazdi M(1), Molimard M(2), Keininger DL(3), Gruenberger JB(3),
Carrasco J(4), Pitotti C(5), Sauvage E(6), Chehab S(7), Price D(8).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Respiratory Medicine, Women's College Hospital, University of
Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada. maleki.pccrc@on.aibn.com. (2)Department of Medical 
Pharmacology, CHU and University of Bordeaux, 33076, Bordeaux Cedex, France.
(3)Primary Care Franchise, Novartis Pharma AG, Postfach, 4002, Basel,
Switzerland. (4)Health Economics and Outcomes Research, Novartis Farma-Produtos
Farmacêuticos SA., Paço de Arcos, Portugal. (5)Health Economics, Novartis Farma
S.p.A., Largo Umberto Boccioni 1, 21041, Origgio, VA, Italy. (6)Strategy Pricing,
Novartis Pharma S.A.S., 2-4, rue Lionel Terray, BP 308, 92506, Rueil-Malmaison
Cedex, France. (7)Health Policy and Patient Access, Novartis Pharmaceuticals
Canada Inc., 385, boulev. Bouchard, CDN-Dorval, Quebec, H9S 1A9, Canada.
(8)Academic Primary Care, Division of Applied Health Sciences, University of
Aberdeen, Polwarth Building, Aberdeen, AB25 2ZD, UK.

OBJECTIVE: The objective of this study was to assess the cost effectiveness of
the dual bronchodilator indacaterol/glycopyrronium (IND/GLY) compared with
salmeterol/fluticasone combination (SFC) in patients with moderate-to-severe
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) who had a history of one or no
exacerbations in the previous year, in Canada, France, Italy, and Portugal.
METHODS: A patient-level simulation was developed to compare the costs and
outcomes of IND/GLY versus SFC based on data from the LANTERN trial
(NCT01709903). Monte-Carlo simulation methods were employed to follow individual 
patients over various time horizons. Population and efficacy inputs were derived 
from the LANTERN trial. Considering the payers' perspective, only direct costs
were included. Costs and health outcomes were discounted annually at 3.0 % for
all countries. Unit costs were taken from publically available sources with all
costs converted to euros (€). The cost base year was 2015. Deterministic and
probabilistic sensitivity analyses were undertaken to test the robustness of the 
model results.
RESULTS: IND/GLY was found to be the dominant (more effective and less costly)
treatment option compared with SFC in all four countries. The use of IND/GLY was 
associated with mean total cost savings per patient over a lifetime of €6202,
€1974, €1611, and €220 in Canada, France, Italy, and Portugal, respectively.
Sensitivity analysis showed that exacerbation rates had the largest impact on
incremental costs and quality-adjusted life-years (QALYs). The probability of
IND/GLY being cost effective was estimated to be >95 % for thresholds above
€5000/QALY.
CONCLUSION: In patients with moderate to severe COPD, IND/GLY is likely to be a
cost-effective treatment alternative compared with SFC.

DOI: 10.1007/s40258-016-0256-z 
PMID: 27516088  [PubMed - in process]


10. Eur Respir J. 2016 Oct;48(4):1030-1039. doi: 10.1183/13993003.00216-2016. Epub
2016 Aug 4.

Efficacy and safety of aclidinium/formoterol versus salmeterol/fluticasone: a
phase 3 COPD study.

Vogelmeier C(1), Paggiaro PL(2), Dorca J(3), Sliwinski P(4), Mallet M(5), Kirsten
AM(6), Beier J(7), Seoane B(8), Segarra RM(8), Leselbaum A(9).

Author information: 
(1)Dept of Medicine, Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, University Medical
Center Giessen and Marburg, Member of the German Center for Lung Research (DZL), 
Philipps-University Marburg, Marburg, Germany
claus.vogelmeier@med.uni-marburg.de. (2)Respiratory Pathophysiology, University
Hospital of Pisa, Pisa, Italy. (3)Hospital Universitari de Bellvitge, University 
of Barcelona, and Institut d'Investigació Biomèdica de Bellvitge (IDIBELL),
Barcelona, Spain. (4)2nd Dept of Respiratory Medicine, Institute of Tuberculosis 
and Lung Diseases, Warsaw, Poland. (5)Moncton Respirology Clinic, Moncton, NB,
Canada. (6)Pulmonary Research Institute at Lung Clinic Grosshansdorf, Airway
Research Center North, Member of the Germany Center for Lung Research (DZL),
Grosshansdorf, Germany. (7)insaf Respiratory Research Institute, Wiesbaden,
Germany. (8)AstraZeneca, Barcelona, Spain. (9)Almirall SA, Barcelona, Spain.

The efficacy and safety of twice-daily aclidinium bromide/formoterol fumarate was
compared with that of salmeterol/fluticasone propionate in patients with stable, 
moderate-to-severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).AFFIRM COPD
(Aclidinium and Formoterol Findings in Respiratory Medicine COPD) was a 24-week, 
double-blind, double-dummy, active-controlled study. Patients were randomised
(1:1) to aclidinium/formoterol 400/12 µg twice-daily via Genuair/Pressair or
salmeterol/fluticasone 50/500 µg twice-daily via Accuhaler. The primary end-point
was peak forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1) at week 24. Other end-points
included Transition Dyspnoea Index (TDI) focal score at week 24, TDI and St
George's Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ) responders, COPD Assessment Test and
SGRQ scores, assessment of COPD symptoms and exacerbations, use of reliever
medication, and device preference. Adverse events were monitored throughout.In
total, 933 patients were eligible (mean age 63.4 years, 65.1% male).
Aclidinium/formoterol was superior to salmeterol/fluticasone in peak FEV1 and
noninferior in TDI. Health status and reduction in exacerbation risk were similar
in both groups. While both treatments were well tolerated, pneumonia occurred
less frequently with aclidinium/formoterol than salmeterol/fluticasone.In stable 
COPD, aclidinium/formoterol significantly improved bronchodilation versus
salmeterol/fluticasone, with equivalent benefits in symptom control and reduction
in exacerbation risk. Both treatments were well tolerated and treatment-related
adverse events were less common with aclidinium/formoterol.

Copyright ©ERS 2016.

DOI: 10.1183/13993003.00216-2016 
PMID: 27492833  [PubMed - in process]


11. Tuberk Toraks. 2016 Jun;64(2):112-8.

Compare the efficacy and safety of long-acting anticholinergic and a combination 
of inhaled steroids and long-acting beta-2 agonist in moderate chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease.

Saraç P(1), Sayıner A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chest Diseases, Faculty of Medicine, Ege University, Izmir,
Turkey. ptaskiranlar@hotmail.com.

INTRODUCTION: The treatment of COPD (Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease) aims 
to improve the patients's well-being and to reduce mortality, morbidity and the
development of exacerbations. This study was thus designed to compare the
efficacy and tolerability of salmeterol/fluticasone combination with tiotropium
in patients with moderate COPD.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: This was an open, prospective, randomized trial in COPD
patients whose FEV1 (forced expiratory volume in 1 second) levels were between
80% and 50% predicted. A total of 44 patients who met the inclusion and exlusion 
criteria and who gave written informed consent were included in the study. At the
end of the two week wash-out period, the patients were randomized to receive
either salmeterol 50 µg/fluticasone 500 µg combination as dry powder inhaler
twice daily (SF Group) or tiotropium dry powder inhaler 18 µg once daily (T
Group) for one year. These were equally distributed in the two groups (22
patients in each study group). At follow-up, the patients were required to come
to the outpatient clinic at the third, sixth, ninth and twelfth months.
RESULT: There were no statistically significant difference between the two groups
with regards to demographic features and baseline measurements. There were 1.2 ± 
1.7 exacerbations in SF Group and 2.1 ± 2.2 exacerbations in T Group (p= 0.070). 
The time to the first exacerbation was 4.2 ± 4.0 and 4.2 ± 3.3 months,
respectively (p= 0.697). The number of severe exacerbations that resulted in
admission to the emergency department or hospital was 0.6 ± 1.0 and 1.1 ± 1.4,
respectively (p= 0.245). Significant improvements were observed in CAT (CPOD
Assessment Test) scores in both groups during the treatment period (p< 0.0001);
but there was no difference between the two groups.
CONCLUSIONS: This study has shown that in patients with moderate COPD, treatment 
with combined corticosteroid and long-acting beta-2 agonist provides similar
improvements in pulmonary function tests, patient-reported outcomes and exercise 
capacity as compared a long-acting anticholinergics.


PMID: 27481077  [PubMed - in process]


12. Lancet Respir Med. 2016 Sep;4(9):731-41. doi: 10.1016/S2213-2600(16)30148-5. Epub
2016 Jul 23.

Blood eosinophil count and pneumonia risk in patients with chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease: a patient-level meta-analysis.

Pavord ID(1), Lettis S(2), Anzueto A(3), Barnes N(4).

Author information: 
(1)Respiratory Medicine Unit, Nuffield Department of Medicine, University of
Oxford, UK. Electronic address: ian.pavord@ndm.ox.ac.uk. (2)Statistics and
Programming, GSK, Stockley Park, UK. (3)University of Texas Health Science Center
at San Antonio, South Texas Veterans Health Care System, San Antonio, TX, USA.
(4)Respiratory Medical Franchise, GSK, Brentford, UK; William Harvey Research
Institute, Barts and The London School of Medicine and Dentistry, London, UK.

BACKGROUND: Inhaled corticosteroids are important in the management of chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), but can slightly increase the risk of
pneumonia in patients with moderate-to-severe COPD. Patients with circulating
eosinophil counts of 2% or more of blood leucocytes respond better to inhaled
corticosteroids than do those with counts of less than 2% and it was therefore
postulated that blood eosinophil count might also have an effect on the risk of
pneumonia in patients with COPD. In this post-hoc meta-analysis, we investigate
whether a 2% threshold can identify patients who differ in their risk of
pneumonia, irrespective of inhaled corticosteroid treatment.
METHODS: From the GlaxoSmithKline trial registry, we selected randomised,
double-blind, clinical trials of patients with COPD that had: inhaled
corticosteroid arms (fluticasone propionate and salmeterol or fluticasone furoate
and vilanterol); a control arm (not given inhaled fluticasone); and
pre-randomisation measurements of blood eosinophil counts and were of at least 24
weeks in duration. With use of specified terms from the Medical Dictionary for
Regulatory Activities we identified pneumonia adverse events in patient-level
data. We calculated number of patients with pneumonia events, stratified by
baseline blood eosinophil count (<2% vs ≥2% of blood leucocytes) and whether or
not patients had received inhaled corticosteroids.
FINDINGS: We identified ten trials (conducted between 1998 and 2011), with
eosinophil count data available for 10 861 patients with COPD. 4043 patients had 
baseline blood eosinophil counts of less than 2% and 6818 patients had baseline
blood eosinophil counts of 2% or more. 149 (3·7%) patients with counts less than 
2% had one or more pneumonia adverse events compared with 215 (3·2%) with counts 
of 2% or more (hazard ratio [HR] 1·31; 95% CI 1·06-1·62). In patients not treated
with inhaled corticosteroids, 40 (3·8%) patients with less than 2% blood
eosinophil counts had a pneumonia event versus 48 (2·4%) with 2% or more blood
eosinophils (HR 1·53; 95% CI 1·01-2·31). In patients treated with inhaled
corticosteroids, events occurred in 107 (4·5%) versus 164 (3·9%; HR 1·25; 95% CI 
0·98-1·60), respectively.
INTERPRETATION: Using 2% baseline eosinophil count as a threshold, patients with 
COPD with lower blood eosinophil counts had more pneumonia events than did those 
with higher counts. The magnitude of this increased risk was small and should be 
further explored in large, prospective studies. These data should be considered
when making treatment decisions, alongside existing evidence that patients with
COPD and baseline blood eosinophil counts less than 2% have a poorer response to 
inhaled corticosteroids.
FUNDING: GlaxoSmithKline.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S2213-2600(16)30148-5 
PMID: 27460163  [PubMed - in process]


13. Drug Discov Today. 2016 Jul 21. pii: S1359-6446(16)30259-8. doi:
10.1016/j.drudis.2016.07.009. [Epub ahead of print]

Triple inhaled therapy for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Montuschi P(1), Malerba M(2), Macis G(3), Mores N(4), Santini G(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Faculty of Medicine, University Hospital Agostino 
Gemelli, Catholic University of the Sacred Heart, Rome, Italy. Electronic
address: pmontuschi@rm.unicatt.it. (2)Department of Internal Medicine, University
of Brescia, Brescia, Italy. (3)Department of Radiological Sciences, Faculty of
Medicine, University Hospital Agostino Gemelli, Catholic University of the Sacred
Heart, Rome, Italy. (4)Department of Pharmacology, Faculty of Medicine,
University Hospital Agostino Gemelli, Catholic University of the Sacred Heart,
Rome, Italy.

Combining individual drugs in a single inhaler is the most convenient way to
deliver triple therapy. A long-acting muscarinic receptor antagonist (LAMA) added
to an inhaled corticosteroid (ICS)/long-acting β2-adrenoceptor agonist (LABA)
fixed-dose combination (FDC) can improve efficacy of pharmacological treatment of
patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). New inhaled
ICS/LABA/LAMA FDCs, including fluticasone furoate/vilanterol/umeclidinium,
budesonide/formoterol/glycopyrronium and beclometasone/formoterol/glycopyrronium,
are in Phase III of clinical development for COPD. Triple inhaled therapy might
be particularly useful in patients with severe to very severe COPD, above all in 
those with peripheral blood or sputum eosinophilia, asthma-COPD overlap syndrome 
(ACOS) or frequent exacerbators. Future prospective studies should assess
efficacy and safety of triple ICS/LABA/LAMA therapy in selected COPD phenotypes.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.drudis.2016.07.009 
PMID: 27452453  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


14. Eur Respir J. 2016 Aug;48(2):320-30. doi: 10.1183/13993003.02165-2015. Epub 2016 
Jul 13.

A phase III randomised controlled trial of single-dose triple therapy in COPD:
the IMPACT protocol.

Pascoe SJ(1), Lipson DA(2), Locantore N(3), Barnacle H(4), Brealey N(4), Mohindra
R(4), Dransfield MT(5), Pavord I(6), Barnes N(7).

Author information: 
(1)Respiratory Research and Development, GSK, King of Prussia, PA, USA
steven.j.pascoe@gsk.com. (2)Respiratory Research and Development, GSK, King of
Prussia, PA, USA Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA, USA. (3)Respiratory Research and Development, GSK, King of
Prussia, PA, USA. (4)Respiratory Medicines Development Centre, GSK, Brentford,
UK. (5)UAB Lung Health Center, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham,
AL, USA. (6)Respiratory Medicine Unit, Nuffield Department of Clinical Medicine, 
University of Oxford, Old Road Campus, Oxford, UK. (7)Respiratory Medicines
Development Centre, GSK, Brentford, UK William Harvey Institute, Barts & The
London School of Medicine and Dentistry, London, UK.

Patients with symptomatic advanced chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)
who experience recurrent exacerbations are particularly at risk of poor outcomes 
and present a significant burden on healthcare systems. The relative merits of
treating with different inhaled combination therapies e.g. inhaled
corticosteroids (ICS)/long-acting β2-agonist (LABA), LABA/long-acting muscarinic 
antagonists (LAMA), ICS/LABA/LAMA, in this patient group are poorly understood,
as is reflected in current guidelines. The InforMing the PAthway of COPD
Treatment (IMPACT) study will evaluate the efficacy and safety of fluticasone
furoate (FF)/umeclidinium (UMEC)/vilanterol (VI) versus FF/VI or UMEC/VI over a
52-week treatment period. The study has been designed with a focus on
understanding the comparative merits of each treatment modality in different
phenotypes/endotypes.This is a phase III, randomised, double-blind, three-arm,
parallel-group, global multicentre study comparing the rate of moderate and
severe exacerbations between FF/UMEC/VI and FF/VI or UMEC/VI over a 52-week
treatment period. The study aims to recruit 10 000 patients from approximately
1070 centres. Eligible patients are aged ≥40 years, with symptomatic advanced
COPD (Global initiative for chronic Obstructive Lung Disease (GOLD) group D) and 
an exacerbation in the previous 12 months.The first patients were recruited to
the IMPACT study (ClinicalTrials.gov: NCT02164513) in June 2014 and the
anticipated completion date is July 2017.

Copyright ©ERS 2016.

DOI: 10.1183/13993003.02165-2015 
PMID: 27418551  [PubMed - in process]


15. BMC Health Serv Res. 2016 Jul 12;16:251. doi: 10.1186/s12913-016-1482-7.

The economic burden of asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and the
impact of poor inhalation technique with commonly prescribed dry powder inhalers 
in three European countries.

Lewis A(1), Torvinen S(2), Dekhuijzen PN(3), Chrystyn H(4), Watson AT(1),
Blackney M(5), Plich A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Covance Market Access, London, UK. (2)Teva Pharmaceuticals Europe B.V,
Haarlem, Netherlands. (3)Department of Pulmonary Diseases, Radboud University
Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands. (4)Talmedica Ltd., Rossendale,
and Faculty of Human and Health Sciences, University of Plymouth, Plymouth,
United Kingdom. (5)Covance Market Access, London, UK.
michael.blackney@covance.com.

BACKGROUND: Asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) are common
chronic inflammatory respiratory diseases, which impose a substantial burden on
healthcare systems and society. Fixed-dose combinations (FDCs) of inhaled
corticosteroids (ICS) and long-acting β2 agonists (LABA), often administered
using dry powder inhalers (DPIs), are frequently prescribed to control persistent
asthma and COPD. Use of DPIs has been associated with poor inhalation technique, 
which can lead to increased healthcare resource use and costs.
METHODS: A model was developed to estimate the healthcare resource use and costs 
associated with asthma and COPD management in people using commonly prescribed
DPIs (budesonide + formoterol Turbuhaler(®) or fluticasone + salmeterol
Accuhaler(®)) over 1 year in Spain, Sweden and the United Kingdom (UK). The model
considered direct costs (inhaler acquisition costs and scheduled and unscheduled 
healthcare costs), indirect costs (productive days lost), and estimated the
contribution of poor inhalation technique to the burden of illness.
RESULTS: The direct cost burden of managing asthma and COPD for people using
budesonide + formoterol Turbuhaler(®) or fluticasone + salmeterol Accuhaler(®) in
2015 was estimated at €813 million, €560 million, and €774 million for Spain,
Sweden and the UK, respectively. Poor inhalation technique comprised 2.2-7.7 % of
direct costs, totalling €105 million across the three countries. When lost
productivity costs were included, total expenditure increased to €1.4 billion,
€1.7 billion and €3.3 billion in Spain, Sweden and the UK, respectively, with
€782 million attributable to poor inhalation technique across the three
countries. Sensitivity analyses showed that the model results were most sensitive
to changes in the proportion of patients prescribed ICS and LABA FDCs, and least 
sensitive to differences in the number of antimicrobials and oral corticosteroids
prescribed.
CONCLUSIONS: The cost of managing asthma and COPD using commonly prescribed DPIs 
is considerable. A substantial, and avoidable, contributor to this burden is poor
inhalation technique. Measures that can improve inhalation technique with current
DPIs, such as easier-to-use inhalers or better patient training, could offer
benefits to patients and healthcare providers through improving disease outcomes 
and lowering costs.

DOI: 10.1186/s12913-016-1482-7 
PMCID: PMC4942909
PMID: 27406133  [PubMed - in process]


16. MMW Fortschr Med. 2016 Jun 9;158(11):75. doi: 10.1007/s15006-016-8388-5.

[Importance of inhaled corticosteroids under discussion].

[Article in German]

Jäger-Becker D(1).

Author information: 
(1).

DOI: 10.1007/s15006-016-8388-5 
PMID: 27271423  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. MMW Fortschr Med. 2016 Jun 9;158(11):18. doi: 10.1007/s15006-016-8350-6.

[Dual bronchodilators becomes the first choice combination].

[Article in German]

Einecke D(1).

Author information: 
(1).

DOI: 10.1007/s15006-016-8350-6 
PMID: 27271388  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Nihon Rinsho. 2016 May;74(5):827-32.

[Role of ICS/LABA on COPD treatment].

[Article in Japanese]

Shibata Y.

In the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), bronchodilators
such as long acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA) and long acting β agonist(LABA) 
play key roles for improving respiratory function and symptoms, and reducing risk
of exacerbation. However, inhaled corticosteroid (ICS), a key medicine for
bronchial asthma, is limitedly used in COPD treatment. Japanese Respiratory
Society recommends to use ICS for severe COPD patients who have been frequently
exacerbated, because previous clinical studies indicated that ICS reduces
exacerbation in moderate to severe COPD patients. Asthma sometimes overlaps with 
COPD, and symptoms of those patients are not well controlled by the
bronchodilation therapy alone. Therefore, ICS/LABA or ICS/LAMA should be
prescribed to those overlapped patients. Concentration of exhaled nitrogen oxide 
and percentage of peripheral eosinophil may be good biomarkers for discriminating
the COPD patients who have good response to ICS treatment.


PMID: 27254954  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. BMJ Open. 2016 Jun 1;6(6):e010099. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2015-010099.

Identification of responders to inhaled corticosteroids in a chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease population using cluster analysis.

Hinds DR(1), DiSantostefano RL(1), Le HV(2), Pascoe S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Worldwide Epidemiology, GSK, Research Triangle Park, North
Carolina, USA. (2)Department of Worldwide Epidemiology, GSK, Research Triangle
Park, North Carolina, USA PAREXEL International, Durham, North Carolina, USA.
(3)Respiratory Medicines Development, GSK, King of Prussia, Pennsylvania, USA.

OBJECTIVES: To identify clusters of patients who may benefit from treatment with 
an inhaled corticosteroid (ICS)/long-acting β2 agonist (LABA) versus LABA alone, 
in terms of exacerbation reduction, and to validate previously identified
clusters of patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) (based on 
diuretic use and reversibility).
DESIGN: Post hoc supervised cluster analysis using a modified recursive
partitioning algorithm of two 1-year randomised, controlled trials of fluticasone
furoate (FF)/vilanterol (VI) versus VI alone, with the primary end points of the 
annual rate of moderate-to-severe exacerbations.
SETTING: Global.
PARTICIPANTS: 3255 patients with COPD (intent-to-treat populations) with a
history of exacerbations in the past year.
INTERVENTIONS: FF/VI 50/25 µg, 100/25 µg or 200/25 µg, or VI 25 µg; all one time 
per day.
OUTCOME MEASURES: Mean annual COPD exacerbation rate to identify clusters of
patients who benefit from adding an ICS (FF) to VI bronchodilator therapy.
RESULTS: Three clusters were identified, including two groups that benefit from
FF/VI versus VI: patients with blood eosinophils >2.4% (RR=0.68, 95% CI 0.58 to
0.79), or blood eosinophils ≤2.4% and smoking history ≤46 pack-years, experienced
a reduced rate of exacerbations with FF/VI versus VI (RR=0.78, 95% CI 0.63 to
0.96), whereas those with blood eosinophils ≤2.4% and smoking history >46
pack-years were identified as non-responders (RR=1.22, 95% CI 0.94 to 1.58).
Clusters of patients previously identified in the fluticasone
propionate/salmeterol (SAL) versus SAL trials of similar design were not
validated; all clusters of patients tended to benefit from FF/VI versus VI alone 
irrespective of diuretic use and reversibility.
CONCLUSIONS: In patients with COPD with a history of exacerbations, those with
greater blood eosinophils or a lower smoking history may benefit more from
ICS/LABA versus LABA alone as measured by a reduced rate of exacerbations. In
terms of eosinophils, this finding is consistent with findings from other
studies; however, the validity of the 2.4% cut-off and the impact of smoking
history require further investigation.
TRIAL REGISTRATION NUMBERS: NCT01009463; NCT01017952; Post-results.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://www.bmj.com/company/products-services/rights-and-licensing/

DOI: 10.1136/bmjopen-2015-010099 
PMCID: PMC4893846
PMID: 27251682  [PubMed - in process]


20. Lancet. 2016 Apr 30;387(10030):1817-26. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(16)30069-1. Epub 
2016 Apr 28.

Fluticasone furoate and vilanterol and survival in chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease with heightened cardiovascular risk (SUMMIT): a double-blind randomised
controlled trial.

Vestbo J(1), Anderson JA(2), Brook RD(3), Calverley PM(4), Celli BR(5), Crim
C(6), Martinez F(7), Yates J(6), Newby DE(8); SUMMIT Investigators.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Respiratory Medicine and Allergy, Manchester Academic Health
Sciences Centre, The University of Manchester and South Manchester University
Hospital NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester, UK. Electronic address:
jorgen.vestbo@manchester.ac.uk. (2)Research & Development, GlaxoSmithKline,
Stockley Park, Middlesex, UK. (3)University of Michigan Health System, Ann Arbor,
MI, USA. (4)University of Liverpool, Department of Medicine, Clinical Sciences
Centre, University Hospital Aintree, Liverpool, UK. (5)Pulmonary and Critical
Care Division, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, 
USA. (6)Research & Development, GlaxoSmithKline, Research Triangle Park, NC, USA.
(7)University of Michigan Health System, Ann Arbor, MI, USA; Division of
Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, NY, USA. 
(8)Centre for Cardiovascular Science, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK.

Comment in
    Lancet. 2016 Apr 30;387(10030):1791-2.

BACKGROUND: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) often coexists with
cardiovascular disease. Treatments for airflow limitation might improve survival 
and both respiratory and cardiovascular outcomes. The aim of this study was to
assess whether inhaled treatment with a combined treatment of the corticosteroid,
fluticasone furoate, and the long-acting β agonist, vilanterol could improve
survival compared with placebo in patients with moderate COPD and heightened
cardiovascular risk.
METHODS: In this double-blind randomised controlled trial (SUMMIT) done in 1368
centres in 43 countries, eligible patients were aged 40-80 years and had a
post-bronchodilator forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1) between 50% and 70% of
the predicted value, a ratio of post-bronchodilator FEV1 to forced vital capacity
(FVC) of 0·70 or less, a smoking history of at least 10 pack-years, and a score
of 2 or greater on the modified Medical Research Council dyspnoea scale. Patients
had to have a history, or be at increased risk, of cardiovascular disease.
Enrolled patients were randomly assigned (1:1:1:1) through a centralised
randomisation service in permuted blocks to receive once daily inhaled placebo,
fluticasone furoate (100 μg), vilanterol (25 μg), or the combination of
fluticasone furoate (100 μg) and vilanterol (25 μg). The primary outcome was
all-cause mortality, and secondary outcomes were on-treatment rate of decline in 
forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1) and a composite of cardiovascular events. 
Safety analyses were performed on the safety population (all patients who took at
least one dose of study drug) and efficacy analyses were performed on the
intention-to-treat population (safety population minus sites excluded with Good
Clinical Practice violations). This study is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, 
number NCT01313676.
FINDINGS: Between Jan 24, 2011, and March 12, 2014, 23 835 patients were
screened, of whom 16 590 were randomised. 16 485 patients were included in the
intention-to-treat efficacy population; 4111 in the placebo group, 4135 in the
fluticasone furoate group, 4118 in the vilanterol group, and 4121 in the
combination group. Compared with placebo, all-cause mortality was unaffected by
combination therapy (hazard ratio [HR] 0·88 [95% CI 0·74-1·04]; 12% relative
reduction; p=0·137) or the components (fluticasone furoate, HR 0·91 [0·77-1·08]; 
p=0·284; vilanterol, 0·96 [0·81-1·14]; p=0·655), and therefore secondary outcomes
should be interpreted with caution. Rate of decline in FEV1 was reduced by
combination therapy (38 mL per year [SE 2·4] vs 46 mL per year [2·5] for placebo,
difference 8 mL per year [95% CI 1-15]) with similar findings for fluticasone
furoate (difference 8 mL per year [95% CI 1-14]), but not vilanterol (difference 
-2 mL per year [95% CI -8 to 5]). Combination therapy had no effect on composite 
cardiovascular events (HR 0·93 [95% CI 0·75-1·14]) with similar findings for
fluticasone furoate (0·90 [0·72-1·11]) and vilanterol (0·99 [0·80-1·22]). All
treatments reduced the rate of moderate and severe exacerbation. No reported
excess risks of pneumonia (5% in the placebo group, 6% in the combination group, 
5% in the fluticasone furoate group, and 4% in the vilanterol group) or adverse
cardiac events (17% in the placebo group, 18% in the combination group, and 17%
in the fluticasone furoate group, and 17% in the vilanterol group) were noted in 
the treatment groups.
INTERPRETATION: In patients with moderate COPD and heightened cardiovascular
risk, treatment with fluticasone furoate and vilanterol did not affect mortality 
or cardiovascular outcomes, reduced exacerbations, and was well tolerated.
Fluticasone furoate, alone or in combination with vilanterol, seemed to reduce
FEV1 decline.
FUNDING: GlaxoSmithKline.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(16)30069-1 
PMID: 27203508  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Lancet. 2016 Apr 30;387(10030):1791-2. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(16)30372-5. Epub
2016 Apr 28.

Vilanterol fluticasone and mortality in comorbid COPD GOLD B.

Brusselle G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Ghent University Hospital, 9000 Ghent,
Belgium; Departments of Epidemiology and Respiratory Medicine, Erasmus Medical
Center, 3000 CA Rotterdam, Netherlands. Electronic address:
guy.brusselle@ugent.be.

Erratum in
    Lancet. 2016 May 7;387(10031):1908.

Comment on
    Lancet. 2016 Apr 30;387(10030):1817-26.

DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(16)30372-5 
PMID: 27203487  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Medicine (Baltimore). 2016 May;95(20):e3702. doi: 10.1097/MD.0000000000003702.

Chinese Herbal Medicine and Salmeterol and Fluticasone Propionate for Chronic
Obstructive Pulmonary Disease: Systematic Review and Network Meta-Analysis.

Chung VC(1), Wu X, Ma PH, Ho RS, Poon SK, Hui DS, Wong SY, Wu JC.

Author information: 
(1)From the Hong Kong Institute of Integrative Medicine (VCC, XW, SYW, JCW),
Jockey Club School of Public Health and Primary Care (VCC, XW, PHM, RSH, DSH,
SYW), Department of Medicine & Therapeutics, The Chinese University of Hong Kong,
Sha Tin, Hong Kong (DSH, JCW), and School of Information Technologies, The
University of Sydney, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia (SKP).

Among Chinese populations worldwide, Chinese herbal medicines (CHMs) are often
used as an adjunct to pharmacotherapy in managing chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD). However, the relative performance among different CHM is
unknown.The aim of this study was to evaluate comparative effectiveness of
different CHM when used with salmeterol and fluticasone propionate (SFP),
compared with SFP alone.This study is a systematic review of randomized
controlled trials (RCTs) with network meta-analyses (NMAs).Eight electronic
databases were searched. Data from RCTs were extracted for random effect pairwise
meta-analyses. Pooled relative risk (RR) with 95% confidence interval (CI) was
used to quantify the impact of CHM and SFP on forced expiratory volume in
1 second (FEV1), St George's Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ) scoring, and
6-Minute Walk Test (6MWT). NMA was used to explore the most effective CHM when
used with SFP.Eleven RCTs (n = 925) assessing 11 different CHM were included.
Result from pairwise meta-analyses indicated favorable, clinically relevant
benefit of CHM and SFP on FEV1 [7 studies, pooled weighted mean difference
(WMD) = 0.20 L, 95% CI: 0.06-0.34 L], SGRQ scoring (5 studies, pooled
WMD = -4.99, 95% CI: -7.73 to -2.24), and 6MWT (3 studies, pooled WMD = 32.84 m, 
95% CI: 18.26-47.42). Results from NMA showed no differences on the comparative
effectiveness among CHM formulations for improving FEV1. For SGRQ, NMA suggested 
that Runfeijianpibushen decoction and Renshenbufei pills performed best. Use of
CHM on top of SFP can provide clinically relevant benefit for COPD patients on
FEV1 and SGRQ. Additional use of Runfeijianpibushen decoction and Renshenbufei
pills showed better effect on improving SGRQ.Use of CHM and SFP may provide
clinically relevant benefit for COPD patients on FEV1, SGRQ, and 6MWT. Use of
different CHM formulae included in this NMA showed similar effect for increasing 
FEV1, while the additional use of Runfeijianpibushen formula and Renshenbufei
Pills showed better effect on improving SGRQ. Well conducted, adequately powered 
trials are needed to confirm their effectiveness in the future.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000003702 
PMCID: PMC4902426
PMID: 27196484  [PubMed - in process]


23. Prescrire Int. 2016 Apr;25(170):94.

vilanterol + fluticasone (RELVAR Ellipta). Asthma and COPD: yet another beta-2
agonist and corticosteroid combination.

[No authors listed]

As expected, the vilanterol + fluticasone combination increases the risk of
pneumonia in patients with COPD.


PMID: 27186620  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. N Engl J Med. 2016 Jun 9;374(23):2284-6. doi: 10.1056/NEJMe1604444. Epub 2016 May
15.

Another Choice for Prevention of COPD Exacerbations.

Donohue JF(1).

Author information: 
(1)From the Division of Pulmonary Diseases and Critical Care Medicine, Department
of Medicine, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill.

Comment on
    N Engl J Med. 2016 Jun 9;374(23):2222-34.

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMe1604444 
PMID: 27181835  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. N Engl J Med. 2016 Jun 9;374(23):2222-34. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1516385. Epub 2016
May 15.

Indacaterol-Glycopyrronium versus Salmeterol-Fluticasone for COPD.

Wedzicha JA(1), Banerji D(1), Chapman KR(1), Vestbo J(1), Roche N(1), Ayers
RT(1), Thach C(1), Fogel R(1), Patalano F(1), Vogelmeier CF(1); FLAME
Investigators.

Collaborators: Ambrosino N, Budani H, Carminio C, Casal E, De Salvo M, Delgado
Vizcarra G, Fazio C, Gene R, Hasner C, Luna C, Maillo M, Mariño G, Massola F,
Mattarucco W, Molina A, Otaola M, Rey LB, Rodriguez A, Rojas RA, Taborda J,
Tolcachier A, Victorio C, Wehbe L, Willigs Rolon M, Yanez A, Voves R, Wuertz J,
Wuertz P, Ablinger O, Forstner B, Wallner G, Olschewski H, Koeberl G, Studnicka
M, Kaehler C, Vincken W, Driesen P, Demedts I, Janssens W, Martinot JB, Aumann J,
Derom E, Ninane V, Corhay JL, Bogerd SP, Vanderheyde K, Fremault A, Schlesser M, 
Janssens E, Jordens P, Verhaeghe W, Verbuyst R, Ilieva-Fartunova V, Shikov R,
Hodzhev V, Kostov K, Ivanov Y, Peneva M, Youroukova V, Georgiev O, Subashki M,
Milcheva V, Chapman KR, Del Carpio J, Fera T, Field S, Killorn P, Landry D,
Larivee P, Pek B, Tellier G, Mazza G, Sherkin M, Frechette A, Soler T, Pavie J,
Miranda G, Zheng J, Huang W, Wen Z, Wang H, Cai B, Sun S, Wen F, Xiong W, Wang C,
Huang Y, Wang L, Xiao Z, Wen G, Liu J, Wan H, Chen P, Yan X, Huang J, Cao J, Li
Z, Huang M, Vallejo JS, Cardona G, Isaza D, Bolivar F, Tudoric N, Vuksan-Cusa T, 
Samarzija M, Tauchman A, Hadrava M, Holub S, Zitkova M, Ali M, Kopecka D,
Presperinova J, Povysilova L, Cmakalova M, Mares J, Kocianova J, Skacel Z, Kasak 
V, Musil J, Blahova M, Jirmanova I, Kolek V, Backer V, Ulrik CS, Nielsen C,
Ottesen A, Seersholm N, Boedtger U, Grzywacz Z, Meyer CN, Nielsen S, Jogi R,
Meren M, Samaruutel P, Venho K, Elo J, Patovirta RL, Nieminen E, Raatikainen L,
Saarelainen P, Herer B, Deslee G, Devouassoux G, Jasnot JY, Berger P, Proust A,
Bourdin A, Boye A, Ballenberger S, Beck E, Benedix A, Birkholz SC, Bollmann L,
Budweiser S, Deckelmann R, Deimling A, Eberhardt F, Eckhardt G, Eller J,
Esselmann A, Feldmeyer F, Feussner W, Foerster K, Franz KH, Fritzsche A, Gebhardt
R, Gernhold M, Gessner C, Haase PU, Heindl S, Hoheisel G, Hueting R, Jaeger B,
Jandl M, Junggeburth J, Kaessner F, Keller C, Kirschner J, Kleinecke-Pohl U,
Kroker A, Lammert-Huenger G, Ludwig-Sengpiel A, Mikloweit P, Mueller H, Noga O,
Reinhardt J, Rueckert P, Schaper L, Schlegel V, Schmoller T, Schuermann W,
Toepfer V, Wiemer S, Winkler J, Botzen U, Djacenko S, Entzian P, Herzig J,
Hofbauer P, Kornmann O, Marten I, Overlack A, Preiss G, Schlenska C, Sohrab S,
Steffen H, Westerhausen U, Zeisler KH, Zemke K, Zingler W, Zuechner D, Kaiser A, 
Tyler K, Ginko T, Marosis K, Gaga A, Siafakas N, Kakoura M, Koulouris N,
Vasilakopoulos T, Papiris S, Zarogoulidis K, Antoniadis A, Kallergis K,
Gourgoulianis K, Contreras E, Espana E, Gonzalez E, Guerra J, Martinez G, Hui DS,
Losonczy G, Vasas S, Varga J, Mark Z, Schlezak J, Balint B, Somfay A, Jonsson M, 
D'Souza G, Arbat A, Sundarakumar S, Vijaykumar NB, Dhar R, Shah N, Kashyap AK,
Srikanth K, Tripathi S, Gupta N, Samiuddin M, Swarnakar R, Paggiaro PL, Idotta G,
Mazza F, Cerveri I, Colombo F, Barbaro MP, Riario Sforza GG, Pomari C, Zucchi L, 
Gigliotti F, Clini E, Aiolfi S, Gasparini S, Ceriana P, Spanevello A, Carone M,
Barisione G, Miyao N, Kiyosue A, Nakatani Y, Harada T, Hayakawa H, Kato M, Ogushi
F, Nakamura H, Yoshida M, Hataji O, Matsui H, Matsumoto M, Taniguchi H, Takeda A,
Kishimoto N, Nishio M, Kinoshita M, Kato R, Hara N, Tamada T, Hashimoto S, Suzuki
M, Hiramatsu T, Shuto H, In KH, Lee S, Kim S, Kim J, Kim D, Park M, Kim J, Yoo C,
Lee Y, Babjoniseva A, Mitrofanova L, Smiltena I, Matukiene V, Nausediene V,
Miliauskas S, Susinskiene D, Vebriene J, Vaicius D, Volosevic T, Kiziela A,
Sileikiene V, Sansores R, Ramirez E, Diaz J, Caleco M, Llamas FS, Bantje T, Gans 
SJ, Goosens M, Sinninghe-Damste HE, de Hosson SM, Wielders PL, van der Valk P,
Michels AJ, Gronert J, Norheim PD, Sparby JA, Risberg K, Karlsson T, Roedolen T, 
Tomala T, Diaz D, Maliwat A, Hernandez JF, Antczak A, Mroz R, Siergiejko Z,
Waszkuc-Golonko J, Olechnowicz D, Napora P, Batura-Gabryel H, Barbara C, Cardoso 
J, Moita J, Rodrigues B, Pires N, Guimaraes JM, Andre N, Ribeiro V, Mihaicuta S, 
Petrui ID, Tudorache V, Bulugean L, Adina M, Rajnoveanu R, Olar D, Matei D, Toma 
C, Gica C, Ambert L, Mihaescu T, Alexandrescu D, Popovici C, Glontescu ID,
Boisteanu D, Vigdorovits M, Jimborean G, Mihaltan F, Abrosimov V, Platonov D,
Astafieva N, Nosov V, Martynenko T, Gantseva K, Shilkina N, Gaydar E, Ignatova G,
Khamitov R, Stankovic I, Cekerevac I, Ilic A, Vukcevic M, Hrebenar S, Lescisinova
H, Golubov A, Oravcova H, Zacik M, Zambova RT, Arpasova K, Orolin M, Jurco P,
Kretik V, Kavkova D, Mihalecova Y, Sarkanova K, Kovacikova L, Kubikova Y,
Rozborilova E, Smith C, Abdullah I, Bruning A, Visser S, Abdullah I, van Zyl-Smit
R, Richter D, Ras G, Joubert J, Irusen, de Saracho JO, Echave-Sustaeta J, Pascual
LR, Casan P, Ramos D, Roldan J, Gonzalez JE, Lista JD, Morera J, Sanchez I,
Caballero LM, Rodriguez E, Galdiz J, Naval E, Fernandez E, Santa Cruz A, Ruiz AB,
Costa JS, Ferrer A, Roig V, Velasco JL, Bjermer L, Jul-Nielsen H, Tengmark BO,
Blom KB, Perng DW, Yu CJ, Cheng SL, Hsu WH, Tsai YH, Hsiue TR, Lin MC, Boonsawat 
W, Pothirat C, Keeratichananont W, Nayci S, Saryal S, Gunen H, Sayiner A,
Ortakoylu G, Yorgancioglu A, Ozkurt S, Harrison R, Jones N, Bourne S, Saralaya D,
Kerrane J, DeSoyza A, Fuller L, Litchfield J, Bourke S, Collier D, Gunstone A.

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2016 Jun 9;374(23):2284-6.
    N Engl J Med. 2016 Sep;375(9):897-8.
    N Engl J Med. 2016 Sep;375(9):899-900.
    N Engl J Med. 2016 Sep;375(9):898-9.
    N Engl J Med. 2016 Sep;375(9):898.

BACKGROUND: Most guidelines recommend either a long-acting beta-agonist (LABA)
plus an inhaled glucocorticoid or a long-acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA) as
the first-choice treatment for patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD) who have a high risk of exacerbations. The role of treatment with 
a LABA-LAMA regimen in these patients is unclear.
METHODS: We conducted a 52-week, randomized, double-blind, double-dummy,
noninferiority trial. Patients who had COPD with a history of at least one
exacerbation during the previous year were randomly assigned to receive, by
inhalation, either the LABA indacaterol (110 μg) plus the LAMA glycopyrronium (50
μg) once daily or the LABA salmeterol (50 μg) plus the inhaled glucocorticoid
fluticasone (500 μg) twice daily. The primary outcome was the annual rate of all 
COPD exacerbations.
RESULTS: A total of 1680 patients were assigned to the indacaterol-glycopyrronium
group, and 1682 to the salmeterol-fluticasone group. Indacaterol-glycopyrronium
showed not only noninferiority but also superiority to salmeterol-fluticasone in 
reducing the annual rate of all COPD exacerbations; the rate was 11% lower in the
indacaterol-glycopyrronium group than in the salmeterol-fluticasone group (3.59
vs. 4.03; rate ratio, 0.89; 95% confidence interval [CI], 0.83 to 0.96; P=0.003).
The indacaterol-glycopyrronium group had a longer time to the first exacerbation 
than did the salmeterol-fluticasone group (71 days [95% CI, 60 to 82] vs. 51 days
[95% CI, 46 to 57]; hazard ratio, 0.84 [95% CI, 0.78 to 0.91], representing a 16%
lower risk; P<0.001). The annual rate of moderate or severe exacerbations was
lower in the indacaterol-glycopyrronium group than in the salmeterol-fluticasone 
group (0.98 vs. 1.19; rate ratio, 0.83; 95% CI, 0.75 to 0.91; P<0.001), and the
time to the first moderate or severe exacerbation was longer in the
indacaterol-glycopyrronium group than in the salmeterol-fluticasone group (hazard
ratio, 0.78; 95% CI, 0.70 to 0.86; P<0.001), as was the time to the first severe 
exacerbation (hazard ratio, 0.81; 95% CI, 0.66 to 1.00; P=0.046). The effect of
indacaterol-glycopyrronium versus salmeterol-fluticasone on the rate of COPD
exacerbations was independent of the baseline blood eosinophil count. The
incidence of adverse events and deaths was similar in the two groups. The
incidence of pneumonia was 3.2% in the indacaterol-glycopyrronium group and 4.8% 
in the salmeterol-fluticasone group (P=0.02).
CONCLUSIONS: Indacaterol-glycopyrronium was more effective than
salmeterol-fluticasone in preventing COPD exacerbations in patients with a
history of exacerbation during the previous year. (Funded by Novartis; FLAME
ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT01782326.).

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa1516385 
PMID: 27181606  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Expert Rev Respir Med. 2016 Jul;10(7):719-31. doi: 10.1080/17476348.2016.1184976.
Epub 2016 May 25.

Vilanterol trifenatate for the treatment of COPD.

Malerba M(1), Radaeli A(2), Montuschi P(3), Morjaria JB(4).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Internal Medicine , University of Brescia and ASST Spedali
Civili , Brescia , Italy. (2)b Department of Emergency , ASST Spedali Civili ,
Brescia , Italy. (3)c Department of Pharmacology, Faculty of Medicine ,
University Hospital Agostino Gemelli, Catholic University of the Sacred Heart ,
Rome , Italy. (4)d Department of Respiratory Medicine , Royal Brompton &
Harefield NHS Trust, Harefield Hospital , Middlesex , UK.

INTRODUCTION: Currently the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD) has limited effectiveness and there is a need to develop new drugs.
International guidelines recommend the use of long-acting bronchodilators (β2
agonists and anti-cholinergics/muscarinics), inhaled steroids and associations
between these drugs in the maintenance treatment of moderate-to-severe COPD.
AREA COVERED: Vilanterol trifenate is a new once-daily highly selective
β2-agonist available in USA and Europe in association with umeclidinium bromide
(a long-acting anti-muscarnic agent) and fluticasone furoate (an inhaled
corticosteroid) for the once-daily maintenance treatment of COPD. Vilanterol
combined in fixed-dose treatments has been tested in numerous clinical trials
involving thousands of patients. Expert commentary: These new once-daily
formulations have the potential to improve compliance to long-term inhaled
therapy. This paper will review the clinical and experimental data regarding
vilanterol use in the regular treatment of COPD as well as provide a critical
discussion of possible future treatment settings.

DOI: 10.1080/17476348.2016.1184976 
PMID: 27143334  [PubMed - in process]


27. Lancet Respir Med. 2016 May;4(5):390-8. doi: 10.1016/S2213-2600(16)00100-4. Epub 
2016 Apr 7.

Blood eosinophil count and exacerbations in severe chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease after withdrawal of inhaled corticosteroids: a post-hoc analysis of the
WISDOM trial.

Watz H(1), Tetzlaff K(2), Wouters EF(3), Kirsten A(4), Magnussen H(4),
Rodriguez-Roisin R(5), Vogelmeier C(6), Fabbri LM(7), Chanez P(8), Dahl R(9),
Disse B(10), Finnigan H(11), Calverley PM(12).

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary Research Institute at Lung Clinic Grosshansdorf, Airway Research
Center North, German Center for Lung Research, Grosshansdorf, Germany. Electronic
address: h.watz@pulmoresearch.de. (2)Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma GmbH and Co KG, 
Ingelheim, Germany; Department of Sports Medicine, University of Tübingen,
Tübingen, Germany. (3)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Maastricht University
Medical Center, Maastricht, Netherlands. (4)Pulmonary Research Institute at Lung 
Clinic Grosshansdorf, Airway Research Center North, German Center for Lung
Research, Grosshansdorf, Germany. (5)Universitat de Barcelona, Hospital Clínic
IDIBAPS-CIBERES, Barcelona, Spain. (6)Department of Medicine, Pulmonary and
Critical Care Medicine, University Medical Center Giessen and Marburg,
Philipps-Universität Marburg, German Center for Lung Research, Marburg, Germany. 
(7)Department of Metabolic Medicine, University of Modena & Reggio Emilia,
Modena, NOCSAE, AUSL Modena, Baggiovara, Italy. (8)Aix-Marseille Université,
Department of Respiratory Diseases and CIC Nord, AP-HM-Hôpital Nord, Marseille,
France. (9)University of Southern Denmark, Odense, Denmark. (10)Boehringer
Ingelheim Pharma GmbH and Co KG, Ingelheim, Germany. (11)Department of
Biostatistics and Data Sciences, Boehringer Ingelheim, Bracknell, UK.
(12)Institute of Ageing and Chronic Disease, Aintree University Hospital,
Liverpool, UK.

BACKGROUND: Blood eosinophil counts might predict response to inhaled
corticosteroids (ICS) in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD) and a history of exacerbations. We used data from the WISDOM trial to
assess whether patients with COPD with higher blood eosinophil counts would be
more likely to have exacerbations if ICS treatment was withdrawn.
METHODS: WISDOM was a 12-month, randomised, parallel-group trial in which
patients received 18 μg tiotropium, 100 μg salmeterol, and 1000 μg fluticasone
propionate daily for 6 weeks and were then randomly assigned (1:1) electronically
to receive either continued or reduced ICS over 12 weeks. We did a post-hoc
analysis after complete ICS withdrawal (months 3-12) to compare rate of
exacerbations and time to exacerbation outcomes on the basis of blood eosinophil 
subgroups of increasing cutoff levels. The WISDOM trial is registered at
ClinicalTrials.gov, number NCT00975195.
FINDINGS: In the 2296 patients receiving treatment after ICS withdrawal, moderate
or severe exacerbation rate was higher in the ICS-withdrawal group versus the
ICS-continuation group in patients with eosinophil counts (out of total white
blood cell count) of 2% or greater (rate ratio 1·22 [95% CI 1·02-1·48]), 4% or
greater (1·63 [1·19-2·24]), and 5% or greater (1·82 [1·20-2·76]). The increase in
exacerbation rate became more pronounced as the eosinophil cutoff level rose,
with significant treatment-by-subgroup interaction reached for 4% and 5% only.
Similar results were seen with eosinophil cutoffs of 300 cells per μL and 400
cells per μL, and mutually exclusive subgroups.
INTERPRETATION: Blood eosinophil counts at screening were related to the
exacerbation rate after complete ICS withdrawal in patients with severe to very
severe COPD and a history of exacerbations. Our data suggest that counts of 4% or
greater or 300 cells per μL or more might identify a deleterious effect of ICS
withdrawal, an effect not seen in most patients with eosinophil counts below
these thresholds.
FUNDING: Boehringer Ingelheim.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S2213-2600(16)00100-4 
PMID: 27066739  [PubMed - in process]


28. J Manag Care Spec Pharm. 2016 Apr;22(4):316-23. doi: 10.18553/jmcp.2016.22.4.316.

Evaluation of a Therapeutic Interchange from Fluticasone/Salmeterol to
Mometasone/Formoterol in Patients with Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease.

Yip E(1), Karimi S(2), Pien LT(3).

Author information: 
(1)1 Primary Care Clinical Pharmacy Specialist, Kaiser Permanente Mid-Atlantic
States, Upper Marlboro, Maryland. (2)2 Primary Care Clinical Pharmacy Specialist,
Kaiser Permanente Mid-Atlantic States, Manassas, Virginia. (3)3 Primary Care
Clinical Pharmacy Specialist, Kaiser Permanente Mid-Atlantic States, Springfield,
Virginia.

BACKGROUND: Combination treatment with an inhaled corticosteroid and long-acting 
beta2-agonist is among the many treatment options for chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD) that has been shown to improve clinical outcomes. While 
mometasone/formoterol does not currently have an FDA-approved indication for
COPD, evidence from 2 phase 3 trials demonstrated that mometasone/formoterol can 
improve lung function and was well tolerated in patients with moderate-to-very
severe COPD. Based on these data, a therapeutic interchange was implemented in
the Kaiser Permanente Mid-Atlantic States region to convert patients with a COPD 
diagnosis from fluticasone/salmeterol to mometasone/formoterol.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the impact of a therapeutic interchange from
fluticasone/salmeterol to mometasone/formoterol on health outcomes in patients
with COPD in a large ambulatory and managed care setting.
METHODS: The investigators retrospectively reviewed the electronic medical
records of patients with a COPD diagnosis who had a prescription for
fluticasone/salmeterol converted to mometasone/formoterol between March 6, 2011, 
to March 6, 2013. Kaiser Permanente's Pharmacy and Therapeutics Committee
provided recommended equivalent doses for conversion from fluticasone/salmeterol 
to mometasone/formoterol. Nonetheless, the final approval for the change in
medication and selection of the dose was left to each physician's clinical
judgment. Patients were excluded if they were (a) prescribed
fluticasone/salmeterol 100/50 mcg, which has no equivalent mometasone/formoterol 
dose; (b) less than aged 18 years; or (c) prescribed fluticasone/salmeterol for a
duration of less than 6 months preconversion to mometasone/formoterol. In
addition, patients who left the Kaiser Permanente network or became deceased
during the study period of interest were excluded. After the application of the
inclusion and exclusion criteria, 521 patients were included in the data
analysis. The primary endpoint was the determination of the difference in the
occurrence of COPD exacerbations 6 months pre- and postconversion from
fluticasone/salmeterol to mometasone/formoterol. COPD exacerbations were defined 
by the diagnosis or documentation of a COPD exacerbation during any
hospitalizations, urgent care (UC)/emergency department (ED) visits, or clinic
encounters. Secondary outcomes included the determination of the difference in
the occurrence of intensive care unit admissions, hospitalizations, UC/ED visits,
and clinic encounters for COPD exacerbations 6 months pre- and postconversion;
number of patients who required modification in therapy; and any reasons for
mometasone/for-moterol discontinuation postconversion. Patients served as their
own controls to compare any differences in outcomes while taking
mometasone/formoterol versus fluticasone/salmeterol.
RESULTS: Within our patient population, 34.2% (n = 178) of patients experienced
at least 1 COPD exacerbation while prescribed fluticasone/salmeterol compared
with 28.6% (n = 149) of patients while prescribed mometasone/formoterol (P =
0.030). Mometasone/formoterol therapy did not demonstrate any statistically
significant differences in the secondary outcomes (P < 0.050). A later subgroup
analysis of the primary outcome revealed that factors associated with a
statistically significant decrease in the occurrence of COPD exacerbations were
male sex (P = 0.023), comorbid asthma (P = 0.026), and conversion from
fluticasone/salmeterol to a more potent dose of mometasone/formoterol (P =
0.014).
CONCLUSIONS: There was a statistically significant decrease in the proportion of 
patients who experienced COPD exacerbations postconversion from
fluticasone/salmeterol to mometasone/formoterol. This study is an example of a
real-world therapeutic interchange that provides additional data to support the
use of mometasone/formoterol for its unlabeled COPD indication.
DISCLOSURES: No outside funding supported this study. The authors report no
financial or other conflicts of interest related to the subject of this article. 
All authors contributed to study design and manuscript revision. Yip collected
and analyzed data and prepared the manuscript.

DOI: 10.18553/jmcp.2016.22.4.316 
PMID: 27023685  [PubMed - in process]


29. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2016 Jun;357(3):606-18. doi: 10.1124/jpet.116.232009. Epub 
2016 Mar 25.

Tiotropium Attenuates Virus-Induced Pulmonary Inflammation in Cigarette
Smoke-Exposed Mice.

Bucher H(1), Duechs MJ(1), Tilp C(1), Jung B(1), Erb KJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Immunology & Respiratory Diseases Research, Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma GmbH &
Co. KG, Biberach an der Riss, Germany. (2)Immunology & Respiratory Diseases
Research, Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma GmbH & Co. KG, Biberach an der Riss,
Germany klaus.erb@boehringer-ingelheim.com.

Viral infections trigger exacerbations in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD), and tiotropium, a M3 receptor antagonist, reduces exacerbations in
patients by unknown mechanisms. In this report, we investigated whether
tiotropium has anti-inflammatory effects in mice exposed to cigarette smoke (CS) 
and infected with influenza virus A/PR/8/34 (H1N1) or respiratory syncytial virus
(RSV) and compared these effects with those of steroid fluticasone and
PDE4-inhibitor roflumilast. Mice were exposed to CS; infected with H1N1 or RSV;
and treated with tiotropium, fluticasone, or roflumilast. The amount of cells and
cytokine levels in the airways, lung function, and viral load was determined.
NCI-H292 cells were infected with H1N1 or RSV and treated with the drugs. In
CS/H1N1-exposed mice, tiotropium reduced neutrophil and macrophage numbers and
levels of interleukin-6 (IL-6) and interferon-γ (IFN-γ) in the airways and
improved lung function. In contrast, fluticasone increased the loss of body
weight; failed to reduce neutrophil or macrophage numbers; increased IL-6, KC,
and tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α) in the lungs; and worsened lung function.
Treatment with roflumilast reduced macrophage numbers, IL-6, and KC in the lungs 
but had no effect on neutrophil numbers or lung function. In CS/RSV-exposed mice,
treatment with tiotropium, but not fluticasone or roflumilast, reduced neutrophil
numbers and IL-6 and TNF-α levels in the lungs. Viral load of H1N1 and RSV was
significantly elevated in CS/virus-exposed mice and NCI-H292 cells after
fluticasone treatment, whereas tiotropium and roflumilast had no effect. In
conclusion, tiotropium has anti-inflammatory effects on CS/virus-induced
inflammation in mice that are superior to the effects of roflumilast and
fluticasone. This finding might help to explain the observed reduction of
exacerbation rates in COPD patients.

Copyright © 2016 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1124/jpet.116.232009 
PMCID: PMC4885512
PMID: 27016458  [PubMed - in process]


30. J Manag Care Spec Pharm. 2016 Mar;22(3):293-304. doi:
10.18553/jmcp.2016.22.3.293.

Health Care Utilization and Costs After Initiating Budesonide/Formoterol
Combination or Fluticasone/Salmeterol Combination Among COPD Patients New to
ICS/LABA Treatment.

Davis JR(1), Kern DM(2), Williams SA(3), Tunceli O(4), Wu B(5), Hollis S(6),
Strange C(7), Trudo F(8).

Author information: 
(1)1 Director, Health Economics and Outcomes Research, AstraZeneca
Pharmaceuticals, Wilmington, Delaware. (2)2 Associate Research Director, Industry
Sponsored Research, HealthCore, Wilmington, Delaware. (3)3 Senior Director,
Medical Evidence Center, AstraZeneca Pharmaceuticals, Gaithersburg, Maryland.
(4)4 Director, Industry Sponsored Research, HealthCore, Wilmington, Delaware.
(5)5 Research Manager, Industry Sponsored Research, HealthCore, Wilmington,
Delaware. (6)6 Senior Director and Biometrics Team Leader, AstraZeneca
Pharmaceuticals, Alderley Park, Cheshire, United Kingdom. (7)7 Professor,
Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Medical University of South
Carolina, Charleston. (8)8 Medical Lead, Respiratory, AstraZeneca
Pharmaceuticals, Wilmington, Delaware.

BACKGROUND: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) affects approximately 15
million people in the United States and accounts for approximately $36 billion in
economic burden, primarily due to medical costs. To address the increasing
clinical and economic burden, the Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung 
Disease emphasizes the use of therapies that help prevent COPD exacerbations,
including inhaled corticosteroid/long-acting beta2-agonist (ICS/LABA).
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate health care costs and utilization among COPD patients
newly initiating ICS/LABA combination therapy with budesonide/formoterol (BFC) or
fluticasone/salmeterol (FSC) in a managed care system.
METHODS: COPD patients aged 40 years and older who initiated BFC (160/4.5 μg) or 
FSC (250/50 μg) treatment between March 1, 2009, and March 31, 2012, were
identified using claims data from major U.S. health plans. BFC and FSC patients
were propensity score matched (1:1) on age, sex, prior asthma diagnosis, prior
COPD-related health care utilization, and respiratory medication use.
COPD-related, pneumonia-related, and all-cause costs and utilization were
analyzed during the 12-month follow-up period. Post-index costs were assessed
with generalized linear models (GLMs) with gamma distribution. Health care
utilization data were analyzed via logistic regression (any event vs. none) and
GLMs with negative binomial distribution (number of visits) and were adjusted for
the analogous pre-index variable as well as pre-index characteristics that
remained imbalanced after matching.
RESULTS: After matching, each cohort had 3,697 patients balanced on age (mean 64 
years), sex (female 52% BFC and 54% FSC), asthma and other comorbid conditions,
prior COPD-related health care utilization, and respiratory medication use.
During the 12-month follow-up, COPD-related costs averaged $316 less for BFC
versus FSC patients ($4,326 vs. $4,846; P = 0.003), reflecting lower inpatient
($966 vs. $1,202; P < 0.001), pharmacy ($1,482 vs. $1,609; P = 0.002), and
outpatient/office ($1,378 vs. $1,436; P = 0.048) costs, but higher emergency
department ($257 vs. $252; P = 0.033) costs. Pneumonia-related health care costs 
were also lower on average for BFC patients ($2,855 vs. $3,605; P < 0.001).
Similarly, initiating BFC was associated with lower all-use health care costs
versus initiating FSC ($21,580 vs. $24,483; P < 0.001, respectively). No
differences in health care utilization were found between the 2 groups.
CONCLUSIONS: In this study, although no difference was observed in rates of
health care utilization, COPD patients initiating BFC treatment incurred lower
average COPD-related, pneumonia-related, and all-cause costs versus FSC
initiators, which was driven by cumulative differences in inpatient, outpatient, 
and pharmacy costs.

DOI: 10.18553/jmcp.2016.22.3.293 
PMID: 27003559  [PubMed - in process]


31. Pharmacol Res Perspect. 2016 Jan 15;4(1):e00202. doi: 10.1002/prp2.202.
eCollection 2016.

Anti-inflammatory effects of the novel inhaled phosphodiesterase type 4 inhibitor
CHF6001 on virus-inducible cytokines.

Edwards MR(1), Facchinetti F(2), Civelli M(2), Villetti G(2), Johnston SL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Airway Disease Infection SectionNational Heart Lung InstituteImperial College 
LondonLondonUnited Kingdom; MRC and Asthma UK Centre for Allergic Mechanisms of
AsthmaLondonUnited Kingdom. (2)Corporate Pre-clinical R&D Chiesi Farmaceutici
S.p.A. Parma Italy.

Respiratory virus infections precipitate asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD) exacerbations, with most exacerbations due to rhinovirus
infection. Both asthma and COPD exacerbations are not well controlled by steroid 
therapies, and there is a much research interest in finding improved therapies or
combinations of therapies for controlling exacerbations. CHF6001 is a new,
inhaled highly potent and selective phosphodiesterase type 4 (PDE4) inhibitor.
Using in vitro human bronchial epithelial cells (BEAS-2B), we investigated the
potential anti-inflammatory effects of CHF6001 on rhinovirus (RV1B)-induced
cytokines. Cytokine mRNA was measured by real-time PCR, while protein release was
measured by ELISA. CHF6001 was used in a 7-point dose-response curve
(1000-0.001 nmol/L) as a 1.5-h pretreatment prior to infection in comparison with
roflumilast. Both roflumilast and CHF6001 reduced RV1B-induced IL-8, IL-29,
IP-10, and RANTES mRNA and protein in a concentration-dependent manner.
Generally, CHF6001 was 13- to 16-fold more potent (subnanomolar EC 50 values)
than roflumilast at reducing IL-8, IL-29, IP-10, and RANTES mRNA and protein
release, but had similar efficacies. In combination with the steroid fluticasone 
propionate (1 nmol/L), CHF6001 had additive effects, significantly reducing
RV-induced cytokines when compared with steroid or CHF6001 alone. Combined
low-dose steroid and low-dose CHF6001 had a similar efficacy as high-dose steroid
or CHF6001 alone, indicating the combination had steroid and PDE4 inhibitor
sparing effects. Overall results indicate that PDE4 inhibitors have
anti-inflammatory activity against virus-induced inflammatory mediators and that 
CHF6001 is more potent than roflumilast.

DOI: 10.1002/prp2.202 
PMCID: PMC4777265
PMID: 26977295  [PubMed]


32. MMW Fortschr Med. 2015 Dec 14;157(21-22):85. doi: 10.1007/s15006-015-7629-3.

[ICS not indicated in the early stage].

[Article in German]

Einecke D(1).

Author information: 
(1).

DOI: 10.1007/s15006-015-7629-3 
PMID: 26960883  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Eur Respir J. 2016 May;47(5):1374-82. doi: 10.1183/13993003.01370-2015. Epub 2016
Feb 25.

Blood eosinophils as a marker of response to inhaled corticosteroids in COPD.

Barnes NC(1), Sharma R(2), Lettis S(3), Calverley PM(4).

Author information: 
(1)Respiratory Medical Franchise, GSK, Brentford, UK William Harvey Research
Institute, Barts and The London School of Medicine and Dentistry, London, UK
neil.c.barnes@gsk.com. (2)Respiratory Medical Franchise, GSK, Brentford, UK.
(3)Clinical Statistics and Programming, GSK, Uxbridge, UK. (4)Respiratory
Research Dept, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, UK.

Identification of a biomarker that predicts response to inhaled corticosteroids
(ICS) would help evaluate the risk/benefit profile of ICS in chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD) and guide treatment.The ISOLDE study randomised 751
patients (mean post-bronchodilator forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1) 1.4 L: 
50% predicted normal) to fluticasone propionate 500 μg twice daily or placebo for
3 years, finding no difference in FEV1 rate of decline between treatments
(p=0.16) and a significant reduction in median exacerbation rate with fluticasone
propionate versus placebo (p=0.026). We re-analysed ISOLDE results by baseline
blood eosinophil count to investigate whether eosinophil level predicts ICS
benefit.Patients with eosinophils <2% (n=456) had a similar rate of
post-bronchodilator FEV1 decline with fluticasone propionate as placebo
(-2.9 mL·year(-1); p=0.688). With eosinophils ≥2% (n=214), the rate of decline
decreased by 33.9 mL·year(-1) with fluticasone propionate versus placebo
(p=0.003). Exacerbation rate reduction on ICS for fluticasone propionate versus
placebo was higher in the eosinophil <2% group compared with the ≥2% group;
time-to-first moderate/severe exacerbation was not different between treatments
in either group.A baseline blood eosinophil count of ≥2% identifies a group of
COPD patients with slower rates of decline in FEV1 when treated with ICS:
prospective testing of this hypothesis is now warranted.

Copyright ©ERS 2016.

DOI: 10.1183/13993003.01370-2015 
PMID: 26917606  [PubMed - in process]


34. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2016 Feb 4;11:193-205. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S95055.
eCollection 2016.

The lung function profile of once-daily tiotropium and olodaterol via Respimat(®)
is superior to that of twice-daily salmeterol and fluticasone propionate via
Accuhaler(®) (ENERGITO(®) study).

Beeh KM(1), Derom E(2), Echave-Sustaeta J(3), Grönke L(4), Hamilton A(5), Zhai
D(6), Bjermer L(7).

Author information: 
(1)Insaf GmbH Institut für Atemwegsforschung, Wiesbaden, Germany. (2)Department
of Internal Medicine, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium. (3)Servicio de
Neumología, Hospital Universitario Quirón, Madrid, Spain. (4)Boehringer Ingelheim
Pharma GmbH & Co. KG, Ingelheim, Germany. (5)Boehringer Ingelheim, Burlington,
ON, Canada. (6)InVentiv Health Clinical, Wilmington, DE, USA. (7)Department of
Respiratory Medicine and Allergology, Lund University, Lund, Sweden.

BACKGROUND: Tiotropium + olodaterol has demonstrated improvements beyond lung
function benefits in a large Phase III clinical program as a once-daily
maintenance treatment for COPD and may be a potential option for the initiation
of maintenance treatment in COPD. Despite guideline recommendations that combined
long-acting β2-agonists and inhaled corticosteroids should only be used in
individuals at high risk of exacerbation, there is substantial use in individuals
at lower risk. This raises the question of the comparative effectiveness of this 
combination as maintenance treatment in this group compared to other combination 
regimens.
OBJECTIVE: The study aimed to assess the effect on lung function of once-daily
tiotropium + olodaterol versus twice-daily salmeterol + fluticasone propionate in
all participants with Global initiative for chronic Obstructive Lung Disease 2 or
3 (moderate to severe) COPD.
METHODS: This was a randomized, double-blind, double-dummy, four-treatment,
complete crossover study in which participants received once-daily tiotropium +
olodaterol (5/5 µg and 2.5/5 µg) via Respimat(®) and twice-daily salmeterol +
fluticasone propionate (50/500 µg and 50/250 µg) via Accuhaler(®) for 6 weeks.
The primary end point was change in forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1)
area under the curve from 0 hour to 12 hours (AUC0-12) relative to the baseline
after 6 weeks.
RESULTS: Tiotropium + olodaterol 5/5 µg and 2.5/5 µg demonstrated statistically
significant improvements in FEV1 AUC0-12 compared to salmeterol + fluticasone
propionate (improvements from baseline were 317 mL and 295 mL with tiotropium +
olodaterol 5/5 µg and 2.5/5 µg, and 188 mL and 192 mL with salmeterol +
fluticasone propionate 50/500 µg and 50/250 µg, respectively). Tiotropium +
olodaterol was superior to salmeterol + fluticasone propionate in lung function
secondary end points, including FEV1 area under the curve from 0 hour to 24 hours
(AUC0-24).
CONCLUSION: Once-daily tiotropium + olodaterol in participants with
moderate-to-severe COPD provided superior lung function improvements to
twice-daily salmeterol + fluticasone propionate. Dual bronchodilation can be
considered to optimize lung function in individuals requiring maintenance
treatment for COPD.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S95055 
PMCID: PMC4745834
PMID: 26893551  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Ther Adv Respir Dis. 2016 Jun;10(3):235-55. doi: 10.1177/1753465816630208. Epub
2016 Feb 18.

Inhaled corticosteroids and the increased risk of pneumonia: what's new? A 2015
updated review.

Iannella H(1), Luna C(2), Waterer G(3).

Author information: 
(1)Hospital de Clínicas 'José de San Martin', Universidad de Buenos Aires, Av.
Córdoba 2351, Ciudad de Buenos Aries, C1120AAR, Argentina hiannella@live.com.
(2)Hospital de Clínicas 'José de San Martin', Universidad de Buenos Aires, Ciudad
de Buenos Aires, Argentina. (3)Royal Perth Hospital, University of Western
Australia, Western Australia, Australia.

There is a considerable amount of evidence that supports the possibility of an
increased risk of pneumonia associated with prolonged use of inhaled
corticosteroids (ICS) in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD). However, as yet, no statistically significant increase in
pneumonia-related 30-day mortality in patients on ICS has been demonstrated. The 
lack of objective pneumonia definitions and radiological confirmations have been 
a major source of bias, because of the similarities in clinical presentation
between pneumonia and acute exacerbations of COPD. One of the newer fluticasone
furoate studies overcomes these limitations and also provides an assessment of a 
range of doses, suggesting that the therapeutic window is quite narrow and that
conventional dosing has probably been too high, although the absolute risk may be
different compared to other drugs. Newer studies were not able to rule out
budesonide as responsible for pneumonia, as previous evidence suggested, and
there is still need for evidence from head-to-head comparisons in order to better
assess possible intra-class differences. Although the exact mechanisms by which
ICS increase the risk of pneumonia are not fully understood, the
immunosuppressive effects of ICS on the respiratory epithelium and the disruption
of the lung microbiome are most likely to be implicated. Given that COPD
represents such a complex and heterogeneous disease, attempts are being made to
identify clinical phenotypes with clear therapeutic implications, in order to
optimize the pharmacological treatment of COPD and avoid the indiscriminate use
of ICS. If deemed necessary, gradual withdrawal of ICS appears to be well
tolerated. Vaccination against pneumococcus and influenza should be emphasized in
patients with COPD receiving ICS. Physicians should keep in mind that signs and
symptoms of pneumonia in COPD patients may be initially indistinguishable from
those of an exacerbation, and that patients with COPD appear to be at increased
risk of developing pneumonia as a complication of ICS therapy.

© The Author(s), 2016.

DOI: 10.1177/1753465816630208 
PMID: 26893311  [PubMed - in process]


36. FASEB J. 2016 May;30(5):2014-26. doi: 10.1096/fj.201500135. Epub 2016 Feb 17.

Corticosteroid modulation of immunoglobulin expression and B-cell function in
COPD.

Lee J(1), Machin M(1), Russell KE(1), Pavlidis S(2), Zhu J(1), Barnes PJ(1),
Chung KF(1), Adcock IM(1), Durham AL(3).

Author information: 
(1)Airway Disease Section, National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College
London, London, United Kingdom; and. (2)Janssen Research and Development, High
Wycombe, United Kingdom. (3)Airway Disease Section, National Heart and Lung
Institute, Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom; and
a.durham@imperial.ac.uk.

We investigated changes in gene expression that occur in chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD) after corticosteroid treatment and sought to identify
the mechanisms that regulate these changes. Biopsy samples were taken from
patients with COPD (Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease stage 
I to II) before and after treatment with fluticasone propionate (FP)/salmeterol
(SM) (50/500, 4 wk). Gene expression was measured by microarray and was confirmed
by real-time reverse transcription-quantitative PCR (RT-qPCR). The effect of FP
on IgG expression and B-cell proliferation in the presence of oxidative stress
was also studied. FP/SM significantly increased the expression of 180 genes while
repressing 343 genes. The top 5 down-regulated genes were associated with
immunoglobulin production, whereas the immunomodulatory FK506 binding protein
(FK506BP) was up-regulated. Genes including IL6, IL8, and TBET-encoding TBX21
were unaffected. FP reduced IgG protein and mRNA expression and proliferation of 
human B cells through the dephosphorylation of ERK-1/2 via increased DUSP1
(dual-specificity protein phosphatase 1) expression. Consistent with in vivo
data, oxidative stress did not prevent FP-induced suppression of IgG expression
in human B cells in vitro Changes in expression were validated by RT-qPCR and by 
gene set enrichment analysis in distinct COPD cohorts. FP may reduce the adaptive
immune response in COPD and may be more effective in patients with an increased
B-cell/antibody response indicated by high autoantibody titers.-Lee, J., Machin, 
M., Russell, K. E., Pavlidis, S., Zhu, J., Barnes, P. J., Chung, K. F., Adcock,
I. M., Durham, A. L. Corticosteroid modulation of immunoglobulin expression and
B-cell function in COPD.

© FASEB.

DOI: 10.1096/fj.201500135 
PMID: 26887440  [PubMed - in process]


37. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2016 Jan 27;11:167-74. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S94709.
eCollection 2016.

Effect of salmeterol/fluticasone combination on the dynamic changes of lung
mechanics in mechanically ventilated COPD patients: a prospective pilot study.

Chen WC(1), Chen HH(2), Chiang CH(2), Lee YC(3), Yang KY(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Emergency and Critical Care Medicine, School of Medicine,
National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan; Department of Chest Medicine,
Taipei Veterans General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan. (2)Department of Chest
Medicine, Taipei Veterans General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan. (3)Sijhih Cathay
General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: The combined therapy of inhaled corticosteroids and long-acting
beta-2 agonists for mechanically ventilated patients with COPD has never been
explored. Therefore, the aim of this study was to investigate their dynamic
effects on lung mechanics and gas exchange.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Ten mechanically ventilated patients with resolution of
the causes of acute exacerbations of COPD were included. Four puffs of salmeterol
25 μg/fluticasone 125 μg combination therapy were administered. Lung mechanics,
including maximum resistance of the respiratory system (Rrs), end-inspiratory
static compliance, peak inspiratory pressure (PIP), plateau pressure, and mean
airway pressure along with gas exchange function were measured and analyzed.
RESULTS: Salmeterol/fluticasone produced a significant improvement in Rrs and PIP
after 30 minutes. With regard to changes in baseline values,
salmeterol/fluticasone inhalation had a greater effect on PIP than Rrs. However, 
the therapeutic effects seemed to lose significance after 3 hours of inhaled
corticosteroid/long-acting beta-2 agonist administration.
CONCLUSION: The combination of salmeterol/fluticasone-inhaled therapy in
mechanically ventilated patients with COPD had a significant benefit in reducing 
Rrs and PIP.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S94709 
PMCID: PMC4734735
PMID: 26869782  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Expert Rev Pharmacoecon Outcomes Res. 2016;16(2):167-92. doi:
10.1586/14737167.2016.1148602. Epub 2016 Feb 22.

Economic evaluations of fluticasone-propionate/salmeterol combination therapy for
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: a review of published studies.

Roberts MH(1,)(2), Borrego ME(1), Kharat AA(1), Marshik PL(1), Mapel DW(2).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Pharmacy Practice and Administrative Sciences , University of 
New Mexico College of Pharmacy , Albuquerque , NM , USA. (2)b LCF Research,
Health Services Research Division , Albuquerque , NM , USA.

This review identifies and evaluates the comprehensive reporting of peer-reviewed
economic evaluations of the effectiveness of fluticasone-propionate/salmeterol
combination (FSC) therapy for maintenance treatment of chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD). Economic evaluations were included if published in
English since 2003. Evaluation categories included in the review were
cost-effectiveness, cost-utility, and cost-consequence analyses. FSC is
cost-effective in comparison to short-acting bronchodilators (SABDs). Cost and
outcome differences between FSC and other long-acting therapies were modest.
Studies exhibited large variations in populations, designs and environment,
limiting the ability to draw conclusions. Many new maintenance treatments for
COPD have been approved since 2010. Most have yet to be compared to older
treatments like FSC. Evaluations are needed that consider costs and outcomes from
a societal perspective (e.g., patients' ability to keep working) and evaluations 
that include subgroup analyses to investigate differential impacts according to
clusters of patient characteristics.

DOI: 10.1586/14737167.2016.1148602 
PMID: 26839089  [PubMed - in process]


39. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2015 Dec 18;11:1-12. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S91407.
eCollection 2016.

Efficacy and safety of fluticasone furoate/vilanterol or tiotropium in subjects
with COPD at cardiovascular risk.

Covelli H(1), Pek B(2), Schenkenberger I(3), Scott-Wilson C(4), Emmett A(5), Crim
C(4).

Author information: 
(1)Kootenai Health, Coeur d'Alene, ID, USA. (2)Clinique de Pneumologie et de
Sommeil de Lanaudière, Quebec, Canada. (3)Klinische Forschung, Berlin, Germany.
(4)GlaxoSmithKline Inc., Research Triangle Park, Durham, NC, USA. (5)PAREXEL
International, Durham, NC, USA.

BACKGROUND: Fluticasone furoate/vilanterol (FF/VI) is a novel, once-daily,
inhaled corticosteroid/long-acting β2-agonist combination approved for the
treatment of COPD and asthma. We compared the safety and efficacy of FF/VI and
tiotropium (TIO) in subjects with moderate-to-severe COPD with greater risk for
comorbid cardiovascular disease (CVD).
METHODS: This randomized, blinded, double-dummy, parallel-group study compared a 
once-daily morning dose of FF/VI 100/25 mcg delivered via ELLIPTA™ with TIO 18
mcg via HandiHaler(®) for 12 weeks in subjects with diagnosed COPD, forced
expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1) 30%-70% predicted, and CVD or CVD risk. The 
primary endpoint was change from baseline in 24-hour weighted mean FEV1 on Day
84. Other efficacy endpoints included time to onset of bronchodilation, trough
FEV1, other spirometry measures, rescue medication use, symptoms, quality of life
(St George's Respiratory Questionnaire-COPD [SGRQ-C]), and health status (COPD
Assessment Tests [CAT]) measures. Safety endpoints included cardiovascular
monitoring, cortisol excretion, COPD exacerbations, and adverse events, including
prespecified drug effects.
RESULTS: Both FF/VI and TIO improved the 24-hour weighted mean FEV1 from baseline
after 12 weeks with no significant difference between treatments. Other endpoints
favored FF/VI for time to onset of bronchodilation, rescue medication use,
dyspnea, SGRQ-C and CAT scores, or favored TIO for change from baseline in forced
vital capacity and inspiratory capacity. Pneumonia occurred more frequently in
the FF/VI group, and two TIO-treated subjects died following cardiovascular
events. Other safety measures were similar between groups, and cardiovascular
monitoring did not reveal increased CVD risk.
CONCLUSION: Both FF/VI and TIO were efficacious in improving lung function in
subjects with COPD and comorbid CVD or CVD risk factors, with minor differences
in efficacy and safety profiles.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S91407 
PMCID: PMC4694692
PMID: 26730183  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Medicine (Baltimore). 2015 Dec;94(51):e2306. doi: 10.1097/MD.0000000000002306.

Long-acting Inhaled Bronchodilator and Risk of Vascular Events in Patients With
Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease in Taiwan Population.

Tsai MJ(1), Chen CY, Huang YB, Chao HC, Yang CJ, Lin PJ, Tsai YH.

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Neurology, China Medical University Hospital (M-JT);
School of Medicine, Medical College, China Medical University, Taichung (M-JT);
Department of Neurology, China Medical University An-Nan Hospital, Tainan (M-JT);
Department of Pharmacy, Kaohsiung Medical University Hospital (C-YC, Y-BH);
School of Pharmacy, Master Program in Clinical Pharmacy, Kaohsiung Medical
University, Kaohsiung (C-YC, Y-BH, P-JL, Y-HT); Department of Pharmacy, Chi Mei
Medical Center, Tainan (H-CC); Department of Respiratory Therapy, Kaohsiung
Medical University, Kaohsiung (C-JY); and Department of Pharmacy, Kaohsiung
Veterans General Hospital, Kaohsiung, Taiwan, ROC (P-JL).

Erratum in
    Medicine (Baltimore). 2016 Feb;95(8):e78fe.

A combination of long-acting anticholinergic agents (LAACs) and long-acting
β2-adrenergic receptor agonist (LABA) is effective in improving lung function in 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) compared with monotherapy. However, 
evidence on whether this combination increases the incidence of stroke or other
cardiac events remains sparse. The objective of the present study was to
investigate the incidence of stroke and other cardiovascular diseases in COPD
patients treated with LAAC, LABA, or a combination of the 2.We conducted this
population-based study using the Taiwan National Health Insurance Research
Database (1997-2008), identifying COPD patients and their prescribed medication
from the International Classification of Disease, Ninth Revision codes 490-492 or
496. A multivariate Cox proportional-hazards model was used to compare the risk
of stroke and other cardiovascular diseases over the 11-year period after
treatment with LAAC or LABA only or in combination.Of the 596 COPD patients (mean
age 70 y), 196 were treated with LAAC, 318 with LABA, and 82 were treated with a 
combination. The overall incidence of stroke (8.53%) significantly increased in
the combination group compared with LAAC (2.04%) or LABA (1.26%) only. In the Cox
regression analysis, the adjusted hazard ratio over the 11-year survey period for
stroke in patients treated with the combination compared with LABA only was 1.04 
(95% confidence interval, 1.06-2.99) and for LAAC, it was 0.31 (95% confidence
interval, 0.02-2.32).This cohort study using a large health insurance database
showed that treating patients with COPD, with a combination of LAAC and LABA, may
be associated with an increased hazard of stroke compared with treatment with
either agent alone. We should be particularly cautious about comedication of LAAC
and LABA in patients with COPD.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000002306 
PMCID: PMC4697980
PMID: 26705214  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Respir Res. 2015 Dec 22;16:154. doi: 10.1186/s12931-015-0314-3.

Regulation of YKL-40 expression by corticosteroids: effect on pro-inflammatory
macrophages in vitro and its modulation in COPD in vivo.

Kunz LI(1), van't Wout EF(2), van Schadewijk A(3), Postma DS(4), Kerstjens HA(5),
Sterk PJ(6), Hiemstra PS(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonology, Leiden University Medical Center, Albinusdreef 2,
NL-2333, ZA, Leiden, The Netherlands. L.I.Z.Kunz@lumc.nl. (2)Department of
Pulmonology, Leiden University Medical Center, Albinusdreef 2, NL-2333, ZA,
Leiden, The Netherlands. E.F.A.van_t_Wout@lumc.nl. (3)Department of Pulmonology, 
Leiden University Medical Center, Albinusdreef 2, NL-2333, ZA, Leiden, The
Netherlands. A.van_Schadewijk@lumc.nl. (4)Department of Pulmonology, University
of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.
D.S.Postma@umcg.nl. (5)Department of Pulmonology, University of Groningen,
University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.
H.A.M.Kerstjens@umcg.nl. (6)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Academic Medical 
Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. P.J.Sterk@amc.nl. (7)Department of
Pulmonology, Leiden University Medical Center, Albinusdreef 2, NL-2333, ZA,
Leiden, The Netherlands. P.S.Hiemstra@lumc.nl.

BACKGROUND: Macrophages constitute a heterogeneous cell population with pro-
(MΦ1) and anti-inflammatory (MΦ2) cells. The soluble chitinase-like-protein
YKL-40 is expressed in macrophages and various other cell types, and has been
linked to a variety of inflammatory diseases, including COPD. Dexamethasone
strongly reduces YKL-40 expression in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC)
in vitro. We hypothesized that: a) YKL-40 is differentially expressed by MΦ1 and 
MΦ2, b) is decreased by corticosteroids and c) that long-term treatment with
inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) affects YKL-40 levels in serum and sputum of COPD
patients.
METHODS: Monocytes of healthy subjects were cultured in vitro for 7 days with
either GM-CSF or M-CSF (for MΦ1 and MΦ2, respectively) and stimulated for 24 h
with LPS, TNFα, or oncostatin M (OSM). MΦ1 and MΦ2 differentiation was assessed
by measuring secretion of IL-12p40 and IL-10, respectively. YKL-40 expression in 
macrophages was measured by quantitative RT-PCR (qPCR) and ELISA; serum and
sputum YKL-40 levels were analyzed by ELISA.
RESULTS: Pro-inflammatory MΦ1 cells secreted significantly more YKL-40 than MΦ2, 
which was independent of stimulation with LPS, TNFα or OSM (p < 0.001) and
confirmed by qPCR. Dexamethasone dose-dependently and significantly inhibited
YKL-40 protein and mRNA levels in MΦ1. Serum YKL-40 levels of COPD patients were 
significantly higher than sputum YKL-40 levels but were not significantly changed
by ICS treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: YKL-40 secretion from MΦ1 cells is higher than from MΦ2 cells and is
unaffected by further stimulation with pro-inflammatory agents. Furthermore,
YKL-40 release from cultured monocyte-derived macrophages is inhibited by
dexamethasone especially in MΦ1, but ICS treatment did not change YKL-40 serum
and sputum levels in COPD. These results indicate that YKL-40 expression could be
used as a marker for MΦ1 macrophages in vitro, but not for monitoring the effect 
of ICS in COPD.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov, registration number: NCT00158847.

DOI: 10.1186/s12931-015-0314-3 
PMCID: PMC4699377
PMID: 26696093  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Nursing. 2016 Jan;46(1):69. doi: 10.1097/01.NURSE.0000475481.82890.36.

Respiratory medications.

Bridgeman MB(1), Dalal KS.

Author information: 
(1)At Rutgers University Ernest Mario School of Pharmacy in Piscataway, N.J.,
Mary B. Bridgeman is a clinical associate professor. Kavitha S. Dalal is a
critical care clinical pharmacist at Virtua in Marlton, N.J.

DOI: 10.1097/01.NURSE.0000475481.82890.36 
PMID: 26692316  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Respir Med. 2016 Jan;110:81. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2015.11.011. Epub 2015 Nov 27.

Response to Letter to the Editor: Improvements in lung function with
umeclidinium/vilanterol versus fluticasone propionate/salmeterol in patients with
moderate-to-severe COPD and infrequent exacerbations.

Donohue JF(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of North Carolina College of Medicine,
Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA. Electronic address: james_donohue@med.unc.edu.

Comment on
    Respir Med. 2015 Jul;109(7):870-81.
    Respir Med. 2016 Jan;110:79-80.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2015.11.011 
PMID: 26689766  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Drugs. 2016 Jan;76(1):135-46. doi: 10.1007/s40265-015-0527-2.

Tiotropium/Olodaterol: A Review in COPD.

Dhillon S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Springer, Private Bag 65901, Mairangi Bay 0754, Auckland, New Zealand.
demail@springer.com.

Tiotropium/olodaterol (Stiolto™ Respimat®, Spiolto™ Respimat®) is a fixed-dose
combination of the long-acting antimuscarinic agent tiotropium bromide (hereafter
referred to as tiotropium) and the long-acting β2-adrenoreceptor agonist
olodaterol delivered via the Respimat® Soft Mist™ inhaler. It is indicated for
the maintenance treatment of airflow obstruction in adults with COPD. Several
randomized, phase III studies of 6-52 weeks' duration evaluated the efficacy of
once-daily tiotropium/olodaterol in patients with GOLD stage 2-3 or 2-4 COPD.
Tiotropium/olodaterol maintenance therapy improved lung function to a greater
extent than the individual components or placebo and provided clinically
meaningful improvements in health-related quality of life and dyspnoea in 12- and
52-week studies. Tiotropium/olodaterol consistently improved 24-h lung function
in 6-week studies, providing greater benefits than the monotherapies, placebo or 
twice-daily fixed-dose fluticasone propionate/salmeterol. Inspiratory capacity
and exercise endurance were also improved with tiotropium/olodaterol following 6 
or 12 weeks' treatment. The tolerability profile of tiotropium/olodaterol in the 
phase III studies was generally similar to that of the component monotherapies.
The most common adverse events and serious adverse events during 52 weeks'
therapy were respiratory in nature, with COPD exacerbation, unsurprisingly,
reported most frequently with tiotropium/olodaterol and component monotherapies. 
Although additional data assessing the effect of tiotropium/olodaterol on
exacerbations and comparative studies with other recommended therapies are needed
to definitively position tiotropium/olodaterol, current evidence indicates that
tiotropium/olodaterol is a useful treatment option for patients with COPD.

DOI: 10.1007/s40265-015-0527-2 
PMID: 26683033  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Ther Adv Respir Dis. 2016 Feb;10(1):43-56. doi: 10.1177/1753465815619136. Epub
2015 Dec 14.

The combination of fluticasone furoate and vilanterol trifenatate in the
management of asthma: clinical trial evidence and experience.

Albertson TE(1), Richards JR(2), Zeki AA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine
and VA Northern California Healthcare Center, Mather UC Davis School of Medicine,
4150 V Street, Suite 3100, Sacramento, CA 95817, USA tealbertson@ucdavis.edu.
(2)Department Emergency Medicine, University of California, Davis, Sacramento,
CA, USA. (3)Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care and Sleep Medicine University of
California, Davis, Sacramento, CA, USA.

The treatment of persistent asthma has been aided by the recent approval of new
medications. The combined inhaled corticosteroid (ICS)/long-acting β2 agonist
(LABA) powder inhaler fluticasone furoate (FF)/vilanterol trifenatate (VI) is one
of these new agents, which was recently approved as a maintenance therapy for
persistent asthma. This once-daily ICS/LABA inhaler has previously been approved 
and used in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease as a maintenance therapy. Both 
FF and VI individually have been shown to have efficacy in the treatment of
persistent asthma; the combination of FF/VI at the dose of 100/25 μg daily
improves trough peak expiratory flows and forced expiratory volume in 1 s. It
also reduces the frequency of asthma exacerbations in patients with persistent
asthma. The once-daily dosing is well tolerated, with limited clinically
significant adverse events; the once-daily inhaled dosing regimen should also
improve medication adherence. The data supporting the use of the FF/VI inhaler in
persistent asthma are reviewed. The dry powder inhaler of FF/VI (100/25 μg) is an
effective and well tolerated once-daily maintenance treatment for patients with
persistent asthma.

© The Author(s), 2015.

DOI: 10.1177/1753465815619136 
PMID: 26668137  [PubMed - in process]


46. PLoS One. 2015 Dec 10;10(12):e0143793. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0143793.
eCollection 2015.

Prediction of Long-Term Benefits of Inhaled Steroids by Phenotypic Markers in
Moderate-to-Severe COPD: A Randomized Controlled Trial.

Snoeck-Stroband JB(1), Lapperre TS(2), Sterk PJ(2), Hiemstra PS(2), Thiadens
HA(1), Boezen HM(3), Ten Hacken NH(4), Kerstjens HA(4), Postma DS(4), Timens
W(5), Sont JK(6); GLUCOLD Study Group.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Public Health and Primary Care, Leiden University Medical
Center, Leiden, The Netherlands. (2)Department of Pulmonology, Leiden University 
Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands. (3)University of Groningen, University
Medical Center Groningen, Department of Epidemiology, Groningen, The Netherlands.
(4)University of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, Department of
Pulmonology, Groningen, The Netherlands. (5)University of Groningen, University
Medical Center Groningen, Department of Pathology, Groningen, The Netherlands.
(6)Department of Medical Decision Making, Leiden University Medical Center,
Leiden, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: The decline in lung function can be reduced by long-term inhaled
corticosteroid (ICS) treatment in subsets of patients with chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD). We aimed to identify which clinical, physiological and 
non-invasive inflammatory characteristics predict the benefits of ICS on lung
function decline in COPD.
METHODS: Analysis was performed in 50 steroid-naive compliant patients with
moderate to severe COPD (postbronchodilator forced expiratory volume in one
second (FEV1), 30-80% of predicted, compatible with GOLD stages II-III), age
45-75 years, >10 packyears smoking and without asthma. Patients were treated with
fluticasone propionate (500 μg bid) or placebo for 2.5 years. Postbronchodilator 
FEV1, dyspnea and health status were measured every 3 months; lung volumes,
airway hyperresponsiveness (PC20), and induced sputum at 0, 6 and 30 months. A
linear mixed effect model was used for analysis of this hypothesis generating
study.
RESULTS: Significant predictors of attenuated FEV1-decline by fluticasone
treatment compared to placebo were: fewer packyears smoking, preserved diffusion 
capacity, limited hyperinflation and lower inflammatory cell counts in induced
sputum (p<0.04).
CONCLUSIONS: Long-term benefits of ICS on lung function decline in patients with 
moderate-to-severe COPD are most pronounced in patients with fewer packyears, and
less severe emphysema and inflammation. These data generate novel hypotheses on
phenotype-driven therapy in COPD.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov NCT00158847.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0143793 
PMCID: PMC4699453
PMID: 26659582  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2015 Nov 9;10:2431-8. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S93375. 
eCollection 2015.

The EFFECT trial: evaluating exacerbations, biomarkers, and safety outcomes with 
two dose levels of fluticasone propionate/formoterol in COPD.

Papi A(1), Jones PW(2), Dalvi PS(3), McAulay K(4), McIver T(5), Dissanayake S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal and CardioRespiratory Medicine, Research Centre on
Asthma and COPD, University of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy. (2)Institute for
Infection and Immunity, St George's, University of London, London, UK. (3)Medical
Science - Respiratory, Mundipharma Research Ltd, Cambridge, UK. (4)Medical
Operations, Mundipharma Research Ltd, Cambridge, UK. (5)Data Management and
Statistics, Mundipharma Research Ltd, Cambridge, UK.

Inhaled corticosteroid/long-acting β2-agonist combination therapy is recommended 
in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) patients at high risk of
exacerbations. The EFFECT (Efficacy of Fluticasone propionate/FormotErol in COPD 
Treatment) trial is a Phase III, 52-week, randomized, double-blind study to
evaluate the efficacy and safety of two doses of fluticasone
propionate/formoterol compared to formoterol monotherapy in COPD patients with
FEV1 ≥50% predicted and a history of exacerbations. The primary endpoint is the
annualized rate of moderate and severe exacerbations. Secondary endpoints include
pre-dose FEV1, EXACT-PRO (EXAcerbations of Chronic pulmonary disease Tool -
Patient-Reported Outcome)-defined exacerbations, St George's Respiratory
Questionnaire for COPD, COPD Assessment Test, and EXACT-Respiratory Symptoms
total score. Lung-specific biomarkers (surfactant protein D and CC chemokine
ligand-18) will be measured in a subset of patients to explore their relationship
to other clinical indices in COPD and their predictive utility. Pneumonia will be
diagnosed per criteria defined by the British Thoracic Society community acquired
pneumonia guideline, primarily by radiological confirmation and, additionally,
using clinical criteria when a chest radiograph cannot be obtained. Serial
measurements of serum potassium, vital signs and electrocardiograms, 24-hour
Holter monitoring, and 24-hour urinary cortisol measurement will be performed in 
a subset of patients in addition to conventional safety assessments.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S93375 
PMCID: PMC4648608
PMID: 26648706  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Saf. 2016 Mar;25(3):278-86. doi: 10.1002/pds.3923. Epub
2015 Dec 9.

Confounding by drug formulary restriction in pharmacoepidemiologic research.

Filion KB(1,)(2,)(3), Eberg M(1), Ernst P(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Clinical Epidemiology, Lady Davis Institute, Jewish General
Hospital, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada. (2)Department of Medicine,
McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada. (3)Department of Epidemiology,
Biostatistics, and Occupational Health, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec,
Canada.

PURPOSE: The potential consequences of confounding due to drug formulary
restrictions in pharmacoepidemiologic research remain incompletely understood.
Our objective was to illustrate this potential bias using the example of
fluticasone/salmeterol combination therapy, an oral inhaler used to treat asthma 
and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, whose use is restricted in the
province of Quebec, Canada.
METHODS: We identified all new users of fluticasone/salmeterol in Quebec's
administrative databases and classified those who received their initial
dispensing of fluticasone/salmeterol between 1 September 1999 and 30 September
2003 as users from the liberal period and those who received it between 1 January
2004 and 31 October 2006 as users from the restricted period. The primary outcome
was time to first hospitalization for respiratory causes within 12 months of
cohort entry.
RESULTS: Our cohort included 72 154 new users from the liberal period and 5058
from the restricted period. Compared with use during the liberal period, use
during the restricted period was associated with an increased rate of
hospitalization for respiratory causes (crude hazard ratio [HR] = 1.41, 95%
confidence interval [CI] = 1.32, 1.51). Subsequent adjustment for age, sex, and
hospitalization for respiratory causes in the previous year attenuated the
association (HR = 1.05, 95%CI = 0.98, 1.12). Further adjustment for other
potential confounders resulted in a lower rate during the restricted period
(HR = 0.78, 95%CI = 0.73, 0.83).
CONCLUSIONS: Formulary restrictions can result in substantial and unexpected
confounding and should be considered during the design and analysis of
pharmacoepidemiologic studies.

Copyright © 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/pds.3923 
PMID: 26648236  [PubMed - in process]


49. BMJ. 2015 Nov 27;351:h6343. doi: 10.1136/bmj.h6343.

The lung study promising a breath of fresh air in research world.

Limb M.


PMID: 26613902  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2015 Nov 4;10:2393-404. doi:
10.2147/COPD.S89948. eCollection 2015.

Triple therapy with salmeterol/fluticasone propionate 50/250 plus tiotropium
bromide improve lung function versus individual treatments in moderate-to-severe 
Japanese COPD patients: a randomized controlled trial - Evaluation of Airway sGaw
after treatment with tripLE.

Saito T(1), Takeda A(2), Hashimoto K(3), Kobayashi A(4), Hayamizu T(5), Hagan
GW(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Ibarakihigashi National Hospital, Naka,
Ibaraki, Japan. (2)Center for Pulmonary Medicine, Asahikawa Medical Center,
Asahikawa, Hokkaido, Japan. (3)AMC Nishiumeda Clinic, Osaka, Japan. (4)Biomedical
Science Department, GlaxoSmithKline KK, Tokyo, Japan. (5)Medical Affairs
Respiratory Department, GlaxoSmithKline KK, Tokyo, Japan. (6)Independent
Consultant, Marbella, Spain.

Erratum in
    Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2016;11:1031-3.

PURPOSE: Triple therapy using salmeterol/fluticasone propionate (FP) and
tiotropium bromide is commonly used to treat chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD), but sparse efficacy data exist in COPD patients with fewer
symptoms and with a lower dose of inhaled corticosteroid in Japanese patients.
The effects of of salmeterol/fluticasone propionate 50/250 μg (SFC250) twice
daily plus tiotropium 18 μg (TIO) once daily and individual treatments on lung
function were compared.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Fifty three Japanese COPD patients participated in this
randomized, double-blind, double-dummy, Williams square design crossover study.
Lung function was assessed by plethysmography and spirometry.
RESULTS: The primary endpoint of postdose specific airway conductance area under 
the curve (AUC0-4h) on day 28 was significantly higher following SFC250 + TIO
(0.854) compared with TIO (0.737, 15.8%) and SFC250 (0.663, 28.8%) alone. SFC250 
+ TIO significantly improved trough forced expiratory volume in 1 second from
baseline versus TIO (0.161 L, P<0.001) and SFC250 (0.103 L, P=0.008). SFC250 +
TIO significantly improved residual volume compared with TIO (P<0.001) and SFC250
(P=0.003) on day 28. Nonsignificant improvements were seen in trough inspiratory 
capacity, total lung capacity, and thoracic gas volume. There was no mean change 
seen in rescue medication.
CONCLUSION: Triple therapy using SFC250 + TIO was well tolerated and gave a
greater improvement in bronchodilation compared with TIO and SFC250 alone in
Japanese patients with COPD. There was improvement in few symptoms, but no mean
change was seen in patient-reported outcomes measured by rescue medication use.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S89948 
PMCID: PMC4639514
PMID: 26604737  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Nurs Clin North Am. 2015 Dec;50(4):761-70. doi: 10.1016/j.cnur.2015.07.006.

Pharmacology Update on Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease, Rheumatoid
Arthritis, and Major Depression.

Weatherspoon D(1), Weatherspoon CA(2), Abbott B(3).

Author information: 
(1)Core Faculty Leadership and Management Specialty College of Health Sciences,
School of Nursing Graduate Program, Walden University, Washington Avenue South,
Suite 900 Minneapolis, MN 55401, USA. Electronic address:
Deborah.Weatherspoon@Waldenu.edu. (2)Veteran Affairs, Tennessee Valley Health
System, Fort Campbell, KY, USA; Contributing Faculty College of Health Sciences, 
School of Nursing Graduate Program, Walden University, Washington Avenue South,
Suite 900 Minneapolis, MN 55401, USA. (3)College of Health Science, Bethel
University, 325 Cherry Avenue, McKenzie, TN 38201, USA.

This article presents a brief review and summarizes current therapies for the
treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, major depression, and
rheumatoid arthritis. One new pharmaceutical agent is highlighted for each of the
topics.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cnur.2015.07.006 
PMID: 26596663  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Thorax. 2016 Feb;71(2):118-25. doi: 10.1136/thoraxjnl-2015-207021. Epub 2015 Nov 
19.

Blood eosinophils and inhaled corticosteroid/long-acting β-2 agonist efficacy in 
COPD.

Pavord ID(1), Lettis S(2), Locantore N(3), Pascoe S(3), Jones PW(4), Wedzicha
JA(5), Barnes NC(6).

Author information: 
(1)Respiratory Medicine Unit, Nuffield Department of Clinical Medicine,
University of Oxford, Oxford, UK. (2)GSK, Uxbridge, UK. (3)Respiratory Medicine
Development Center, GSK, Research Triangle Park, North Carolina, USA. (4)St
George's, University of London, London, UK. (5)National Heart and Lung Institute,
Royal Brompton Campus, Imperial College London, London, UK. (6)Respiratory
Medical Franchise, GSK, Uxbridge, UK William Harvey Institute, Barts and The
London School of Medicine and Dentistry, London, UK.

OBJECTIVE: We performed a review of studies of fluticasone propionate
(FP)/salmeterol (SAL) (combination inhaled corticosteroid (ICS)/long-acting
β2-agonist (LABA)) in patients with COPD, which measured baseline (pretreatment) 
blood eosinophil levels, to test whether blood eosinophil levels ≥2% were
associated with a greater reduction in exacerbation rates with ICS therapy.
METHODS: Three studies of ≥1-year duration met the inclusion criteria. Moderate
and severe exacerbation rates were analysed according to baseline blood
eosinophil levels (<2% vs ≥2%). At baseline, 57-75% of patients had ≥2% blood
eosinophils. Changes in FEV1 and St George's Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ)
scores were compared by eosinophil level.
RESULTS: For patients with ≥2% eosinophils, FP/SAL was associated with
significant reductions in exacerbation rates versus tiotropium (INSPIRE: n=719,
rate ratio (RR)=0.75, 95% CI 0.60 to 0.92, p=0.006) and versus placebo (TRISTAN: 
n=1049, RR=0.63, 95% CI 0.50 to 0.79, p<0.001). No significant difference was
seen in the <2% eosinophil subgroup in either study (INSPIRE: n=550, RR=1.18, 95%
CI 0.92 to 1.51, p=0.186; TRISTAN: n=354, RR=0.99, 95% CI 0.67 to 1.47, p=0.957, 
respectively). In SCO30002 (n=373), no significant effects were observed (FP or
FP/SAL vs placebo). No relationship was observed in any study between eosinophil 
subgroup and treatment effect on FEV1 and SGRQ.
DISCUSSION: Baseline blood eosinophil levels may represent an informative marker 
for exacerbation reduction with ICS/LABA in patients with COPD and a history of
moderate/severe exacerbations.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://www.bmj.com/company/products-services/rights-and-licensing/

DOI: 10.1136/thoraxjnl-2015-207021 
PMCID: PMC4752631
PMID: 26585525  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. BMC Pulm Med. 2015 Nov 11;15:145. doi: 10.1186/s12890-015-0138-4.

Mortality and drug therapy in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease: a network meta-analysis.

Scott DA(1), Woods B(2,)(3), Thompson JC(4), Clark JF(5), Hawkins N(6), Chambers 
M(7), Celli BR(8), Calverley P(9).

Author information: 
(1)ICON Health Economics and Epidemiology, Seacourt Tower, West Way, Oxford, OX2 
0JJ, UK. david.scott@iconplc.com. (2)ICON Health Economics and Epidemiology,
Seacourt Tower, West Way, Oxford, OX2 0JJ, UK. beth.woods@york.ac.uk. (3)Centre
for Health Economics, University of York, York, UK. beth.woods@york.ac.uk.
(4)ICON Health Economics and Epidemiology, Seacourt Tower, West Way, Oxford, OX2 
0JJ, UK. juliette.thompson@iconplc.com. (5)ICON Health Economics and
Epidemiology, Seacourt Tower, West Way, Oxford, OX2 0JJ, UK.
james.clark-wright@pharmagenesis.com. (6)ICON Health Economics and Epidemiology, 
Seacourt Tower, West Way, Oxford, OX2 0JJ, UK. neil.hawkins@iconplc.com.
(7)GlaxoSmithKline, Brentford, UK. mgchambers@ntlworld.com. (8)Brigham and
Women's Hospital, Harvard University, Boston, MA, USA. bcelli@copdnet.org.
(9)Institute of Aging and Chronic Disease, University of Liverpool, Liverpool,
UK. pmacal@liverpool.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: Increasing evidence suggests pharmacological treatments may impact on
overall survival in Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD) patients.
Individual clinical trials are rarely powered to detect mortality differences
between treatments and may not include all treatment options relevant to
healthcare decision makers.
METHODS: A systematic review was conducted to identify RCTs of COPD treatments
reporting mortality; evidence was synthesised using network meta-analysis (NMA). 
The analysis included 40 RCTs; a quantitative indirect comparison between 14
treatments using data from 55,220 patients was conducted.
RESULTS: The analysis reported two treatments reducing all-cause mortality;
salmeterol/fluticasone propionate combination (SFC) was associated with a
reduction in mortality versus placebo in the fixed effects (HR 0.79; 95 % Crl
0.67, 0.94) but not the random effects model (0.79; 0.56, 1.09). Indacaterol was 
associated with a reduction in mortality versus placebo in fixed (0.28; 0.08 to
0.85) and random effects (0.29; 0.08, 0.89) models. Mean estimates and credible
intervals for hazard ratios for indacaterol versus placebo are based on a small
number of events; estimates may change when the results of future studies are
included. These results were maintained across a variety of assumptions and
provide evidence that SFC and indacaterol may lead to improved survival in COPD
patients.
CONCLUSION: Results of an NMA of COPD treatments suggest that SFC and indacaterol
may reduce mortality. Further research is warranted to strengthen this
conclusion.

DOI: 10.1186/s12890-015-0138-4 
PMCID: PMC4642642
PMID: 26559138  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2016 Apr 1;193(7):717-26. doi:
10.1164/rccm.201508-1647OC.

Lung Deflation and Cardiovascular Structure and Function in Chronic Obstructive
Pulmonary Disease. A Randomized Controlled Trial.

Stone IS(1,)(2), Barnes NC(2,)(3), James WY(1), Midwinter D(3), Boubertakh R(2), 
Follows R(3), John L(1), Petersen SE(2).

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Respiratory Medicine, The London Chest Hospital, Barts Health 
NHS Trust, London, United Kingdom. (2)2 William Harvey Research Institute, Queen 
Mary University of London, London, United Kingdom; and. (3)3 Global Respiratory
Department, GlaxoSmithKline, Stockley Park, Uxbridge, United Kingdom.

Comment in
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2016 Apr 1;193(7):703-4.
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2016 Apr 15;193(8):932.

RATIONALE: Patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease develop increased 
cardiovascular morbidity with structural alterations.
OBJECTIVES: To investigate through a double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover 
study the effect of lung deflation on cardiovascular structure and function using
cardiac magnetic resonance.
METHODS: Forty-five hyperinflated patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease were randomized (1:1) to 7 (maximum 14) days inhaled
corticosteroid/long-acting β2-agonist fluticasone furoate/vilanterol 100/25 μg or
placebo (7-day minimum washout). Primary outcome was change from baseline in
right ventricular end-diastolic volume index versus placebo.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: There was a 5.8 ml/m(2) (95% confidence interval, 
2.74-8.91; P < 0.001) increase in change from baseline right ventricular
end-diastolic volume index and a 429 ml (P < 0.001) reduction in residual volume 
with fluticasone furoate/vilanterol versus placebo. Left ventricular
end-diastolic and left atrial end-systolic volumes increased by 3.63 ml/m(2)
(P = 0.002) and 2.33 ml/m(2) (P = 0.002). In post hoc analysis, right ventricular
stroke volume increased by 4.87 ml/m(2) (P = 0.003); right ventricular ejection
fraction was unchanged. Left ventricular adaptation was similar; left atrial
ejection fraction improved by +3.17% (P < 0.001). Intrinsic myocardial function
was unchanged. Pulmonary artery pulsatility increased in two of three locations
(main +2.9%, P = 0.001; left +2.67%, P = 0.030). Fluticasone furoate/vilanterol
safety profile was similar to placebo.
CONCLUSIONS: Pharmacologic treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease has
consistent beneficial and plausible effects on cardiac function and pulmonary
vasculature that may contribute to favorable effects of inhaled therapies. Future
studies should investigate the effect of prolonged lung deflation on intrinsic
myocardial function. Clinical trial registered with www.clinicaltrials.gov (NCT
01691885).

DOI: 10.1164/rccm.201508-1647OC 
PMID: 26550687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. BMJ Open. 2015 Oct 26;5(10):e009183. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2015-009183.

Comparative safety and effectiveness of long-acting inhaled agents for treating
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: a systematic review and network
meta-analysis.

Tricco AC(1), Strifler L(2), Veroniki AA(2), Yazdi F(3), Khan PA(2), Scott A(2), 
Ng C(2), Antony J(2), Mrklas K(4), D'Souza J(2), Cardoso R(2), Straus SE(5).

Author information: 
(1)Knowledge Translation Program, Li Ka Shing Knowledge Institute, St. Michael's 
Hospital, Toronto, Ontario, Canada Epidemiology Division, Dalla Lana School of
Public Health, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. (2)Knowledge
Translation Program, Li Ka Shing Knowledge Institute, St. Michael's Hospital,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada. (3)Ottawa Hospital Research Institute, Center for
Practice Changing Research Building, The Ottawa Hospital-General Campus, Ottawa, 
Ontario, Canada. (4)Knowledge Translation Program, Li Ka Shing Knowledge
Institute, St. Michael's Hospital, Toronto, Ontario, Canada Alberta Health
Services, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada. (5)Knowledge Translation Program, Li Ka
Shing Knowledge Institute, St. Michael's Hospital, Toronto, Ontario, Canada
Department of Geriatric Medicine, University of Toronto, 27 Kings College Circle,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

OBJECTIVE: To compare the safety and effectiveness of long-acting β-antagonists
(LABA), long-acting antimuscarinic agents (LAMA) and inhaled corticosteroids
(ICS) for managing chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
SETTING: Systematic review and network meta-analysis (NMA).
PARTICIPANTS: 208 randomised clinical trials (RCTs) including 134,692 adults with
COPD.
INTERVENTIONS: LABA, LAMA and/or ICS, alone or in combination, versus each other 
or placebo.
PRIMARY AND SECONDARY OUTCOMES: The proportion of patients with
moderate-to-severe exacerbations. The number of patients experiencing mortality, 
pneumonia, serious arrhythmia and cardiovascular-related mortality (CVM) were
secondary outcomes.
RESULTS: NMA was conducted including 20 RCTs for moderate-to-severe exacerbations
for 26,141 patients with an exacerbation in the past year. 32 treatments were
effective versus placebo including: tiotropium, budesonide/formoterol,
salmeterol, indacaterol, fluticasone/salmeterol, indacaterol/glycopyrronium,
tiotropium/fluticasone/salmeterol and tiotropium/budesonide/formoterol.
Tiotropium/budesonide/formoterol was most effective (99.2% probability of being
the most effective according to the Surface Under the Cumulative RAnking (SUCRA) 
curve). NMA was conducted on mortality (88 RCTs, 97 526 patients);
fluticasone/salmeterol was more effective in reducing mortality than placebo,
formoterol and fluticasone alone, and was the most effective (SUCRA=71%). NMA was
conducted on CVM (37 RCTs, 55,156 patients) and the following were safest:
salmeterol versus each OF placebo, tiotropium and tiotropium (Soft Mist Inhaler
(SMR)); fluticasone versus tiotropium (SMR); and salmeterol/fluticasone versus
tiotropium and tiotropium (SMR). Triamcinolone acetonide was the most harmful
(SUCRA=81%). NMA was conducted on pneumonia occurrence (54 RCTs, 61 551
patients). 24 treatments were more harmful, including 2 that increased risk of
pneumonia versus placebo; fluticasone and fluticasone/salmeterol. The most
harmful agent was fluticasone/salmeterol (SUCRA=89%). NMA was conducted for
arrhythmia; no statistically significant differences between agents were
identified.
CONCLUSIONS: Many inhaled agents are available for COPD, some are safer and more 
effective than others. Our results can be used by patients and physicians to
tailor administration of these agents.
PROTOCOL REGISTRATION NUMBER: PROSPERO # CRD42013006725.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://www.bmj.com/company/products-services/rights-and-licensing/

DOI: 10.1136/bmjopen-2015-009183 
PMCID: PMC4636655
PMID: 26503392  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Pulm Pharmacol Ther. 2015 Dec;35:28-33. doi: 10.1016/j.pupt.2015.10.005. Epub
2015 Oct 22.

A comparison of the efficacy of once-daily fluticasone furoate/vilanterole with
twice-daily fluticasone propionate/salmeterol in asthma-COPD overlap syndrome.

Ishiura Y(1), Fujimura M(2), Shiba Y(3), Ohkura N(4), Hara J(4), Kasahara K(4).

Author information: 
(1)Respiratory Medicine, Toyama City Hospital, Toyama, Japan. Electronic address:
ishiura-@p2322.nsk.ne.jp. (2)Respiratory Medicine, National Hospital Organization
Nanao Hospital, Nanao, Japan. (3)Respiratory Medicine, Toyama City Hospital,
Toyama, Japan. (4)Respiratory Medicine, Kanazawa University Hospital, Kanazawa,
Japan.

BACKGROUND: Asthma-chronic obstructive pulmonary disease overlap syndrome (ACOS) 
is important because patients with ACOS have significantly worse outcomes
compared with those with asthma or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)
alone. Inhaled corticosteroids (ICS), together with a long-acting β2 agonist
(LABA), are recommended, but no therapeutic studies for ACOS have been conducted.
Recently, fluticasone furoate/vilanterole (FF/VI) has been approved as the first 
once-daily ICS/LABA combination therapy for asthma and COPD.
METHODS: A 12-week, randomized, open-label cross-over study was conducted in 16
patients with ACOS to compare the effectiveness of once-daily FF/VI 200/25 μg vs.
twice-daily fluticasone propionate/salmeterol (FP/SAL) 500/50 μg. The study
period included a 4-week run-in, the first 4-week treatment, and the second
4-week treatment. Respiratory functions, including forced expiratory volume in
1 s (FEV1) and respiratory impedance using the forced oscillation technique
(FOT), were measured, as was fractional exhaled nitric oxide (FeNO). A COPD
assessment test (CAT) scores and asthma control test (ACT) scores were recorded
0, 4, and 8 weeks after randomization.
RESULTS: The mean values for the FEV1 were 1.33 (±0.29) L in the run-in period,
1.38 (±0.39) L after the FP/SAL treatment period, and 1.47 (±0.38) L after the
FF/VI treatment period. The FEV1 value after the FF/VI treatment was
significantly greater than the value after the run-in period (p < 0.01). FOT
parameters, FeNO levels, CAT scores, ACT scores, and other blood tests were not
significantly different during the run-in period, the FP/SAL treatment period,
and the FF/VI treatment period.
CONCLUSIONS: FF/VI, the first once-daily ICS/LABA, can provide substantial
improvement in lung functions, indicating that FF/VI should be considered for the
regular treatment of ACOS.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pupt.2015.10.005 
PMID: 26497109  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Eur J Drug Metab Pharmacokinet. 2015 Oct 16. [Epub ahead of print]

Population Pharmacokinetics of Inhaled Fluticasone Furoate and Vilanterol in
Subjects with Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease.

Siederer S(1), Allen A(2), Yang S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Pharmacology Modelling and Simulation Department, GSK, Gunnels Wood
Road, Stevenage, Herts, SG1 2NY, UK. Sarah.K.Siederer@gsk.com. (2)Clinical
Pharmacology Modelling and Simulation Department, GSK, Gunnels Wood Road,
Stevenage, Herts, SG1 2NY, UK. (3)Clinical Pharmacology Modelling and Simulation 
Department, GSK, Stockley Park West, Uxbridge, Middlesex, UB11 1BT, UK.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Previous pharmacokinetic studies of the inhaled
corticosteroid, fluticasone furoate (FF), and the long-acting, beta2-receptor
agonist, vilanterol (VI) have been performed in relatively small populations
using non-compartmental pharmacokinetic methods and censored data (due to low
drug exposure relative to assay sensitivity). This paper presents a population
pharmacokinetic analysis, utilizing pooled concentration-time data from clinical 
studies in healthy subjects and from global trials in patients with chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). The objective of this analysis was to
characterize the population pharmacokinetics of FF and VI following once-daily
inhalation dosing of FF/VI or the individual components (FF and VI) and to
identify significant covariates that impact systemic exposure to FF and VI in
this population.
METHODS: Population pharmacokinetic methods that maximize the likelihood of all
data were developed to describe systemic exposure to FF and VI following
once-daily FF/VI, FF, or VI, and to identify significant covariates that impact
the pharmacokinetics. COPD patients (N = 1225 for the FF analysis and N = 1091
for the VI analysis; 94 and 93 % of total data, respectively) and healthy
subjects contributed to the analysis.
RESULTS: FF data were described by a two-compartment model with first-order
absorption and elimination. The population grouping "race" was a significant
covariate on inhaled clearance (CL/F). The area under the curve over 24 h
(AUC0-24) for FF was higher for East Asian, Japanese, and South East Asian
(average 23-30 %) and Asian Central, White Arabic, American Indian/Native
Alaskan, and 'other' (10-26 %) subjects compared with White/Caucasians. VI
pharmacokinetics were described by a three-compartment model with zero-order
absorption and first-order elimination. Significant demographic covariates
identified to affect pharmacokinetics of VI were age [on CL/F and central volume 
(V 1/F)], bodyweight (on CL/F), sex and smoking (on V 1/F).
CONCLUSIONS: While significant effects of the covariates were observed in this
study, the magnitude of these effects on systemic exposure is not large enough to
warrant FF/VI dosage adjustment in patients with COPD.

DOI: 10.1007/s13318-015-0303-4 
PMID: 26474864  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


58. COPD. 2016;13(1):1-10. doi: 10.3109/15412555.2015.1034256. Epub 2015 Oct 9.

Efficacy and Safety of Umeclidinium Added to Fluticasone Propionate/Salmeterol in
Patients with COPD: Results of Two Randomized, Double-Blind Studies.

Siler TM(1), Kerwin E(2), Singletary K(3), Brooks J(4), Church A(3).

Author information: 
(1)a Midwest Chest Consultants, PC, St. Charles , Missouri , USA. (2)b Clinical
Research Institute of Southern Oregon , Medford , Oregon , USA. (3)c GSK,
Respiratory and Immuno-Inflammation, Research Triangle Park , North Carolina ,
USA. (4)d GSK, Respiratory Medicines Development Centre, Stockley Park , Uxbridge
, United Kingdom.

Combinations of drugs with distinct and complementary mechanisms of action may
offer improved efficacy in the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD). In two 12-week, double-blind, parallel-group studies, patients with COPD 
were randomized 1:1:1 to once-daily umeclidinium (UMEC; 62.5 μg and 125 μg) or
placebo (PBO), added to twice-daily fluticasone propionate/salmeterol (FP/SAL;
250/50 μg). In both studies, the primary efficacy measure was trough forced
expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1) at Day 85. Secondary endpoints were
weighted-mean (WM) FEV1 over 0-6 hours post-dose (Day 84) and rescue albuterol
use. Health-related quality of life outcomes (St. George's Respiratory
Questionnaire [SGRQ] and COPD assessment test [CAT]) were also examined. Safety
was assessed throughout. Both UMEC+FP/SAL doses provided statistically
significant improvements in trough FEV1 (Day 85: 0.127-0.148 L) versus
PBO+FP/SAL. Similarly, both UMEC+FP/SAL doses provided statistically-significant 
improvements in 0-6 hours post-dose WM FEV1 versus PBO+FP/SAL (Day 84:
0.144-0.165 L). Rescue use over Weeks 1-12 decreased with UMEC+FP/SAL in both
studies versus PBO+FP/SAL (Study 1, 0.3 puffs/day [both doses]; Study 2, 0.5
puffs/day [UMEC 125+FP/SAL]). Decreases from baseline in CAT score were generally
larger for both doses of UMEC+FP/SAL versus PBO+FP/SAL (except for Day 84 Study
2). In Study 1, no differences in SGRQ score were observed between UMEC+FP/SAL
and PBO+FP/SAL; however, in Study 2, statistically significant improvements were 
observed with UMEC 62.5+FP/SAL (Day 28) and UMEC 125+FP/SAL (Days 28 and 84)
versus PBO+FP/SAL. The incidence of on-treatment adverse events across all
treatment groups was 37-41% in Study 1 and 36-38% in Study 2. Overall, these data
indicate that the combination of UMEC+FP/SAL can provide additional benefits over
FP/SAL alone in patients with COPD.

DOI: 10.3109/15412555.2015.1034256 
PMID: 26451734  [PubMed - in process]


59. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2015 Sep 28;10:2055-66. doi:
10.2147/COPD.S90658. eCollection 2015.

Comparative effectiveness of budesonide/formoterol combination and tiotropium
bromide among COPD patients new to these controller treatments.

Trudo F(1), Kern DM(2), Davis JR(1), Tunceli O(2), Zhou S(2), Graham EL(3),
Strange C(4), Williams SA(1).

Author information: 
(1)AstraZeneca Pharmaceuticals LP, Wilmington, DE, USA. (2)HealthCore, Inc.,
Wilmington, DE, USA. (3)AstraZeneca Pharmaceuticals LP, Alderley Park, Cheshire, 
UK. (4)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Medicine, 
Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, SC, USA.

BACKGROUND: Inhaled corticosteroid/long-acting β2-agonist combinations and/or
long-acting muscarinic antagonists are recommended first-line therapies for
preventing chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) exacerbation. Comparative
effectiveness of budesonide/formoterol combination (BFC, an inhaled
corticosteroid/long-acting β2-agonist combination) vs tiotropium (long-acting
muscarinic antagonist) in the US has not yet been studied.
METHODS: Using US claims data from the HealthCore Integrated Research
Environment, COPD patients (with or without comorbid asthma) ≥40 years old
initiating BFC or tiotropium between March 1, 2009 and February 28, 2012 and at
risk for exacerbation were identified and followed for 12 months. Patients were
propensity score matched on demographics and COPD disease severity indicators.
The primary outcome was time to first COPD exacerbation. Secondary outcomes
included COPD exacerbation rate, health care resource utilization, and costs.
RESULTS: The Cox proportional hazards model for time to first exacerbation
yielded a hazard ratio (HR) of 0.78 (95% CI =[0.70, 0.87], P<0.001), indicating a
22% reduction in risk of COPD exacerbation associated with initiation of BFC
versus tiotropium. A post hoc sensitivity analysis found similar effects in those
who had a prior asthma diagnosis (HR =0.72 [0.61, 0.86]) and those who did not
(HR =0.83 [0.72, 0.96]). BFC initiation was associated with lower COPD-related
health care resource utilization and costs ($4,084 per patient-year compared with
$5,656 for tiotropium patients, P<0.001).
CONCLUSION: In COPD patients new to controller therapies, initiating treatment
with BFC was associated with improvements in health and economic outcomes
compared with tiotropium.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S90658 
PMCID: PMC4592033
PMID: 26451101  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Drugs Today (Barc). 2015 Aug;51(8):469-78. doi: 10.1358/dot.2015.51.8.2365401.

Fluticasone furoate/vilanterol combination for the treatment of COPD and asthma.

Rogliani P(1), Matera MG(2), Cazzola M(3).

Author information: 
(1)University of Rome Tor Vergata, Department of Systems Medicine, Chair of
Respiratory Medicine, and University Hospital Tor Vergata, Division of
Respiratory Medicine, Rome, Italy. (2)Second University of Naples, Department of 
Experimental Medicine, Unit of Pharmacology, Naples, Italy. (3)University of Rome
Tor Vergata, Department of Systems Medicine, Chair of Respiratory Medicine;
Department of Systems Medicine, Respiratory Pharmacology Research Unit, and
Division of Respiratory Medicine, Rome, Italy.

The critical role of the combination therapy of an inhaled corticosteroid (ICS)
and a long-acting β-adrenoceptor agonist (LABA) in the treatment of patients
suffering from asthma and also severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD) patients with frequent exacerbations explains why there is a strong
interest within the pharmaceutical industry in developing a once-daily ICS/LABA
fixed-dose combination (FDC), in an attempt to simplify the treatment and,
consequently, increase adherence to the prescribed therapy, and also to overcome 
the loss of patent protection. GlaxoSmithKline and Theravance have developed an
inhaled FDC of the ICS fluticasone furoate (FF) and the LABA vilanterol (VI) as a
once-daily treatment for asthma and COPD. FF/VI, by simplifying the dosing
schedule, allows, for the first time, a shift from twice-daily to once-daily
treatment, with an acceptable safety and tolerability profile that is consistent 
with the ICS/LABA class. The decision to prescribe FF/VI rather than another
ICS/LABA FDC is likely to be based on the patient's preference for the inhaler
device, their ability to use the device correctly and the convenience of
once-daily dosing frequency as well as comparative costs with other combination
products. However, further studies are required to specifically assess these
possibilities.

Copyright 2015 Prous Science, S.A.U. or its licensors. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1358/dot.2015.51.8.2365401 
PMID: 26380385  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. J Aerosol Med Pulm Drug Deliv. 2015 Dec;28(6):498-506. doi:
10.1089/jamp.2015.1225. Epub 2015 Sep 15.

In Vitro Dosing Performance of the ELLIPTA® Dry Powder Inhaler Using Asthma and
COPD Patient Inhalation Profiles Replicated with the Electronic Lung (eLung™).

Hamilton M(1), Leggett R(1), Pang C(1), Charles S(1), Gillett B(1), Prime D(1).

Author information: 
(1)GSK Research and Development Ltd , Ware, Hertfordshire, United Kingdom .

BACKGROUND: To evaluate the in vitro dose delivery characteristics of approved
asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) therapies delivered via
the ELLIPTA(®) dry powder inhaler across inhalation endpoints representative of
the target patient population, using the Electronic Lung (eLung™) to replicate
inhaler-specific patient inhalation profiles that were previously recorded in
vivo.
METHODS: Selected profiles, representative of the range of inhalation endpoints
achieved by patients with all severities of asthma and COPD, were replicated
using the eLung breathing simulator in conjunction with an oropharyngeal cast. A 
Next Generation Impactor was coupled to the eLung to determine the aerodynamic
particle size distribution of the ex-throat dose (ETD) of asthma and COPD
therapies delivered via the ELLIPTA inhaler. Delivered dose (DD), ETD, and fine
particle dose (FPD; defined as a mass of active substance less than 5 μm) were
determined for fluticasone furoate (FF)/vilanterol (VI) 100/25 μg and 200/25 μg
(asthma and COPD), umeclidinium (UMEC)/VI 62.5/25 μg (COPD only), FF 100 μg and
200μg monotherapy (asthma only), and UMEC 62.5 μg monotherapy (COPD only).
RESULTS: Inhalation profiles replicated by eLung covered a wide range of peak
inspiratory flow rates (41.6-136.9 L/min), pressure drops (1.2-13.8 kPa), and
inhaled volumes through the inhaler (0.7-4.2L). DD was consistent across the
range of patient representative inhalation parameters for all components (FF, VI,
and UMEC) of each therapy assessed; although ETD and FPD were also generally
consistent, some small variation was observed. Dose delivery was consistent for
each of the components, whether delivered as mono- or combination therapy.
CONCLUSIONS: The in vitro performance of the ELLIPTA inhaler has been
demonstrated for the delivery of FF/VI, UMEC/VI, FF monotherapy, and UMEC
monotherapy. Across a range of inspiratory profiles, DD was consistent, while ETD
and FPD showed little flow dependency.

DOI: 10.1089/jamp.2015.1225 
PMCID: PMC4685503
PMID: 26372465  [PubMed - in process]


62. Respir Med. 2015 Oct;109(10):1363-8. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2015.07.013. Epub 2015
Jul 20.

Optimizing inhaler use by pharmacist-provided education to community-dwelling
elderly.

Bouwmeester C(1), Kraft J(2), Bungay KM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Northeastern University, Bouvé College of Health Sciences, School of Pharmacy,
360 Huntington Avenue, R218TF, Boston, MA, 02115, USA; Elder Service Plan of the 
Harbor Health Services, 1135 Morton Street, Mattapan, MA, 02126, USA. Electronic 
address: c.bouwmeester@neu.edu. (2)Atrius Health - Harvard Vanguard Medical
Associates, 485 Arsenal Street, Watertown, MA, 02472, USA. Electronic address:
Jacqueline_Kraft@atriushealth.org. (3)Northeastern University, Bouvé College of
Health Sciences, School of Pharmacy, 360 Huntington Avenue, R218TF, Boston, MA,
02115, USA; Center for the Evaluation of Value and Risk in Health (CEVR), The
Institute for Clinical Research and Health Policy Studies, Tufts Medical Center, 
800 Washington Street, Boston, MA, 02111, USA. Electronic address:
kbungay@tuftsmedicalcenter.org.

OBJECTIVE: To assess, using a standard observational tool, the ability of
patients to demonstrate and maintain proper inhaled medication administration
techniques following pharmacist education.
DESIGN: Six-month observational study.
SETTING: Patients' homes or adult day health center.
PARTICIPANTS: Patients in a Program for All-inclusive Care for the Elderly (PACE)
prescribed one or more inhaled medications used at least once daily.
INTERVENTION: Instruction by on-site clinical pharmacist.
MEASUREMENTS: Hickey's Pharmacies Inhaler Technique assessment (score range:
0-20, higher better).
RESULTS: Forty-two patients were evaluated at baseline, taught proper techniques 
for using inhaled medications, assessed immediately following the education, and 
re-assessed 4-6 weeks later. The mean pre-assessment score was 14 (SD 4.5, range 
0-20), the initial post-assessment score increased to 18 (SD 3, range 10-20). The
second post-assessment (4-6 weeks later) score mean was 17.7 (SD 3, range 10-20).
Both follow-up scores were significantly improved from baseline (p < 0.05).
Multivariable analysis indicated the strongest predictors of second post-training
score were: score after initial pharmacist training and being subscribed to
auto-refill. These characteristics predicted ∼70% of the variance in the second
score (p < 0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: These results indicate that education by a pharmacist combined with 
an auto-refill program can improve and sustain appropriate inhaler use by
community-dwelling elders in a PACE program. The improved score was maintained
4-6 weeks later indicating a sustained benefit of medication administration
education. Optimal inhaler use ensures optimal dosing and supports appropriate
inhaler treatment in lieu of oral agents.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2015.07.013 
PMID: 26341546  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Respir Res. 2015 Sep 4;16:101. doi: 10.1186/s12931-015-0267-6.

The Salford Lung Study protocol: a pragmatic, randomised phase III real-world
effectiveness trial in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Bakerly ND(1), Woodcock A(2), New JP(3), Gibson JM(4), Wu W(5), Leather D(6),
Vestbo J(7,)(8).

Author information: 
(1)Salford Royal NHS Foundation Trust, Salford, UK. nawar.bakerly@srft.nhs.uk.
(2)Institute of Inflammation and Repair, Manchester Academic Health Science
Centre, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK.
ashley.woodcock@manchester.ac.uk. (3)Salford Royal NHS Foundation Trust, Salford,
UK. john.new@manchester.ac.uk. (4)Salford Royal NHS Foundation Trust, Salford,
UK. Martin.Gibson@manchester.ac.uk. (5)GlaxoSmithKline, Research Triangle Park,
Durham, NC, USA. wei.w.wu@gsk.com. (6)GSK Respiratory Centre of Excellence,
GlaxoSmithKline UK Ltd, Uxbridge, UK. david.a.leather@gsk.com. (7)Institute of
Inflammation and Repair, Manchester Academic Health Science Centre, University of
Manchester, Manchester, UK. jorgen.vestbo@manchester.ac.uk. (8)Centre for
Respiratory Medicine and Allergy, 2nd Floor Education and Research Centre,
University Hospital of South Manchester NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester, M23
9LT, UK. jorgen.vestbo@manchester.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: New treatments need to be evaluated in real-world clinical practice
to account for co-morbidities, adherence and polypharmacy.
METHODS: Patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), ≥ 40 years
old, with exacerbation in the previous 3 years are randomised 1:1 to once-daily
fluticasone furoate 100 μg/vilanterol 25 μg in a novel dry-powder inhaler versus 
continuing their existing therapy. The primary endpoint is the mean annual rate
of COPD exacerbations; an electronic medical record allows real-time collection
and monitoring of endpoint and safety data.
CONCLUSIONS: The Salford Lung Study is the world's first pragmatic randomised
controlled trial of a pre-licensed medication in COPD.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: Clinicaltrials.gov identifier NCT01551758.

DOI: 10.1186/s12931-015-0267-6 
PMCID: PMC4558879
PMID: 26337978  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Genet Test Mol Biomarkers. 2015 Oct;19(10):566-72. doi: 10.1089/gtmb.2015.0108.
Epub 2015 Sep 1.

Impact of ABCB1 single-nucleotide polymorphisms on treatment outcomes with
salmeterol/fluticasone combination therapy for stable chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease.

Wang XW(1), Zhang YL(2), Xiong Y(3).

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Respiratory Diseases, Hubei Zhongshan Hospital , Wuhan,
People's Republic of China . (2)2 Department of Internal Medicine, Wuhan
Institute of Tuberculosis Prevention , Wuhan, People's Republic of China . (3)3
Department of Laboratory, Wuhan Union Hospital , Wuhan, People's Republic of
China .

OBJECTIVES: To investigate the relationship between ABCB1 single-nucleotide
polymorphisms and the efficacy of salmeterol/fluticasone combination (SFC)
inhalation therapy for stable chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) in a
Chinese Han population.
METHODS: A total of 362 patients with stable COPD were recruited between July
2012 and March 2014. Based on the therapeutic effects of lung function
improvement and COPD Assessment Test (CAT) scores, all patients were either
placed into the effective group (n = 138) or the ineffective group (n = 224).
Three common polymorphisms (rs1045642C > T, rs1128503C > T, and rs1202184A > G)
in the ABCB1 gene were analyzed by polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment
length polymorphism in these patients. All data were analyzed by SPSS version
18.0 software.
RESULTS: The genotype and allele frequencies of the ABCB1 rs1045642C > T
polymorphic locus were significantly different between the effective group and
the ineffective group under the codominant, recessive, and allele models (all
p < 0.05). Haplotype analysis of ABCB1 indicated that CTA
(rs1045642C-rs1128503T-rs1202184A) haplotype frequencies in the effective group
were significantly lower than the ineffective group (p = 0.022), but TCG
(rs1045642T-rs1128503C-rs1202184G) haplotype frequencies in the effective group
were significantly higher than the ineffective group (p = 0.048). Logistic
regression analysis showed that smoking history and rs1045642 CT + CC/TT may be
correlated with the efficacy of SFC inhalation therapy in stable COPD patients.
CONCLUSION: ABCB1 rs1045642C > T polymorphism and CTA/TCG haplotypes, as well as 
smoking history may influence the efficacy of SFC inhalation therapy in stable
COPD patients in the Chinese Han population.

DOI: 10.1089/gtmb.2015.0108 
PMID: 26327575  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Springerplus. 2015 Aug 27;4:455. doi: 10.1186/s40064-015-1218-x. eCollection
2015.

Iatrogenic Cushing syndrome and adrenal insufficiency during concomitant therapy 
with ritonavir and fluticasone.

Epperla N(1), McKiernan F(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology and Oncology, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, 
WI USA. (2)Center for Bone Disease, Marshfield Clinic, Marshfield, WI USA.

Ritonavir is a potent inhibitor of the cytochrome P450 enzyme CYP3A4 and is
subject to multiple drug-drug interactions. This becomes especially important
when the patient is also taking medications metabolized through CYP3A pathway as 
increased and potentially toxic drug levels may ensue. Herein we present one such
interaction wherein a 57 year old gentleman with human immunodeficiency virus
(HIV) infection on highly active antiretroviral therapy that included ritonavir, 
had addition of fluticasone inhaler to his medication repertoire for treatment of
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. This resulted in severe osteoporosis,
iatrogenic Cushing syndrome and adrenal insufficiency due to the potentiated
systemic glucocorticoid effect of inhaled fluticasone by ritonavir. This case
emphasizes the need for pharmacovigilance when managing patients on complex drug 
regimens for physicians treating HIV infected patients.

DOI: 10.1186/s40064-015-1218-x 
PMCID: PMC4549367
PMID: 26322261  [PubMed]


66. Lancet. 2015 Feb 26;385 Suppl 1:S88. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(15)60403-2.

Effect of fluticasone propionate on virus-induced airways inflammation and
anti-viral immune responses in mice.

Singanayagam A(1), Glanville N(2), Bartlett N(2), Johnston S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Airway Disease Infection Section, National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial 
College, London, UK. Electronic address: aransinga@gmail.com. (2)Airway Disease
Infection Section, National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College, London,
UK.

BACKGROUND: Inhaled corticosteroids are commonly used in the treatment of asthma 
and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, but their effects on viral loads and
anti-viral responses are poorly characterised. The aim of this study was to
assess effects of inhaled fluticasone propionate on rhinovirus infection in vivo,
in a mouse model. We tested the hypothesis that this treatment would reduce
virus-induced airways inflammation but that the effect would be confounded by
interference with anti-viral immune responses, leading to delayed viral
clearance.
METHODS: C57BL/6 mice were intranasally dosed with fluticasone propionate (1
mg/kg) or vehicle (dimethyl sulfoxide, control), 1 h before infection with
rhinovirus 1B. We assessed bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) inflammatory cell
numbers, and measured gene expression, protein production of innate mediators, or
both by quantitative RT-PCR or ELISA. We compared mice treated with fluticasone
with controls at various timepoints after infection. In additional experiments,
recombinant interferon (IFN) beta was administered with fluticasone and
rhinovirus 1B in both groups of mice.
FINDINGS: At 24 h post infection, fluticasone treatment suppressed rhinovirus
induction of type I and III IFNs in the airways (for the fluticasone-treated
group compared with controls: mean IFNβ BAL protein 20·2 pg/mL [SD 16·7] vs 103·0
[30·9]; mean IFNλ BAL protein 102·6 pg/mL [17·4] vs 217 [44·6], p<0·001); it also
impaired viral clearance, with increased lung tissue viral RNA copy numbers
(4·7 × 10(5) copies [SD 1·3] vs 2·6 × 10(5) [0·8], p<0·001). Despite increasing
viral loads, fluticasone inhibited rhinovirus-induced airway inflammation as
evidenced by suppressed BAL neutrophil numbers in fluticasone compared with
control mice (0·021 × 10(5) [0·012] vs 0·59 × (5) [0·39], p<0·001) and by
suppressed lymphocyte numbers (0·092 × 10(5) [0·044] vs 0·45 × 10(5) [0·11],
p<0·001). By contrast, fluticasone increased MUC5AC proteins (158·2 arbitrary
units [29·9] vs 107·6 [7·1], p=0·0165) and MUC5B proteins (623·8 arbitrary units 
[231·9] vs 413·5 [70·5], p=0·0476) in BAL at day 7 post infection. Administration
of intranasal recombinant IFN beta (10(4) units) with fluticasone and rhinovirus 
1B led to upregulation of interferon-inducible cytokines OAS and CXCL10/IP-10
compared with control mice treated with fluticasone and rhinovirus alone and
improved viral clearance without having any effect on suppression of inflammation
by fluticasone.
INTERPRETATION: Our findings suggest that fluticasone treatment suppresses
rhinovirus-induced airways inflammation in vivo but also impairs anti-viral
immune responses and increases viral titres, leading to mucus hypersecretion.
Since asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease are both associated with
inherent deficient IFN responses to rhinovirus, inhaled corticosteroids might
interact synergistically with disease to inhibit IFN and thus lead to increased
severity of exacerbation. The clinical applicability of these findings requires
confirmation in human models of disease.
FUNDING: Wellcome Trust.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(15)60403-2 
PMID: 26312910  [PubMed]


67. Breathe (Sheff). 2015 Mar;11(1):81-2. doi: 10.1183/20734735.111215.

Hot topics from the Assemblies.

[No authors listed]

INSTEAD: a randomised switch trial of indacaterol versus salmeterol/fluticasone
in moderate COPD Authors: Rossi A, van der Molen T, Ricardo del Olmo, et al. Eur 
Respir J 2014; 44: 6, 1548-1556 SUMMARY: Inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) remain a
highly controversial treatment for stable chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD). Data linking high-dose ICS with complications, such as pneumonia and
fractures, has necessitated a re-evaluation of their role in COPD management.
Guidelines currently suggest ICS for patients with a forced expiratory volume in 
1 s (FEV1) <50% predicted (or <60% in some regions) and a history of
exacerbations. Nevertheless, it is well known that ICS and combination
ICS/long-acting β-agonist (LABA) treatments are commonly used outside these
groups. In view of the increasingly recognised dangers of ICS treatment, data
demonstrating the safety of discontinuing ICS treatment is welcome.

DOI: 10.1183/20734735.111215 
PMCID: PMC4487384
PMID: 26306109  [PubMed]


68. J Asthma. 2015;52(10):1073-83. doi: 10.3109/02770903.2015.1056350. Epub 2015 Aug 
18.

Fluticasone furoate (FF)/vilanterol (100/25 mcg or 200/25 mcg) or FF (100 mcg) in
persistent asthma.

Bernstein DI(1), Bateman ED(2), Woodcock A(3), Toler WT(4), Forth R(5), Jacques
L(6), Nunn C(6), O'Byrne PM(7).

Author information: 
(1)a Division of Immunology and Allergy , University of Cincinnati and Bernstein 
Clinical Research Center , Cincinnati , OH , USA . (2)b Department of Medicine , 
University of Cape Town , Cape Town , South Africa . (3)c Institute of
Inflammation and Repair, University of Manchester , Manchester , UK . (4)d
Respiratory Medicines Development Center, GSK , Research Triangle Park , NC , USA
. (5)e GSK Business Unit, PAREXEL , Research Triangle Park , NC , USA . (6)f
Respiratory Medicines Development Centre, GSK , London , UK , and. (7)g Michael
G. DeGroote School of Medicine , Hamilton , ON , Canada.

OBJECTIVES: Fluticasone furoate (FF; inhaled corticosteroid) combined with
vilanterol (VI; long-acting beta(2) agonist) is a once-daily therapy for asthma
and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. This 12-week phase III study compared 
the efficacy and safety of once-daily (evening dosing) FF/VI 100/25 mcg versus FF
100 mcg (primary objective) and FF/VI 100/25 mcg versus FF/VI 200/25 mcg
(descriptive comparison only) in patients (n = 1039) ≥12 years with
moderate-to-severe persistent asthma.
METHODS: The primary end point was weighted mean (wm) 0-24-h serial forced
expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV(1)) at week 12. Secondary end points (change from
baseline) were trough FEV(1) and the proportion (%) of rescue-free 24-h periods
(both powered), the proportion (%) of symptom-free 24-h periods, and morning and 
evening peak expiratory flow (PEF). Safety data (adverse events, AEs) were
collected throughout.
RESULTS: Compared with FF 100 mcg, FF/VI 100/25 mcg significantly improved
wmFEV(1) (p < 0.001), trough FEV(1) (p = 0.014), % rescue-free (p < 0.001), %
symptom-free (p = 0.002) 24-h periods, and morning and evening PEF (p < 0.001).
FF/VI 200/25 mcg produced small numerical improvements versus FF/VI 100/25 mcg
for all end points. Incidence of AEs was similar across groups.
CONCLUSIONS: FF/VI 100/25 mcg resulted in significant improvements in all primary
and secondary end points versus FF 100 mcg. Numerical improvements occurred with 
FF/VI 200/25 mcg versus FF/VI 100/25 mcg. All treatments were well tolerated.

DOI: 10.3109/02770903.2015.1056350 
PMID: 26291137  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. MMW Fortschr Med. 2015 Aug 20;157(14):76. doi: 10.1007/s15006-015-3429-z.

[LAMA/LABA or LABA/ICS?].

[Article in German]

Hubert M(1).

Author information: 
(1), .

DOI: 10.1007/s15006-015-3429-z 
PMID: 26289895  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. BMC Pulm Med. 2015 Aug 19;15:91. doi: 10.1186/s12890-015-0092-1.

Umeclidinium/vilanterol versus fluticasone propionate/salmeterol in COPD: a
randomised trial.

Singh D(1), Worsley S(2), Zhu CQ(3), Hardaker L(4), Church A(5).

Author information: 
(1)University of Manchester, Medicines Evaluation Unit, Langley Building,
University Hospital of South Manchester Foundations Trust, Southmoor Road,
Manchester, M23 9QZ, UK. dsingh@meu.org.uk. (2)Respiratory Medicines Development 
Centre, GSK, London, UK. sally.d.worsley@gsk.com. (3)Quantitative Sciences
Division, GSK, London, UK. chang-qing.2.zhu@gsk.com. (4)Global Clinical Safety
and Pharmacovigilance, GSK, London, UK. liz.x.hardaker@gsk.com. (5)Respiratory
Medicines Development Center, GSK, Research Triangle Park, North Carolina, USA.
alison.x.church@gsk.com.

BACKGROUND: Umeclidinium (UMEC; long-acting muscarinic antagonist) plus
vilanterol (VI; long-acting beta2 agonist [LABA]) and the LABA/inhaled
corticosteroid fluticasone propionate/salmeterol (FP/SAL) are approved
maintenance treatments for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). This
12-week, multicentre, double-blind, parallel-group, double-dummy study compared
the efficacy and safety of these treatments in symptomatic patients with
moderate-to-severe COPD with no exacerbations in the year prior to enrolment.
METHODS: Patients (n = 717) were randomised 1:1 to once-daily UMEC/VI 62.5/25 mcg
or twice-daily FP/SAL 500/50 mcg. Endpoints included 0-24 h weighted mean (wm)
forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1) (Day 84; primary), trough FEV1 (Day 85;
secondary), other lung function endpoints, symptoms, quality of life (QoL) and
safety.
RESULTS: Improvements with UMEC/VI versus FP/SAL were 0.080 L (95 % confidence
interval: 0.046-0.113; wmFEV1) and 0.090 L (0.055-0.125; trough FEV1) (both
p < 0.001). UMEC/VI statistically significantly improved all other lung function 
measures versus FP/SAL. Both treatments demonstrated a clinically meaningful
improvement in symptoms (Transition Dyspnoea Index ≥1 unit) and QoL (St George's 
Respiratory Questionnaire Total score ≥4 unit decrease from baseline) over 12
weeks. The incidence of adverse events was 28 % (UMEC/VI) and 29 % (FP/SAL);
nasopharyngitis and headache were most common.
CONCLUSIONS: Once-daily UMEC/VI 62.5/25 mcg over 12 weeks resulted in significant
and sustained improvements in lung function versus twice-daily FP/SAL 500/50 mcg 
in patients with moderate-to-severe COPD and with no exacerbations in the year
prior to enrolment.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: NCT01822899 Registration date: March 28, 2013.

DOI: 10.1186/s12890-015-0092-1 
PMCID: PMC4545560
PMID: 26286141  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. BMJ Case Rep. 2015 Aug 6;2015. pii: bcr2015211493. doi: 10.1136/bcr-2015-211493.

Allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis in an adult with Kartagener syndrome.

Sehgal IS(1), Dhooria S(1), Bal A(2), Agarwal R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Postgraduate Institute of Medical Education 
and Research, Chandigarh, India. (2)Department of Histopathology, Postgraduate
Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh, India.

Allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis (ABPA) is a pulmonary disorder resulting 
from immune responses directed against inhaled Aspergillus fumigatus antigens. It
manifests with poorly controlled asthma, fleeting pulmonary opacities and
structural lung damage in the form of bronchiectasis. Initially defined in
individuals suffering from bronchial asthma and cystic fibrosis, it has also been
described in patients with other structural lung disorders such as chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease, pulmonary tuberculosis, idiopathic bronchiectasis 
and others. Kartagener syndrome is a manifestation of primary ciliary dyskinesia 
characterised by the presence of dextrocardia, bronchiectasis and chronic
sinusitis. We report a case of ABPA in an adult suffering from Kartagener
syndrome. We also performed a systematic review of the literature on the
association between Kartagener syndrome and ABPA.

2015 BMJ Publishing Group Ltd.

DOI: 10.1136/bcr-2015-211493 
PMID: 26250371  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Perspect Clin Res. 2015 Jul-Sep;6(3):150-8. doi: 10.4103/2229-3485.159940.

Cost-effectiveness analysis of three different combinations of inhalers for
severe and very severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease patients at a
tertiary care teaching hospital of South India.

Altaf M(1), Zubedi AM(1), Nazneen F(1), Kareemulla S(1), Ali SA(1), Aleemuddin
NM(2), Hannan Hazari MA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy Practice and PharmD, Deccan School of Pharmacy,
Jawaharlal Nehru Technological University, Hyderabad, Telangana, India.
(2)Department of Pulmonology, Deccan College of Medical Sciences, Hyderabad,
Telangana, India. (3)Department of Physiology, Deccan College of Medical
Sciences, Hyderabad, Telangana, India.

BACKGROUND: This study aims at simplifying the practical patient management and
offers some general indications for pharmacotherapeutic choice by the
implementation of (Global Initiative for Chronic Lung Disease) guidelines. This
study was designed to evaluate the clinical and economic consequences of
salmeterol/fluticasone (SF), formoterol/budesonide (FB), and
formoterol/fluticasone (FF) in severe and very severe chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD) patients.
OBJECTIVES: The aim was to find out the most cost-effective drug combination
between the three combinations (SF/FB/FF) in COPD patients.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A prospective observational comparative study
(cost-effectiveness analysis), in which 90 severe (30 ≤ forced expiratory volume 
in 1 s [FEV1] <50% predicted) and very severe (FEV1 < 30% predicted) COPD
patients (outpatients/inpatients) who are prescribed with any one of the
following combinations (SF/FB/FF) were selected. In our study, we have divided 90
COPD patients into three groups (Group I, Group II, and Group III) each group
consisting of 30 patients. Group I was prescribed with medication SF, Group II
with medication FB, and Group III with medication FF. We used five different
parameters such as spirometry test (mean FEV1 initial and final visit), number of
symptom-free days (SFDs), number of moderate and severe exacerbations, Number of 
days of hospitalization and direct, indirect, and total cost to assess the
cost-effectiveness of SF/FB/FF. Comparison of cost and effects was done during
the period of 6 months of using SF/FB/FF.
RESULTS: The average FEV1 for Group I, Group II, and Group III subjects at
initial visit was 33.47%, 33.73%, and 33.20% and was increased to 36.60%, 35.8%, 
and 33.4%, respectively. A 3% increment in FEV1 was reported for Group I subjects
(SF) and was highly significant statistically (t = -8.833, P = 0.000) at 95% CI. 
For Group II subjects (FB), a 2% increment in FEV1 was reported and was highly
significant statistically (t = -9.001, P = 0.000) at 95% CI. For Group III (FF)
subjects 0.2% increment in FEV1. The overall mean total cost for Group I, Group
II, and Group III subjects during the 6 months period was found to be Rs.
29,725/-, Rs. 32,602/- and Rs. 37,155/-. Incremental cost-effectiveness of FB
versus SF was Rs. 37,781/- per avoided exacerbation and Rs. 661/-per SFD.
CONCLUSION: This study highlights the favorable therapeutic performance of
combined inhaled bronchodilators and corticosteroids (SF/FB/FF), thus suggesting 
that healthcare costs would be also affected positively. Results from our study
showed that SF and FB were the most effective strategies in the treatment of
COPD, with a slight clinical superiority of SF. The FF strategy was not much
effective (i.e. associated with fewer outcomes and higher costs).

DOI: 10.4103/2229-3485.159940 
PMCID: PMC4504057
PMID: 26229751  [PubMed]


73. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2015 Jul 23;10:1383-92. doi:
10.2147/COPD.S55488. eCollection 2015.

Clinical role of dual bronchodilation with an indacaterol-glycopyrronium
combination in the management of COPD: its impact on patient-related outcomes and
quality of life.

Rossi A(1), Zanardi E(2), Poletti V(3), Cazzola M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary Unit, University of Verona, Verona, Italy. (2)Department of
Respiratory and General Rehabilitation, ULSS 20, Verona, Italy. (3)Pulmonary
Unit, GB Morgani Hospital, AUSL 20, Forli, Italy. (4)Pulmonary Unit, University
of Rome, Tor Vergata, Italy.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is the result of persistent and
progressive pathologic abnormalities in the small airways, most often associated 
with alveolar loss. Smoking cessation is the most effective intervention to slow 
down the progression of COPD. Long-acting inhaled bronchodilators are prescribed 
for the symptomatic relief at any stage of disease severity. For patients whose
COPD cannot be not sufficiently controlled with long-acting bronchodilator
monotherapy, international guidelines suggest the possibility of associating a
long-acting beta2 agonist (LABA) with a long-acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA),
ie, dual bronchodilation. This is not a new concept as the combination of
short-acting agents has been popular in the past. In recent years, several
fixed-dose combinations containing a LAMA and a LABA in a single inhaler have
been approved by regulatory authorities in several countries. Among the new
LAMA/LABA combinations, the fixed-dose combination of indacaterol 110
µg/glycopyrronium 50 µg (QVA149) has been shown in a series of clinical trials to
be as safe as the single components and placebo, and more effective than placebo 
and the single components with regard to lung function, symptoms, and
patient-oriented outcomes. Furthermore, QVA149 achieved better bronchodilation
than salmeterol 50 µg/fluticasone 500 µg twice daily. Compared with tiotropium, a
well-recognized treatment for COPD, the percentage of patients that exceed the
minimal clinical important difference for dyspnea and health-related quality of
life measurements was superior with QVA149. Other patient-oriented outcomes, such
as daily symptoms, night-time awakening, and use of rescue medication
consistently favored QVA149. Finally, QVA149 was significantly superior to LAMAs 
for reducing all types of exacerbation. In conclusion, several years after
introduction of dual bronchodilation, the fixed-dose combination of indacaterol
110 µg/glycopyrronium 50 µg in a single inhaler for once-daily administration via
the Breezhaler device (QVA149) has been demonstrated to be a safe and effective
treatment for COPD patients.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S55488 
PMCID: PMC4516211
PMID: 26229457  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Respir Med. 2016 Jan;110:79-80. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2015.07.009. Epub 2015 Jul
17.

Improvements in lung function with umeclidinium/vilanterol versus fluticasone
propionate/salmeterol in patients with moderate-to-severe COPD and infrequent
exacerbations.

Banerji D(1), Patalano F(2).

Author information: 
(1)Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corporation, East Hanover, NJ, USA. Electronic
address: donald.banerji@novartis.com. (2)Novartis Pharma AG, Basel, Switzerland.

Comment in
    Respir Med. 2016 Jan;110:81.

Comment on
    Respir Med. 2015 Jul;109(7):870-81.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2015.07.009 
PMID: 26211886  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Expert Opin Pharmacother. 2015;16(13):2009-21. doi:
10.1517/14656566.2015.1070826. Epub 2015 Jul 20.

Pharmacological basis and scientific rationale underlying the targeted use of
inhaled corticosteroid/long-acting β2-adrenergic agonist combinations in chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease treatment.

Pelaia G(1), Muzzio CC, Vatrella A, Maselli R, Magnoni MS, Rizzi A.

Author information: 
(1)University 'Magna Græcia' of Catanzaro, Department of Medical and Surgical
Sciences, Section of Respiratory Diseases , Catanzaro , Italy.

INTRODUCTION: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a complex
respiratory disorder, whose medical and socioeconomic burden as one of the main
causes of morbidity and mortality is increasing worldwide. COPD pathophysiology
includes chronic airway/lung inflammation and progressive airflow limitation.
Therefore, anti-inflammatory and bronchodilator agents are key players in COPD
treatment.
AREAS COVERED: This review article discusses the complementary molecular
interactions connecting the respective mechanisms of action of inhaled
corticosteroids (ICS) and long-acting β2-adrenergic agonists (LABAs). Moreover,
attention is also focused on clinical trials, which have shown that ICS/LABA
combinations are very effective in improving COPD symptoms and lung function,
being also able to significantly reduce disease exacerbations.
EXPERT OPINION: In selected subgroups of COPD patients, ICS/LABA combinations
represent a very useful therapeutic approach for this widespread chronic
respiratory disease. In addition to the well-known fixed-dose drug associations
such as fluticasone propionate/salmeterol xinafoate and budesonide/formoterol
fumarate, other newly developed ICS/LABA combinations are currently emerging as
very interesting pharmacological options for COPD treatment.

DOI: 10.1517/14656566.2015.1070826 
PMID: 26194120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Respir Med. 2015 Sep;109(9):1155-63. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2015.06.006. Epub 2015
Jun 14.

Efficacy and safety of umeclidinium added to fluticasone furoate/vilanterol in
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: Results of two randomized studies.

Siler TM(1), Kerwin E(2), Sousa AR(3), Donald A(4), Ali R(3), Church A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Midwest Chest Consultants, PC, 330 First Capitol Drive, Suite 470, St Charles,
MO, USA. Electronic address: thomas.siler.md@midwestchest.com. (2)Clinical
Research Institute of Southern Oregon, Medford, OR, USA. (3)GSK, Respiratory
Medicines Development Centre, Stockley Park, Middlesex, UK. (4)GSK, Respiratory
and Immuno-Inflammation, Research Triangle Park, NC, USA.

Erratum in
    Respir Med. 2015 Nov;109(11):1493.

OBJECTIVE: The aim of these studies (NCT01957163; NCT02119286) was to evaluate
the efficacy and safety of umeclidinium (UMEC 62.5 μg and 125 μg) added to
fluticasone furoate/vilanterol (FF/VI, 100/25 μg) in chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD).
METHODS: These were 12-week, double-blind, placebo-controlled, parallel-group,
multicenter studies. Eligible patients were randomized 1:1:1 to treatment with
once-daily blinded UMEC 62.5 μg (delivering 55 μg), UMEC 125 μg (delivering 113
μg) or placebo (PBO) added to open-label FF/VI (delivering 92/22 μg; N = 1238
[intent-to-treat population]). The primary endpoint was trough forced expiratory 
volume in one second (FEV1) on Day 85; the secondary endpoint was 0-6 h post-dose
weighted mean (WM) FEV1 at Day 84. Health-related quality of life was reported
using St George's respiratory questionnaire (SGRQ). Adverse events (AEs) were
also assessed.
RESULTS: In both studies, trough FEV1 was significantly improved with UMEC +
FF/VI (62.5 μg and 125 μg) versus PBO + FF/VI (range: 0.111-0.128 L, all p <
0.001 [Day 85]), as was 0-6 h post-dose WM FEV1 (range: 0.135-0.153 L, all p <
0.001 [Day 84]). SGRQ results were inconsistent, with statistically significant
improvements with UMEC + FF/VI versus PBO + FF/VI in one study only and with UMEC
62.5 μg only (difference in SGRQ total score from baseline between treatments:
-2.16, p < 0.05). Across all treatment groups, the overall incidences of AEs were
similar (30-39%), as were cardiovascular AEs of special interest (<1-3%) and
pneumonia AEs (0-1%).
CONCLUSION: Overall, the addition of UMEC to FF/VI therapy resulted in
significant improvements in lung function compared with PBO + FF/VI in patients
with COPD, with similar safety profiles, though SGRQ results were inconsistent.
CLINICAL RELEVANCE: The results from these two studies demonstrate that the
addition of umeclidinium (62.5 μg and 125 μg) to FF/VI (100/25 μg) provides
statistically significant and clinically meaningful improvements in lung function
compared with placebo + FF/VI in patients with COPD. Statistically significant
improvements in quality of life with UMEC + FF/VI versus placebo + FF/VI were
reported in one study only. Safety profiles were consistent across all treatment 
groups in both studies. These studies support the use of triple therapy in COPD, 
providing physicians with an alternative treatment option.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2015.06.006 
PMID: 26117292  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Chest. 2015 Nov;148(5):1177-83. doi: 10.1378/chest.15-0627.

Discontinuation of Inhaled Corticosteroids in COPD and the Risk Reduction of
Pneumonia.

Suissa S, Coulombe J, Ernst P.

BACKGROUND: The widespread use of inhaled corticosteroids (ICSs) for COPD
treatment has been questioned. Recent studies of weaning some patients with COPD 
off ICSs found little or no adverse consequences compared with long-acting
bronchodilators. It is unclear, however, whether discontinuation of ICSs reduces 
the elevated risk of pneumonia associated with these drugs.
METHODS: Using the Quebec health insurance databases, we formed a new-user cohort
of patients with COPD treated with ICSs during 1990 to 2005 and followed through 
2007 or until a serious pneumonia event, defined as a first hospitalization for
or death from pneumonia. A nested case-control analysis of the cohort was used to
estimate the rate ratio of serious pneumonia associated with discontinuation of
ICS use compared with continued use, adjusted for age, sex, respiratory disease
severity, and comorbidity.
RESULTS: The cohort included 103,386 users of ICSs, of whom 14,020 had a serious 
pneumonia event during 4.9 years of follow-up (incidence rate, 2.8/100/y).
Discontinuation of ICSs was associated with a 37% decrease in the rate of serious
pneumonia (rate ratio [RR], 0.63; 95% CI, 0.60-0.66). The risk reduction was
rapidly evident, going from 20% in the first month to 50% by the fourth month
after discontinuation. The risk reduction was particularly marked with
fluticasone (RR, 0.58; 95% CI, 0.54-0.61) but less so with budesonide (RR, 0.87; 
95% CI, 0.78-0.97).
CONCLUSIONS: Discontinuation of ICS use in COPD is associated with a reduction in
the elevated risk of serious pneumonia, particularly so with fluticasone.

DOI: 10.1378/chest.15-0627 
PMID: 26110239  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2015 Jun 15;10:1123-8. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S83205.
eCollection 2015.

Roflumilast, a phosphodiesterase-4 inhibitor, induces phagocytic activity in
Greek COPD patients.

Porpodis K(1), Domvri K(1), Zarogoulidis P(1), Petridis D(2), Tsirgogianni K(1), 
Papaioannou A(1), Hatzizisi O(3), Kioumis I(1), Liaka A(3), Kikidaki V(3),
Lampaki S(1), Organtzis J(1), Zarogoulidis K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary Department-Oncology Unit, G Papanikolaou General Hospital, Aristotle
University of Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki, Greece. (2)Department of Food
Technology, School of Food Technology and Nutrition, Alexander Technological
Educational Institute, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki,
Greece. (3)Pulmonary Department, Immunology and Histocompatibility Laboratory, G 
Papanikolaou General Hospital, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki,
Thessaloniki, Greece.

Comment in
    Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2015;10:1931-4.

BACKGROUND: A new approach to the treatment of COPD includes controlling
inflammation because of its important role in exacerbation of the disease.
Recently, roflumilast has been added as a therapeutic option for COPD.
Roflumilast is an oral phosphodiesterase-4 inhibitor that targets inflammatory
cells involved in triggering exacerbations of COPD. The objective of the current 
study was to evaluate roflumilast for its contribution to phagocytic activity in 
COPD patients.
METHODS: Twenty-one patients diagnosed with COPD received roflumilast once daily 
for 6 months in combination with fluticasone (an inhaled corticosteroid),
salmeterol (a long-acting β2-agonist), and tiotropium (a long-acting muscarinic
antagonist) or combinations of these agents. The main inclusion criterion was
stable disease for at least the previous 30 days. Neutrophils and spirometric
changes, ie, forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1) and forced vital
capacity (FVC), were measured in the COPD patients at indicated time points. The 
first sample was taken before receiving roflumilast, the second 3 months later,
and the third after 6 months. Examination of defective phagocytosis was done by
flow cytometry using a FagoFlowEx(®) kit. The statistical analysis was performed 
using Statistica software.
RESULTS: Our results indicate that phagocytic activity was increased after 3 and 
6 months of treatment when compared with baseline (P<0.001). Similarly, FVC and
FEV1 were also increased during the 6-month period, but only FVC differed
significantly from baseline (P<0.001).
CONCLUSION: Although the number of patients in this study was limited, our
results indicate that roflumilast induces phagocytic activity, which improves
lung function.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S83205 
PMCID: PMC4474389
PMID: 26109853  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Ther Clin Risk Manag. 2015 Jun 2;11:889-99. doi: 10.2147/TCRM.S55116. eCollection
2015.

Fluticasone-formoterol: a systematic review of its potential role in the
treatment of asthma.

Prosser TR(1), Bollmeier SG(1).

Author information: 
(1)St Louis College of Pharmacy, St Louis, MO, USA.

BACKGROUND: The purpose of this systematic review is to summarize and evaluate
the available published data regarding the efficacy and safety of a combination
product containing fluticasone propionate/formoterol (FP-F) in order to establish
its potential role compared with other inhaled combination
corticosteroid/long-acting beta2 receptor agonists for the maintenance treatment 
of asthma.
METHODS: A PubMed and EMBASE search was conducted using the terms "fluticasone
propionate", "formoterol fumarate", "Flutiform(®)", and "asthma" in July 2014 to 
identify trials using this combination specifically for the treatment of asthma. 
Additional information was gathered from references cited in the identified
publications, the package insert, and the ClinicalTrials. gov registry. All
randomized controlled clinical trials for humans in asthma were evaluated for
inclusion. Data from animal trials, clinical trials for chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease, and non-English sources were excluded.
RESULTS: Seven short-term safety and efficacy trials of FP-F compared with its
individual components and two comparison trials of FP-F versus other combination 
products were identified. Generally, the incidence of drug-related adverse events
was low and consistent with previously reported drug class-related adverse events
(ie, pharyngitis, dysphonia, and headache). The combination of FP-F was shown to 
be noninferior to fluticasone propionate/salmeterol for improving predose forced 
expiratory volume at one second (FEV1) and 2 hours post dose FEV1. FP-F was also 
noninferior to budesonide/formoterol in improving predose FEV1. Other clinical
endpoints, including various symptom scores, asthma control, quality of life, and
subjects' assessment of the medications were not significantly different.
CONCLUSION: Poor asthma control is common. The data from short-term studies
indicate that this inhaled corticosteroid and long-acting beta2 receptor agonist 
combination product is non-inferior to similar combination products available. As
FP-F is available in different strengths, the corticosteroid dose can be titrated
without changing devices. A potential advantage is that those with good
technique, the same type of device could be used for both their controller and
rapid relief inhaler medicines. The choice of this combination versus other
similar products may be based primarily on cost.

DOI: 10.2147/TCRM.S55116 
PMCID: PMC4459636
PMID: 26082638  [PubMed]


80. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2015 Jun 5;10:1015-26. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S84436.
eCollection 2015.

LANTERN: a randomized study of QVA149 versus salmeterol/fluticasone combination
in patients with COPD.

Zhong N(1), Wang C(2), Zhou X(3), Zhang N(1), Humphries M(4), Wang L(4), Thach
C(5), Patalano F(6), Banerji D(5); LANTERN Investigators.

Collaborators: Zhong N, Zhang N, Wang C, Zhou X, Huang W, Zhao Z, Yang J, Wen Z, 
Cai B, Li J, Huang K, Wang H, Wang G, Chang X, Chen P, Sun S, He Y, Wen F, Xiao
Z, Zhou J, Ying K, Wang L, Huang Y, Wen G, Kuang J, Xiao Z, Huang M, Shi Y, Zhong
X, Tang H, Bai C, Liu J, Li Q, Zhou X, Chen P, Kang J, Yan X, Han X, Shi M, Yang 
L, Li Z, Xin J, Jiang L, Perng DW, Kuo HP, Hsu JY, Wang CC, Lai RS, Chen SL,
Salvado A, Lopez AM, Medina A, Garcia G, Wehbe L, Rey LB, De Salvo MC, Otaola M, 
Rolon MW, Aramayo N, del Olmo R, Gene R, Rivera F, Barros M, Saldias F, Sepulveda
R, Soler T.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Respiratory Diseases, First Affiliated Hospital,
Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, People's Republic of China.
(2)Institute of Respiratory Disease, Xin Qiao Hospital, Third Military Medical
University, Chongqing City, Chongqing, People's Republic of China. (3)Department 
of Respiratory Medicine, Southwest Hospital, Third Military Medical University,
Chongqing City, Chongqing, People's Republic of China. (4)Beijing Novartis Pharma
Co. Ltd., Shanghai, People's Republic of China. (5)Novartis Pharmaceuticals
Corporation, East Hanover, NJ, USA. (6)Novartis Pharma AG, Basel, Switzerland.

BACKGROUND: The current Global initiative for chronic Obstructive Lung Disease
(GOLD) treatment strategy recommends the use of one or more bronchodilators
according to the patient's airflow limitation, their history of exacerbations,
and symptoms. The LANTERN study evaluated the effect of the long-acting
β2-agonist (LABA)/long-acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA) dual bronchodilator,
QVA149 (indacaterol/glycopyrronium), as compared with the LABA/inhaled
corticosteroid, salmeterol/fluticasone (SFC), in patients with moderate-to-severe
COPD with a history of ≤1 exacerbation in the previous year.
METHODS: In this double-blind, double-dummy, parallel-group study, 744 patients
with moderate-to-severe COPD with a history of ≤1 exacerbations in the previous
year were randomized (1:1) to QVA149 110/50 μg once daily or SFC 50/500 μg twice 
daily for 26 weeks. The primary endpoint was noninferiority of QVA149 versus SFC 
for trough forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1) at week 26.
RESULTS: Overall, 676 patients completed the study. The primary objective of
noninferiority between QVA149 and SFC in trough FEV1 at week 26 was met. QVA149
demonstrated statistically significant superiority to SFC for trough FEV1
(treatment difference [Δ]=75 mL; P<0.001). QVA149 demonstrated a statistically
significant improvement in standardized area under the curve (AUC) from 0 hours
to 4 hours for FEV1 (FEV1 AUC0-4h) at week 26 versus SFC (Δ=122 mL; P<0.001).
QVA149 and SFC had similar improvements in transition dyspnea index focal score, 
St George Respiratory Questionnaire total score, and rescue medication use.
However, QVA149 significantly reduced the rate of moderate or severe
exacerbations by 31% (P=0.048) over SFC. Overall, the incidence of adverse events
was comparable between QVA149 (40.1%) and SFC (47.4%). The incidence of pneumonia
was threefold lower with QVA149 (0.8%) versus SFC (2.7%).
CONCLUSION: These findings support the use of the LABA/LAMA, QVA149 as an
alternative treatment, over LABA/inhaled corticosteroid, in the management of
moderate-to-severe COPD patients (GOLD B and GOLD D) with a history of ≤1
exacerbation in the previous year.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S84436 
PMCID: PMC4461092
PMID: 26082625  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Pharmacotherapy. 2015 Jun;35(6):586-99. doi: 10.1002/phar.1598. Epub 2015 Jun 9.

Pharmacodynamics and pharmacokinetics of fluticasone furoate/vilanterol in
healthy Chinese subjects.

Chen X(1), Zheng X(1), Jiang J(1), Hu P(1), Wu K(2), Zhuang L(2), Liu L(2), Du
X(3), Kempsford R(4), Allen A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Pharmacological Research Centre, Peking Union Medical College
Hospital, Beijing, China. (2)GlaxoSmithKline (China) R&D Company, Shanghai,
China. (3)GlaxoSmithKline (China) R&D Company, Beijing, China. (4)Respiratory
Medicines Development Centre, GlaxoSmithKline, Stevenage, Hertfordshire, UK.

STUDY OBJECTIVE: To investigate the pharmacodynamic and pharmacokinetic profiles 
of fluticasone furoate (FF)/vilanterol (VI) - a fixed-dose combination of an
inhaled corticosteroid (ICS) and a long-acting β2 -agonist for the treatment of
asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease - after single and repeat
administration in healthy Chinese subjects.
DESIGN: Double-blind, placebo-controlled, single-site, randomized, four-way
crossover study.
SETTING: The Clinical Pharmacological Research Centre at Peking Union Medical
College Hospital [PUMCH]) in Beijing, China.
SUBJECTS: Sixteen healthy, nonsmoking Chinese adults.
INTERVENTION: Subjects were randomized to receive FF/VI 50/25, 100/25, or
200/25 μg, or placebo once/daily in the morning, delivered by the Ellipta dry
powder inhaler, for 7 consecutive days. The subjects then received the other
three treatments, with each treatment period separated by a 7-day washout period.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: The co-primary outcome measures reflected
pharmacodynamic responses relating to recognized class effects of the two drug
classes: reduced serum cortisol level (ICSs), and increased Fridericia's
corrected QT interval (QTcF) and reduced serum potassium level (long-acting β2
-agonists). Co-primary pharmacodynamic endpoints were 0-24-hour weighted mean
serum cortisol level on day 7 (cortisol0-24 hr, Day 7 ), and 0-4-hour weighted
mean and maximum QTcF and weighted mean and minimum serum potassium level on days
1 and 7. Fluticasone furoate and VI plasma concentrations, derived
pharmacokinetic parameters, and safety were also assessed. Of the 16 subjects
randomized, 15 completed the study. Reductions in cortisol0-24 hour, Day 7 of 15%
and 25% were observed with FF/VI 100/25 and 200/25 μg, respectively, versus
placebo. Minor increases (< 10 msec) in maximum QTcF on day 7 were seen with
FF/VI 50/25 and 100/25 μg but not with 200/25 μg. Slight decreases in serum
potassium level were only observed in subjects receiving FF/VI 50/25 μg on day 1 
and FF/VI 50/25 and 200/25 μg on day 7. Fluticasone furoate accumulation (day 7
vs day 1) for FF/VI 50/25-200/25 μg ranged from 38 to 54% for maximum observed
concentration and 63-71% for area under the concentration-time curve from 0 to
4 hours. Fluticasone furoate pharmacokinetics were less than dose proportional.
The VI pharmacokinetic profiles were similar for all three FF/VI doses. Adverse
events were all mild in intensity and were reported by 13 (81%) of the 16
subjects.
CONCLUSION: In healthy Chinese subjects, minimal and non-clinically relevant
β-adrenergic pharmacodynamic effects were observed with FF/VI doses ranging from 
50/25 to 200/25 μg. FF dose-dependent reductions in serum cortisol levels of
15-25% were seen after administration of FF/VI 100/25 and 200/25 μg. FF/VI was
safe and well tolerated in these subjects at doses ranging from 50/25 to
200/25 μg.

© 2015 The Authors. Pharmacotherapy published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on
behalf of Pharmacotherapy Publications, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/phar.1598 
PMCID: PMC4744690
PMID: 26059225  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Profiles Drug Subst Excip Relat Methodol. 2015;40:321-69. doi:
10.1016/bs.podrm.2015.02.002. Epub 2015 Apr 1.

Salmeterol Xinafoate.

Anwar MM(1), El-Haggar RS(2), Zaghary WA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Therapeutical Chemistry Department, National Research Centre, Dokki, Cairo,
Egypt. (2)Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, Faculty of Pharmacy, Helwan
University, Cairo, Egypt; Department of Medicinal Chemistry, Pharmacy Program,
Batterjee Medical College, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia. (3)Department of Pharmaceutical 
Chemistry, Faculty of Pharmacy, Helwan University, Cairo, Egypt; Department of
Pharmaceutical Chemistry, College of Pharmacy, King Saud University, Riyadh,
Saudi Arabia. Electronic address: wafaa.zaghary@pharm.helwan.edu.eg.

Salmeterol xinafoate is a potent and a long-acting β2-adrenoceptor agonist. It is
prescribed for the treatment of severe persistent asthma and chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease. Different methods were used to prepare (R)-(-)-salmeterol such
as: mixing a sample of 4-benzyloxy-3-hydroxymethyl-ω-bromoacetophenone with
sodium lauryl sulfate and the mixture was added to the microbial culture of
Rhodotorula rubra, treatment of p-hydroxyacetophenone with Eschenmoser's salt and
carbonate exchange resin followed by a sequence of supported reagents and
scavenging agents or via Rh-catalyzed asymmetric transfer hydrogenation. The
enantioselective synthesis of (S)-salmeterol was achieved via asymmetric
reduction of the azidoketone 4 by Pichia angusta yeast. Physical characteristics 
of salmeterol xinafoate were confirmed via: X-ray powder diffraction pattern,
thermal analysis and UV, vibrational, nuclear magnetic resonance, and mass
spectroscopical data. Initial improvement in asthma control may occur within 30
min following oral inhalation of salmeterol in fixed combination with fluticasone
propionate. Clinically important improvements are maintained for up to 12 h in
most patients. It is extensively metabolized in the liver by hydroxylation, thus 
increased plasma concentrations may occur in patients with hepatic impairment.

© 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/bs.podrm.2015.02.002 
PMID: 26051688  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. MMW Fortschr Med. 2015 Jun 11;157(11):66. doi: 10.1007/s15006-015-3225-9.

[Once daily with a powder inhaler].

[Article in German]

Fath R(1).

Author information: 
(1), .

DOI: 10.1007/s15006-015-3225-9 
PMID: 26049359  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Respir Med. 2015 Jul;109(7):870-81. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2015.04.018. Epub 2015
May 8.

Improvements in lung function with umeclidinium/vilanterol versus fluticasone
propionate/salmeterol in patients with moderate-to-severe COPD and infrequent
exacerbations.

Donohue JF(1), Worsley S(2), Zhu CQ(3), Hardaker L(4), Church A(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of North Carolina College of Medicine,
Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA. Electronic address: james_donohue@med.unc.edu. (2)The
Respiratory Medicines Development Centre, Stockley Park West, 1-3 Ironbridge
Road, Uxbridge, Middlesex UB11 1BT, UK. Electronic address:
sally.d.worsley@gsk.com. (3)The Quantitative Sciences Division, GSK, Stockley
Park West, 1-3 Ironbridge Road, Uxbridge, Middlesex UB11 1BT, UK. Electronic
address: chang-qing.2.zhu@gsk.com. (4)Global Clinical Safety and
Pharmacovigilance, GSK, Stockley Park West, 1-3 Ironbridge Road, Uxbridge,
Middlesex UB11 1BT, UK. Electronic address: liz.x.hardaker@gsk.com. (5)The
Respiratory Medicines Development Center, GSK, 5 Moore Drive, PO Box 13398,
Research Triangle Park, NC 27709-3398, USA. Electronic address:
alison.x.church@gsk.com.

Comment in
    Respir Med. 2016 Jan;110:79-80.
    Respir Med. 2016 Jan;110:81.

BACKGROUND: Umeclidinium (UMEC; long-acting muscarinic antagonist
[LAMA])/vilanterol (VI; long-acting beta2-agonist [LABA]) and fluticasone
propionate/salmeterol (FP/SAL) (inhaled corticosteroid/LABA) are approved
maintenance therapies for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Two
studies compared efficacy and safety of UMEC/VI with FP/SAL in patients with
moderate-to-severe COPD with no exacerbations in the previous year.
METHODS: In these 12-week, multicenter, double-blind, parallel-group,
double-dummy trials, randomized (1:1) patients received once-daily UMEC/VI
62.5/25 mcg or twice-daily FP/SAL 250/50 mcg (DB2114930 n = 353 and 353;
DB2114951 n = 349 and 348, respectively; intent-to-treat). Endpoints included
0-24 h weighted mean (wm) forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1) (Day 84;
primary), trough FEV1 (Day 85; secondary), other lung function endpoints,
dyspnea, quality of life (QoL) and safety.
RESULTS: UMEC/VI demonstrated statistically significant, clinically meaningful
improvements in lung function measures versus FP/SAL. For 0-24 h wmFEV1 (Day 84),
improvements with UMEC/VI versus FP/SAL were 74 mL (95% confidence interval [CI]:
38-110; DB2114930) and 101 mL (63-139; DB2114951) (both p < 0.001). Trough FEV1
improvements were 82 mL (45-119) and 98 mL (59-137) (both p < 0.001) for UMEC/VI 
versus FP/SAL, respectively. Both treatments demonstrated similar, clinically
meaningful improvements from baseline in dyspnea (Transition Dyspnea Index focal 
score >1 unit) and QoL (St George's Respiratory Questionnaire Total score >4-unit
decrease) in both studies with no statistical differences between treatments.
Adverse event rates were similar: 26 and 30% UMEC/VI; 27 and 31% FP/SAL.
CONCLUSIONS: Once-daily UMEC/VI 62.5/25 mcg over 12 weeks resulted in
statistically significant, clinically meaningful improvements in lung function
versus twice-daily FP/SAL 250/50 mcg in patients with moderate-to-severe COPD
with infrequent exacerbations. Both treatments improved dyspnea and QoL.
CLINICAL TRIAL REGISTRATION: DB2114930/NCT01817764; DB2114951/NCT01879410.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2015.04.018 
PMID: 26006754  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. J Immunol. 2015 Jul 1;195(1):174-84. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1402217. Epub 2015 May
18.

Glucocorticoid-Augmented Efferocytosis Inhibits Pulmonary Pneumococcal Clearance 
in Mice by Reducing Alveolar Macrophage Bactericidal Function.

Stolberg VR(1), McCubbrey AL(2), Freeman CM(3), Brown JP(4), Crudgington SW(4),
Taitano SH(2), Saxton BL(5), Mancuso P(6), Curtis JL(7).

Author information: 
(1)Research Service, VA Ann Arbor Healthcare System, Ann Arbor, MI 48105;
(2)Graduate Program in Immunology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109;
(3)Research Service, VA Ann Arbor Healthcare System, Ann Arbor, MI 48105;
Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Internal
Medicine, University of Michigan Health System, Ann Arbor, MI 48109; (4)Division 
of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine,
University of Michigan Health System, Ann Arbor, MI 48109; (5)Kalamazoo College, 
Kalamazoo, MI 49006; (6)Graduate Program in Immunology, University of Michigan,
Ann Arbor, MI 48109; Department of Environmental Health Sciences, School of
Public Health, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109; and. (7)Graduate
Program in Immunology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109; Division of
Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine, University
of Michigan Health System, Ann Arbor, MI 48109; Medical Service, VA Ann Arbor
Healthcare System, Ann Arbor, MI 48105 jlcurtis@umich.edu.

Inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) increase community-acquired pneumonia (CAP)
incidence in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) by
unknown mechanisms. Apoptosis is increased in the lungs of COPD patients. Uptake 
of apoptotic cells (ACs) ("efferocytosis") by alveolar macrophages (AMøs) reduces
their ability to combat microbes, including Streptococcus pneumoniae, the most
common cause of CAP in COPD patients. Having shown that ICS significantly
increase AMø efferocytosis, we hypothesized that this process, termed
glucocorticoid-augmented efferocytosis, might explain the association of CAP with
ICS therapy in COPD. To test this hypothesis, we studied the effects of
fluticasone, AC, or both on AMøs of C57BL/6 mice in vitro and in an established
model of pneumococcal pneumonia. Fluticasone plus AC significantly reduced
TLR4-stimulated AMø IL-12 production, relative to either treatment alone, and
decreased TNF-α, CCL3, CCL5, and keratinocyte-derived chemoattractant/CXCL1,
relative to AC. Mice treated with fluticasone plus AC before infection with
viable pneumococci developed significantly more lung CFUs at 48 h. However, none 
of the pretreatments altered inflammatory cell recruitment to the lungs at 48 h
postinfection, and fluticasone plus AC less markedly reduced in vitro mediator
production to heat-killed pneumococci. Fluticasone plus AC significantly reduced 
in vitro AMø killing of pneumococci, relative to other conditions, in part by
delaying phagolysosome acidification without affecting production of reactive
oxygen or nitrogen species. These results support glucocorticoid-augmented
efferocytosis as a potential explanation for the epidemiological association of
ICS therapy of COPD patients with increased risk for CAP, and establish murine
experimental models to dissect underlying molecular mechanisms.

Copyright © 2015 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1402217 
PMCID: PMC4475455
PMID: 25987742  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2015 Apr 21;10:813-22. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S56067.
eCollection 2015.

Role of combined indacaterol and glycopyrronium bromide (QVA149) for the
treatment of COPD in Japan.

Horita N(1), Kaneko T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonology, Yokohama City University Graduate School of
Medicine, Yokohama, Japan.

Once-daily dual-bronchodilator therapy with combined indacaterol and
glycopyrronium bromide in one device (Ultibro, Breezhaler), often called QVA149, 
was first approved in 2013 in Japan and Europe. As of November 2014, more than 40
countries had approved this medication except for the USA. This is the first dual
bronchodilator in one device. Now, the Breezhaler is the only device that can
provide long-acting muscarinic antagonist (glycopyrronium bromide), long-acting
beta agonist (indacaterol), and a combination of the two medications (QVA149).
The choice among the three medications allows a patient to use the same
inhalation device even when the regimen is changed from single-bronchodilator
therapy to dual-bronchodilator therapy. In addition, the quick bronchodilation
effect and once-daily administration can improve patient adherence to medical
treatment for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). To our knowledge, as 
of November 2014, the safety and the efficacy of QVA149 have been evaluated in 14
randomized controlled trials. The 14 trials generally showed good safety
profiles, and there were better or not-inferior bronchodilator effects of QVA149 
when compared with placebo, or other inhaled medication. According to the
Japanese Respiratory Society guidelines, QVA149 is a combination of the two
first-line bronchodilators. Our meta-analysis indicated that QVA149 is superior
to the salmeterol-fluticasone combination to treat COPD in respect of the
frequency of adverse effects, exacerbation, pneumonia, and improvement of trough 
forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1). Thus, we believe that QVA149 can be 
a key medication for COPD treatments.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S56067 
PMCID: PMC4410821
PMID: 25960646  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2015 Apr 17;10:803-11. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S79842.
eCollection 2015.

Anti-inflammatory effects of salmeterol/fluticasone propionate 50/250 mcg
combination therapy in Japanese patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease.

Asai K(1), Kobayashi A(2), Makihara Y(3), Johnson M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka City
University, Osaka, Japan. (2)Biomedical Data Sciences, GlaxoSmithKline, Tokyo,
Japan. (3)Medical Affairs Respiratory Department, GlaxoSmithKline, Tokyo, Japan. 
(4)Respiratory Global Franchise, GlaxoSmithKline, Uxbridge, UK.

PURPOSE: Using sputum neutrophils as the primary measure, and other inflammation 
biomarkers, this study evaluated the anti-inflammatory effects of the combination
salmeterol 50 mcg and fluticasone propionate 250 mcg (SFC 250) in Japanese
patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Patients were treated in a randomized, double-blind,
parallel group, placebo-controlled trial with SFC 250 twice daily (n=26) or
placebo (n=26) for 12 weeks. At the start and end of treatment, inflammation
biomarkers (sputum and serum), lung function, and health status (COPD Assessment 
Test [CAT] questionnaire) were measured.
RESULTS: Although a numerical decrease in differential neutrophil count was
observed from baseline, SFC 250 did not significantly reduce sputum neutrophils
compared with placebo, nor were there significant changes from baseline in the
other biomarkers (sputum or serum), lung function, or CAT, versus placebo.
Squamous epithelial cell contamination in some sputum samples rendered them
unacceptable for analysis, which reduced the sample size to n=19 (SFC 250) and
n=10 (placebo). However, inclusion of contaminated samples did not affect the
overall trend of the outcome. Ad hoc bootstrap statistical analysis showed a
27.9% (SFC 250) and 1.3% (placebo) decrease in sputum neutrophils. Sputum IL-8
decreased by 43.2% after SFC 250 but increased by 48.3% with placebo. Responder
analyses showed 42% of patients had ≥20% decrease in neutrophils from baseline;
and 47% of patients had a ≥200 pg/mL change in sputum IL-8 following SFC 250
versus 20% after placebo; both changes are considered clinically relevant.
CONCLUSION: This study provides additional information about inflammation in
Japanese COPD patients and is the first to study the anti-inflammatory effects of
SFC 250 in this context and population. In the primary analysis, SFC 250 did not 
produce significant changes from baseline in sputum neutrophil levels or other
sputum or serum inflammatory markers compared with placebo. Secondary ad hoc
statistical analysis showed that SFC 250 reduced the number of sputum neutrophils
and IL-8 compared with placebo.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S79842 
PMCID: PMC4407765
PMID: 25945045  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Lancet. 2015 May 2;385(9979):1778-88. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(15)60647-X.

Early chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: definition, assessment, and
prevention.

Rennard SI(1), Drummond MB(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Nebraska Medical Center,
Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE, USA. Electronic address: srennard@unmc.edu.
(2)Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is the third leading cause of death 
worldwide. COPD, however, is a heterogeneous collection of diseases with
differing causes, pathogenic mechanisms, and physiological effects. Therefore a
comprehensive approach to COPD prevention will need to address the complexity of 
COPD. Advances in the understanding of the natural history of COPD and the
development of strategies to assess COPD in its early stages make prevention a
reasonable, if ambitious, goal.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(15)60647-X 
PMCID: PMC4819246
PMID: 25943942  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Expert Opin Pharmacother. 2015;16(10):1539-41. doi:
10.1517/14656566.2015.1043888. Epub 2015 May 4.

Efficacy of indacaterol as a single therapy versus salmeterol/fluticasone therapy
in patients with milder chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Ruxandra U(1), Antoniu SA, Mihaltan F, Boisteanu D.

Author information: 
(1)University of Oradea , Oradea , Romania.

Comment on
    Eur Respir J. 2014 Dec;44(6):1548-56.

INTRODUCTION: In non-exacerbation chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)
with mild lung function impairment, single bronchodilator therapy might be as
effective as combined inhaled corticosteroid/bronchodilator therapy, whereas the 
risk of pneumonia associated with the latter would be practically absent.
AREAS COVERED: We performed an analysis of a recent study evaluating the efficacy
and safety of inhaled indacaterol versus inhaled salmeterol/fluticasone in COPD
patients.
EXPERT OPINION: Both therapies were found to exert comparable effects on lung
function, symptom severity and health status.

DOI: 10.1517/14656566.2015.1043888 
PMID: 25936440  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2015 Apr 15;10:775-89. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S80656.
eCollection 2015.

Role of the fixed combination of fluticasone and salmeterol in adult Chinese
patients with asthma and COPD.

Gao J(1), Pleasants RA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Diseases, Peking Union Medical College Hospital,
Peking Union Medical College and Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing,
People's Republic of China. (2)Division of Pulmonary, Allergy, and Critical Care 
Medicine, Department of Medicine, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC,
USA.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and asthma are common airway
disorders characterized by chronic airway inflammation and airflow obstruction,
and are a leading cause of morbidity and mortality in the People's Republic of
China. These two diseases pose a high economic burden on the family and the whole
of society. Despite evidence-based Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung
Disease and Global Initiative for Asthma guidelines being available for the
diagnosis and management of COPD and asthma, many of these patients are not
properly diagnosed or managed in the People's Republic of China. The value of
combination therapy with inhaled corticosteroids and long-acting β2-agonists has 
been established in the management of asthma and COPD globally. Combinations of
inhaled corticosteroids and long-acting β2-agonists such as fluticasone and
salmeterol, have been shown to be effective for improving symptoms, health
status, and reducing exacerbations in both diseases. In this review, we discuss
the efficacy and safety of this combination therapy from key studies,
particularly in the People's Republic of China.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S80656 
PMCID: PMC4403740
PMID: 25926729  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Respir Res. 2015 Apr 23;16:52. doi: 10.1186/s12931-015-0210-x.

Comparative effectiveness of budesonide/formoterol combination and
fluticasone/salmeterol combination among chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
patients new to controller treatment: a US administrative claims database study.

Kern DM(1), Davis J(2), Williams SA(3), Tunceli O(4), Wu B(5), Hollis S(6),
Strange C(7), Trudo F(8).

Author information: 
(1)HealthCore, Inc., 123 Justison St, Suite 200, Wilmington, DE, 19801-5134, USA.
dkern@healthcore.com. (2)AstraZeneca Pharmaceuticals, 1800 Concord Pike,
Wilmington, DE, 19850, USA. Jill.Davis@astrazeneca.com. (3)AstraZeneca
Pharmaceuticals, One MedImmune Way, Gaithersburg, MD, 20878, USA.
Setareh.Williams@astrazeneca.com. (4)HealthCore, Inc., 123 Justison St, Suite
200, Wilmington, DE, 19801-5134, USA. otunceli@healthcore.com. (5)HealthCore,
Inc., 123 Justison St, Suite 200, Wilmington, DE, 19801-5134, USA.
bwu@healthcore.com. (6)AstraZeneca Pharmaceuticals, Alderley Park, Cheshire, UK. 
Sally.Hollis@astrazeneca.com. (7)Department of Medicine, Division of Pulmonary
and Critical Care Medicine, Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, SC,
29425, USA. strangec@musc.edu. (8)AstraZeneca Pharmaceuticals, 1800 Concord Pike,
Wilmington, DE, 19850, USA. Frank.Trudo@astrazeneca.com.

BACKGROUND: Inhaled corticosteroid/long-acting β2-agonist combinations (ICS/LABA)
have emerged as first line therapies for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD) patients with exacerbation history. No randomized clinical trial has
compared exacerbation rates among COPD patients receiving budesonide/formoterol
combination (BFC) and fluticasone/salmeterol combination (FSC) to date, and only 
limited comparative data are available. This study compared the real-world
effectiveness of approved BFC and FSC treatments among matched cohorts of COPD
patients in a large US managed care setting.
METHODS: COPD patients (≥40 years) naive to ICS/LABA who initiated BFC or FSC
treatments between 03/01/2009-03/31/2012 were identified in a geographically
diverse US managed care database and followed for 12 months; index date was
defined as first prescription fill date. Patients with a cancer diagnosis or
chronic (≥180 days) oral corticosteroid (OCS) use within 12 months prior to index
were excluded. Patients were matched 1-to-1 on demographic and pre-initiation
clinical characteristics using propensity scores from a random forest model. The 
primary efficacy outcome was COPD exacerbation rate, and secondary efficacy
outcomes included exacerbation rates by event type and healthcare resource
utilization. Pneumonia objectives included rates of any diagnosis of pneumonia
and pneumonia-related healthcare resource utilization.
RESULTS: Matching of the identified 3,788 BFC and 6,439 FSC patients resulted in 
3,697 patients in each group. Matched patients were well balanced on age (mean=64
years), gender (BFC: 52% female; FSC: 54%), prior COPD-related medication use,
healthcare utilization, and comorbid conditions. During follow-up, no significant
difference was seen between BFC and FSC patients for number of COPD-related
exacerbations overall (rate ratio [RR]=1.02, 95% CI=[0.96,1.09], p=0.56) or by
event type: COPD-related hospitalizations (RR=0.96), COPD-related ED visits
(RR=1.11), and COPD-related office/outpatient visits with OCS and/or antibiotic
use (RR=1.01). The proportion of patients diagnosed with pneumonia during the
post-index period was similar for patients in each group (BFC =17.3%, FSC =19.0%,
odds ratio=0.92 [0.81,1.04], p=0.19), and no difference was detected for
pneumonia-related healthcare utilization by place of service.
CONCLUSION: This study demonstrated no difference in COPD-related exacerbations
or pneumonia events between BFC and FSC treatment groups for patients new to
ICS/LABA treatment in a real-world setting.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov identifier NCT01921127 .

DOI: 10.1186/s12931-015-0210-x 
PMCID: PMC4409772
PMID: 25899176  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Lancet Respir Med. 2015 Jun;3(6):435-42. doi: 10.1016/S2213-2600(15)00106-X. Epub
2015 Apr 12.

Blood eosinophil counts, exacerbations, and response to the addition of inhaled
fluticasone furoate to vilanterol in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease: a secondary analysis of data from two parallel randomised controlled
trials.

Pascoe S(1), Locantore N(2), Dransfield MT(3), Barnes NC(4), Pavord ID(5).

Author information: 
(1)GlaxoSmithKline, Research Triangle Park, NC, USA. Electronic address:
steven.j.pascoe@gsk.com. (2)GlaxoSmithKline, Research Triangle Park, NC, USA.
(3)University of Alabama Lung Health Center, University of Alabama at Birmingham,
Birmingham, AL, USA; Birmingham VA Medical Center, Birmingham, AL, USA.
(4)GlaxoSmithKline, Uxbridge, Middlesex, UK; William Harvey Institute, Barts &
The London School of Medicine and Dentistry, London, UK. (5)Respiratory Medicine 
Unit, Nuffield Department of Clinical Medicine, University of Oxford, UK.

Erratum in
    Lancet Respir Med. 2015 Jun;3(6):e19.

Comment in
    Lancet Respir Med. 2015 Jun;3(6):416-7.
    Lancet Respir Med. 2015 Aug;3(8):e26.
    Lancet Respir Med. 2015 Aug;3(8):e27.

BACKGROUND: The short-term benefits of inhaled corticosteroids for patients with 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) are greater in patients with
evidence of eosinophilic airway inflammation. We investigated whether blood
eosinophil count is a useful biomarker of the long-term effect of the inhaled
corticosteroid fluticasone furoate on exacerbation frequency.
METHODS: We did a post-hoc analysis of data from two replicate, randomised,
double-blind trials of 12 months' duration (Sept 25, 2009 to Oct 21, 2011 and Oct
17, 2011) in which once a day vilanterol 25 μg was compared with 25 μg vilanterol
plus 50 μg, 100 μg, or 200 μg fluticasone furoate in patients with
moderate-to-severe COPD and a history of one or more exacerbation in the previous
year. We compared exacerbation rates according to two baseline eosinophil cell
count strata (<2% and ≥2%), and according to four baseline percentage groupings. 
We also assessed lung function and incidence of pneumonia per strata in treatment
groups.
FINDINGS: We included 3177 patients in the analyses, with 2083 patients (66%)
having an eosinophil count of 2% or higher at study entry. Across all doses of
inhaled corticosteroids, fluticasone furoate and vilanterol reduced exacerbations
by 29% compared with vilanterol alone (mean 0·91 vs 1·28 exacerbations per
patient per year; p<0·0001) in patients with eosinophil counts of 2% or higher,
and by 10% (0·79 vs 0·89; p=0·2827) in patients with eosinophil counts lower than
2%. Reductions in exacerbations with fluticasone furoate and vilanterol, compared
with vilanterol alone, were 24% in patients with baseline eosinophil counts of
≥2-<4%, 32% for those with counts of 4-<6%, and 42% for those with eosinophil
counts of ≥6%. In patients treated with vilanterol alone, exacerbation rates
increased progressively with increasing eosinophil count percentage category.
Improvement in trough forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1) and the increased
risk of pneumonia with fluticasone furoate and vilanterol compared with
vilanterol alone were not associated with eosinophil count.
INTERPRETATION: Blood eosinophil count is a promising biomarker of response to
inhaled corticosteroids in patients with COPD. Blood eosinophil count could
potentially be used to stratify patients for different exacerbation rate
reduction strategies.
FUNDING: GlaxoSmithKline (study ID 201595).

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S2213-2600(15)00106-X 
PMID: 25878028  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Drug Ther Bull. 2015 Apr;53(4):42-5. doi: 10.1136/dtb.2015.4.0319.

▼Olodaterol--another LABA for COPD.

[No authors listed]

▼Olodaterol solution for inhalation (Striverdi Respimat-Boehringer Ingelheim) is 
a long-acting beta2 agonist (LABA) licensed for once-daily use as maintenance
bronchodilator therapy for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). This is 
the third LABA to be licensed in the UK for once-daily use for patients with
COPD. DTB has previously reviewed the use of indacaterol and vilanterol in
combination with fluticasone furoate (▼Relvar Ellipta).1,2 In this article we
consider the evidence for olodaterol and whether it offers any advantages in the 
management of COPD.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

DOI: 10.1136/dtb.2015.4.0319 
PMID: 25858815  [PubMed - in process]


94. Respir Res. 2015 Feb 15;16:25. doi: 10.1186/s12931-015-0184-8.

Once-daily fluticasone furoate/vilanterol 100/25 mcg versus twice daily
combination therapies in COPD - mixed treatment comparisons of clinical efficacy.

Stynes G, Svedsater H, Wex J, Lettis S, Leather D, Castelnuovo E, Detry M, Berry 
S.

BACKGROUND: Fluticasone furoate (FF)/vilanterol (VI) 100/25 mcg is a once-daily
inhaled corticosteroid (ICS)/long-acting beta2 agonist (LABA) treatment approved 
in the United States, Canada and Europe for the long-term maintenance therapy of 
COPD. We report data from mixed treatment comparisons (MTC) of once-daily FF/VI
against established twice-daily ICS/LABA combination therapies on clinical
efficacy outcomes.
METHODS: Data from 33 parallel-group randomised controlled trials (RCTs) of
ICS/LABAs, of ≥8 weeks' duration in patients ≥12 years of age with COPD,
identified by systematic review, were analysed using covariate-adjusted Bayesian 
hierarchical models for three efficacy outcomes. Lung function, assessed by
change from baseline in forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV1), was the
outcome of primary interest (n = 28 studies). Secondary objectives were
assessment of annual rate of moderate/severe exacerbations (n = 15) and
patient-reported health status, measured by change from baseline in St George's
Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ) Total score (n = 20). Overall, 25 different
treatments were included in the MTC; we report findings, including probabilities 
of non-inferiority, for comparisons of once-daily FF/VI 100/25 mcg with
twice-daily fluticasone propionate (FP)/salmeterol (SAL) 500/50 mcg and
budesonide (BUD)/formoterol (FORM) 400/12 mcg.
RESULTS: For FEV1, FF/VI 100/25 mcg demonstrated >99% probability of
non-inferiority to FP/SAL 500/50 mcg and BUD/FORM 400/12 mcg using a 50 mL
margin. For annual rate of moderate/severe exacerbations, FF/VI 100/25 mcg
demonstrated 73% and 77% probability of non-inferiority to FP/SAL 500/50 mcg and 
BUD/FORM 400/12 mcg, respectively, using a 10% rate ratio margin. For SGRQ Total 
score, the corresponding probabilities of non-inferiority were 99% and 98%,
respectively, on a 2-unit margin. Significant covariate effects were identified: 
increased age was associated with deterioration in FEV1 and reduced exacerbation 
frequency; shorter study duration was associated with reduced exacerbation
frequency.
CONCLUSIONS: FF/VI 100/25 mcg was comparable with corresponding doses of FP/SAL
and BUD/FORM on lung function and health status outcomes. Non-inferiority on
moderate/severe exacerbation rate was not demonstrated to the same degree of
confidence, though observed rates were similar. Model limitations include a weak 
treatment network for the exacerbation analysis and variability across the
included studies. Our data support previous RCT findings suggesting that the
efficacy of FF/VI 100/25 mcg on lung function and health status in COPD is
comparable with twice-daily ICS/LABAs.

DOI: 10.1186/s12931-015-0184-8 
PMCID: PMC4339422
PMID: 25849223  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Thorax. 2015 Jun;70(6):519-27. doi: 10.1136/thoraxjnl-2014-206670. Epub 2015 Apr 
3.

Glycopyrronium once-daily significantly improves lung function and health status 
when combined with salmeterol/fluticasone in patients with COPD: the GLISTEN
study, a randomised controlled trial.

Frith PA(1), Thompson PJ(2), Ratnavadivel R(3), Chang CL(4), Bremner P(5), Day
P(6), Frenzel C(7), Kurstjens N(7); Glisten Study Group.

Collaborators: Waddell A, Daniel A, Khoussousi A, Springfield A, Veale A, Graham 
AN, Gallagher B, Pande BR, O'Kane B, Jones C, Baldi C, Helm C, O'Dochartaigh C,
Chambers D, Quinn D, Yull D, Karthigesu D, Then E, Graham F, Faigenbaum F, Geddam
G, Cameron G, Blom H, Goldman H, Snell H, Chia I, Jeong J, Liew J, Salvaris J,
Pryke J, Reid J, Kolbe J, O'Sullivan J, Pak J, Upham J, Feiber J, Ford JO, Yong
K, Perrin K, Noonan L, Atlas L, Murdoch L, Pearce M, Bloch M, Holmes M, Chia M,
Epton M, Leadston M, Tandon M, Chitgopeker M, Liebenberg N, Hendry N, Olaniyi O, 
Singh O, Kendall P, Van Niekerk P, Willet R, Tomlins R, Pillay S, Sharifeh S,
Carson S, Bingham S, Walford T, Erasmus T, Claridge T, Hess Z.

Author information: 
(1)Respiratory Clinical Research Unit, Repatriation General Hospital, Adelaide,
South Australia, Australia. (2)The Lung Health Clinic, Centre for Asthma Allergy 
and Respiratory Research, University of Western Australia, and the Lung Institute
of Western Australia, Perth, Western Australia, Australia. (3)Department of
Respiratory Medicine, Gosford Hospital, Gosford, New South Wales, Australia.
(4)Department of Respiratory and Sleep Medicine, Waikato Hospital, Hamilton, New 
Zealand. (5)St John of God Hospital, Murdoch, Western Australia, Australia.
(6)Medical Centre, Redcliffe Peninsula 7 Day Medical Centre, Brisbane,
Queensland, Australia. (7)Clinical Development and Medical Affairs, Novartis
Pharmaceuticals Australia Pty Limited, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia.

Comment in
    Thorax. 2015 Oct;70(10):991.

BACKGROUND: The optimal use of various therapeutic combinations for
moderate/severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is unclear. The
GLISTEN trial compared the efficacy of two long-acting anti-muscarinic
antagonists (LAMA), when combined with an inhaled corticosteroid (ICS) and a
long-acting β2 agonist (LABA).
METHODS: This randomised, blinded, placebo-controlled trial in moderate/severe
COPD patients compared once-daily glycopyrronium (GLY) 50 µg, once-daily
tiotropium (TIO) 18 µg or placebo (PLA), when combined with
salmeterol/fluticasone propionate (SAL/FP) 50/500 µg twice daily. The primary
objective was to determine the non-inferiority of GLY+SAL/FP versus TIO+SAL/FP on
trough FEV1 after 12 weeks. An important secondary objective was whether addition
of GLY to SAL/FP was better than SAL/FP alone.
RESULTS: 773 patients (mean FEV1 57.2% predicted) were randomised; 84.9%
completed the trial. At week 12, GLY+SAL/FP demonstrated non-inferiority to
TIO+SAL/FP for trough FEV1: least square mean treatment difference (LSMdiff)
-7 mL (SE 17.4) with a lower limit for non-inferiority of -60 mL. There was
significant increase in week 12 trough FEV1 with GLY+SAL/FP versus PLA+SAL/FP
(LSMdiff 101 mL, p<0.001). At 12 weeks, GLY+SAL/FP produced significant
improvement in St George's Respiratory Questionnaire total score versus
PLA+SAL/FP (LSMdiff -2.154, p=0.02). GLY+SAL/FP demonstrated significant rescue
medication reduction versus PLA+SAL/FP (LSMdiff -0.72 puffs/day, p<0.001).
Serious adverse events were similar for GLY+SAL/FP, TIO+SAL/FP and PLA+SAL/FP
with an incidence of 5.8%, 8.5% and 5.8%, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: GLY+SAL/FP showed comparable improvements in lung function, health
status and rescue medication to TIO+SAL/FP. Importantly, addition of GLY to
SAL/FP demonstrated significant improvements in lung function, health status and 
rescue medication compared to SAL/FP.
TRIAL REGISTRATION NUMBER: NCT01513460.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

DOI: 10.1136/thoraxjnl-2014-206670 
PMCID: PMC4453631
PMID: 25841237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Chest. 2015 Aug;148(2):389-96. doi: 10.1378/chest.14-3091.

Relapse in FEV1 Decline After Steroid Withdrawal in COPD.

Kunz LI, Postma DS, Klooster K, Lapperre TS, Vonk JM, Sont JK, Kerstjens HA,
Snoeck-Stroband JB, Hiemstra PS, Sterk PJ; GLUCOLD Study Group.

Collaborators: Kauffman HF, de Reus D, Boezen HM, Jansen DF, Vonk JM, Barentsen
MD, Timens W, Zeinstra-Smit M, Luteijn AJ, van der Molen T, Ter Veen G, Gosman
MM, Ten Hacken NH, Kerstjens HA, van Maaren MS, Postma DS, Veltman CA, Verbokkem 
A, Verhage I, Klooster K, Thiadens HA, Snoeck-Stroband JB, Sont JK,
Gast-Strookman J, Hiemstra PS, Janssen K, Rabe KF, van Schadewijk A, Schrumpf JA,
Smit-Bakker J, Stolk J, Tire AC, van der Veen H, Wijffels MM, Willems LN, Sterk
PJ, Lapperre TS, Mauad T.

BACKGROUND: We previously observed that 30 months of inhaled corticosteroid (ICS)
treatment can attenuate FEV1 decline in COPD, but it is unclear whether
withdrawal induces a relapse. We hypothesized that FEV1 decline, airway
hyperresponsiveness (AHR), and quality of life (QOL) deteriorate after ICS
cessation even after prolonged use.
METHODS: One hundred fourteen patients with moderate to severe COPD finished
randomized 6-month or 30-month treatment with fluticasone (500 μg bid), 30-month 
treatment with fluticasone and salmeterol (500/50 μg bid), or placebo (first part
of the Groningen and Leiden Universities Corticosteroids in Obstructive Lung
Disease [GLUCOLD] study [GL1]). The subsequent 5 years, patients were
prospectively followed annually, treated by their physician (GLUCOLD follow-up
study [GL2]). Postbronchodilator FEV1, AHR, and QOL were initially recorded at
baseline, at 30 months (GL1), and annually during GL2. Analysis was performed by 
linear mixed-effects models.
RESULTS: Among 101 adherent patients during GL1, 79 patients started and 58
completed GL2. Patients using ICSs during GL1, but only using ICSs 0% to 50% of
the time during GL2 (n = 56 of 79), had significantly accelerated annual FEV1
decline compared with GL1 (difference GL2-GL1 [95% CI]: 30-month treatment with
fluticasone and salmeterol, -68 mL/y [-112 to -25], P = .002; 30-month treatment 
with fluticasone, -73 mL/y [-119 to -26], P = .002), accompanied by deterioration
in AHR and QOL.
CONCLUSIONS: ICS discontinuation after 30 months in COPD can worsen lung function
decline, AHR, and QOL during 5-year follow-up. This suggests that ICS treatment
lacks sustained disease-modifying effect after treatment cessation.
TRIAL REGISTRY: ClinicalTrials.gov; No.: NCT00158847; URL:
www.clinicaltrials.gov.

DOI: 10.1378/chest.14-3091 
PMID: 25836351  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Curr Med Res Opin. 2015 Jun;31(6):1191-200. doi: 10.1185/03007995.2015.1036016.

Efficacy and safety of fluticasone furoate/vilanterol (50/25 mcg; 100/25 mcg;
200/25 mcg) in Asian patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: a
randomized placebo-controlled trial.

Zheng J(1), de Guia T, Wang-Jairaj J, Newlands AH, Wang C, Crim C, Zhong N.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Lab of Respiratory Disease, National Clinical Research Centre of
Respiratory Disease, 1st Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou Medical University ,
Guangzhou , China.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Three strengths of fluticasone furoate/vilanterol
(FF/VI) were previously evaluated for the treatment of chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD) in a program of global Phase 3 studies that included
only a small subgroup of Asian patients. This study further evaluated the
efficacy and safety of the same three strengths of FF/VI exclusively in Asian
patients.
METHODS: A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, parallel-group,
multicenter study. Patients with post-bronchodilator FEV1/FVC ≤0.70, FEV1 ≤70%
predicted and modified Medical Research Council score ≥2 were randomized
(1:1:1:1) to placebo, FF/VI 50/25 mcg, 100/25 mcg or 200/25 mcg once daily via
the ELLIPTA dry powder inhaler. The primary efficacy endpoint was change from
baseline in trough FEV1 at Week 24.
RESULTS: The intent-to-treat population comprised 643 patients. Statistically
significant (p < 0.001) improvements in trough FEV1 were observed with all
strengths of FF/VI versus placebo at Week 24 (0.14-0.19 L). Reduction of
supplemental albuterol use was observed with all strengths of FF/VI versus
placebo. The incidence of on-treatment adverse events (AEs) was 48% with FF/VI
200/25 mcg and 37-40% with other treatments. The incidence of on-treatment
serious AEs was 4-9% with FF/VI treatments versus 9% with placebo; however, the
study only covered a 6 month treatment period and was not powered to assess
effects on exacerbations. No clinically significant treatment effects versus
placebo were identified for electrocardiogram, vital signs, 24 hour urinary
cortisol excretion and pneumonia.
CONCLUSIONS: All strengths of FF/VI improved lung function with an acceptable
safety profile. There is no evidence to suggest that dose adjustment may be
required in Asian patients using FF/VI 100/25 mcg for the treatment of COPD.
CLINICAL TRIAL REGISTRATION: NCT01376245.

DOI: 10.1185/03007995.2015.1036016 
PMID: 25830381  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Eur Respir J. 2015 Apr;45(4):1188-9. doi: 10.1183/09031936.00003715.

Salmeterol/fluticasone combination instead of indacaterol or vice-versa?

Rossi A(1), van der Molen T(2), Del Olmo R(3), Wehbe L(4).

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary Unit, University of Verona, Verona, Italy. (2)University Medical
Center Groningen, University of Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.
(3)Fundación CIDEA and Hospital Maria Ferrer, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(4)Fundacion Enfisema, Buenos Aires, Argentina.

Comment on
    Eur Respir J. 2014 Dec;44(6):1548-56.
    Eur Respir J. 2015 Apr;45(4):1187-8.

DOI: 10.1183/09031936.00003715 
PMID: 25829434  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Eur Respir J. 2015 Apr;45(4):1187-8. doi: 10.1183/09031936.00226314.

Salmeterol/fluticasone combination instead of indacaterol or vice-versa?

Fabbri LM(1), Agusti A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Respiratory Disease Unit, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Modena,
Italy leonardo.fabbri@unimore.it. (2)Hospital Clinic de Barcelona, CIBER en
Enfermedades Respiratorias (CIBERES), Barcelona, Spain Institut d'Investigacions 
Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS), Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona,
Spain.

Comment in
    Eur Respir J. 2015 Apr;45(4):1188-9.

Comment on
    Eur Respir J. 2014 Dec;44(6):1548-56.

DOI: 10.1183/09031936.00226314 
PMID: 25829433  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Eur Respir J. 2015 Apr;45(4):875-8. doi: 10.1183/09031936.00216514.

Number needed to treat: enigmatic results for exacerbations in COPD.

Suissa S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Clinical Epidemiology, Lady Davis Institute, Jewish General
Hospital, Montreal, QC, Canada Dept of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, McGill
University, Montreal, QC, Canada samy.suissa@mcgill.ca.

DOI: 10.1183/09031936.00216514 
PMID: 25829430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Eur J Radiol. 2015 Jun;84(6):1196-201. doi: 10.1016/j.ejrad.2015.02.022. Epub
2015 Mar 9.

Regional bronchodilator response assessed by computed tomography in chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease.

Shimizu K(1), Makita H(1), Hasegawa M(1), Kimura H(1), Fuke S(1), Nagai K(1),
Yoshida T(1), Suzuki M(1), Konno S(1), Ito YM(2), Nishimura M(3).

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Medicine, Hokkaido University School of Medicine, N-15
W-7, Kita-Ku, Sapporo 060-8638, Japan. (2)Department of Biostatistics, Hokkaido
University Graduate School of Medicine, N-15 W-7, Kita-Ku, Sapporo 060-8638,
Japan. (3)First Department of Medicine, Hokkaido University School of Medicine,
N-15 W-7, Kita-Ku, Sapporo 060-8638, Japan. Electronic address:
ma-nishi@med.hokudai.ac.jp.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: The reliability of CT assessment of regional
bronchodilation is not universally accepted. In this study, using our proprietary
3D-CT software, we first examined airway inner luminal area (Ai) before and after
inhalation of SFC in a group of COPD patients and then evaluated the same
parameters for two sets of CT data obtained from clinically stable subjects with 
no intervention.
METHODS: We conducted CT at deep inspiration and pulmonary function tests before 
and one week after inhalation of SFC in 23 COPD patients. As a non-intervention
group, we used two sets of CT data obtained with one-year interval in another
group of subjects who demonstrated stable pulmonary function (n=8). We measured
Ai at the mid-portions of 3rd to 6th generation in 8 bronchi of the right lung, a
total of 32 identical sites before and after intervention.
RESULTS: The average bronchodilation at all sites (ΔAi%: 28.2 ± 4.1 (SE)%)
(r=0.65, p<0.001) and that of each generation significantly correlated with %
improvement of FEV1 (ΔFEV1%), which increased from 1.40 ± 0.10 L to 1.58 ± 0.10
L. When subjects were classified into two groups in terms of mean ΔFEV1%, even
the poor responders (ΔFEV1% <14% above baseline, n=13) displayed significantly
larger ΔAi% compared with the non-intervention group (19.1 ± 4.6% versus 2.1 ±
3.9%). Inter-observer variability for overall ΔAi% was within acceptable levels.
CONCLUSIONS: CT can reliably detect the regional bronchodilation in 3rd to 6th
generation airways when ΔFEV1 is as small as 180 ml on average. This study was
registered in the UMIN Clinical Trials Registry (UMIN-CTR) system
(http://www.umin.ac.jp/. No. UMIN 000002668).

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejrad.2015.02.022 
PMID: 25805332  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Chest. 2015 Aug;148(2):397-407. doi: 10.1378/chest.15-0084.

A Systematic Review of the Efficacy and Safety of a Fixed-Dose Combination of
Umeclidinium and Vilanterol for the Treatment of COPD.

Rodrigo GJ, Neffen H.

Comment in
    Ann Intern Med. 2015 Dec 15;163(12):JC10.
    Praxis (Bern 1994). 2015 Oct 28;104(22):1221.

BACKGROUND: COPD guidelines recommend the combined use of inhaled long-acting
β2-agonists (LABAs) and long-acting muscarinic antagonists (LAMAs) if symptoms
are not improved by a single agent. This systematic review tested the hypothesis 
that the bronchodilator effect of the LABA/LAMA combination, umeclidinium
(UMEC)/vilanterol (VIL), would translate into better outcomes without incurring
increased adverse events (AEs).
METHODS: This was a systematic review of randomized, placebo-controlled or
crossover trials (> 4 weeks) involving UMEC/VIL compared with its monocomponents,
tiotropium, or fluticasone/salmeterol. Primary outcomes were trough FEV1, serious
adverse events (SAEs), and serious cardiovascular events (SCVEs).
RESULTS: Eleven trials from 10 studies (9,609 patients) showed that UMEV/VIL
provided superior improvements in lung function compared with UMEC, VIL,
tiotropium, and fluticasone propionate/salmeterol (mean trough FEV1, 60, 110, 90,
and 90 mL, respectively; P < .0001). Also, UMEC/VIL had a greater likelihood of
demonstrating a minimal clinically important difference on the Transition Dyspnea
Index compared with UMEC and VIL (number needed to treat for benefit [NNTB] = 14 
and 10, respectively). UMEC/VIL therapy significantly reduced the risk of COPD
exacerbations compared with UMEC and VIL (NNTB = 42 and 41, respectively). On the
contrary, we noted no significant differences between UMEC/VIL and tiotropium
with respect to dyspnea, health status, or risk of COPD exacerbation. Regarding
safety issues, the incidence of AEs, SAEs, SCVEs, and mortality on treatment was 
similar across treatments, suggesting reduced safety concerns with the use of the
UMEC/VIL combination.
CONCLUSIONS: Once-daily inhaled UMEC/VIL showed superior efficacy compared with
its monocomponents, tiotropium, and fluticasone/combination in patients with
moderate to severe COPD.

DOI: 10.1378/chest.15-0084 
PMID: 25798635  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. COPD. 2015;12(6):643-8. doi: 10.3109/15412555.2014.995292. Epub 2015 Mar 16.

Differences in Adherence to Common Inhaled Medications in COPD.

Koehorst-ter Huurne K(1), Movig K(2), van der Valk P(1), van der Palen J(1,)(3), 
Brusse-Keizer M(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Pulmonary Medicine , Medisch Spectrum Twente , Enschede , the 
Netherlands. (2)b Department of Clinical Pharmacy , Medisch Spectrum Twente ,
Enschede , the Netherlands. (3)c Department of Research Methodology ,
Measurement, and Data Analysis, University of Twente , Enschede , Netherlands.

OBJECTIVE: To study differences in adherence to common inhaled medications in
COPD.
METHODS: Adherence of 795 patients was recorded from pharmacy records over 3
years in the COMIC cohort. It was expressed as percentage and deemed good at
≥75-≤125%, sub-optimal ≥50-<75%, and poor <50% (underuse) or >125% (overuse).
Most patients used more than one medication, so we present 1379 medication
periods.
RESULTS: The percentages of patients with good therapy adherence ranged from 43.2
(beclomethasone) -75.8% (tiotropium); suboptimal from 2.3 (budesonide) -23.3%
(fluticasone); underuse from 4.4 (formoterol/budesonide) -18.2% (beclomethasone);
and overuse from 5.1 (salmeterol) -38.6% (budesonide). Patients using fluticasone
or salmeterol/fluticasone have a 2.3 and 2.0-fold increased risk of suboptimal
versus good adherence compared to tiotropium. Patients using
salmeterol/fluticasone or beclomethasone have a 2.3- and 4.6-fold increased risk 
of underuse versus good adherence compared to tiotropium. Patients using
budesonide, salmeterol/fluticasone, formoterol/budesonide, ciclesonide and
beclomethasone have an increased risk of overuse versus good adherence compared
to tiotropium. Adherence to inhalation medication is inversely related to lung
function.
CONCLUSION: Therapy adherence to inhalation medication for the treatment of COPD 
is in our study related to the medication prescribed. Tiotropium showed the
highest percentage of patients with good adherence, followed by ciclesonide, both
dosed once daily. The idea of improving adherence by using combined preparations 
cannot be confirmed in this study. Further research is needed to investigate the 
possibilities of improving adherence by changing inhalation medication.

DOI: 10.3109/15412555.2014.995292 
PMID: 25775100  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Open Respir Med J. 2014 Dec 31;8:59-65. doi: 10.2174/1874306401408010059.
eCollection 2014.

Systemic effects of inhaled corticosteroids: an overview.

Pandya D(1), Puttanna A(1), Balagopal V(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Walsall Manor Hospital, West Midlands, WS2 9PS,
UK. (2)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Walsall Manor Hospital, Walsall, West 
Midlands, WS2 9PS, UK.

Inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) are common medications, used in respiratory
medicine for controlling conditions such as asthma and other obstructive airway
diseases. The systemic effects of oral corticosteroids are well known and
established; inhaled steroids have been known to cause relatively minor and
localized adverse effects such as oral candidiasis. However, less attention has
been paid to their systemic effects. Although currently there is a paucity of
prospective studies demonstrating the systemic effects of inhaled
corticosteroids, there are numerous retrospective studies adding evidence to this
link. Inhaled corticosteroids can affect the hypothalamo-pituitary-adrenal axis, 
bone density and growth, eyes, skin and immunity including an increased risk of
pneumonia. Clinicians are recommended to aim for the lowest possible dose to
avoid these systemic side effects. Fluticasone is more likely to cause systemic
effects compared to budesonide. Newer ICS molecules such as ciclesonide may be
more beneficial in reducing such systemic complications on prolonged use. This
paper provides an updated overview of the common systemic effects encountered
with ICS treatment.

DOI: 10.2174/1874306401408010059 
PMCID: PMC4319197
PMID: 25674175  [PubMed]


105. Chest. 2015 Feb;147(2):e44-7. doi: 10.1378/chest.14-1193.

A 41-year-old woman with shortness of breath and history of rash and recurrent
laryngeal edema.

Ataya A, Faruqi I, Salgado JC.

A 41-year-old Hispanic woman with a 20 pack-year smoking history presented with
worsening shortness of breath on exertion that gradually started 2 years ago,
then significantly deteriorated over the last 4 months. She was diagnosed with
COPD 2 months prior to her presentation and started on treatment with fluticasone
propionate and albuterol. Her medical history was relevant for undifferentiated
connective tissue disorder diagnosed 5 years prior due to a positive antinuclear 
antibody test, arthralgia, recurrent urticarial skin rash, peripheral neuropathy,
abdominal pain, and diffuse body swelling. She was started on treatment with
prednisone and azathioprine at the time and had substantial improvement in the
occurrence of her urticaria. She also had a history of recurrent laryngeal edema 
of unclear etiology. She had no history of IV drug abuse, no exposure to animals,
was not sexually active, and had no recent travel outside of Florida. There was
no significant family history of lung diseases.

DOI: 10.1378/chest.14-1193 
PMID: 25644915  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. J Korean Med Sci. 2015 Jan;30(1):54-9. doi: 10.3346/jkms.2015.30.1.54. Epub 2014 
Dec 23.

Three-month treatment response and exacerbation in chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease.

Lee JS(1), Rhee CK(2), Yoo KH(3), Lee JH(4), Yoon HI(5), Kim TH(6), Kim WJ(7),
Lee J(8), Lim SY(9), Park TS(1), Lee JS(1), Lee SW(1), Lee SD(1), Oh YM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, and Clinical Research
Center for Chronic Obstructive Airway Diseases, Asan Medical Center, University
of Ulsan College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea. (2)Department of Internal Medicine,
Seoul St. Mary's Hospital, The Catholic University of Korea, Seoul, Korea.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, Konkuk University School of Medicine, Seoul, 
Korea. (4)Department of Internal Medicine, CHA Bundang Medical Center, CHA
University, Seongnam, Korea. (5)Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul National
University Bundang Hospital, Seoul National University College of Medicine,
Seongnam, Korea. (6)Division of Pulmonology, Department of Internal Medicine,
Hanyang University Guri Hospital, Hanyang University College of Medicine, Guri,
Korea. (7)Department of Internal Medicine and Environmental Health Center,
Kangwon National University Hospital, School of Medicine, Kangwon National
University, Chuncheon, Korea. (8)Department of Internal Medicine, Ewha Womans
University Mokdong Hospital, College of Medicine, Ewha Womans University, Seoul, 
Korea. (9)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of
Medicine, Kangbuk Samsung Hospital, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine,
Seoul, Korea.

The aim of this study was to investigate relationships between acute exacerbation
and Forced Expiratory Volume 1 second (FEV1) improvement after treatment with
combined long-acting beta-agonist (LABA) and inhaled corticosteroid (ICS) in
patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). A total of 137 COPD
patients were classified as responders or nonresponders according to FEV1
improvement after 3 months of LABA/ICS treatment in fourteen referral hospitals
in Korea. Exacerbation occurrence in these two subgroups was compared over a
period of 1 yr. Eighty of the 137 COPD patients (58.4%) were classified as
responders and 57 (41.6%) as nonresponders. Acute exacerbations occurred in 25
patients (31.3%) in the responder group and in 26 patients (45.6%) in the
nonresponder group (P=0.086). FEV1 improvement after LABA/ICS treatment was a
significant prognostic factor for fewer acute exacerbations in a multivariate Cox
proportional hazard model adjusted for age, sex, FEV1, smoking history, 6 min
walk distance, body mass index, exacerbation history in the previous year, and
dyspnea scale.Three-month treatment response to LABA/ICS might be a prognostic
factor for the occurrence of acute exacerbation in COPD patients.

DOI: 10.3346/jkms.2015.30.1.54 
PMCID: PMC4278027
PMID: 25552883  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Zhongguo Zhen Jiu. 2014 Oct;34(10):951-5.

[Efficacy on chronic obstructive pulmonary disease at stable stage treated with
cutting method and western medication].

[Article in Chinese]

Xu JH, Xu B, Deng YQ.

OBJECTIVE: To compare the difference in clinical efficacy on chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD) at stable stage in the patients among the combined
therapy of cutting method and western medication (combined therapy), simple
cutting method and simple western medication.
METHODS: One hundred and twenty cases of COPD were randomized into three groups, 
40 cases in each one. In the cutting method group, for excessive phlegm
pattern/syndrome, Feishu (BL 13), Danzhong (CV 17), Dingchuan (EX-B 1) and Yuji
(LU 10) were selected as the main acupoints, and Lieque (LU 7) and Pianli (LI 6) 
were as the supplementary acupoints. For the pattern/syndrome of failure to
consolidate kidney primary, Shenshu (BL 23), Pishu (BL 20), Guanyuan (CV 4) and
Yuji (LU 10) were selected as main acupoints, and Jueyinshu (BL 14) and Zusanli
(ST 36) were as the supplementary acupoint. Three acupoints were selected
alternatively in each treatment and the cutting method was applied once every 10 
days. Three treatments made one session. Two sessions of treatment were required.
In the western medication group, salbutamol sulfate aerosol, one press (200
μg/press) was used each night, as well as salmeterol xinafoate and fluticasone
propionate powder for inhalation, one inhalation each night. The treatment of 1
month made one session. Two sessions were required. In the combined therapy
group, the cutting method and western medication were applied in combination. The
results of clinical symptom score, lung function test, arterial blood gas
analysis, degree of inflation as well as clinical efficacy were observed before
and after treatment in each group.
RESULTS: Except the degree of lung inflation, the clinical symptom score, indices
of lung function test, partial pressure of arterial blood gas (PaO2) and partial 
pressure of carbon dioxide (PaCO2) were all obviously improved after treatment as
compared with those before treatment in each group (all P<0.05). They were
apparently improved after treatment in the combined therapy group and the cutting
method group as compared with those in the western medication group (all P<0.05).
The total effective rate was 77.5% (31/40) in the combined therapy group and was 
75.0% (30/40) in the cutting method group, both better than 60.0% (24/40) in the 
western medication group (both P<0.05).
CONCLUSION: The simple cutting method based on syndrome differentiation and the
combined therapy with western medication achieve the superior efficacy on COPD at
stable stage as compared with the simple western medication. The effect mechanism
is possibly related to the improvement of bronchial airway function through
constant acupoint stimulation.


PMID: 25543420  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Basic Clin Pharmacol Toxicol. 2015 Apr;116(4):291-307. doi: 10.1111/bcpt.12366.
Epub 2015 Jan 22.

Diagnosis and pharmacotherapy of stable chronic obstructive pulmonary disease:
the finnish guidelines.

Kankaanranta H(1), Harju T, Kilpeläinen M, Mazur W, Lehto JT, Katajisto M, Peisa 
T, Meinander T, Lehtimäki L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Seinäjoki Central Hospital, Seinäjoki,
Finland; Department of Respiratory Medicine, University of Tampere, Tampere,
Finland.

The Finnish Medical Society Duodecim initiated and managed the update of the
Finnish national guideline for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). The 
Finnish COPD guideline was revised to acknowledge the progress in diagnosis and
management of COPD. This Finnish COPD guideline in English language is a part of 
the original guideline and focuses on the diagnosis, assessment and
pharmacotherapy of stable COPD. It is intended to be used mainly in primary
health care but not forgetting respiratory specialists and other healthcare
workers. The new recommendations and statements are based on the best evidence
available from the medical literature, other published national guidelines and
the GOLD (Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease) report. This
guideline introduces the diagnostic approach, differential diagnostics towards
asthma, assessment and treatment strategy to control symptoms and to prevent
exacerbations. The pharmacotherapy is based on the symptoms and a clinical
phenotype of the individual patient. The guideline defines three clinically
relevant phenotypes including the low and high exacerbation risk phenotypes and
the neglected asthma-COPD overlap syndrome (ACOS). These clinical phenotypes can 
help clinicians to identify patients that respond to specific pharmacological
interventions. For the low exacerbation risk phenotype, pharmacotherapy with
short-acting β2 -agonists (salbutamol, terbutaline) or anticholinergics
(ipratropium) or their combination (fenoterol-ipratropium) is recommended in
patients with less symptoms. If short-acting bronchodilators are not enough to
control symptoms, a long-acting β2 -agonist (formoterol, indacaterol, olodaterol 
or salmeterol) or a long-acting anticholinergic (muscarinic receptor antagonists;
aclidinium, glycopyrronium, tiotropium, umeclidinium) or their combination is
recommended. For the high exacerbation risk phenotype, pharmacotherapy with a
long-acting anticholinergic or a fixed combination of an inhaled glucocorticoid
and a long-acting β2 -agonist (budesonide-formoterol, beclomethasone
dipropionate-formoterol, fluticasone propionate-salmeterol or fluticasone
furoate-vilanterol) is recommended as a first choice. Other treatment options for
this phenotype include combination of long-acting bronchodilators given from
separate inhalers or as a fixed combination (glycopyrronium-indacaterol or
umeclidinium-vilanterol) or a triple combination of an inhaled glucocorticoid, a 
long-acting β2 -agonist and a long-acting anticholinergic. If the patient has
severe-to-very severe COPD (FEV1  < 50% predicted), chronic bronchitis and
frequent exacerbations despite long-acting bronchodilators, the pharmacotherapy
may include also roflumilast. ACOS is a phenotype of COPD in which there are
features that comply with both asthma and COPD. Patients belonging to this
phenotype have usually been excluded from studies evaluating the effects of drugs
both in asthma and in COPD. Thus, evidence-based recommendation of treatment
cannot be given. The treatment should cover both diseases. Generally, the therapy
should include at least inhaled glucocorticoids (beclomethasone dipropionate,
budesonide, ciclesonide, fluticasone furoate, fluticasone propionate or
mometasone) combined with a long-acting bronchodilator (β2 -agonist or
anticholinergic or both).

© 2014 The Authors. Basic & Clinical Pharmacology & Toxicology published by John 
Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of Nordic Association for the Publication of BCPT
(former Nordic Pharmacological Society).

DOI: 10.1111/bcpt.12366 
PMCID: PMC4409821
PMID: 25515181  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Ann Am Thorac Soc. 2015 Jan;12(1):27-34. doi: 10.1513/AnnalsATS.201409-413OC.

Pneumonia risk with inhaled fluticasone furoate and vilanterol compared with
vilanterol alone in patients with COPD.

Crim C(1), Dransfield MT, Bourbeau J, Jones PW, Hanania NA, Mahler DA, Vestbo J, 
Wachtel A, Martinez FJ, Barnhart F, Lettis S, Calverley PM.

Author information: 
(1)1 GSK, Research Triangle Park, North Carolina.

RATIONALE: Radiographically confirmed pneumonia risk with inhaled corticosteroid 
use in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) has not been assessed to
date.
OBJECTIVES: To determine the incidence of pneumonia, risk factors, and clinical
attributes with inhaled fluticasone furoate (FF) in patients with COPD with an
exacerbation history.
METHODS: Two replicate, 1-year, double-blind clinical trials enrolled subjects
with COPD with moderate to very severe airflow limitation and at least one
exacerbation within the prior year. Subjects were randomized 1:1:1:1 to receive
inhaled once-daily vilanterol (VI) 25 μg or VI 25 μg combined with 50, 100, or
200 μg FF. Subjects were required to have a chest radiograph at screening and
within 48 hours of any suspected pneumonia or exacerbation.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: Among 3,255 randomized subjects, 205 pneumonia
events occurred in 181 subjects. Chest imaging was available for 195 (95%) of
these events. Chest radiographs were also obtained for 1,793 (70%) of the 2,545
moderate and severe exacerbations. For VI alone and the combination with 50, 100,
or 200 μg FF, reported pneumonia incidence was 3, 6, 6, and 7%, respectively.
However, for events with compatible parenchymal infiltrates, the respective
incidences were 2, 4, 4, and 5%. Factors associated with at least a twofold
increase in the risk of pneumonia with FF/VI treatment were being a current
smoker, having prior pneumonia, body mass index <25 kg/m(2), and severe airflow
limitation.
CONCLUSIONS: Radiographically confirmed pneumonia risk is increased with inhaled 
FF/VI, although at less than investigator-defined rates. Modifiable pneumonia
risk factors should be considered when attempting to optimize COPD management.
Clinical trial registered with www.clinicaltrials.gov (NCT01009463 [HZC102871];
NCT01017952 [HZC102970]).

DOI: 10.1513/AnnalsATS.201409-413OC 
PMID: 25490706  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Expert Rev Respir Med. 2015 Feb;9(1):5-12. doi: 10.1586/17476348.2015.986468.
Epub 2014 Dec 6.

Fluticasone furoate and vilanterol inhalation powder for the treatment of chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease.

Matera MG(1), Capuano A, Cazzola M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Medicine, Section of Pharmacology 'L. Donatelli',
Centre of Excellence for Cardiovascular Diseases, Second University of Naples,
Naples, Italy.

Fluticasone furoate/vilanterol (FF/VI) is a novel inhaled
corticosteroid/long-acting β₂-agonist (ICS/LABA) fixed dose combination that, by 
simplifying the dosing schedule, allows, for the first time in a member of the
ICS/LABA class, a shift from twice-daily to once-daily treatment. FF/VI is
delivered via a novel, single-step activation, multi-dose dry powder inhaler for 
oral inhalation, Ellipta. Regrettably, there are no head-to-head trials that have
shown superiority in the safety or efficacy of FF versus other ICSs, but evidence
shows that VI has a quicker onset of effect versus salmeterol. However, the
clinical utility of this effect in a maintenance medication is still
questionable. Furthermore, benefits of FF/VI over twice-daily ICS/LABA comparator
have not been shown yet and, in addition, its adverse event profile is generally 
consistent with the known class effects of an ICS/LABA fixed dose combination. In
particular, there is an increase in the risk of pneumonia among patients treated 
with FF/VI relative to VI, mainly among those who benefit most from FF/VI.
Nevertheless, the interesting pharmacological profiles of both FF and VI, the
possibility that FF/VI can be administered once-daily, and the attractive
characteristics of Ellipta are important features that could help FF/VI to be a
successful combination in the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

DOI: 10.1586/17476348.2015.986468 
PMID: 25482512  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Pulm Pharmacol Ther. 2015 Feb;30:44-50. doi: 10.1016/j.pupt.2014.10.006. Epub
2014 Nov 6.

Differences in the efficacy and safety among inhaled corticosteroids
(ICS)/long-acting beta2-agonists (LABA) combinations in the treatment of chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD): Role of ICS.

Latorre M(1), Novelli F(1), Vagaggini B(1), Braido F(2), Papi A(3), Sanduzzi
A(4), Santus P(5), Scichilone N(6), Paggiaro P(7).

Author information: 
(1)Cardio-Thoracic and Vascular Department, Pathophysiology Unit, University of
Pisa, Italy. (2)Allergy and Respiratory Diseases Clinic, DIMI, University of
Genoa, IRCS AOU San Martino-IST, Genoa, Italy. (3)Respiratory Medicine,
Department of Medical Sciences, University of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy. (4)Section
of Respiratory Diseases, Department of Surgery and Clinical Medicine, University 
of Naples, Italy. (5)Dipartimento di Scienze della Salute, Pneumologia
Riabilitativa Fondazione Salvatore Maugeri, Istituto Scientifico di Milano-IRCCS.
Università degli Studi di Milano, Italy. (6)Department of Internal Medicine,
Section of Pulmonology (DIBIMIS), University of Palermo, Palermo, Italy.
(7)Cardio-Thoracic and Vascular Department, Pathophysiology Unit, University of
Pisa, Italy. Electronic address: pierluigi.paggiaro@unipi.it.

Inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) are frequently recommended for the treatment of
asthma and COPD, often in combination with long-acting beta2-agonists (LABA),
depending on the severity of the disease and/or on the specific phenotype.
Several ICS/LABA combinations are currently available that differ in their
pharmacokinetic characteristics and dose of both components. Thus, this review
assesses differences in the efficacy and the safety profiles of the ICS
components in the two more frequently used ICS/LABA combinations
(budesonide/formoterol and fluticasone/salmeterol) for the management of COPD.
Whereas the basic mechanism of action is similar for all ICS (binding with the
intracellular glucocorticoid receptor, which mediates both genomic and non
genomic effects), the pharmacokinetic and characteristics of ICS are quite
different in terms of receptor affinity, bioavailability, lipophilicity and drug 
persistence in the airways. Fluticasone persists longer in airway mucus and
requires more time to dissolve in the lining fluid and then enter the airway
wall, whereas budesonide is cleared more quickly from the airways. Comparative
efficacy of the two major ICS/LABA combinations recommended for the treatment of 
COPD show similar efficacy in terms of reduction of exacerbations, improvement in
forced expiratory volume in the first second (FEV1) and quality of life. One
retrospective cohort study suggested a greater efficacy for the
budesonide/formoterol combination on hospital or emergency department admissions,
oral corticosteroid courses, and addition of tiotropium, and an observational
real-life study reported a greater reduction of COPD exacerbations with
budesonide/formoterol than with fluticasom/salmeterol combination. Among the
potential side effects of chronic ICS treatment in patients with COPD, recently
the use of fluticasone or fluticasone/salmeterol combination has been associated 
with a higher prevalence of pneumonia in the major long-term studies. On the
other hand, no similar increased risk of pneumonia has been reported in patients 
with COPD treated with the budesonide/formoterol combination. A recent
population-based cohort study from the Quebec database showed that the adjusted
odds ratio for having severe pneumonia was higher for fluticasone (2.1) than for 
budesonide (1.17) or other ICS (1.41). Of the ICS studied, only fluticasone
demonstrated a dose-related increase in risk of pneumonia in patients with COPD. 
This difference between fluticasone and budesonide may be explained by the longer
retention of fluticasone in the airways, with potentially greater inhibition of
type-1 innate immunity. Therefore, the risk:benefit ratio should be evaluated
thoroughly when choosing an ICS/LABA combination for patients with COPD.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pupt.2014.10.006 
PMID: 25445928  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Drugs. 2015 Jan;75(1):61-74. doi: 10.1007/s40265-014-0326-1.

Umeclidinium/vilanterol: a review of its use as maintenance therapy in adults
with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Blair HA(1), Deeks ED.

Author information: 
(1)Springer, Private Bag 65901, Mairangi Bay 0754, Auckland, New Zealand,
demail@springer.com.

Umeclidinium/vilanterol (Anoro(®) Ellipta™; Laventair™) is an inhaled fixed-dose 
combination of a long-acting muscarinic receptor antagonist and a long-acting
β2-adrenoceptor agonist. It is available in several countries, including Japan,
the USA, Canada and those of the EU, where it is indicated for oral inhalation in
adults with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Umeclidinium/vilanterol
is administered once daily using the Ellipta™ multi-dose dry powder inhaler,
which is regarded as easy to use. Umeclidinium/vilanterol (62.5/25 µg once daily,
equivalent to a delivered dose of 55/22 µg once daily) was effective and well
tolerated in adult patients with COPD participating in large, multicentre trials 
of up to 24 weeks' duration. Umeclidinium/vilanterol improved pulmonary function 
to a significantly greater extent than placebo and each of the individual
components. Moreover, umeclidinium/vilanterol was significantly more effective
than once-daily tiotropium bromide monotherapy and a twice-daily fixed
combination of salmeterol/fluticasone propionate at improving pulmonary function.
Umeclidinium/vilanterol also had beneficial effects on dyspnoea, use of rescue
medication, exacerbations, health-related quality of life and, in one study,
exercise endurance. Umeclidinium/vilanterol is generally well tolerated in
patients with COPD, with the most common adverse events in clinical trials being 
headache and nasopharyngitis. Umeclidinium/vilanterol was not associated with a
clinically relevant increased risk of cardiovascular adverse events in patients
with COPD, when data from several clinical trials were pooled. Thus, inhaled
umeclidinium/vilanterol extends the treatment options currently available for the
maintenance treatment of adults with COPD and has the convenience of once-daily
administration.

DOI: 10.1007/s40265-014-0326-1 
PMID: 25398674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2014 Oct 17;9:1163-86. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S68289.
eCollection 2014.

Comparing the effectiveness of small-particle versus large-particle inhaled
corticosteroid in COPD.

Postma DS(1), Roche N(2), Colice G(3), Israel E(4), Martin RJ(5), van Aalderen
WM(6), Grigg J(7), Burden A(8), Hillyer EV(8), von Ziegenweidt J(8), Gopalan
G(9), Price D(10).

Author information: 
(1)University of Groningen, Department of Pulmonary Medicine and Tuberculosis,
University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, the Netherlands. (2)Respiratory
and Intensive Care Medicine, Cochin Hospital Group, APHP, Paris-Descartes
University (EA2511), Paris, France. (3)Pulmonary, Critical Care and Respiratory
Services, Washington Hospital Center and George Washington University School of
Medicine, Washington DC, USA. (4)Pulmonary and Critical Care Division, Brigham
and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. (5)Department of
Medicine, National Jewish Health, Denver, CO, USA. (6)Dept of Pediatric
Respiratory Medicine and Allergy, Emma Children's Hospital AMC, Amsterdam, the
Netherlands. (7)Blizard Institute, Queen Mary University London, London, UK.
(8)Research in Real Life, Ltd, Cambridge, UK. (9)Respiratory, Global Scientific
Affairs, Teva Pharmaceuticals, Frazer, PA, USA. (10)Research in Real Life, Ltd,
Cambridge, UK ; Academic Primary Care, Division of Applied Health Sciences,
University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen, UK.

PURPOSE: Small airway changes and dysfunction contribute importantly to airway
obstruction in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), which is currently
treated with inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) and long-acting bronchodilators at
Global initiative for Obstructive Lung Disease (GOLD) grades 2-4. This
retrospective matched cohort analysis compared effectiveness of a representative 
small-particle ICS (extrafine beclomethasone) and larger-particle ICS
(fluticasone) in primary care patients with COPD.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Smokers and ex-smokers with COPD ≥ 40 years old initiating 
or stepping-up their dose of extrafine beclomethasone or fluticasone were matched
1:1 for demographic characteristics, index prescription year, concomitant
therapies, and disease severity during 1 baseline year. During 2 subsequent
years, we evaluated treatment change and COPD exacerbations, defined as emergency
care/hospitalization for COPD, acute oral corticosteroids, or antibiotics for
lower respiratory tract infection.
RESULTS: Mean patient age was 67 years, 57%-60% being male. For both initiation
(n=334:334) and step-up (n=189:189) patients, exacerbation rates were comparable 
between extrafine beclomethasone and fluticasone cohorts during the 2 year
outcome period. Odds of treatment stability (no exacerbation or treatment change)
were significantly greater for patients initiating extrafine beclomethasone
compared with fluticasone (adjusted odds ratio 2.50; 95% confidence interval,
1.32-4.73). Median ICS dose exposure during 2 outcome years was significantly
lower (P<0.001) for extrafine beclomethasone than fluticasone cohorts (315 μg/day
versus 436 μg/day for initiation, 438 μg/day versus 534 μg/day for step-up
patients).
CONCLUSION: We observed that small-particle ICS at significantly lower doses had 
comparable effects on exacerbation rates as larger-particle ICS at higher doses, 
whereas initiation of small-particle ICS was associated with better odds of
treatment stability during 2-years' follow-up.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S68289 
PMCID: PMC4207569
PMID: 25378918  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Br J Clin Pharmacol. 2015 May;79(5):695-708. doi: 10.1111/bcp.12545.

New combination bronchodilators for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease:
current evidence and future perspectives.

Singh D(1).

Author information: 
(1)University of Manchester, Medicines Evaluation Unit, University Hospital of
South Manchester NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester, M23 9QZ, UK.

Fixed dose combination (FDC) dual bronchodilators that co-administer a long
acting β2 -adrenoceptor agonist (LABA) and a long acting muscarinic antagonist
(LAMA) are a new class of inhaled treatment for chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD). This review focuses on the clinical evidence for the benefit of
LABA/LAMA FDCs compared with monocomponent treatments, and also compared with
active comparators that are widely used for the treatment of COPD, namely
tiotropium and salmeterol-fluticasone. Novel FDC dual bronchodilators include
QVA149 and umeclidinium/vilanterol (UMEC/VI). Long term clinical trials show that
QVA149 and UMEC/VI are superior to monocomponent therapy in terms of trough
forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1), although the FEV1 improvement was limited
to approximately 80-90% of the added monocomponent values. This suggests that the
effect of combining a LABA and a LAMA is not fully additive. LABA/LAMA FDC were
associated with the largest mean changes in symptoms and health status that were 
above the minimal clinically important difference, in contrast to the
monocomponents. Furthermore, these LABA/LAMA FDCs demonstrated superiority over
the active comparators tiotropium and salmeterol-fluticasone in terms of trough
FEV1 and patient-reported outcomes. LABA/LAMA FDCs offer a simplified means of
maximizing bronchodilation for COPD patients, with the improvements in lung
function being mirrored by benefits in terms of symptoms and exacerbations. The
use of LABA/LAMA FDCs in clinical practice is set to grow and further studies are
needed to define their optimal place in treatment guidelines.

© 2014 The Author. British Journal of Clinical Pharmacology published by John
Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of The British Pharmacological Society.

DOI: 10.1111/bcp.12545 
PMCID: PMC4415707
PMID: 25377687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Eur Respir J. 2014 Dec;44(6):1548-56. doi: 10.1183/09031936.00126814. Epub 2014
Oct 30.

INSTEAD: a randomised switch trial of indacaterol versus salmeterol/fluticasone
in moderate COPD.

Rossi A(1), van der Molen T(2), del Olmo R(3), Papi A(4), Wehbe L(5), Quinn M(6),
Lu C(6), Young D(7), Cameron R(7), Bucchioni E(8), Altman P(6).

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary Unit, University of Verona, Verona, Italy andrea.rossi_03@univr.it. 
(2)University Medical Center Groningen, University of Groningen, Groningen, the
Netherlands. (3)Fundación CIDEA and Hospital Maria Ferrer, Buenos Aires,
Argentina. (4)University of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy. (5)Fundacion Enfisema,
Buenos Aires, Argentina. (6)Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corporation, East Hanover,
NJ, USA. (7)Novartis Horsham Research Centre, Horsham, UK. (8)Novartis Farma,
Origgio, Italy.

Comment in
    Eur Respir J. 2014 Dec;44(6):1391-3.
    Eur Respir J. 2015 Apr;45(4):1188-9.
    Eur Respir J. 2015 Apr;45(4):1187-8.
    Expert Opin Pharmacother. 2015;16(10):1539-41.

The Indacaterol: Switching Non-exacerbating Patients with Moderate COPD From
Salmeterol/Fluticasone to Indacaterol (INSTEAD) study investigated the effect of 
switching patients at low risk of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)
exacerbations from salmeterol/fluticasone (SFC; inhaled corticosteroid (ICS)
regimen) to indacaterol monotherapy (non-ICS regimen). This 26-week,
double-blind, double-dummy, parallel-group, phase IV study, randomised 581
patients with moderate COPD to indacaterol 150 μg once daily or SFC 50/500 μg
twice daily. Patients had been receiving SFC 50/500 μg for ≥3 months, with no
COPD exacerbations for more than a year before the study (patients for whom ICS
is not recommended). The primary objective was to demonstrate non-inferiority of 
indacaterol to SFC, measured by trough forced expiratory volume in 1 second
(FEV₁) after 12 weeks (non-inferiority margin of 0.06 L). The primary objective
was met, with a mean treatment difference of 9 mL (95% CI -45-26 mL). There were 
no significant differences between treatments in terms of breathlessness
(transition dyspnoea index) or health status (Saint George's Respiratory
Questionnaire) at weeks 12 or 26, or rescue medication use or COPD exacerbation
rates over 26 weeks. Safety profiles of both treatments were as expected. This
study demonstrated that patients with moderate COPD and no exacerbations in the
previous year can be switched from SFC to indacaterol 150 μg with no efficacy
loss.

©ERS 2014.

DOI: 10.1183/09031936.00126814 
PMID: 25359348  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Int J Clin Exp Med. 2014 Sep 15;7(9):2907-11. eCollection 2014.

Salmeterol combined with fluticasone propionate improved COPD in patients during 
stable stage.

Lu D(1), Ma J(2), Yang X(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Disease, People's Hospital of Xinjiang Uygur
Autonomous Region Wulumuqi, Xinjiang 830000, China. (2)Department of Pharmacy,
People's Hospital of Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Region Wulumuqi, Xinjiang 830000, 
China.

PURPOSE: To evaluate the clinical effect of inhaled Salmeterol with Fluticasone
propionate (50:500 μg) in patients with moderate to severe chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD) during the stable stage of the disease.
METHODS: Sixty patients with moderate to severe COPD were randomly divided into
trial and control groups (N=30 each). In the trial group, patients inhaled
Salmeterol with Fluticasone (50:500 μg) propionate twice daily via turbuhaler for
3 months. In the control group, patients used slow- released theophylline, 200
mg, twice daily for 3 months; patients took an expectorant (Ambroxol
Hydrochloride, 10 ml, three times daily) if necessary. Clinical symptoms and
physical signs were graded using St. George's respiratory disease questionnaire
(SGRQ). Changes in lung function were assessed.
RESULTS: Indicators of lung function including the values of FEV1, FEV1/FVC, and 
FEV1/predicted values were significantly higher after treatment in the trial
group than in the control group (P<0.05). SGRQ values in the trial group
decreased significantly after treatment (P<0.05).
CONCLUSION: Inhaled Salmeterol 50 μg and Fluticasone propionate 500 μg can
significantly improve the lung function and clinical symptoms of patients with
stable moderate to severe COPD.


PMCID: PMC4211807
PMID: 25356157  [PubMed]


117. Respir Med. 2014 Dec;108(12):1786-93. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2014.09.015. Epub 2014 
Oct 2.

Cost-effectiveness of the LABA/LAMA dual bronchodilator
indacaterol/glycopyrronium in a Swedish healthcare setting.

Price D(1), Keininger D(2), Costa-Scharplatz M(3), Mezzi K(2), Dimova M(4),
Asukai Y(4), Ställberg B(5).

Author information: 
(1)Academic Primary Care, Division of Applied Health Sciences, University of
Aberdeen, Polwarth Building, Aberdeen AB25 2ZD, UK. (2)Primary Care Franchise,
Novartis Pharma AG, Postfach, CH-4002 Basel, Switzerland. (3)Novartis Pharma AB, 
Box 1150, TÄBY, Stockholm S-183 79, Sweden. Electronic address:
madlaina.costa-scharplatz@novartis.com. (4)IMS Health Economics and Outcomes
Research, 210 Pentonville Road, London N1 9JY, UK. (5)Department of Public Health
and Caring Sciences, Family Medicine and Preventive Medicine, Uppsala University,
Uppsala, Sweden.

BACKGROUND: Indacaterol/glycopyrronium (IND/GLY) is a once-daily inhaled
fixed-dose combination of indacaterol (IND), a long-acting β2-adrenergic agonist 
(LABA), and glycopyrronium (GLY), a long-acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA) for 
use as maintenance treatment to relieve symptoms of chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD) in adults.
OBJECTIVE: To determine the economic benefits of IND/GLY compared with the free
combination of indacaterol and glycopyrronium (IND + GLY), and with the
fixed-dose combination of salmeterol/fluticasone (SFC), in a moderate-to-severe
COPD population with low-exacerbation risk. The model-based analysis extrapolated
results up to lifetime time horizon and calculated costs per quality-adjusted
life year.
METHODS: Assuming equal efficacy, a cost-minimisation analysis compared IND/GLY
vs IND + GLY using model inputs from the double-blind, randomised SHINE trial.
The double-blind, randomised ILLUMINATE and TORCH trials were used to analyse
cost-effectiveness versus SFC. To consider ICS-related pneumonia events,
published odds ratio comparing an ICS-exposed group to a control group of COPD
patients was used. Direct and indirect drug costs as well as drug acquisition
costs (in Swedish Krona [SEK]) were derived from published Swedish sources. Cost 
and effects were discounted with 3%. Uncertainty was assessed by one-way and
probabilistic sensitivity analyses (PSA).
RESULTS: IND/GLY was cost-saving vs IND + GLY with incremental savings of SEK
(EUR) 768 (85), and 3309 (368) per patient over one and five years. IND/GLY was
found to be less costly and more effective compared to SFC with cost savings of
SEK (EUR) 2744 (303), 8854 (976), 13,938 (1536), 27,495 (3031) and 43,033 (4744) 
over one, three, five, ten years and lifetime. The PSA indicated that all
iterations produced dominant results for IND/GLY.
CONCLUSION: IND/GLY is cost-minimising vs IND + GLY and dominates SFC in the
maintenance treatment of COPD patients in Sweden. Encouraging dual bronchodilator
therapy over an ICS-containing combination results in lower total costs and
better outcomes compared to combination therapy including fluticasone in
moderate-to-severe COPD patients with low exacerbation risk.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2014.09.015 
PMID: 25307414  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Ugeskr Laeger. 2014 Sep 15;176(38). pii: V02140088.

[The combination of indacaterol and glycopyrronium has effects on symptoms, lung 
function, and rate of exacerbations in COPD patients].

[Article in Danish]

Ulrik CS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Lungemedicinsk Afdeling, Hvidovre -Hospital, Kettegård Allé 30, 2650 Hvidovre.
E-mail: csulrik@dadlnet.dk.

Long-acting bronchodilators are the mainstay of pharmacological therapy for
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). This paper reviews the efficacy of 
the once-daily fixed-dose dual bronchodilator combination of indacaterol and
glycopyrronium in COPD patients. Compared with single therapy with indacaterol,
glycopyrronium and tiotropium and fixed combination salmeterol/fluticasone,
fixed-dose indacaterol/glycopyrronium has clinically relevant effects on
symptoms, health status, lung function, and rate of exacerbations and by that
suggests a potential for dual bronchodilation as an important maintenance
therapeutic option for some patients with COPD.


PMID: 25294211  [PubMed - in process]


119. J Asthma. 2015 Apr;52(3):296-300. doi: 10.3109/02770903.2014.971965. Epub 2014
Oct 22.

Dry mouth as a novel indicator of hoarseness caused by inhalation therapy.

Hira D(1), Koshiyama S, Komase Y, Hoshino N, Morita SY, Terada T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy, Shiga University of Medical Science Hospital , Seta
Tsukinowa-cho, Otsu, Shiga , Japan .

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the influence of dry mouth on the incidence and
severity of inhalation therapy-induced hoarseness.
METHODS: The volume of saliva secreted without stimulation was measured in
patients with asthma or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) who also
answered a questionnaire on subjective ratings for hoarseness. The relationship
between salivary secretion and hoarseness was analyzed by the Pearson correlation
and multiple linear regression. The prediction accuracy of salivary secretion for
the grade of hoarseness was evaluated using a receiver-operating characteristic
(ROC) analysis.
RESULTS: A total of 232 patients participated in this study. The subjective
rating score of hoarseness was negatively correlated with the volume of saliva
secreted (r = -0.273, p < 0.001). A stepwise multiple linear regression analysis 
revealed that salivary secretion (p < 0.001) and the dose of fluticasone
administered (p < 0.05) were significant variables for predicting hoarseness. The
ROC analysis for predicting severe hoarseness by salivary secretion showed
significant prediction accuracy (AUC = 0.690, 95% CI: 0.614-0.766, p < 0.001) and
was higher in patients administered fluticasone (AUC = 0.732, 95% CI:
0.644-0.821, p < 0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: Hyposalivation is a significant prediction factor of hoarseness
induced by inhaled corticosteroids (ICS). The prediction accuracy was higher in
patients administered fluticasone than in those administered another inhalation
drug. Although the pharmaceutical efficacy of fluticasone is high, patients with 
hyposalivation should be prescribed other inhalation drugs.

DOI: 10.3109/02770903.2014.971965 
PMID: 25272184  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. J Aerosol Med Pulm Drug Deliv. 2015 Jun;28(3):219-28. doi:
10.1089/jamp.2014.1142. Epub 2014 Sep 29.

Inhaler devices for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: insights from patients
and healthcare practitioners.

Molimard M(1), Colthorpe P(2).

Author information: 
(1)1Département de Pharmacologie, CHU de Bordeaux, Universite Bordeaux, INSERM
U657, Bordeaux Cedex, France. (2)2Novartis Pharma AG, Basel, Switzerland.

BACKGROUND: The choice of inhaler device for patients with chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD) depends upon multiple attributes. An online survey was
devised to assess COPD patients' and healthcare practitioners' (HCPs; physicians 
and nurses) opinions and preferences for inhaler devices.
METHODS: Patients diagnosed with COPD ≥6 months from United States (US), United
Kingdom (UK), France, and Germany, and HCPs from the US, UK, France, Italy, and
Japan were enrolled to participate in an online quantitative 35 minutes survey. A
proprietary analytical tool from Sawtooth Software was used to collect,
randomize, and analyze participant opinions and preferences of device attributes,
including functionality.
RESULTS: A total of 245 patients (mean age, 60.7 years) completed the survey. Of 
these, 124 and 121 patients were taking fluticasone/salmeterol, and tiotropium,
respectively. Patients cited ease of use, dose recording, and dose capacity
(single or multi-dose) as important attributes for the device. Key factors that
patients considered would make the device easier to use were fewer steps to
operate the inhaler, confirmation that the dose has been taken correctly, easier 
coordination of breathing manoeuver, and least resistance while inhaling. A total
of 504 HCPs (380 physicians and 124 nurses) completed the survey, and cited
patient satisfaction and ease of use as the most important attributes when
selecting an inhaler device for patients. Dose recording and multi-dose versus
single-dose designs were given less importance than other attributes such as
patient satisfaction and cost by HCPs.
CONCLUSION: The survey provides important insights into what patients and HCPs
consider to be key attributes of an ideal inhaler device for COPD management.
Given that patients with COPD self-administer their COPD chronic medication and
need to deliver the correct dose, it is important to consider these insights for 
the appropriate management of COPD.

DOI: 10.1089/jamp.2014.1142 
PMCID: PMC4559157
PMID: 25265316  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Postepy Dermatol Alergol. 2014 Aug;31(4):235-46. doi: 10.5114/pdia.2014.45070.
Epub 2014 Sep 9.

The adherence and illness perception of patients diagnosed with asthma or chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease treated with polytherapy using new generation
Cyclohaler.

Olszanecka-Glinianowicz M(1), Almgren-Rachtan A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Health Promotion and Obesity Management Unit, Department of Pathophysiology,
Medical Faculty in Katowice, Medical University of Silesia. Head of the Unit:
Prof. Magdalena Olszanecka-Glinianowicz MD, PhD. (2)Safety and Pharmacovigilance 
Department, Europharma Rachtan Ltd., Katowice, Poland.

INTRODUCTION: The factors influencing adherence of patients diagnosed with asthma
and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) include the complexity of the
therapy, fear of side effects of drugs, method of taking the drug, dosage
regimen, polypharmacy, adverse events, knowledge about the essence of the disease
and its complications, illness perception and priorities in life, training on the
use of the inhaler, the duration of treatment, social support, and drug
availability.
AIM: To assess the adherence of patients diagnosed with asthma and COPD treated
with polytherapy with fluticasone propionate and formoterol fumarate using the
Fantasmino inhaler in relation to primary diagnosis and illness perception as
well as patients' and doctors' opinion about this form of therapy.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: A questionnaire survey covering adherence, illness
perception and opinion about polytherapy using new generation Cyclohaler
performed by pulmonologists, allergologists and general practitioners in 3,618
patients with asthma and 2,602 with COPD.
RESULTS: On visit 1, a lower adherence rate was observed in COPD than in the
asthma group (72.0% vs. 61.5%; p < 0.01). During the observation, the adherence
rate increased significantly in the COPD group, only (61.5% vs. 73.0%; p < 0.01).
A negative correlation between total MMAS-8 and BIPQ scores was observed in both 
study groups (R = -0.15; p < 0.001 and R = -0.24; p < 0.001, respectively).
During the observation, a percentage of patients who believed that the
administration of the two drugs in a single inhaler considerably facilitates
their use increased significantly in both study groups. In addition, an increased
percentage of doctors believed that this therapeutic option facilitated education
of patients and decreased the number of errors made by the patients.
CONCLUSIONS: The illness perception, younger age, disease duration and severity
are predictors of adherence to treatment with fluticasone propionate and
formoterol fumarate using the Fantasmino inhaler among patients with asthma and
COPD. The positive opinion of patients and doctors about administration of
fluticasone propionate and formoterol fumarate using the Fantasmino inhaler
increased during observation.

DOI: 10.5114/pdia.2014.45070 
PMCID: PMC4171677
PMID: 25254009  [PubMed]


122. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2015;839:1-5. doi: 10.1007/5584_2014_51.

Inhaled corticosteroids increase siglec-5/14 expression in sputum cells of COPD
patients.

Wielgat P(1), Mroz RM, Stasiak-Barmuta A, Szepiel P, Chyczewska E, Braszko JJ,
Holownia A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacology, Medical University of Bialystok, 15A
Waszyngtona St., Bialystok, Poland, pwielgat@gmail.com.

Recent studies show that several Siglec receptors, such as Siglec-8 and
Siglec-14, may be important therapeutic targets in asthma and COPD. Siglecs are a
family of lectins belonging to the immunoglobulin superfamily and recognize
sialic acid residues of glycoproteins. Most of Siglecs have intracellular
immunoreceptor tyrosine-based inhibitory motifs (ITIM), implicating them in the
suppression of immunoreceptor signaling. Siglec-5/14 may be involved in the
negative regulation of innate immune responses. The aim of this study was to
analyze Siglec-5/14 expression in induced sputum cells of COPD patients in the
following treatment combinations: (1) a long-acting beta2-agonist, formoterol;
(2) formoterol combined with a long-acting antimuscarinic agent, tiotropium; and 
(3) formoterol combined with an inhaled corticosteroid or formoterol combined
with tiotropium and with an inhaled corticosteroid. Siglec expression was
assessed in sputum cells by flow cytometry using a specific monoclonal antibody. 
Double staining of cells indicated that Siglec-5/14 is expressed in
monocyte/macrophages and neutrophils, but not in lymphocytes. Siglec-5/14
expression was significantly higher in patients receiving combined therapy
including inhaled corticosteroids compared with patients taking only formoterol
or formoterol + tiotropium. Our results suggest that inhaled corticosteroids may 
exert beneficial or negative effects, depending on the patients' phenotype,
through increased immunosuppressive Siglec-5 or immunoactivatory Siglec-14
receptors, respectively.

DOI: 10.1007/5584_2014_51 
PMID: 25252903  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Respir Res. 2014 Sep 24;15:105. doi: 10.1186/s12931-014-0105-2.

Fluticasone propionate/salmeterol 250/50 μg versus salmeterol 50 μg after chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease exacerbation.

Ohar JA(1), Crater GD, Emmett A, Ferro TJ, Morris AN, Raphiou I, Sriram PS,
Dransfield MT.

Author information: 
(1)Wake Forest University Medical Center, 1 Medical Center Boulevard,
Winston-Salem, NC, USA. johar@wakehealth.edu.

BACKGROUND: Inhaled long-acting beta2 agonists used alone and in combination with
an inhaled corticosteroid reduce the risk of exacerbations in patients with
stable COPD. However, the relative efficacy of these agents in preventing
recurrent exacerbations in those recovering from an initial episode is not known.
This study compared the rate of COPD exacerbations over the 26 weeks after an
initial exacerbation in patients receiving the combination of fluticasone
propionate and salmeterol (FP/SAL) or SAL alone.
METHODS: Patients (n = 639) aged ≥40 years were randomized to either twice-daily 
inhaled FP/SAL 250/50 μg or SAL 50 μg. Primary, and secondary, endpoints were
rates of recurrent severe, and moderate/severe, exacerbations of COPD. Lung
function, health outcomes and levels of biomarkers of systemic inflammation were 
also assessed.
RESULTS: There was no statistically significant treatment difference in rates of 
recurrent severe exacerbations (treatment ratio 0.92 [95% CI: 0.58, 1.45]) and
moderate/severe exacerbations (0.82 [0.64, 1.06]) between FP/SAL and SAL in the
intent-to-treat population. Pre-dose morning FEV1 change from baseline was
greater (0.10 L [0.04, 0.16]) with FP/SAL than SAL. No treatment difference was
seen for other endpoints including patient-reported health outcomes and biomarker
levels for the full cohort.
CONCLUSIONS: No significant treatment difference between FP/SAL and SAL was seen 
in COPD exacerbation recurrence for the complete cohort. Treatment benefit with
FP/SAL over SAL (treatment ratio 0.68 [0.47, 0.97]) was seen in patients having
FEV1 ≥ 30% and prior exposure to ICS. No unexpected safety issues were identified
with either treatment. Patients with the most severe COPD may be more refractory 
to treatment.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov (identifier NCT01110200). This study was
funded by GlaxoSmithKline (study number ADC113874).

DOI: 10.1186/s12931-014-0105-2 
PMCID: PMC4176847
PMID: 25248764  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. BMJ. 2014 Sep 22;349:g5237. doi: 10.1136/bmj.g5237.

Management and prevention of exacerbations of COPD.

Aaron SD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Ottawa Hospital Research Institute, Ottawa, ON, Canada, K1H 8L6
saaron@ohri.ca.

Patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) are prone to acute
respiratory exacerbations, which can develop suddenly or subacutely over the
course of several days. Exacerbations have a detrimental effect on patients'
health status and increase the burden on the healthcare system. Initial treatment
is unsuccessful in 24-27% of patients, who have a relapse or a second
exacerbation within 30 days of the initial event. No obvious benefit has been
seen in recent clinical trials of anti-tumour necrosis factor therapy,
anti-leukotriene therapy, intensive chest physiotherapy, or early inpatient
pulmonary rehabilitation for treatment of exacerbations. By contrast, clinical
trials of prevention rather than acute treatment have shown promising results.
Long acting β agonist (LABA) or long acting anti-muscarinic (LAMA)
bronchodilators and inhaled corticosteroid-LABA combinations prevent
exacerbations in patients at risk, with relative risk reductions averaging 14-27%
for each of these drugs relative to placebo. Triple therapy with inhaled
corticosteroid-LABA plus LAMA may provide additional benefit, although study
results to date are heterogeneous and more studies are needed. Pneumonia is an
important complication of treatment with inhaled corticosteroid-LABA products,
and the risk of pneumonia seems to be doubled in patients with COPD who use
fluticasone. The addition of azithromycin to usual COPD therapy prevents
exacerbations, although it may prolong the Q-T interval and increase the risk of 
death from cardiovascular disease in patients prone to arrhythmia. New potential 
drugs--including mitogen activated protein kinase inhibitors, phosphodiesterase 3
inhibitors, and monoclonal antibodies to the interleukin 1 receptor--offer
additional hope for treatments that may prevent exacerbations in the future.

© BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2014.


PMID: 25245156  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract. 2014 Sep-Oct;2(5):553-61. doi:
10.1016/j.jaip.2014.02.010. Epub 2014 Apr 24.

Fluticasone furoate-vilanterol 100-25 mcg compared with fluticasone furoate 100
mcg in asthma: a randomized trial.

Bleecker ER(1), Lötvall J(2), O'Byrne PM(3), Woodcock A(4), Busse WW(5), Kerwin
EM(6), Forth R(7), Medley HV(8), Nunn C(8), Jacques L(8), Bateman ED(9).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Genomics and Personalized Medicine, Wake Forest School of Medicine,
Winston-Salem, NC. Electronic address: ebleeck@wakehealth.edu. (2)Krefting
Research Centre, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden. (3)Michael G
DeGroote School of Medicine, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada. (4)Institute of
Inflammation and Repair, University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom.
(5)Department of Medicine, University of Wisconsin, Madison, Wis. (6)Clinical
Research Institute of Southern Oregon, PC, Ore. (7)Quantitative Sciences
Division, GlaxoSmithKline, RTP, NC. (8)Respiratory Medicines Development Centre, 
GlaxoSmithKline, London, United Kingdom. (9)Department of Medicine, University of
Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa.

BACKGROUND: The inhaled corticosteroid fluticasone furoate (FF) in combination
with the long-acting β2-agonist vilanterol (VI) is under development for the
treatment of asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
OBJECTIVE: To compare the efficacy and safety of FF-VI and FF in patients (≥ 12
years old) with persistent asthma.
METHODS: In a randomized, double-blind, parallel-group study, patients (n = 609) 
(intent-to-treat population) received FF-VI 100-25 mcg, FF 100 mcg, or placebo
once daily (evening) by using a dry powder inhaler for 12 weeks. Coprimary end
points were change from baseline in trough FEV1 and serial (0-24 hours) weighted 
mean FEV1 (wmFEV(1)). Rescue-free 24-hour periods and safety also were assessed.
RESULTS: Placebo increased trough FEV1 (196 mL) and wmFEV(1) (212 mL) versus
baseline. Compared with placebo, FF-VI and FF significantly improved trough FEV1 
(172 mL [P < .001] and 136 mL [P = .002]), respectively, and serial wmFEV(1) (302
mL [P < .001] and 186 mL [P = .003]), respectively. Treatment differences between
FF-VI and FF approached significance for serial wmFEV(1) (116 mL; P = .060) but
not for trough FEV1 (36 mL; P = .405). The percentage of rescue-free 24-hour
periods with FF-VI was 10.6% greater than FF and 19.3% greater than placebo.
Statistically significant (P = .032) urinary cortisol suppression was observed
with FF-VI (ratio, 0.82) relative to placebo, but not with FF. Adverse event and 
safety profiles were similar across treatment groups.
CONCLUSIONS: Significant improvement in lung function was observed with FF-VI and
FF versus placebo in patients with persistent asthma. Improvement of FEV1 when VI
was added to FF was not significant. The high placebo response in evening trough 
FEV1 may have influenced the assessment of efficacy.

Copyright © 2014 American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaip.2014.02.010 
PMID: 25213048  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Drugs. 2014 Sep;74(14):1635-57. doi: 10.1007/s40265-014-0284-7.

Turning a molecule into a medicine: the development of indacaterol as a novel
once-daily bronchodilator treatment for patients with COPD.

Murphy L(1), Rennard S, Donohue J, Molimard M, Dahl R, Beeh KM, Dederichs J,
Fülle HJ, Higgins M, Young D.

Author information: 
(1)Novartis Horsham Research Centre, Novartis Pharmaceuticals UK Limited,
Wimblehurst Road, Horsham, West Sussex, RH12 5AB, UK,
lorraine.murphy@novartis.com.

Indacaterol is the first once-daily, long-acting β2-adrenergic agonist (LABA)
approved for the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
Indacaterol was developed using a combination of informed drug design and
molecular chemistry to generate a β2-adrenergic agonist with a fast onset and
long duration of action, enabling once-daily dosing with an acceptable safety
profile. Early preclinical studies with indacaterol demonstrated these
characteristics, and this promising molecule was taken into clinical development,
originally for asthma treatment. Subsequent safety concerns over LABA monotherapy
in patients with asthma redirected indacaterol's development to centre on COPD,
where a good evidence base and guideline recommendations for bronchodilator
monotherapy existed. Clinical development was initially complicated by different 
inhaler devices and differing doses of indacaterol. Using a phase III innovative 
adaptive-design clinical trial (INHANCE), indacaterol 150 and 300 μg once-daily
doses were selected to be taken forward into the phase III INERGIZE programme.
This programme delivered placebo-controlled and active-comparator data, including
comparisons with formoterol, tiotropium and salmeterol/fluticasone, as well as
the use of indacaterol in combination with tiotropium. Together, these studies
provided a comprehensive assessment of the benefit-risk profile of indacaterol,
allowing for regulatory submission. Indacaterol was first approved at once-daily 
doses of 150 and 300 μg in the European Union in 2009, followed by 150 µg in
Japan (2011) and China (2012), and 75 μg in the United States (2011). To date,
indacaterol is approved and marketed in more than 100 countries worldwide for
once-daily maintenance treatment of COPD.

DOI: 10.1007/s40265-014-0284-7 
PMID: 25212789  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. N Engl J Med. 2014 Oct 2;371(14):1285-94. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1407154. Epub 2014
Sep 8.

Withdrawal of inhaled glucocorticoids and exacerbations of COPD.

Magnussen H(1), Disse B, Rodriguez-Roisin R, Kirsten A, Watz H, Tetzlaff K, Towse
L, Finnigan H, Dahl R, Decramer M, Chanez P, Wouters EF, Calverley PM; WISDOM
Investigators.

Collaborators: Chia M, Peters M, Polasek J, Sajkov D, Seale P, Wheatley J, Bedert
L, Decramer M, Driesen P, Fievez P, Flemale A, Martinot JB, Mentens Y, Ninane V, 
Péche R, Plas B, van Zandweghe L, Adalberto R, Carmo Moreira MA, Fritscher C,
Gondim H, Jardim JR, Dancheva A, Kostov K, Lllieva-Fartunova V, Metev H,
Osmanliev D, Rashkov Palaveev K, Taseva M, Troshanova E, Bai C, Baiqiang C, Li H,
Lin Y, Tang Y, Wu Y, Xin J, Yao W, Backer V, Dahl R, Titlestad I, Arvin-Berod C, 
Boyer GR, Brouquieres D, Brousse C, Caillaud D, Castelnau O, Cavailles A, Chanez 
P, Claussner Paulignan M, Dupouy J, Gutgobert C, Jasnot JY, Le Merre C, Meziane
L, Paganin F, Pegliasco H, Proust A, Raspaud C, Tarodo de la Fuente P, Verdier S,
Andreas S, Bewig B, Büttner C, Eich A, Gebhardt R, Herth F, Kardos P, Keller C,
Koch A, Korn S, Kronsbein J, Käßner F, Magnussen H, Mikloweit P, Pfeifer M,
Schröder-Babo W, Schultebraucks R, Vogelmeier C, Knorr R, Neurohr C, Gaga M,
Gourgoulianis K, Kakoura M, Kosmas E, Koulouris N, Papiris S, Siafakas N,
Sichletides L, Tatsis G, Toubis M, Vassilakopoulos T, Panagiotis D, Balint B,
Jedlinszki M, Meszaros I, Papp M, Radeczky E, Rajakay K, Schlezák J, Di Maria GU,
Fabbri LM, Foresi A, Fracchia C, Paggiaro PL, Foschino MP, Potena A, Spanevello
A, Papi A, de Munck DR, Pasma HR, Rudolphus A, van Noord JA, Brockway B, Epton M,
Jones S, McWilliams T, Mills G, Quinn D, Walford E, Kelly E, Custodio V,
Fernandez L, de Guia T, Jorge M, Mortera L, Roa C, Santiaguel J, Wang A,
Asankowicz-Bargiel B, Batura-Gabryel H, Chwist-Nowak A, Mieszko Filipczyk G,
Madra-Rogacka D, Pawlukiewicz M, Silber M, Wesolowski S, Astafyeva N, Ilkovich M,
Ivleva A, Khokhlov A, Leshchenko I, Nikishenkova L, Shilkina N, Zhestkov A,
Mishina I, Alekseeva E, Abdool-Gaffar M, Abdullah I, Bateman E, Irusen E, Jansen 
J, Joubert JR, Ras G, Alonso A, Arismendi E, Cejudo P, Echave Sustaeta JM,
Farrero E, Ferrer A, Galdiz Iturri JB, Gutierrez Lara JA, Rodriguez-Roisin R,
Roldan J, Perng WC, Hang LW, Huang MS, Kuo PH, Tsao CY, Wu RG, Abdelkader A,
Benzarti M, Bouacha H, Chabbou A, Megdiche ML, Aktogu S, Altin S, Atis S,
Caglayan B, Cetinkaya E, Cikrikcioglu S, Damar D, Ergun P, Erkan L, Evyapan F,
Guclu SZ, Gulmez I, Ilgazli A, Karakurt S, Sayiner A, Uzaslan EK, Yildiz O,
Dzyublyk O, Krasnokutskiy S, Mostoviy Y, Ostrovskiy M, Sevchuk S, Voeykova L,
Iashyna L, Barnes NC, Calverley P, Chilvers ER, Elborn S, Hadfield JW, Langan J, 
Lawson R, Mahdi H, Mansur A, McKeith D, Morice A, Nordstrum M, Russell R,
Sridharan K, Wilson AM, Winning A.

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2014 Oct 2;371(14):1340-1.
    Evid Based Med. 2015 Apr;20(2):57.
    N Engl J Med. 2015 Jan 1;372(1):93-4.
    Ann Intern Med. 2015 Mar 17;162(6):JC5.
    N Engl J Med. 2015 Jan 1;372(1):92-3.
    N Engl J Med. 2015 Jan 1;372(1):92.
    N Engl J Med. 2015 Jan 1;372(1):93.

BACKGROUND: Treatment with inhaled glucocorticoids in combination with
long-acting bronchodilators is recommended in patients with frequent
exacerbations of severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). However,
the benefit of inhaled glucocorticoids in addition to two long-acting
bronchodilators has not been fully explored.
METHODS: In this 12-month, double-blind, parallel-group study, 2485 patients with
a history of exacerbation of COPD received triple therapy consisting of
tiotropium (at a dose of 18 μg once daily), salmeterol (50 μg twice daily), and
the inhaled glucocorticoid fluticasone propionate (500 μg twice daily) during a
6-week run-in period. Patients were then randomly assigned to continued triple
therapy or withdrawal of fluticasone in three steps over a 12-week period. The
primary end point was the time to the first moderate or severe COPD exacerbation.
Spirometric findings, health status, and dyspnea were also monitored.
RESULTS: As compared with continued glucocorticoid use, glucocorticoid withdrawal
met the prespecified noninferiority criterion of 1.20 for the upper limit of the 
95% confidence interval (CI) with respect to the first moderate or severe COPD
exacerbation (hazard ratio, 1.06; 95% CI, 0.94 to 1.19). At week 18, when
glucocorticoid withdrawal was complete, the adjusted mean reduction from baseline
in the trough forced expiratory volume in 1 second was 38 ml greater in the
glucocorticoid-withdrawal group than in the glucocorticoid-continuation group
(P<0.001); a similar between-group difference (43 ml) was seen at week 52
(P=0.001). No change in dyspnea and minor changes in health status occurred in
the glucocorticoid-withdrawal group.
CONCLUSIONS: In patients with severe COPD receiving tiotropium plus salmeterol,
the risk of moderate or severe exacerbations was similar among those who
discontinued inhaled glucocorticoids and those who continued glucocorticoid
therapy. However, there was a greater decrease in lung function during the final 
step of glucocorticoid withdrawal. (Funded by Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma; WISDOM
ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT00975195.).

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa1407154 
PMID: 25196117  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. N Engl J Med. 2014 Oct 2;371(14):1340-1. doi: 10.1056/NEJMe1409219. Epub 2014 Sep
8.

Stepping down therapy in COPD.

Reilly JJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Medicine, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh.

Comment on
    N Engl J Med. 2014 Oct 2;371(14):1285-94.

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMe1409219 
PMID: 25196116  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Eur Respir J. 2014 Nov;44(5):1166-76. doi: 10.1183/09031936.00024314. Epub 2014
Sep 3.

Prospective validation of the endurance shuttle walking test in the context of
bronchodilation in COPD.

Borel B(1), Pepin V(2), Mahler DA(3), Nadreau É(4), Maltais F(5).

Author information: 
(1)Centre de recherche, Institut Universitaire de Cardiologie et de Pneumologie
de Québec - Université Laval, Quebec, Canada Laboratoire HAVAE (EA6310),
Université de Limoges, Limoges, France. (2)Centre de recherche, Hôpital du
Sacré-Coeur de Montréal, Montreal, Canada. (3)Geisel School of Medicine at
Dartmouth, Hanover, NH, USA. (4)Centre de recherche, Institut Universitaire de
Cardiologie et de Pneumologie de Québec - Université Laval, Quebec, Canada.
(5)Centre de recherche, Institut Universitaire de Cardiologie et de Pneumologie
de Québec - Université Laval, Quebec, Canada Francois.Maltais@fmed.ulaval.ca.

This study focused on repeatability data and minimal important difference (MID)
estimates of the endurance shuttle walking test (ESWT). 255 chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease patients (forced expiratory volume in 1 s 54.7±13.2% predicted)
completed four ESWTs at different times during the 8-week study: two under
baseline conditions with tiotropium (1 week apart), one after a single dose and
one after 4 weeks of either fluticasone propionate/salmeterol combination or
placebo in addition to tiotropium. 97 patients performed all the tests with a
portable metabolic system. Reproducibility of test performance and
cardiorespiratory response was investigated with the data obtained on the first
two ESWTs. The mean differences between the first two ESWT performances
(-6.7±72.2 s and -7.3±113.1 m for endurance time and walking distance,
respectively) were not statistically significant. The between-test end-exercise
and isotime values for each cardiorespiratory parameter were not significantly
different from each other. With the exception of arterial oxygen saturation by
pulse oximetry, the repeatability of cardiorespiratory adaptations to ESWT was
also confirmed with strong Pearson and intraclass correlation coefficients.
Finally, changes of 56-61 s and 70-82 m in endurance time and distance walked,
respectively, were perceived by patients. This study provides methodological
information supporting the reliability of the ESWT and suggests MID estimates for
this test.

©ERS 2014.

DOI: 10.1183/09031936.00024314 
PMID: 25186261  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. J Tradit Chin Med. 2014 Aug;34(4):445-9.

Effect of yiqibushenhuoxue decoction on chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
measured by St. George's respiratory disease questionnaire scores and forced
expiratory volume.

Liu J, Gao F, Li Z.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the effects of Yiqibushenhuoxue decoction on stable
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) by observing its influences on
patients' quality of life and airway inflammation.
METHODS: Seventy patients with stable COPD were randomly divided into a treatment
group (n = 35) treated with Yiqibushenhuoxue decoction plus Seretide and a
control group (n = 35) treated with Seretide only. The dosage of Yiqibushenhuoxue
decoction was 100 mL each time, twice a day, and the dosage of Seretide was
salmeterol 50 microg/fluticasone 250 microg twice a day. Both groups were treated
for 12 weeks. Before and after the treatment, St George's respiratory disease
questionnaire (SGRQ) scores, forced expiratory volume, and forced expiratory
volume in 1 second/forced vital capacity (FEV1/ FVC) were measured.
RESULTS: The SGRQ scores in both groups were significantly lower than those
before treatment (P < 0.05). After treatment, the total SGRQ scores and each
subscore in the treatment group were significantly lower than those in the
control group (P < 0.05). The percentage of the predicted FEV1% and FEV1/FVC were
higher in both groups, but no statistical differences were detected from before
to after the treatment or between the two groups (P > 0.05).
CONCLUSION: Yiqibushenhuoxue decoction could significantly decrease the SGRQ
scores in patients with stable COPD, which suggests that it is able to improve
patient symptoms.


PMID: 25185362  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Pulm Pharmacol Ther. 2015 Feb;30:128-33. doi: 10.1016/j.pupt.2014.08.002. Epub
2014 Aug 23.

Comparison of airway dimensions with once daily tiotropium plus indacaterol
versus twice daily Advair(®) in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Hoshino M(1), Ohtawa J(2), Akitsu K(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Atami Hospital, International University
of Health and Welfare, Atami, Japan. Electronic address: hoshino@iuhw.ac.jp.
(2)Department of Radiology, Atami Hospital, International University of Health
and Welfare, Atami, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Current guidelines recommend combining long-acting bronchodilators
with different modes of action in patients with moderate-to-severe chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). We evaluated the effects of airway
dimensions and pulmonary function with tiotropium plus indacaterol versus
Advair(®).
METHODS: Subjects (n = 46) were randomized to receive tiotropium (18 μg once
daily) plus indacaterol (150 μg once daily) or Advair(®) (50/250 μg twice daily) 
for 16 weeks. Airway geometry was determined by quantitative computed tomography 
(luminal area, Ai; total area of the airway, Ao; wall area, WA; and percentage
wall area, WA/Ao and wall thickness, T). Spirometry (forced expiratory volume in 
1 s, FEV1; forced vital capacity, FVC and inspiratory capacity, IC) and St.
George's Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ) were evaluated.
RESULTS: Tiotropium plus indacaterol significantly increased CT-indices including
Ai corrected for body surface area (Ai/BSA), and decreased WA/BSA, WA/Ao and
T/√BSA compared with Advair(®) (p < 0.05, respectively). In physiological
parameters, mean difference in IC was significantly higher under treatment with
tiotropium plus indacaterol than Advair(®) (p < 0.05). The changes in Ai/BSA,
WA/BSA, WA/Ao and T/√BSA were significantly correlated with changes in IC
(r = 0.535, p = 0.011; r = -0.688, p < 0.001; r = -0.555, p = 0.002 and
r = -0.542, p = 0.007; respectively). There were more significant improvements in
SGRQ scores after treatment with tiotropium plus indacaterol than Advair(®).
CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest that dual bronchodilation with tiotropium
plus indacaterol is superior in airway geometry and lung function compared with
Advair(®) in COPD.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pupt.2014.08.002 
PMID: 25183687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2014 Aug 13;9:853-61. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S67044. 
eCollection 2014.

Airway epithelial platelet-activating factor receptor expression is markedly
upregulated in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Shukla SD(1), Sohal SS(1), Mahmood MQ(1), Reid D(2), Muller HK(1), Walters EH(1).

Author information: 
(1)NHMRC Centre for Research Excellence for Chronic Respiratory Disease and Lung 
Ageing, School of Medicine, University of Tasmania, Hobart, Tasmania, Australia. 
(2)Queensland Institute of Medical Research, Iron Metabolism Laboratory,
Brisbane, Queensland, Australia.

BACKGROUND: We recently published that platelet-activating factor receptor (PAFr)
is upregulated on the epithelium of the proximal airways of current smokers and
also in bronchial epithelial cells exposed to cigarette smoke extract. These
treated cells also showed upregulation of Streptococcus pneumoniae adhesion.
Bacterial wall phosphorylcholine specifically binds to PAFr expressed on airway
epithelium, thus facilitating adherence and tissue invasion, which may be
relevant to chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Moreover, the use of
inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) in COPD patients is associated with an increased
risk of invasive respiratory pneumococcal infections.
OBJECTIVE: In this study, we have investigated whether PAFr expression is
especially upregulated in airway epithelium in COPD patients and whether this
expression may be modulated by ICS therapy.
METHODS: We cross-sectionally evaluated PAFr expression in bronchial biopsies
from 15 COPD patients who were current smokers (COPD-smokers) and 12
COPD-ex-smokers, and we compared these to biopsies from 16 smokers with normal
lung function. We assessed immunostaining with anti-PAFr monoclonal antibody. We 
also used material from a previous double-blinded randomized placebo-controlled
6-month ICS intervention study in COPD patients to explore the effect of ICS on
PAFr expression. We employed computer-aided image analysis to quantify the
percentage of epithelium stained for PAFr.
RESULTS: Markedly enhanced expression of PAFr was found in both COPD-smokers
(P<0.005) and COPD-ex-smokers (P<0.002) compared to smokers with normal lung
function. There was little evidence that PAFr expression was affected by ICS
therapy over 6 months.
CONCLUSION: Epithelial PAFr expression is upregulated in smokers, especially in
those with COPD, and is not obviously affected by ICS therapy.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S67044 
PMCID: PMC4137917
PMID: 25143722  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Ann Intern Med. 2014 Aug 19;161(4):JC8. doi:
10.7326/0003-4819-161-4-201408190-02008.

ACP Journal Club. Review: In COPD, fluticasone or budesonide increases serious
pneumonia but not mortality.

Stanbrook MB.

Comment on
    Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2014;3:CD010115.

DOI: 10.7326/0003-4819-161-4-201408190-02008 
PMID: 25133387  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Drug Ther Bull. 2014 Aug;52(8):93-6. doi: 10.1136/dtb.2014.8.0273.

Relvar Ellipta for asthma.

[No authors listed]

▼Relvar Ellipta (GSK) is a dry powder inhaler that contains a corticosteroid
(fluticasone furoate) and a long-acting beta2 agonist (vilanterol trifenatate).
It is licensed for once-daily use as maintenance therapy for chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD) and asthma. In a previous article we considered its use 
in the management of COPD.1 Here we review the evidence for Relvar Ellipta in the
treatment of patients with asthma.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

DOI: 10.1136/dtb.2014.8.0273 
PMID: 25125553  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Br J Clin Pharmacol. 2014 Aug;78(2):282-300. doi: 10.1111/bcp.12334.

Inhaled corticosteroids in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: a pro-con
perspective.

Babu KS(1), Kastelik JA, Morjaria JB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Queen Alexandra Hospital, Cosham,
Portsmouth, Hampshire, UK.

Current guidelines limit regular use of inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) to a
specific subgroup of patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)
in whom the forced expiratory volume in 1 s is <60% of predicted and who have
frequent exacerbations. In these patients, there is evidence that ICS reduce the 
frequency of exacerbations and improve lung function and quality of life.
However, a review of the literature suggests that the evidence available may be
interpreted to favour or contradict these observations. It becomes apparent that 
COPD is a heterogeneous condition. Clinicians therefore need to be aware of the
heterogeneity as well as having an understanding of how ICS may be used in the
context of the specific subgroups of patients with COPD. This review argues for
and against the use of ICS in COPD by providing an in-depth analysis of the
currently available evidence.

© 2014 The British Pharmacological Society.

DOI: 10.1111/bcp.12334 
PMCID: PMC4137821
PMID: 25099256  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Respir Care. 2014 Oct;59(10):1550-9. doi: 10.4187/respcare.03036. Epub 2014 Jul
29.

Inhaled corticosteroids do not influence the early inflammatory response and
clinical presentation of hospitalized subjects with COPD exacerbation.

Crisafulli E(1), Guerrero M(2), Menéndez R(3), Huerta A(2), Martinez R(3), Gimeno
A(3), Soler N(2), Torres A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Cardio-Thoracic Department, Pneumology and Respiratory Intensive Care Unit,
Carlo Poma Hospital, Mantua, Italy. (2)Pneumology Department, Clinic Institute of
Thorax, Hospital Clinic of Barcelona, Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques
August Pi i Sunyer, University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain. (3)Pneumology
Department, Hospital Universitario y Politecnico La Fe, Centro de Investigación
Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Respiratorias, Valencia, Spain. (4)Pneumology
Department, Clinic Institute of Thorax, Hospital Clinic of Barcelona, Institut
d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer, University of Barcelona,
Barcelona, Spain. atorres@clinic.ub.es.

BACKGROUND: Inhaled corticosteroids are anti-inflammatory medications that can
down-regulate the immunologic response in patients with COPD; however, their role
at onset of COPD exacerbation is still not understood. The aim of this study was 
to assess the early inflammatory response and clinical presentation of patients
with COPD exacerbation mediated by inhaled corticosteroids.
METHODS: Prospective data were collected on 123 hospitalized subjects with COPD
exacerbation over a 30-month period at 2 Spanish university hospitals. Based on
domiciliary use, comparative analyses were performed between subjects who did not
use inhaled corticosteroids (n = 58) and subjects who did (n = 65). Measurements 
of serum biomarkers were recorded on admission to the hospital (day 1) and on day
3; clinical, physiological, microbiological, and severity data and
mortality/readmission rates were also recorded.
RESULTS: At days 1 and 3, both groups showed a similar inflammatory response;
fluticasone produced lower levels of interleukin-8 compared with budesonide (P < 
.01). All clinical features considered were similar in the 2 groups; multivariate
analysis predicting clinical complications on hospitalization showed air-flow
obstruction severity as the only predictive factor (odds ratio 3.13, 95% CI
1.13-8.63, P = .02).
CONCLUSIONS: Our study demonstrates a lack of inhaled corticosteroid influence in
the early systemic inflammatory response to and clinical presentation of COPD
exacerbation.

Copyright © 2014 by Daedalus Enterprises.

DOI: 10.4187/respcare.03036 
PMID: 25074943  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Drugs. 2014 Sep;74(13):1509-22. doi: 10.1007/s40265-014-0269-6.

Fluticasone furoate/vilanterol: a review of its use in chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease.

McKeage K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Springer, Private Bag 65901, Mairangi Bay 0754, Auckland, New Zealand,
demail@springer.com.

Fluticasone furoate/vilanterol (Relvar(®), Breo(®), Revinty(®)) is a fixed
combination of a corticosteroid and a long-acting β2-adrenergic agonist (LABA)
for once-daily use via a dry powder inhaler (Ellipta(®)). Fluticasone
furoate/vilanterol 100/25 µg is approved for the treatment of chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD) in several countries. This article reviews the clinical 
use of the combination in COPD and summarises pharmacological properties.
Fluticasone furoate has enhanced affinity for the glucocorticoid receptor
compared with other clinically used inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) and longer lung
retention than fluticasone propionate. Vilanterol is highly selective for
β2-adrenoreceptors and provides a rapid and prolonged duration of action. In
phase 3 trials in patients with moderate to very severe COPD, overall, once-daily
fluticasone furoate/vilanterol 100/25 µg improved pulmonary function more than
placebo and fluticasone furoate alone and improved exacerbation rates more than
vilanterol alone. With regard to pulmonary function, once-daily fluticasone
furoate/vilanterol 100/25 μg was more effective than twice-daily fluticasone
propionate/salmeterol 250/50 µg and similarly effective as twice-daily
fluticasone propionate/salmeterol 500/50 μg. In 12-month trials, fluticasone
furoate/vilanterol was generally well tolerated, and in 12- and 24-week trials,
the incidence of adverse events was similar overall to that associated with the
individual components or fluticasone propionate/salmeterol. However, as with the 
long-term use of all ICS agents, 12-month data indicate an increase in the risk
of pneumonia with fluticasone furoate/vilanterol. In conclusion, fluticasone
furoate/vilanterol is an effective and generally well tolerated additional
LABA/ICS agent for the treatment of COPD with the added convenience of once-daily
administration, which may improve treatment adherence in some patients.

DOI: 10.1007/s40265-014-0269-6 
PMID: 25074268  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Chest. 2014 Dec;146(6):1521-30. doi: 10.1378/chest.13-2859.

Long-acting bronchodilators and arterial stiffness in patients with COPD: a
comparison of fluticasone furoate/vilanterol with tiotropium.

Pepin JL, Cockcroft JR, Midwinter D, Sharma S, Rubin DB, Andreas S.

BACKGROUND: Increased arterial stiffness as measured by aortic pulse wave
velocity (aPWV) predicts cardiovascular events and mortality and is elevated in
patients with COPD. Prior investigation suggests that a long-acting β-agonist
(LABA)/inhaled corticosteroid (ICS) lowers aPWV in patients with baseline aPWV ≥ 
11 m/s. This study compared the effect of the ICS/LABA fluticasone
furoate/vilanterol (FF/VI), 100/25 μg, delivered via the ELLIPTA dry powder
inhaler, with tiotropium bromide (TIO), 18 μg, on aPWV.
METHODS: This multicenter, randomized, blinded, double-dummy, parallel-group,
12-week study compared FF/VI and TIO, both administered once daily. The primary
end point was aPWV change from baseline at 12 weeks. Safety end points included
adverse events (AEs), vital signs, and clinical laboratory tests.
RESULTS: Two hundred fifty-seven patients with COPD and aPWV ≥ 11 m/s were
randomized; 87% had prior cardiovascular events and/or risk. The mean difference 
in aPWV between FF/VI and TIO at week 12 was not significant (P = .484). Because 
the study did not contain a placebo arm, a post hoc analysis was performed to
show that both treatments lowered aPWV by an approximate difference of 1 m/s
compared with baseline. The proportion of patients reporting AEs was similar with
FF/VI (24%) and TIO (18%). There were no changes in clinical concern for vital
signs or clinical laboratory tests.
CONCLUSIONS: No differences on aPWV were observed between FF/VI and TIO. However,
further studies with a placebo arm are required to establish definitively whether
long-acting bronchodilators lower aPWV. Both treatments demonstrated an
acceptable tolerability profile.
TRIAL REGISTRY: ClinicalTrials.gov; No.: NCT01395888; URL:
www.clinicaltrials.gov.

DOI: 10.1378/chest.13-2859 
PMID: 25058845  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Respir Physiol Neurobiol. 2014 Oct 1;202:1-5. doi: 10.1016/j.resp.2014.07.008.
Epub 2014 Jul 18.

The application of impulse oscillation system for the evaluation of treatment
effects in patients with COPD.

Mineshita M(1), Shikama Y(2), Nakajima H(3), Nishihira R(4), Komatsu S(5), Kubota
M(6), Kobayashi H(7), Kokubu F(8), Shinkai M(9), Kaneko T(10), Miyazawa T(11);
COPD EXHALATION Investigators.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Respiratory and Infectious Diseases, Department of Internal
Medicine, St. Marianna University School of Medicine, 2-16-1, Sugao, Miyamae-ku, 
Kawasaki 216-8511, Japan. Electronic address: m-mine@marianna-u.ac.jp.
(2)Respiratory Disease Center, Showa University Northern Yokohama Hospital, 35-1 
Chigasaki-chuo, Tuzuki-ku, Yokohama, Japan. Electronic address:
shikamay@med.showa-u.ac.jp. (3)Respiratory Disease Center, Showa University
Northern Yokohama Hospital, 35-1 Chigasaki-chuo, Tuzuki-ku, Yokohama, Japan.
Electronic address: hiroaki@med.showa-u.ac.jp. (4)Department of Respiratory
Medicine, Kanagawa Cardiovascular and Respiratory Center, 6-16-1 Tomiokahigashi, 
Kanazawa-ku, Yokohama 236-0051, Japan. Electronic address:
nishihira@kanagawa-junko.jp. (5)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Kanagawa
Cardiovascular and Respiratory Center, 6-16-1 Tomiokahigashi, Kanazawa-ku,
Yokohama 236-0051, Japan. Electronic address: komatsu-s@kanagawa-junko.jp.
(6)Respiratory Medicine, Kitasato University School of Medicine, 1-15-1 Kitasato,
Sagamihara 228-8555, Japan. Electronic address: mkubota@med.kitasato-u.ac.jp.
(7)Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kitasato University, 1-15-1 Kitasato,
Sagamihara 228-8555, Japan. Electronic address: hiro@kitasato-u.ac.jp.
(8)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Showa University Fujigaoka Hospital, 1-30 
Fujigaoka, Aoba-ku, Yokohama 227-8501, Japan. Electronic address:
fkokubu@med.showa-u.ac.jp. (9)Respiratory Disease Center, Yokohama City
University Medical Center, 4-57 Urafune-cho, Minami-ku, Yokohama 232-0024, Japan.
Electronic address: shinkai@yokohama-cu.ac.jp. (10)Respiratory Disease Center,
Yokohama City University Medical Center, 4-57 Urafune-cho, Minami-ku, Yokohama
232-0024, Japan. Electronic address: takeshi@med.yokohama-cu.ac.jp. (11)Division 
of Respiratory and Infectious Diseases, Department of Internal Medicine, St.
Marianna University School of Medicine, 2-16-1, Sugao, Miyamae-ku, Kawasaki
216-8511, Japan.

There are only a few reports of the use of impulse oscillation system (IOS) for
the evaluation of COPD treatment. In this study, we applied IOS and spirometry to
evaluate the effectiveness of fluticasone propionate and salmeterol (SFC)
combined with tiotropium (TIO) in COPD patients. Following a 4-week run-in period
with TIO (18 μg once daily) treatment, COPD patients were randomized to SFC
(250/50 μg twice daily; SFC+TIO group, n=25), or TIO alone (TIO group, n=31).
Pulmonary functions were recorded by IOS and spirometry before and after the
study period. The SFC+TIO group showed significant improvements in inspiratory
resistance at 5 Hz and resonant frequency, as well as in FVC and FEV1, after the 
12-week treatment (p<0.05). Since there were no significant correlations between 
improvements in IOS measurements and FVC or FEV1, IOS may provide a physiological
point of view that is different from spirometry and seemed to be applicable as an
additional assessment tool targeting COPD patients.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.resp.2014.07.008 
PMID: 25046279  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Respir Med. 2014 Sep;108(9):1355-62. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2014.04.015. Epub 2014
May 2.

Appraisal of lens opacity with mometasone furoate/formoterol fumarate combination
in patients with COPD or asthma.

Maspero J(1), Cherrez I(2), Doherty DE(3), Tashkin DP(4), Kuna P(5), Kuo WL(6),
Gates D(6), Nolte H(6), Chylack LT Jr(7).

Author information: 
(1)Fundacion CIDEA Allergy and Respiratory Research Unit, Buenos Aires,
Argentina. Electronic address: maspero@ciudad.com.ar. (2)Respiralab Allergy and
Respiratory Center, Kennedy Hospital, Guayaquil, Ecuador. (3)University of
Kentucky, Lexington, KY, USA. (4)David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los
Angeles, CA, USA. (5)Medical University of Lodz, Poland. (6)Merck & Co., Inc.,
Whitehouse Station, NJ, USA. (7)Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.

BACKGROUND: Long-term corticosteroid use may increase cataract risk. The Lens
Opacities Classification System (LOCS) III ranked lens opacities as Class 1:
0.5-0.9 unit; Class 2: 1.0-1.4 units; or Class 3: ≥1.5 units in clinical trials
of combined mometasone furoate and formoterol (MF/F) administered by metered-dose
inhaler (MDI). We examined retrospectively shifts in lenticular opacity in
patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) or asthma.
METHODS: We analyzed pooled LOCS III data from two COPD studies and separately
analyzed LOCS III data from an asthma study. COPD subjects were randomized to
twice daily MF/F 200/10 μg, MF/F 400/10 μg, MF 400 μg, F 10 μg, and placebo;
asthma subjects were randomized to MF/F 200/10 μg, MF/F 400/10 μg, fluticasone
propionate/salmeterol (FP/S) 250/50 μg, and FP/S 500/50 μg. Lenticular opacity
changes were analyzed post hoc for proportions of subjects with LOCS III grade
increases ≥0.5, ≥1.0, or ≥1.5 units at weeks 26 and 52.
RESULTS: Proportions of subjects in the COPD studies with Class 1 (≥0.5 unit), 2 
(≥1.0 unit), or 3 (≥1.5 units) increases in LOCS III at week 26 (N = 1675) ranged
from 15.5 to 18.6%, 3.3-6.0%, and 0.9-2.2%, respectively. At week 52 (N = 1085), 
proportions of active-treated subjects with Class 1, 2, or 3 increases in LOCS
III ranged from 26.6 to 28.9%, 6.3-10.7%, and 2.6-5.9%, respectively. Treatment
differences in lenticular shifts were generally small and nonsignificant in the
asthma study.
CONCLUSION: No clinically relevant trends were observed in the LOCS III
assessment of lenticular shifts during treatment of COPD and asthma patients,
although further study may be needed to confirm the findings presented here. In
these trials, MF/F effects on lens opacity were not observed. (Clinicaltrials.gov
numbers: NCT00383435, NCT00383721, and NCT00379288.).

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2014.04.015 
PMID: 25044280  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Respir Med. 2014 Aug;108(8):1171-9. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2014.05.008. Epub 2014
Jun 19.

Efficacy and safety of once-daily fluticasone furoate/vilanterol (100/25 mcg)
versus twice-daily fluticasone propionate/salmeterol (250/50 mcg) in COPD
patients.

Dransfield MT(1), Feldman G(2), Korenblat P(3), LaForce CF(4), Locantore N(5),
Pistolesi M(6), Watkins ML(5), Crim C(5), Martinez FJ(7).

Author information: 
(1)UAB Lung Health Center, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL
35294, USA; Birmingham VA Medical Center, Birmingham, AL 35233, USA. Electronic
address: mdrans99@uab.edu. (2)S. Carolina Pharmaceutical Research, Spartanburg,
SC 29303, USA. (3)Clinical Research Center LLB, St Louis, MO 63141, USA. (4)North
Carolina Clinical Research, Raleigh, NC 27607, USA. (5)GlaxoSmithKline, Research 
Triangle Park, NC 27709, USA. (6)University of Florence, Florence, 50121 Firenze,
Italy. (7)University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.

BACKGROUND: Fluticasone furoate/vilanterol (FF/VI) is an inhaled
corticosteroid/long-acting beta2-agonist (ICS/LABA), recently approved as
once-daily maintenance therapy for COPD. We compared the lung function effects of
FF/VI with those of twice-daily fluticasone propionate/salmeterol (FP/SAL).
METHODS: Three 12 week studies comparing FF/VI and FP/SAL were conducted.
Patients aged ≥40 years with moderate-to-very severe COPD were randomized to
receive double-blind, double-dummy FF/VI 100/25 mcg once-daily, or FP/SAL 250/50 
mcg twice-daily for 12 weeks following a 2 week placebo run-in period. The
primary endpoint of each study was change from baseline trough in 0-24 h weighted
mean FEV(1) (wmFEV(1)) on Day 84. Safety was also assessed.
RESULTS: In Study 1 (HZC113109) (intent-to-treat n: FF/VI = 260; FP/SAL = 259),
the increase from baseline in 0-24 h wmFEV(1) was significantly greater with
FF/VI than FP/SAL (Δ80 mL, P < 0.001). In Study 2 (HZC112352) (intent-to-treat n:
FF/VI = 259; FP/SAL = 252) and Study 3 (RLV116974) (intent-to-treat n: FF/VI =
412; FP/SAL = 416), the increase from baseline in 0-24 h wmFEV(1) was not
significantly greater with FF/VI than FP/SAL (Δ29 mL, P = 0.267; Δ25 mL, P =
0.137). The treatment difference was statistically but not clinically significant
in a pooled analysis (Δ41 mL, P < 0.001). Pooled adverse events (FF/VI 27%;
FP/SAL 28%) and serious adverse events (FF/VI 2%; FP/SAL 3%) were similar between
treatments.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest that once-daily FF/VI 100/25 mcg provides FEV(1)
improvement in COPD that is at least comparable with that conferred by
twice-daily FP/SAL 250/50 mcg, although interpretation is limited by differences 
in individual study outcomes. The safety profiles of FF/VI 100/25 mcg and FP/SAL 
250/50 mcg are similar.
CLINICAL TRIAL REGISTRATION: clinicaltrials.gov: NCT01323634; NCT01323621;
NCT01706328. GlaxoSmithKline study codes: HZC113109; HZC112352; RLV116974.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2014.05.008 
PMID: 24998880  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2014 Jun 5;9:569-76. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S65693.
eCollection 2014.

Outcomes and costs of treating chronic obstructive pulmonary disease with inhaled
fixed combinations: the Italian perspective of the PATHOS study.

Roggeri A(1), Micheletto C(2), Roggeri DP(1).

Author information: 
(1)ProCure Solutions, Bergamo, Italy. (2)Respiratory Unit, Mater Salutis
Hospital, Legnago, Verona, Italy.

PURPOSE: Fixed-dose combinations of inhaled corticosteroids and long-acting
β2-agonists have proven to prevent and reduce chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD) exacerbations. The aim of this analysis was to explore the
clinical consequences and direct health care costs of applying the findings of
the PATHOS (An Investigation of the Past 10 Years Health Care for Primary Care
Patients with Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease) study to the Italian
context.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Effectiveness data from the PATHOS study, a
population-based, retrospective, observational registry study conducted in
Sweden, in terms of reduction in COPD and pneumonia-related hospitalizations,
were considered, in order to estimate the differences in resource consumption
between patients treated with budesonide/formoterol and fluticasone/salmeterol.
The base case considers the average dosages of the two drugs reported in the
PATHOS study and the actual public price in charges to the Italian National
Health Service, while the difference in hospitalization rates reported in the
PATHOS study was costed based on Italian real-world data.
RESULTS: The PATHOS study demonstrated a significant reduction in COPD
hospitalizations and pneumonia-related hospitalizations in patients treated with 
budesonide/formoterol versus fluticasone/salmeterol (-29.1% and -42%,
respectively). In the base case, the treatment of a patient for 1 year with
budesonide/formoterol led to a saving of €499.90 (€195.10 for drugs, €193.10 for 
COPD hospitalizations, and €111.70 for pneumonia hospitalizations) corresponding 
to a -27.6% difference compared with fluticasone/salmeterol treatment.
CONCLUSION: Treatment of COPD with budesonide/formoterol compared with
fluticasone/salmeterol could lead to a reduction in direct health care costs,
with relevant improvement in clinical outcomes.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S65693 
PMCID: PMC4051514
PMID: 24940053  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2014 May 27;9:533-42. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S63911. 
eCollection 2014.

A randomized controlled trial of inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) on markers of
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in large airway samples in COPD: an
exploratory proof of concept study.

Sohal SS(1), Soltani A(1), Reid D(2), Ward C(3), Wills KE(4), Muller HK(1),
Walters EH(1).

Author information: 
(1)National Health and Medical Research Council Centre of Research Excellence for
Chronic Respiratory Disease, School of Medicine, University of Tasmania, Hobart, 
Tasmania, Australia. (2)National Health and Medical Research Council Centre of
Research Excellence for Chronic Respiratory Disease, School of Medicine,
University of Tasmania, Hobart, Tasmania, Australia ; Iron Metabolism Laboratory,
Queensland Institute of Medical Research, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia.
(3)National Health and Medical Research Council Centre of Research Excellence for
Chronic Respiratory Disease, School of Medicine, University of Tasmania, Hobart, 
Tasmania, Australia ; Institute of Cellular Medicine, Newcastle University,
Newcastle upon Tyne, Tyne and Wear, UK. (4)National Health and Medical Research
Council Centre of Research Excellence for Chronic Respiratory Disease, School of 
Medicine, University of Tasmania, Hobart, Tasmania, Australia ; Department of
Biostatistics, Menzies Research Institute Tasmania, University of Tasmania,
Hobart, Tasmania, Australia.

BACKGROUND: We recently reported that epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is 
active in the airways in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), suggesting
presence of an active profibrotic and promalignant stroma. With no data available
on potential treatment effects, we undertook a blinded analysis of inhaled
corticosteroids (ICS) effects versus placebo on EMT markers in previously
obtained endobronchial biopsies in COPD patients, as a "proof of concept" study.
METHODS: Assessment of the effects of inhaled fluticasone propionate (FP; 500 μg 
twice daily for 6 months) versus placebo in 34 COPD patients (23 on fluticasone
propionate and eleven on placebo). The end points were epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR; marker of epithelial activation) and the biomarkers of EMT:
reticular basement membrane (Rbm) fragmentation ("hallmark" structural marker),
matrix metalloproteinase-9 (MMP-9) cell expression, and S100A4 expression in
basal epithelial and Rbm cells (mesenchymal transition markers).
RESULTS: Epithelial activation, "clefts/fragmentation" in the Rbm, and changes in
the other biomarkers all regressed on ICS, at or close to conventional levels of 
statistical significance. From these data, we have been able to nominate primary 
and secondary end points and develop power calculations that would be applicable 
to a definitive prospective study.
CONCLUSION: Although only a pilot "proof of concept" study, this trial provided
strong suggestive support for an anti-EMT effect of ICS in COPD airways. A larger
and fully powered prospective study is now indicated as this issue is likely to
be extremely important. Such studies may clarify the links between ICS use and
better clinical outcomes and protection against lung cancer in COPD.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S63911 
PMCID: PMC4043431
PMID: 24920891  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Drug Des Devel Ther. 2014 May 28;8:601-7. doi: 10.2147/DDDT.S63100. eCollection
2014.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease treated with inhaled medium- or high-dose
corticosteroids: a prospective and randomized study focusing on clinical efficacy
and the risk of pneumonia.

Cheng SL(1), Su KC(2), Wang HC(3), Perng DW(2), Yang PC(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Far Eastern Memorial Hospital, New Taipei
City, Taiwan ; Department of Chemical Engineering and Materials Science, Yuan Ze 
University, Zhongli City, Taoyuan County, Taiwan. (2)Department of Chest
Medicine, Taipei Veterans General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan. (3)Department of
Internal Medicine, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.

PURPOSE: Complications of pneumonia development in patients with chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) receiving inhaled corticosteroid (ICS)
therapy have been documented. The aim of this study was to focus on clinical
efficacy and the incidence of pneumonia between COPD patients receiving medium
and high doses of ICS.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: This prospective, randomized study included COPD patients
identified from three tertiary medical centers from 2010 to 2012. The patients
were randomized into two groups: high dose (HD; fluticasone 1,000 μg + salmeterol
100 μg/day) and medium dose (MD; fluticasone 500 μg + salmeterol 100 μg/day).
Lung function with forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV₁), forced vital
capacity, and COPD-assessment test (CAT) were checked every 2 months. The
frequency of acute exacerbations and number of pneumonia events were measured.
The duration of the study period was 1 year.
RESULTS: In total, 237 COPD patients were randomized into the two treatment arms 
(115 in the HD group, 122 in the MD group). The FEV₁ level was significantly
improved in the patients in the HD group compared with those in the MD group (HD 
103.9±26.6 mL versus MD 51.4±19.7 mL, P<0.01) at the end of the study. CAT scores
were markedly improved in patients using an HD compared to those using an MD (HD 
13±5 versus MD 16±7, P=0.05). There was a significant difference in the
percentage of annual rates in acute exacerbations (HD 0.16 versus MD 0.34,
P<0.01) between the two groups. The incidence of pneumonia was similar in the two
groups (HD 0.08 versus MD 0.10, P=0.38).
CONCLUSION: COPD patients treated with high doses of ICS had more treatment
benefits and no significant increases in the incidence in pneumonia. Higher-dose 
ICS treatment may be suitable for COPD therapy.

DOI: 10.2147/DDDT.S63100 
PMCID: PMC4044992
PMID: 24920884  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Drug Ther Bull. 2014 Jun;52(6):66-9. doi: 10.1136/dtb.2014.6.0258. Epub 2014 Jun 
5.

▼Relvar Ellipta for COPD.

[No authors listed]

▼Relvar Ellipta 92 μg/22 μg (GSK) is a dry powder inhaler that contains a
corticosteroid (fluticasone furoate) and a long-acting beta2 agonist (vilanterol 
trifenatate).1 Neither ingredient is currently marketed as a single-ingredient
inhalation product, although fluticasone furoate is available as a nasal spray
for the treatment of allergic rhinitis. Relvar Ellipta 92 μg/22 μg is licensed
for once-daily use as maintenance therapy for chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD) and asthma. In this article we consider the evidence for its use
in the management of patients with COPD. An article in a future issue will review
its use in the management of patients with asthma.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

DOI: 10.1136/dtb.2014.6.0258 
PMID: 24904005  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Mediators Inflamm. 2014;2014:232167. doi: 10.1155/2014/232167. Epub 2014 May 6.

Adipokines NUCB2/nesfatin-1 and visfatin as novel inflammatory factors in chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease.

Leivo-Korpela S(1), Lehtimäki L(2), Hämälainen M(3), Vuolteenaho K(3), Kööbi
L(4), Järvenpää R(4), Kankaanranta H(5), Saarelainen S(6), Moilanen E(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Tampere University Hospital, PL 2000,
33521 Tampere, Finland ; The Immunopharmacology Research Group, School of
Medicine, University of Tampere and Tampere University Hospital, 33014 Tampere,
Finland. (2)The Immunopharmacology Research Group, School of Medicine, University
of Tampere and Tampere University Hospital, 33014 Tampere, Finland ; Allergy
Centre, Tampere University Hospital, PL 2000, 33521 Tampere, Finland. (3)The
Immunopharmacology Research Group, School of Medicine, University of Tampere and 
Tampere University Hospital, 33014 Tampere, Finland. (4)Medical Imaging Centre,
Tampere University Hospital, PL 2000, 33521 Tampere, Finland. (5)Department of
Respiratory Medicine, Seinäjoki Central Hospital, 60220 Seinäjoki, Finland.
(6)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Tampere University Hospital, PL 2000,
33521 Tampere, Finland.

COPD (chronic obstructive pulmonary disease) is a common lung disease
characterized by airflow limitation and systemic inflammation. Recently, adipose 
tissue mediated inflammation has gathered increasing interest in the pathogenesis
of the disease. In this study, we investigated the role of novel adipocytokines
nesfatin-1 and visfatin in COPD by measuring if they are associated with the
inflammatory activity, lung function, or symptoms. Plasma levels of
NUCB2/nesfatin-1 and visfatin were measured together with IL-6, IL-8, TNF- α ,
and MMP-9, lung function, exhaled nitric oxide, and symptoms in 43 male patients 
with emphysematous COPD. The measurements were repeated in a subgroup of the
patients after four weeks' treatment with inhaled fluticasone. Both visfatin and 
NUCB2/nesfatin-1 correlated positively with plasma levels of IL-6 (r = 0.341, P =
0.027 and rho = 0.401, P = 0.008, resp.) and TNF- α (r = 0.305, P = 0.052 and rho
= 0.329, P = 0.033, resp.) and NUCB2/nesfatin-1 also with IL-8 (rho = 0.321, P = 
0.036) in patients with COPD. Further, the plasma levels of visfatin correlated
negatively with pulmonary diffusing capacity (r = -0.369, P = 0.016). Neither of 
the adipokines was affected by fluticasone treatment and they were not related to
steroid-responsiveness. The present results introduce adipocytokines
NUCB2/nesfatin-1 and visfatin as novel factors associated with systemic
inflammation in COPD and suggest that visfatin may mediate impaired pulmonary
diffusing capacity.

DOI: 10.1155/2014/232167 
PMCID: PMC4033393
PMID: 24891763  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Trials. 2014 May 1;15:153. doi: 10.1186/1745-6215-15-153.

Comparison of conventional medicine, TCM treatment, and combination of both
conventional medicine and TCM treatment for patients with chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease: study protocol of a randomized comparative effectiveness
research trial.

Li JS(1), Xie Y, Li SY, Yu XQ.

Author information: 
(1)The Geriatric Department, Henan University of Traditional Chinese Medicine,
Longzihu University Town, Zhengdong New District, Zhengzhou, People's Republic of
China. li_js8@163.com.

BACKGROUND: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) affects millions
worldwide. Although many therapies exist and are being developed to relieve
symptoms and reduce mortality, few data are available to understand which of the 
therapeutic alternatives is the most cost-effective for COPD patients in everyday
clinical practice, especially for traditional Chinese medicine (TCM). Comparative
effectiveness research can help patients, clinicians, and decision-makers make
best informed treatment decisions where such evidence was previously lacking.
This study aims to compare the effectiveness and economic evaluation of three
treatments: (1) conventional Western medicine; (2) TCM treatments, which have
been evaluated and have certain effect; and (3) a combination of both
conventional Western medicine and TCM treatments, and then determine which
treatment is the most suitable for COPD patients.
METHODS/DESIGN: A multicenter, pragmatic, randomized, controlled trial is
adopted. A total of 360 patients will be recruited and randomly assigned to one
of the three treatments group, with 120 in each group. Patients in the
conventional Western medicine group will be given Salbutamol, Formoterol,
Salmeterol/fluticasone, respectively, according to the guidelines. For the TCM
group, patients will be given Bufei granule, Bu-Fei Jian-Pi granule, Bu-Fei
Yi-Shen granule, and Yi-Qi Zi-Shen granule based on their corresponding TCM
syndrome patterns, respectively. For the combination of conventional medicine and
TCM treatments group, patients will be given a combination of conventional
Western medicine and TCM granules. Treatments in each group are recognized as a
whole comprehensive intervention. After the 26-week treatment, another 26 weeks
will be followed up. The outcome measures including the frequency and duration of
acute exacerbations, lung function, dyspnea, exercise capacity, quality of life, 
and economic evaluation will be assessed.
DISCUSSION: It is hypothesized that each of the three treatments will have
beneficial effects in reducing the frequency and duration of acute exacerbations,
improving exercise capacity and psychosocial function of COPD patients. In
addition, the combination of conventional medicine and TCM treatments may be most
suitable for COPD patients with better effectiveness and economic evaluation.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov NCT01836016.

DOI: 10.1186/1745-6215-15-153 
PMCID: PMC4017822
PMID: 24885672  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2014 May 7;9:457-68. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S60498.
eCollection 2014.

Risk of pneumonia with inhaled corticosteroid/long-acting β2 agonist therapy in
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: a cluster analysis.

DiSantostefano RL(1), Li H(1), Hinds D(1), Galkin DV(2), Rubin DB(2).

Author information: 
(1)Worldwide Epidemiology, GlaxoSmithKline, Research Triangle Park, Durham, NC,
USA. (2)Respiratory Clinical Development, GlaxoSmithKline, Research Triangle
Park, Durham, NC, USA.

BACKGROUND: Pneumonia poses a significant risk in patients with moderate to
severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease but data are limited on the disease 
phenotypes most susceptible to pneumonia.
METHODS: Cluster analysis using a data-driven recursive partitioning algorithm
was employed using baseline data from two pooled one-year randomized exacerbation
trials (n=3,255) of fluticasone furoate/vilanterol or vilanterol alone to
identify distinct patient groups at greatest risk of pneumonia or serious
(hospitalization or death) pneumonia.
RESULTS: Five clusters were identified. Patients at greater risk of first
pneumonia had more severe obstruction (forced expiratory volume in one
second/forced vital capacity <46%) and either a body mass index <19 kg/m(2)
(hazard ratio 7.8, 95% confidence interval 4.7-13.0; n=144) or a pneumonia
history and greater comorbidities (hazard ratio 4.8, 95% confidence interval
3.0-7.7; n=374) relative to the cluster with the lowest pneumonia risk
(reference; n=1310). Multiple comorbidities and use of psychoanaleptics also
contributed to an increased risk of pneumonia in more obstructed patients.
Independent of cluster, use of inhaled corticosteroids was associated with
pneumonia (hazard ratio 1.89, 95% confidence interval 1.25-2.84) and serious
pneumonia (hazard ratio 2.92, 95% confidence interval 1.40-6.01).
CONCLUSION: Cluster analysis can identify patient populations at risk for serious
safety outcomes and inform risk management strategies to optimize patient
management. The greatest risk for pneumonia was in subjects with multiple
pneumonia risk factors.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S60498 
PMCID: PMC4019612
PMID: 24855350  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. J Asthma Allergy. 2014 May 3;7:77-83. doi: 10.2147/JAA.S39625. eCollection 2014.

New combination treatments in the management of asthma: focus on
fluticasone/vilanterol.

Tan LD(1), Chan AL(1), Albertson TE(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care and Sleep Medicine, Department of
Internal Medicine, School of Medicine, University of California, Davis,
Sacramento, CA ; Department of Medicine, Veterans Administration Northern
California Health Care System, Mather, CA. (2)Division of Pulmonary, Critical
Care and Sleep Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine, School of Medicine,
University of California, Davis, Sacramento, CA ; Department of Medicine,
Veterans Administration Northern California Health Care System, Mather, CA ;
Department of Emergency Medicine, School of Medicine, University of California,
Davis, Sacramento, CA, USA.

Despite the 2007 National Asthma Education and Prevention Program Expert Panel 3 
guidelines for the treatment of uncontrolled asthma, many patients with poorly
controlled asthma still continue to tax the health care system. Controlling
asthma symptoms and preventing acute exacerbations have been the foundation of
care. Using long-term controller treatments such as inhaled corticosteroids (ICS)
and inhaled long-acting beta2-agonists (LABAs) is a common approach. While
patient responses to recommended pharmacotherapy may vary, poor adherence to
therapy also contributes to poor asthma control. A once-daily combination
inhaler, such as fluticasone furoate, an ICS, in combination with vilanterol, a
LABA, offers increased convenience and potential improved adherence, which should
result in enhanced clinical outcomes and reduced exacerbations. The ICS/LABA
combination inhaler of fluticasone furoate and vilanterol is currently approved
in the United States for use in the maintenance of chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease and to reduce exacerbations. This paper reviews the expanding literature 
on the efficacy of fluticasone furoate and vilanterol in treating asthma.

DOI: 10.2147/JAA.S39625 
PMCID: PMC4014386
PMID: 24833910  [PubMed]


150. Eur J Intern Med. 2014 Jun;25(5):491-5. doi: 10.1016/j.ejim.2014.04.007. Epub
2014 May 10.

Benefits of adding fluticasone propionate/salmeterol to tiotropium in COPD: a
meta-analysis.

Liu Y(1), Shi H(2), Sun X(2), Zhang D(2), Zhang Y(2), Yang K(3), Mi L(4), Li
M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Medical 
College, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, Shaanxi Province, China. Electronic
address: xian_liuyun@163.com. (2)Department of Respiratory Medicine, The Second
Affiliated Hospital of Medical College, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, Shaanxi
Province, China. (3)Department of Gastroenterology, Xi'an North Hospital, Xi'an, 
Shaanxi Province, China. (4)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Traditional
Chinese Medical Hospital of Shaanxi Province, Xi'an, Shaanxi Province, China.

OBJECTIVE: This meta-analysis was performed to evaluate the efficacy and safety
of adding fluticasone propionate/salmeterol (FSC) to tiotropium (Tio) in COPD
patients.
METHODS: A systematic search was made of MEDLINE, Cochrane, ISI Web of Science
and SCOPUS databases, and a hand search of leading respiratory journals.
Randomized clinical trials on treatment of stable COPD with the addition of FSC, 
compared with tiotropium alone, were reviewed. Studies were pooled to odds ratio 
(OR) and weighted mean differences (WMD), with 95% confidence interval (CI).
RESULTS: Six trials met the inclusion criteria. Compared with tiotropium,
addition of FSC presented significant effects on trough forced expiratory volume 
in 1s (FEV1) (WMD 54.64 mL; 95% CI 51.76 to 57.52 mL; P<0.001), COPD
exacerbations (OR 0.73; 95% CI 0.55 to 0.96; p=0.03), and health-related quality 
of life (WMD 4.63; 95% CI 4.26 to 5.01; P<0.001). No significant increase was
noticed in adverse events in the Tio+FSC group (OR 1.24; 95% CI 0.98 to 1.57;
p=0.07).
CONCLUSIONS: The addition of FSC to subjects with COPD treated with tiotropium
significantly improves lung function, quality of life and COPD exacerbations
without increasing the risk of adverse events.

Copyright © 2014 European Federation of Internal Medicine. Published by Elsevier 
B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejim.2014.04.007 
PMID: 24816076  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Expert Rev Respir Med. 2014 Jun;8(3):357-79. doi: 10.1586/17476348.2014.910457.
Epub 2014 May 7.

Recent advances in COPD disease management with fixed-dose long-acting
combination therapies.

Bateman ED(1), Mahler DA, Vogelmeier CF, Wedzicha JA, Patalano F, Banerji D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Pulmonology, University of Cape Town,
George Street, Mowbray 7700, Cape Town, South Africa.

Combinations of two long-acting bronchodilators and long-acting bronchodilators
with inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) are recommended therapies in the management of
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Three fixed-dose combination
products have recently been approved for the treatment of COPD (the long-acting
β2-agonist plus long-acting muscarinic antagonist [LABA/LAMA] combinations
glycopyrronium/indacaterol [QVA149] and umeclidinium/vilanterol, and the LABA/ICS
fluticasone furoate/vilanterol), with others currently in late-stage development.
LABA/LAMA and LABA/ICS combination therapies demonstrate positive effects on both
lung function and patient-reported outcomes, with significant improvements
observed with LABA/LAMA combinations compared with placebo, each component alone 
and other comparators in current use. No new safety concerns have been observed
with combinations of long-acting bronchodilators. Combinations of two long-acting
bronchodilators represent a new and convenient treatment option in COPD. This
review summarizes published efficacy and safety data from clinical trials of both
LABA/LAMA and novel LABA/ICS combinations in patients with COPD.

DOI: 10.1586/17476348.2014.910457 
PMID: 24802656  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Drugs. 2014 May;74(7):737-55. doi: 10.1007/s40265-014-0214-8.

Management of asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease with combination
inhaled corticosteroids and long-acting β-agonists: a review of comparative
effectiveness research.

Mapel DW(1), Roberts MH.

Author information: 
(1)Lovelace Clinic Foundation, 2309 Renard Place SE, Albuquerque, NM, 87106, USA,
dmapel@comcast.net.

The value of combination therapy with inhaled corticosteroids and long-acting
β-agonists (ICS/LABA) is well recognized in the management of asthma and chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Despite differences in the pharmacological 
properties between two well-established ICS/LABA products (budesonide/formoterol 
and fluticasone/salmeterol), data from randomized clinical trials (RCTs) and
meta-analyses suggest that these two products perform similarly under RCT
conditions. In contrast, a few recently reported real-world comparative
effectiveness studies have suggested that there are substantial differences
between ICS/LABA combination treatments in terms of clinical and healthcare
outcomes in patients with asthma or COPD. The purpose of this article is to
provide a brief review of the benefits, as well as the limitations, of
comparative effectiveness research (CER) in the therapeutic area of asthma and
COPD. We conducted a structured literature review of the current CER studies on
ICS/LABA combinations in asthma and COPD. These articles were then used to
illustrate the unique challenges of CER studies, providing a summary of study
results and limitations. We focus particularly on difficult biases and
confounding factors that may be introduced before, during, and after the
initiation of therapy. Beyond being a review of these two ICS/LABA combination
treatments, this article is intended to help those who wish to assess the quality
of CER published projects in asthma and COPD, or guide investigators who wish to 
design new CER studies for chronic respiratory disease treatments.

DOI: 10.1007/s40265-014-0214-8 
PMCID: PMC4030099
PMID: 24797158  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Chin Med J (Engl). 2014;127(9):1613-8.

Interleukin-32, not reduced by salmeterol/fluticasone propionate in smokers with 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Du Y(1), Wang W(1), Yang W(1), He B(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Peking University Third Hospital, Beijing 
100191, China. (2)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Peking University Third
Hospital, Beijing 100191, China. Email: puh3_hb@bjmu.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: The interleukin (IL)-32/tumor necrosis factor (TNF) a pathway is
supposed to play a key role in the amplification of the immune response in
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) inflammation. Inhaled
corticosteroids (ICS) in combination with long-acting β2-agonists (LABA) have
shown airway anti-inflammatory effects in recent studies, but the mechanism is
still uncertain.
METHODS: Patients were treated in a randomized, open-labeled, parallel group
clinical trial with either a combination of salmeterol xinafoate/fluticasone
propionate (SF; Seretide, GlaxoSmithKline) Diskus (50/500 µg twice daily) or
ipratropium bromide/salbutamol (IS; Combivent, Boehringer Ingelheim) MDI (42
µg/240 µg quartic daily) for 12 weeks. At the start and the end of treatment,
induced sputum was collected and the concentration of IL-32 and TNF-α, the number
of neutrophils and eosinophils were measured.
RESULTS: Following 12 weeks of treatment, a statistically significant fall from
baseline in the concentration of TNF-α in sputum (P = 0.004) was seen after
treatment with SF but not with IS. However, neither treatment had significant
effects on the concentration of IL-32 in sputum. There was a decrease from
baseline in the number of sputum neutrophils with SF that approached statistical 
significance (P = 0.028) but not with IS, while the number of sputum eosinophils 
did not change significantly from baseline in either treatment group. There was a
statistically significant decline from baseline in the quality of life as
assessed by the St George's respiratory questionnaire in both the SF (P = 0.004) 
and IS (P = 0.030) treatment groups, but no evidence of improvement in lung
function was observed in either group.
CONCLUSION: The sputum TNF-α and neutrophils, but not IL-32 and macrophages,
could be reduced by ICS/LABA treatment, suggesting that IL-32 could be involved
in the corticosteroid resistance of COPD inflammation.


PMID: 24791863  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2014 Apr 1;9:331-8. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S60362.
eCollection 2014.

Clinical benefit of fixed-dose dual bronchodilation with glycopyrronium and
indacaterol once daily in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: a 
systematic review.

Ulrik CS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Hvidovre Hospital and University of
Copenhagen, Hvidovre, Denmark.

BACKGROUND AND AIM: Long-acting bronchodilators are the preferred option for
maintenance therapy of patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD). The aim of this review is to provide an overview of the clinical studies 
evaluating the clinical efficacy of the once-daily fixed-dose dual bronchodilator
combination of indacaterol and glycopyrronium bromide in patients suffering from 
COPD.
METHODS: This study comprised a systematic review of randomized controlled trials
identified through systematic searches of different databases of published
trials.
RESULTS: Nine trials (6,166 participants) were included. Fixed-dose once-daily
indacaterol/glycopyrronium seems to be safe and well tolerated in patients with
COPD. Compared with single therapy with other long-acting bronchodilators
(indacaterol, glycopyrronium, and tiotropium) and fixed-combination long-acting
β2-agonist/inhaled corticosteroid (salmeterol/fluticasone twice daily),
once-daily fixed-dose indacaterol/glycopyrronium has clinically important effects
on symptoms, including dyspnea score, health status, level of lung function, and 
rate of moderate or severe exacerbations in patients with moderate-to-very severe
COPD (Global initiative for chronic Obstructive Lung Disease [GOLD] spirometric
criteria). Furthermore, a very recent study has shown that fixed-dose
indacaterol/glycopyrronium improves exercise endurance time compared with
placebo, although no significant difference was observed between fixed-dose
indacaterol/glycopyrronium and tiotropium.
CONCLUSION: Fixed-dose indacaterol/glycopyrronium has clinically relevant effects
on important COPD outcome measures and is, in general, superior to therapy with a
single long-acting bronchodilator (with or without inhaled corticosteroid)
indicating long-acting dual bronchodilation as a potential important maintenance 
therapeutic option for patients with symptomatic COPD, possibly also for the
treatment of naïve patients.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S60362 
PMCID: PMC3979690
PMID: 24729699  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Consult Pharm. 2014 Apr;29(4):224-38. doi: 10.4140/TCP.n.2014.224.

2013 new drug update: what do new approvals hold for the elderly?

Hussar DA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Philadelphia College of Pharmacy, University of the Sciences in Philadelphia, 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.

Six new drugs that are used for medical problems often experienced by the elderly
have been selected for consideration in this review. The uses and most important 
properties of these agents are reviewed, and a rating for each new drug is
determined. The rating is based on a comparison of the new drug with related
drugs already marketed. Advantages, disadvantages, and other important
information regarding the new drug are identified and used as the basis for
determining the rating.

DOI: 10.4140/TCP.n.2014.224 
PMID: 24704892  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. BMC Pulm Med. 2014 Apr 2;14:56. doi: 10.1186/1471-2466-14-56.

Real-life use of fluticasone propionate/salmeterol in patients with chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease: a French observational study.

Roche N(1), Pribil C, Van Ganse E, Serrier P, Housset B, Poirier D, Texier N,
Schück S, Boucot I.

Author information: 
(1)Respiratory and Intensive Care Medicine, Cochin Hospital Group, AP-HP,
University Paris Descartes, HIA du Val de Grâce 4e C, Paris, France.
nicolas.roche@htd.aphp.fr.

BACKGROUND: In Europe, administration of an inhaled corticosteroid (ICS) combined
with a long-acting β2 agonist is approved in chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD) patients with a pre-bronchodilator FEV1 < 60% predicted normal, a 
history of repeated exacerbations, and who have significant symptoms despite
regular bronchodilator therapy. Minimal data are available on the use of the
fluticasone propionate/salmeterol xinafoate combination (FSC) in the real-life
COPD setting and prescription compliance with the licensed specifications.
METHODS: A French observational study was performed to describe the COPD
population prescribed with FSC, prescription modalities, and the coherence of
prescription practices with the market authorized population. Data were collected
for patients initiating FSC treatment (500 μg fluticasone propionate, 50 μg
salmeterol, dry powder inhaler) prescribed by a general practitioner (GP) or a
pulmonologist, using physician and patient questionnaires.
RESULTS: A total of 710 patients were included, 352 by GPs and 358 by
pulmonologists. Mean age was over 60 years, and 70% of patients were male. More
than half were retired, and overweight or obese. Approximately half were current 
smokers and one-third had cardiovascular comorbidities. According to both
physician evaluation and GOLD 2006 classification, the majority of patients
(>75%) had moderate to very severe COPD. Strict compliance by prescribing
physicians with the market-approved population for dry powder inhaler SFC in COPD
was low, notably in ICS-naïve patients; all three conditions were fulfilled in
less than a quarter of patients with prior ICS and less than 7% of ICS-naïve
patients.
CONCLUSIONS: Prescription of dry powder inhaler SFC by GPs and pulmonologists has
very low conformity with the three conditions defining the licensed COPD
population. Prescription practices need to be improved and systematic FEV1
evaluation for COPD diagnosis and treatment management should be emphasized.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2466-14-56 
PMCID: PMC3997842
PMID: 24694050  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2014 Mar 26;(3):CD010844. doi:
10.1002/14651858.CD010844.pub2.

Long-acting inhaled therapy (beta-agonists, anticholinergics and steroids) for
COPD: a network meta-analysis.

Kew KM(1), Dias S, Cates CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Population Health Research Institute, St George's, University of London,
Cranmer Terrace, London, UK, SW17 0RE.

BACKGROUND: Pharmacological therapy for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD) is aimed at relieving symptoms, improving quality of life and preventing
or treating exacerbations.Treatment tends to begin with one inhaler, and
additional therapies are introduced as necessary. For persistent or worsening
symptoms, long-acting inhaled therapies taken once or twice daily are preferred
over short-acting inhalers. Several Cochrane reviews have looked at the risks and
benefits of specific long-acting inhaled therapies compared with placebo or other
treatments. However for patients and clinicians, it is important to understand
the merits of these treatments relative to each other, and whether a particular
class of inhaled therapies is more beneficial than the others.
OBJECTIVES: To assess the efficacy of treatment options for patients whose
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease cannot be controlled by short-acting
therapies alone. The review will not look at combination therapies usually
considered later in the course of the disease.As part of this network
meta-analysis, we will address the following issues.1. How does long-term
efficacy compare between different pharmacological treatments for COPD?2. Are
there limitations in the current evidence base that may compromise the
conclusions drawn by this network meta-analysis? If so, what are the implications
for future research?
SEARCH METHODS: We identified randomised controlled trials (RCTs) in existing
Cochrane reviews by searching the Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews (CDSR).
In addition, we ran a comprehensive citation search on the Cochrane Airways Group
Register of trials (CAGR) and checked manufacturer websites and reference lists
of other reviews. The most recent searches were conducted in September 2013.
SELECTION CRITERIA: We included parallel-group RCTs of at least 6 months'
duration recruiting people with COPD. Studies were included if they compared any 
of the following treatments versus any other: long-acting beta2-agonists (LABAs; 
formoterol, indacaterol, salmeterol); long-acting muscarinic antagonists (LAMAs; 
aclidinium, glycopyrronium, tiotropium); inhaled corticosteroids (ICSs;
budesonide, fluticasone, mometasone); combination long-acting beta2-agonist
(LABA) and inhaled corticosteroid (LABA/ICS) (formoterol/budesonide,
formoterol/mometasone, salmeterol/fluticasone); and placebo.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: We conducted a network meta-analysis using Markov
chain Monte Carlo methods for two efficacy outcomes: St George's Respiratory
Questionnaire (SGRQ) total score and trough forced expiratory volume in one
second (FEV1). We modelled the relative effectiveness of any two treatments as a 
function of each treatment relative to the reference treatment (placebo). We
assumed that treatment effects were similar within treatment classes (LAMA, LABA,
ICS, LABA/ICS). We present estimates of class effects, variability between
treatments within each class and individual treatment effects compared with every
other.To justify the analyses, we assessed the trials for clinical and
methodological transitivity across comparisons. We tested the robustness of our
analyses by performing sensitivity analyses for lack of blinding and by
considering six- and 12-month data separately.
MAIN RESULTS: We identified 71 RCTs randomly assigning 73,062 people with COPD to
184 treatment arms of interest. Trials were similar with regards to methodology, 
inclusion and exclusion criteria and key baseline characteristics. Participants
were more often male, aged in their mid sixties, with FEV1 predicted normal
between 40% and 50% and with substantial smoking histories (40+ pack-years). The 
risk of bias was generally low, although missing information made it hard to
judge risk of selection bias and selective outcome reporting. Fixed effects were 
used for SGRQ analyses, and random effects for Trough FEV1 analyses, based on
model fit statistics and deviance information criteria (DIC). SGRQ SGRQ data were
available in 42 studies (n = 54,613). At six months, 39 pairwise comparisons were
made between 18 treatments in 25 studies (n = 27,024). Combination LABA/ICS was
the highest ranked intervention, with a mean improvement over placebo of -3.89
units at six months (95% credible interval (CrI) -4.70 to -2.97) and -3.60 at 12 
months (95% CrI -4.63 to -2.34). LAMAs and LABAs were ranked second and third at 
six months, with mean differences of -2.63 (95% CrI -3.53 to -1.97) and -2.29
(95% CrI -3.18 to -1.53), respectively. Inhaled corticosteroids were ranked
fourth (MD -2.00, 95% CrI -3.06 to -0.87). Class differences between LABA, LAMA
and ICS were less prominent at 12 months. Indacaterol and aclidinium were ranked 
somewhat higher than other members of their classes, and formoterol 12 mcg,
budesonide 400 mcg and formoterol/mometasone combination were ranked lower within
their classes. There was considerable overlap in credible intervals and rankings 
for both classes and individual treatments. Trough FEV1 Trough FEV1 data were
available in 46 studies (n = 47,409). At six months, 41 pairwise comparisons were
made between 20 treatments in 31 studies (n = 29,271). As for SGRQ, combination
LABA/ICS was the highest ranked class, with a mean improvement over placebo of
133.3 mL at six months (95% CrI 100.6 to 164.0) and slightly less at 12 months
(mean difference (MD) 100, 95% CrI 55.5 to 140.1). LAMAs (MD 103.5, 95% CrI 81.8 
to 124.9) and LABAs (MD 99.4, 95% CrI 72.0 to 127.8) showed roughly equivalent
results at six months, and ICSs were the fourth ranked class (MD 65.4, 95% CrI
33.1 to 96.9). As with SGRQ, initial differences between classes were not so
prominent at 12 months. Indacaterol and salmeterol/fluticasone were ranked
slightly better than others in their class, and formoterol 12, aclidinium,
budesonide and formoterol/budesonide combination were ranked lower within their
classes. All credible intervals for individual rankings were wide.
AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: This network meta-analysis compares four different classes 
of long-acting inhalers for people with COPD who need more than short-acting
bronchodilators. Quality of life and lung function were improved most on
combination inhalers (LABA and ICS) and least on ICS alone at 6 and at 12 months.
Overall LAMA and LABA inhalers had similar effects, particularly at 12 months.
The network has demonstrated the benefit of ICS when added to LABA for these
outcomes in participants who largely had an FEV1 that was less than 50%
predicted, but the additional expense of combination inhalers and any potential
for increased adverse events (which has been established by other reviews)
require consideration. Our findings are in keeping with current National
Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) guidelines.

DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD010844.pub2 
PMID: 24671923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Curr Med Res Opin. 2014 Jul;30(7):1427-36. doi: 10.1185/03007995.2014.908828.
Epub 2014 Apr 14.

Impact of adherence to treatment with tiotropium and fluticasone
propionate/salmeterol in chronic obstructive pulmonary diseases patients.

Ismaila A(1), Corriveau D, Vaillancourt J, Parsons D, Dalal A, Su Z, Sampalis JS.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Affairs, GlaxoSmithKline , Mississauga, ON , Canada.

OBJECTIVE: Poor adherence to treatment may contribute to the treatment gap in
chronic obstructive pulmonary diseases (COPD). The aim of the current study was
to describe the association between adherence to treatment and the risk of COPD
moderate (ME) and severe (SE) exacerbations, and health care utilization.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: Observational single cohort study utilizing the
Quebec Provincial Health Insurance databases. All patients older than 40 years
with a diagnosis of COPD between 2001 and 2010 were entered in the study cohort
at the time of their first prescription for tiotropium (TIO) alone or
co-administered with fluticasone propionate/salmeterol (TIO + FSC). Follow-up
continued to the last known claim or death. Adherence was measured by the
medication possession ratio (MPR) ≥80% and persistence defined as no treatment
gap ≥30 days.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: ME was defined as use of an oral corticosteroid or
antibiotic, SE as COPD related hospitalization or an emergency room (ER) visit.
COPD related health care resource utilization ascertained was prescription of
rescue medications, ER visits, hospitalizations, intensive care unit (ICU)
admissions, intubations, and general practitioner (GP) and respirologist visits.
RESULTS: There were 23,707 patients included in this study. Compliance and
persistence with TIO for monotherapy patients were 61.1% and 47.6% respectively. 
For patients treated with TIO + FSC, compliance and persistence for TIO were
62.9% and 45.3% respectively, and for FSC they were 35.4% and 33.0%. Multivariate
analyses showed a significant (P < 0.001) adjusted odds ratios for ME (OR(ME))
and SE (OR(SE)) for TIO compliant vs. non-compliant patients (TIO:
OR(ME) = 0.543, OR(SE) = 0.712; TIO + FSC: OR(ME) = 0.436, OR(SE) = 0.570).
Similarly for FSC compliance: OR(ME) = 0.546; OR(SE) = 0.749. Similar results
were observed for persistence. Compliance and persistence with TIO and FSC were
associated with significantly reduced rates of health care utilization.
CONCLUSIONS: Despite the typical limitations of an administrative database study,
the results of this large population-based study have shown that reduced
adherence to treatment with TIO and FSC is associated with increased risk for
exacerbations and higher health care utilization in COPD patients.

DOI: 10.1185/03007995.2014.908828 
PMID: 24666181  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Drugs. 2014 Apr;74(5):539-47. doi: 10.1007/s40265-014-0202-z.

Meta-review: adverse effects of inhaled corticosteroids relevant to older
patients.

Mattishent K(1), Thavarajah M, Blanco P, Gilbert D, Wilson AM, Loke YK.

Author information: 
(1)Norwich Medical School, University of East Anglia, Norwich, NR4 7TJ, UK.

BACKGROUND: In recent years, clinical trials and observational studies have
raised concerns about the potential adverse effects of inhaled corticosteroids
(ICS) such as pneumonia, cataract, fractures and hyperglycaemia, which are of
particular concern for older patients.
METHODS: We conducted a meta-review by searching electronic databases (MEDLINE,
EMBASE, PubMed) for systematic reviews and meta-analyses of ICS use and the
adverse effects of interest. We also evaluated new primary studies that reported 
information beyond that available from previously published meta-analyses. Two
reviewers independently extracted data on measures of associated harm with ICS
use.
RESULTS: We identified five relevant meta-analyses for inclusion in this
meta-review, and also three new studies of ICS and pneumonia. We found consistent
evidence of a dose-response relationship between ICS use and serious adverse
effects such as fractures and pneumonia. The estimated number needed to treat for
harm due to fracture with ICS was 83 with 3-years use, and 60 per year for
pneumonia. Both asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) users of 
ICS were at risk of pneumonia, with fluticasone appearing to confer higher risk
than budesonide. There is also some suggestion that ICS use is associated with
cataracts in a dose-response manner but the evidence is less robust here.
Equally, the influence of ICS on diabetes mellitus remains uncertain.
CONCLUSIONS: In view of the dose-response relationship seen between ICS use and
important adverse effects such as fractures and pneumonia, clinicians needs to
carefully balance the benefits of ICS versus the harms in older patients
receiving long-term high-dose ICS.

DOI: 10.1007/s40265-014-0202-z 
PMID: 24659375  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. BMC Pulm Med. 2014 Mar 12;14:43. doi: 10.1186/1471-2466-14-43.

Extrafine beclomethasone/formoterol compared to fluticasone/salmeterol
combination therapy in COPD.

Singh D(1), Nicolini G, Bindi E, Corradi M, Guastalla D, Kampschulte J,
Pierzchała W, Sayiner A, Szilasi M, Terzano C, Vestbo J; FUTURE (Foster Upgrades 
TherapeUtic care in REspiratory disease) study group.

Author information: 
(1)University of Manchester, Medicines Evaluation Unit, University Hospital of
South Manchester Foundation Trust, Manchester, UK. DSingh@meu.org.uk.

BACKGROUND: The study evaluated the efficacy of beclomethasone
dipropionate/formoterol fumarate (BDP/FF) extrafine combination versus
fluticasone propionate/salmeterol (FP/S) combination in COPD patients.
METHODS: The trial was a 12-week multicentre, randomised, double-blind, double
dummy study; 419 patients with moderate/severe COPD were randomised to BDP/FF
200/12 μg or FP/S 500/50 μg twice daily. The primary objective was to demonstrate
the equivalence between treatments in terms of Transition Dyspnoea Index (TDI)
score and the superiority of BDP/FF in terms of change from pre-dose in the first
30 minutes in forced expiratory volume in the first second (FEV1). Secondary
endpoints included lung function, symptom scores, symptom-free days and use of
rescue medication, St. George's Respiratory Questionnaire, six minute walking
test and COPD exacerbations.
RESULTS: BDP/FF was equivalent to FP/S in terms of TDI score and superior in
terms of FEV1 change from pre-dose (p < 0.001). There were no significant
differences between treatments in secondary outcome measures, confirming overall 
comparability in terms of efficacy and tolerability. Moreover, a clinically
relevant improvement (>4 units) in SGRQ was detected in the BDP/FF group only.
CONCLUSION: BDP/FF extrafine combination provides COPD patients with an
equivalent improvement of dyspnoea and a faster bronchodilation in comparison to 
FP/S.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov: NCT01245569.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2466-14-43 
PMCID: PMC4008134
PMID: 24621109  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2014 Mar 10;(3):CD010115. doi:
10.1002/14651858.CD010115.pub2.

Inhaled steroids and risk of pneumonia for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Kew KM(1), Seniukovich A.

Author information: 
(1)Population Health Research Institute, St George's, University of London,
Cranmer Terrace, London, UK, SW17 0RE.

Comment in
    Ann Intern Med. 2014 Aug 19;161(4):JC8.

BACKGROUND: Inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) are anti-inflammatory drugs that have
proven benefits for people with worsening symptoms of chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD) and repeated exacerbations. They are commonly used as
combination inhalers with long-acting beta2-agonists (LABA) to reduce
exacerbation rates and all-cause mortality, and to improve lung function and
quality of life. The most common combinations of ICS and LABA used in combination
inhalers are fluticasone and salmeterol, budesonide and formoterol and a new
formulation of fluticasone in combination with vilanterol, which is now
available. ICS have been associated with increased risk of pneumonia, but the
magnitude of risk and how this compares with different ICS remain unclear. Recent
reviews conducted to address their safety have not compared the relative safety
of these two drugs when used alone or in combination with LABA.
OBJECTIVES: To assess the risk of pneumonia associated with the use of
fluticasone and budesonide for COPD.
SEARCH METHODS: We identified trials from the Cochrane Airways Group Specialised 
Register of trials (CAGR), clinicaltrials.gov, reference lists of existing
systematic reviews and manufacturer websites. The most recent searches were
conducted in September 2013.
SELECTION CRITERIA: We included parallel-group randomised controlled trials
(RCTs) of at least 12 weeks' duration. Studies were included if they compared the
ICS budesonide or fluticasone versus placebo, or either ICS in combination with a
LABA versus the same LABA as monotherapy for people with COPD.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Two review authors independently extracted study
characteristics, numerical data and risk of bias information for each included
study.We looked at direct comparisons of ICS versus placebo separately from
comparisons of ICS/LABA versus LABA for all outcomes, and we combined these with 
subgroups when no important heterogeneity was noted. After assessing for
transitivity, we conducted an indirect comparison to compare budesonide versus
fluticasone monotherapy, but we could not do the same for the combination
therapies because of systematic differences between the budesonide and
fluticasone combination data sets.When appropriate, we explored the effects of
ICS dose, duration of ICS therapy and baseline severity on the primary outcome.
Findings of all outcomes are presented in 'Summary of findings' tables using
GRADEPro.
MAIN RESULTS: We found 43 studies that met the inclusion criteria, and more
evidence was provided for fluticasone (26 studies; n = 21,247) than for
budesonide (17 studies; n = 10,150). Evidence from the budesonide studies was
more inconsistent and less precise, and the studies were shorter. The populations
within studies were more often male with a mean age of around 63, mean pack-years
smoked over 40 and mean predicted forced expiratory volume of one second (FEV1)
less than 50%.High or uneven dropout was considered a high risk of bias in almost
40% of the trials, but conclusions for the primary outcome did not change when
the trials at high risk of bias were removed in a sensitivity
analysis.Fluticasone increased non-fatal serious adverse pneumonia events
(requiring hospital admission) (odds ratio (OR) 1.78, 95% confidence interval
(CI) 1.50 to 2.12; 18 more per 1000 treated over 18 months; high quality), and no
evidence suggested that this outcome was reduced by delivering it in combination 
with salmeterol or vilanterol (subgroup differences: I(2) = 0%, P value 0.51), or
that different doses, trial duration or baseline severity significantly affected 
the estimate. Budesonide also increased non-fatal serious adverse pneumonia
events compared with placebo, but the effect was less precise and was based on
shorter trials (OR 1.62, 95% CI 1.00 to 2.62; six more per 1000 treated over nine
months; moderate quality). Some of the variation in the budesonide data could be 
explained by a significant difference between the two commonly used doses: 640
mcg was associated with a larger effect than 320 mcg relative to placebo
(subgroup differences: I(2) = 74%, P value 0.05).An indirect comparison of
budesonide versus fluticasone monotherapy revealed no significant differences
with respect to serious adverse events (pneumonia-related or all-cause) or
mortality. The risk of any pneumonia event (i.e. less serious cases treated in
the community) was higher with fluticasone than with budesonide (OR 1.86, 95% CI 
1.04 to 3.34); this was the only significant difference reported between the two 
drugs. However, this finding should be interpreted with caution because of
possible differences in the assignment of pneumonia diagnosis, and because no
trials directly compared the two drugs.No significant difference in overall
mortality rates was observed between either of the inhaled steroids and the
control interventions (both high-quality evidence), and pneumonia-related deaths 
were too rare to permit conclusions to be drawn.
AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: Budesonide and fluticasone, delivered alone or in
combination with a LABA, are associated with increased risk of serious adverse
pneumonia events, but neither significantly affected mortality compared with
controls. The safety concerns highlighted in this review should be balanced with 
recent cohort data and established randomised evidence of efficacy regarding
exacerbations and quality of life. Comparison of the two drugs revealed no
statistically significant difference in serious pneumonias, mortality or serious 
adverse events. Fluticasone was associated with higher risk of any pneumonia when
compared with budesonide (i.e. less serious cases dealt with in the community),
but variation in the definitions used by the respective manufacturers is a
potential confounding factor in their comparison.Primary research should
accurately measure pneumonia outcomes and should clarify both the definition and 
the method of diagnosis used, especially for new formulations such as fluticasone
furoate, for which little evidence of the associated pneumonia risk is currently 
available. Similarly, systematic reviews and cohorts should address the
reliability of assigning 'pneumonia' as an adverse event or cause of death and
should determine how this affects the applicability of findings.

DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD010115.pub2 
PMID: 24615270  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Drugs. 2014 Mar;74(4):465-88. doi: 10.1007/s40265-014-0194-8.

QVA149 (indacaterol/glycopyrronium fixed-dose combination): a review of its use
in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Frampton JE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Adis, 41 Centorian Drive, Private Bag 65901, Mairangi Bay, North Shore, 0754, 
Auckland, New Zealand, demail@springer.com.

QVA149 (indacaterol/glycopyrronium) [Xoterna(®) Breezhaler(®), Ultibro(®)
Breezhaler(®)] is an inhaled fixed-dose combination of indacaterol (a long-acting
selective β2-adrenergic receptor agonist [LABA]) and glycopyrronium (a
long-acting muscarinic receptor antagonist [LAMA]) that has been approved in the 
EU and Japan for the symptomatic control of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD) in adults. In phase III studies, QVA149 significantly improved
bronchodilation versus indacaterol, glycopyrronium or tiotropium alone and the
LABA/inhaled corticosteroid fixed-dose combination salmeterol/fluticasone. These 
improvements in lung function, which were rapid in onset and maintained during
long-term treatment, were generally associated with significant improvements in
dyspnoea, health status, COPD exacerbation risk, patient symptoms, and rescue
medication use. The SHINE and ILLUMINATE studies in low (exacerbation) risk
patients with moderate to severe disease suggest that QVA149 may offer more
symptomatic relief than tiotropium and salmeterol/fluticasone. Similarly, the
SPARK study in high (exacerbation) risk patients with severe or very severe
disease showed that QVA149 was more effective than glycopyrronium in preventing
moderate to severe exacerbations, and suggests that QVA149 may offer more
symptomatic relief than LAMA monotherapy. Another phase III study comparing
QVA149 with salmeterol/fluticasone in high-risk patients with moderate to very
severe disease (FLAME) is ongoing. QVA149 is generally well tolerated, with no
new safety signals identified compared with its monocomponents. Bronchodilators
remain central to the symptomatic management of COPD. When dual bronchodilation
is indicated, QVA149 offers the convenience of two bronchodilators in a single
inhaler coupled with a simple, once-daily dosing regimen that may encourage
better treatment adherence. Therefore, it is a valuable option in the treatment
of COPD.

DOI: 10.1007/s40265-014-0194-8 
PMID: 24604791  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2014 Feb 24;9:249-56. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S32604. 
eCollection 2014.

Profile of fluticasone furoate/vilanterol dry powder inhaler combination therapy 
as a potential treatment for COPD.

Caramori G(1), Chung KF(2), Adcock IM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Centro Interdipartimentale per lo Studio delle Malattie Infiammatorie delle
vie Aeree e Patologie Fumo-correlate (CEMICEF; formerly Centro di Ricerca su Asma
e BPCO), Sezione di Medicina Interna e Cardiorespiratoria, Università di Ferrara,
Ferrara, Italy. (2)Airways Disease Section, National Heart and Lung Institute,
Royal Brompton Hospital Biomedical Research Unit, Imperial College London,
London, UK.

Currently, there is no cure for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). The
limited efficacy of current therapies for COPD indicates a pressing need to
develop new treatments to prevent the progression of the disease, which consumes 
a significant amount of health care resources and is an important cause of
mortality worldwide. Current national and international guidelines for the
management of stable COPD patients recommend the use of inhaled long-acting
bronchodilators, inhaled corticosteroids, and their combination for maintenance
treatment of moderate to severe stable COPD. Once-daily fluticasone
furoate/vilanterol dry powder inhaler combination therapy has recently been
approved by the US Food and Drug Administration and the European Medicines Agency
as a new regular treatment for patients with stable COPD. Fluticasone
furoate/vilanterol dry powder inhaler combination therapy has been shown to be
effective in many controlled clinical trials involving thousands of patients in
the regular treatment of stable COPD. This is the first once-daily combination of
ultra-long-acting inhaled β2-agonists and inhaled glucocorticoids that is
available for the treatment of stable COPD and has great potential to improve
compliance to long-term regular inhaled therapy and hence to improve the natural 
history and prognosis of COPD patients.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S32604 
PMCID: PMC3940640
PMID: 24596460  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Evid Based Med. 2014 Jun;19(3):116. doi: 10.1136/eb-2013-101695. Epub 2014 Feb
14.

Inhaled fluticasone and budesonide increased the risk of serious pneumonia in
COPD.

White P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Primary Care & Public Health Sciences, Kings College London,
London, UK.

Comment on
    Thorax. 2013 Nov;68(11):1029-36.

DOI: 10.1136/eb-2013-101695 
PMID: 24530996  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Enferm Infecc Microbiol Clin. 2014 Dec;32(10):662-5. doi:
10.1016/j.eimc.2013.12.008. Epub 2014 Feb 14.

[Iatrogenic adrenal insufficiency secondary to an interaction between ritonavir
and inhaled fluticasone. A review of the literature].

[Article in Spanish]

Gómez-Cerquera JM(1), Hernando-López E(2), Blanco-Ramos JR(3).

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Medicina Interna, Hospital San Pedro, Logroño, La Rioja, España.
Electronic address: jmgomez@riojasalud.es. (2)Servicio de Neumología, Hospital
San Pedro, Logroño, La Rioja, España. (3)Departamento de Enfermedades
Infecciosas, Hospital San Pedro, Centro de Investigación Biomédica de La Rioja
(CIBIR), Logroño, La Rioja, España.

INTRODUCTION: Highly effective antiretroviral treatment has improved the life
expectancy of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infected patients, but has led
to an increase in the comorbidities related to aging, such as the chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). All this implies the need for a greater
number of drugs and an increasing risk of drugs interactions with antiretroviral 
treatment, particularly protease inhibitors.
METHODS: We report a case of iatrogenic adrenal insufficiency interaction
secondary to ritonavir and inhaled fluticasone in an HIV-infected patient with
COPD. A review was made of the cases reported in adults in the medical literature
(Medline) up to December 2012.
RESULTS: A total of 34 cases were reported. The mean age was 4 years. The mean
dose of ritonavir was 187 mg/day, while the fluticasone dose was 866 μg/day. The 
average time of the interaction between ritonavir and fluticasone was 8 months.
In 85% of cases fluticasone was discontinued at the time of diagnosis of adrenal 
insufficiency/Cushing syndrome. Almost all (90%) patients had a complete
resolution of the symptoms after changing the treatment.
CONCLUSION: HIV-infected patients on antiretroviral therapy with protease
inhibitor boosted with ritonavir which requires the use of inhaled
corticosteroids, beclomethasone would be the best treatment option.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier España, S.L.U. y Sociedad Española de Enfermedades
Infecciosas y Microbiología Clínica. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.eimc.2013.12.008 
PMID: 24529679  [PubMed - in process]


166. Respir Med. 2014 Apr;108(4):593-9. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2014.01.002. Epub 2014 Jan
15.

Stepwise withdrawal of inhaled corticosteroids in COPD patients receiving dual
bronchodilation: WISDOM study design and rationale.

Magnussen H(1), Watz H(2), Kirsten A(2), Decramer M(3), Dahl R(4), Calverley
PM(5), Towse L(6), Finnigan H(7), Tetzlaff K(8), Disse B(9).

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary Research Institute at Lung Clinic Grosshansdorf, Airway Research
Center North, Member of the German Center for Lung Research, Grosshansdorf,
Germany. Electronic address: magnussen@pulmoresearch.de. (2)Pulmonary Research
Institute at Lung Clinic Grosshansdorf, Airway Research Center North, Member of
the German Center for Lung Research, Grosshansdorf, Germany. (3)Department of
Respiratory Diseases, University of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. (4)Odense University
Hospital, Odense, Denmark. (5)Institute of Ageing and Chronic Disease, University
Hospital Aintree, Liverpool, UK. (6)Clinical Research Department, Boehringer
Ingelheim (UK), Berkshire, UK. (7)Biometry and Data Management Department,
Boehringer Ingelheim (UK), Berkshire, UK. (8)Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma GmbH &
Co. KG, Ingelheim, Germany; Department of Sports Medicine, University of
Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany. (9)Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma GmbH & Co. KG,
Ingelheim, Germany.

Long-acting bronchodilators in combination with inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) are
recommended to decrease the risk of recurrent exacerbations in patients with
Global initiative for chronic Obstructive Lung Disease (GOLD) stage 3-4 chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). There is increasing concern about the
clinical benefit and long-term safety of ICS use in COPD patients. The WISDOM
(Withdrawal of Inhaled Steroids During Optimised bronchodilator Management) study
(NCT00975195) aims to evaluate the need for ICS use via stepwise withdrawal of
ICS in COPD patients (GOLD 3-4 with a history of at least one exacerbation during
the 12-month period prior to screening) receiving dual bronchodilation. During
the 6-week run-in period, 2456 patients receive tiotropium 18 μg once daily,
salmeterol 50 μg twice daily and fluticasone 500 μg twice daily. In a randomized,
double-blind, parallel-group, active-controlled fashion, one group of patients
continues to receive tiotropium, salmeterol and fluticasone, while the second
group initiates stepwise withdrawal of fluticasone. The primary end point is time
to first moderate or severe exacerbation following randomized treatment over 52
weeks. Lung function, symptoms and safety are also assessed. A sub-study aims to 
identify sub-populations and markers of steroid need. This study will determine
the benefit of continued ICS therapy in combination with dual long-acting
bronchodilators in COPD.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2014.01.002 
PMID: 24477080  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Int Immunopharmacol. 2014 Mar;19(1):153-60. doi: 10.1016/j.intimp.2013.12.029.
Epub 2014 Jan 13.

Fluticasone furoate is more effective than mometasone furoate in restoring
tobacco smoke inhibited SOCS-3 expression in airway epithelial cells.

Nasreen N(1), Gonzalves L(2), Peruvemba S(1), Mohammed KA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary Critical Care & Sleep Medicine, College of Medicine,
University of Florida, United States; NF/SGVHS, Malcom Randal VA Medical Center, 
Gainesville, FL, United States. (2)Division of Pulmonary Critical Care & Sleep
Medicine, College of Medicine, University of Florida, United States. (3)Division 
of Pulmonary Critical Care & Sleep Medicine, College of Medicine, University of
Florida, United States; NF/SGVHS, Malcom Randal VA Medical Center, Gainesville,
FL, United States. Electronic address: mkamal@medicine.ufl.edu.

Fluticasone furoate (FF) and mometasone furoate (MF) are potent glucocorticoids
recommended for the treatment of allergic rhinitis and other inflammatory
diseases. However, whether these drugs render any anti-inflammatory effects in
Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD) is unclear. Emerging data on
suppressors of cytokine signaling-3 (SOCS-3) activation in the lungs during
inflammation suggests that SOCS3 can be potential targets for regulating
pulmonary inflammatory responses in COPD. In this study, we compared the effect
of FF with MF on SOCS-3 expression in tobacco smoke (TS) exposed BAEpCs in vitro 
and in a mouse model of COPD in vivo. BAEpCs were exposed to TS or room air and
later were treated with either FF (1nmol-100nmol) or MF (10-500nmol) inhibitors
in the presence and absence of Jak1 and Stat-3 inhibitors. C57BL/6 mice were
exposed to TS for 6 months, and treated with either FF, MF for 2 and 4 weeks. FF 
induced 7 fold increases in SOCS-3 expression in BAEpCs whereas MF induced a
three fold increase when compared to control. Jak1 and Stat-3 inhibitors
significantly inhibited the FF and MF induced SOCS-3 expression in BAEpCs. In
addition, FF and MF restored TS inhibited SOCS-3 expression in the airway
epithelium of COPD mice. FF and MF treatments significantly reduced leukocyte
infiltration in airways and inhibited lung inflammation. Our study elucidates a
novel mechanism for the anti-inflammatory action of FF in COPD. The superior
efficacy of FF may be in part due to the increased expression of SOCS-3 in
BAEpCs.

Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.intimp.2013.12.029 
PMID: 24434372  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Lancet Respir Med. 2013 Jul;1(5):e21. doi: 10.1016/S2213-2600(13)70100-0. Epub
2013 Jul 8.

Fluticasone furoate and vilanterol for COPD.

Morjaria JB(1), Morice AH(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Academic Respiratory Medicine, Hull York Medical School,
University of Hull, Castle Hill Hospital, Cottingham, HU16 5JQ, UK. Electronic
address: jaymin.morjaria@hey.nhs.uk. (2)Department of Academic Respiratory
Medicine, Hull York Medical School, University of Hull, Castle Hill Hospital,
Cottingham, HU16 5JQ, UK.

Comment in
    Lancet Respir Med. 2013 Jul;1(5):e21-2.

Comment on
    Lancet Respir Med. 2013 May;1(3):210-23.

DOI: 10.1016/S2213-2600(13)70100-0 
PMID: 24429208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Lancet Respir Med. 2013 Jul;1(5):e21-2. doi: 10.1016/S2213-2600(13)70125-5. Epub 
2013 Jul 8.

Fluticasone furoate and vilanterol for COPD - authors' reply.

Dransfield MT(1), Lettis S(2), Barnhart F(3), Crim C(3), Calverley PM(4).

Author information: 
(1)AB Lung Health Center Division of Pulmonary, Allergy and Critical Care
Medicine University of Alabama at Birmingham & Birmingham VA Medical Center,
Birmingham, AL 35294, USA. Electronic address: mdransfield99@msn.com.
(2)GlaxoSmithKline, London, UK. (3)GlaxoSmithKline, Research Triangle Park, NC,
USA. (4)University of Liverpool, Liverpool, UK.

Comment on
    Lancet Respir Med. 2013 May;1(3):210-23.
    Lancet Respir Med. 2013 Jul;1(5):e21.

DOI: 10.1016/S2213-2600(13)70125-5 
PMID: 24429207  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Lancet Respir Med. 2013 May;1(3):210-23. doi: 10.1016/S2213-2600(13)70040-7. Epub
2013 Apr 12.

Once-daily inhaled fluticasone furoate and vilanterol versus vilanterol only for 
prevention of exacerbations of COPD: two replicate double-blind, parallel-group, 
randomised controlled trials.

Dransfield MT(1), Bourbeau J(2), Jones PW(3), Hanania NA(4), Mahler DA(5), Vestbo
J(6), Wachtel A(7), Martinez FJ(8), Barnhart F(9), Sanford L(10), Lettis S(10),
Crim C(9), Calverley PM(11).

Author information: 
(1)Lung Health Center, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, USA. 
(2)McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada. (3)St George's University of London, 
London, UK. (4)Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA. (5)Geisel School of 
Medicine at Dartmouth, Hanover, NH, USA. (6)Odense University Hospital, Odense,
Denmark; University of Southern Denmark, Odense, Denmark; Manchester Academic
Health Sciences Centre, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK. (7)Southern
California Institute for Respiratory Diseases, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(8)University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA. (9)GlaxoSmithKline, Research
Triangle Park, NC, USA. (10)GlaxoSmithKline, Stockley Park, London, UK.
(11)University of Liverpool, Liverpool, UK. Electronic address:
pmacal@liverpool.ac.uk.

Erratum in
    Lancet Respir Med. 2013 May;1(3):186.

Comment in
    Lancet Respir Med. 2013 Jul;1(5):e21-2.
    Lancet Respir Med. 2013 Jul;1(5):e21.

BACKGROUND: Whether the combination of a once-daily inhaled corticosteroid with a
once-daily longacting β(2) agonist is more protective than a once-daily
longacting β(2) agonist alone against exacerbations of chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD) is unknown. We hypothesised that fluticasone furoate and
vilanterol would prevent more exacerbations than would vilanterol alone.
METHODS: We did two replicate double-blind parallel-group 1 year trials. Both
studies began on Sept 25, 2009. Study 1 ended on Oct 31, 2011, and study 2 on Oct
17, 2011. Eligible patients were aged 40 years or older, had a history of COPD, a
smoking history of 10 or more pack-years, a ratio of forced expiratory volume in 
1 s (FEV(1)) to forced vital capacity of 0·70 or less after bronchodilators (and 
an FEV(1) of 70% or less of predicted), and a documented history of one or more
moderate or severe disease exacerbations in the year before screening. Patients
were randomly assigned (1:1:1:1) on the basis of the Registration and Medication 
Ordering System to 25 μg vilanterol alone or 25 μg vilanterol combined with
either 50 μg, 100 μg, or 200 μg fluticasone furoate once daily. Our primary
endpoint was the yearly rate of moderate and severe exacerbations. The trials
were analysed separately and a pooled analysis was also done. These trials are
registered with ClinicalTrials.gov (NCT01009463 and NCT01017952).
FINDINGS: 1622 patients in study 1 and 1633 patients in study 2 were randomly
assigned. In study 1, no significant difference in exacerbation rate was noted
between the 200/25 μg fluticasone furoate/vilanterol group and the vilanterol
only group (mean 0·90 events vs 1·05 events per year; ratio 0·9 [95% CI
0·7-1·0]). Because of the statistical hierarchy used, we could not infer
significance for the 50 μg and 100 μg groups. In study 2, significantly fewer
moderate and severe exacerbations were noted in all fluticasone
furoate/vilanterol groups than in the vilanterol only group (p=0·0398 for the 50 
μg group, 0·0244 for the 100 μg group, and 0·0004 for the 200 μg group). In the
pooled analysis, significantly fewer moderate and severe exacerbations were noted
in all fluticasone furoate/vilanterol groups than in the vilanterol only group
(0·0141 for the 50 μg group, <0·0001 for the 100 μg group, and 0·0003 for the 200
μg group). Nasopharyngitis was the most frequently reported adverse event in both
studies. Pneumonia and fractures were reported more frequently with fluticasone
furoate and vilanterol than with vilanterol alone. Eight deaths from pneumonia
were noted in the fluticasone furoate/vilanterol groups compared with none in the
vilanterol only group.
INTERPRETATION: Addition of fluticasone furoate to vilanterol was associated with
a decreased rate of moderate and severe exacerbations of COPD in patients with a 
history of exacerbation, but was also associated with an increased pneumonia
risk.
FUNDING: GlaxoSmithKline.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S2213-2600(13)70040-7 
PMID: 24429127  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Lancet Respir Med. 2013 May;1(3):177-8. doi: 10.1016/S2213-2600(13)70042-0. Epub 
2013 Apr 15.

Inhaled corticosteroids in severe COPD.

Bousquet J(1).

Author information: 
(1)University Hospital CHRU Arnaud de Villeneuve, Services des Maladies
Respiratoires, 34295 Montpellier, France. Electronic address:
jean.bousquet@orange.fr.

DOI: 10.1016/S2213-2600(13)70042-0 
PMID: 24429112  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Dtsch Med Wochenschr. 2014 Jan;139(3):76. doi: 10.1055/s-0032-1329071. Epub 2014 
Jan 7.

[Do inhaled corticosteroids favor pneumonia in COPD? Particularly fluticasone
increases the risk of pneumonia].

[Article in German]

Worth H.

Comment on
    Thorax. 2013 Nov;68(11):1029-36.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0032-1329071 
PMID: 24399653  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. J Immunol. 2014 Feb 1;192(3):1196-208. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1302138. Epub 2014
Jan 6.

Chronic exposure to glucocorticoids shapes gene expression and modulates innate
and adaptive activation pathways in macrophages with distinct changes in
leukocyte attraction.

van de Garde MD(1), Martinez FO, Melgert BN, Hylkema MN, Jonkers RE, Hamann J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Immunology, Academic Medical Center, University of 
Amsterdam, 1105 AZ Amsterdam, The Netherlands;

Glucocorticoids (GCs) have been used for more than 50 y as immunosuppressive
drugs, yet their efficacy in macrophage-dominated disorders, such as chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease, is debated. Little is known how long-term GC
treatment affects macrophage responses in inflammatory conditions. In this study,
we compared the transcriptome of human macrophages, matured in the presence or
absence of fluticasone propionate (FP), and their ability to initiate or sustain 
classical activation, mimicked using acute LPS and chronic IFN-γ stimulation,
respectively. We identified macrophage gene expression networks, modulated by FP 
long-term exposure, and specific patterns of IFN-γ- and LPS-induced genes that
were resistant, inhibited, or exacerbated by FP. Results suggest that long-term
treatment with GCs weakens adaptive immune signature components of IFN-γ and LPS 
gene profiles by downmodulating MHC class II and costimulatory molecules, but
strengthens innate signature components by maintaining and increasing expression 
of chemokines involved in phagocyte attraction. In a mouse model of chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease, GC treatment induced higher chemokine levels, and 
this correlated with enhanced recruitment of leukocytes. Thus, GCs do not
generally suppress macrophage effector functions, but they cause a shift in the
innate-adaptive balance of the immune response, with distinct changes in the
chemokine-chemokine receptor network.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1302138 
PMID: 24395918  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. J Biol Chem. 2014 Feb 7;289(6):3262-75. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.541052. Epub 2013
Dec 17.

Glucocorticoids recruit Tgfbr3 and Smad1 to shift transforming growth factor-β
signaling from the Tgfbr1/Smad2/3 axis to the Acvrl1/Smad1 axis in lung
fibroblasts.

Schwartze JT(1), Becker S, Sakkas E, Wujak ŁA, Niess G, Usemann J, Reichenberger 
F, Herold S, Vadász I, Mayer K, Seeger W, Morty RE.

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Lung Development and Remodelling, Max Planck Institute 
for Heart and Lung Research, D-61231 Bad Nauheim, Germany.

Glucocorticoids represent the mainstay therapy for many lung diseases, providing 
outstanding management of asthma but performing surprisingly poorly in patients
with acute respiratory distress syndrome, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, 
lung fibrosis, and blunted lung development associated with bronchopulmonary
dysplasia in preterm infants. TGF-β is a pathogenic mediator of all four of these
diseases, prompting us to explore glucocorticoid/TGF-β signaling cross-talk.
Glucocorticoids, including dexamethasone, methylprednisolone, budesonide, and
fluticasone, potentiated TGF-β signaling by the Acvrl1/Smad1/5/8 signaling axis
and blunted signaling by the Tgfbr1/Smad2/3 axis in NIH/3T3 cells, as well as
primary lung fibroblasts, smooth muscle cells, and endothelial cells.
Dexamethasone drove expression of the accessory type III TGF-β receptor Tgfbr3,
also called betaglycan. Tgfbr3 was demonstrated to be a "switch" that blunted
Tgfbr1/Smad2/3 and potentiated Acvrl1/Smad1 signaling in lung fibroblasts. The
Acvrl1/Smad1 axis, which was stimulated by dexamethasone, was active in lung
fibroblasts and antagonized Tgfbr1/Smad2/3 signaling. Dexamethasone acted
synergistically with TGF-β to drive differentiation of primary lung fibroblasts
to myofibroblasts, revealed by acquisition of smooth muscle actin and smooth
muscle myosin, which are exclusively Smad1-dependent processes in fibroblasts.
Administration of dexamethasone to live mice recapitulated these observations and
revealed a lung-specific impact of dexamethasone on lung Tgfbr3 expression and
phospho-Smad1 levels in vivo. These data point to an interesting and hitherto
unknown impact of glucocorticoids on TGF-β signaling in lung fibroblasts and
other constituent cell types of the lung that may be relevant to lung physiology,
as well as lung pathophysiology, in terms of drug/disease interactions.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M113.541052 
PMCID: PMC3916529
PMID: 24347165  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Lancet Respir Med. 2013 Mar;1(1):51-60. doi: 10.1016/S2213-2600(12)70052-8. Epub 
2012 Dec 6.

Efficacy and safety of once-daily QVA149 compared with twice-daily
salmeterol-fluticasone in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(ILLUMINATE): a randomised, double-blind, parallel group study.

Vogelmeier CF(1), Bateman ED, Pallante J, Alagappan VK, D'Andrea P, Chen H,
Banerji D.

Author information: 
(1)Universitätsklinikum Gießen und Marburg, Marburg, Germany. Electronic address:
claus.vogelmeier@med.uni-marburg.de.

Erratum in
    Lancet Respir Med. 2013 Apr;1(2):101.

Comment in
    Lancet Respir Med. 2013 Mar;1(1):6-7.

BACKGROUND: QVA149 is an inhaled fixed-dose combination therapy under development
for the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). It combines
indacaterol (a longacting β2-agonist) with glycopyrronium (a longacting
muscarinic antagonist) as a dual bronchodilator. We aimed to compare the
efficacy, safety, and tolerability of QVA149 versus salmeterol-fluticasone (SFC) 
over 26 weeks in patients with moderate-to-severe COPD.
METHODS: In this multicentre double-blind, double-dummy, parallel-group study,
523 patients (age 40 years or older, Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive
Lung Disease [GOLD] stages II-III, without exacerbations in the previous year)
were randomly assigned (1:1; via automated, interactive response technology and
stratified for smoking status) to once-daily QVA149 110/50 μg or twice-daily SFC 
50/500 μg for 26 weeks. Efficacy was assessed in the full analysis set
(randomised patients who received at least one dose of study drug); safety was
assessed in all patients who received at least one dose of study drug. The
primary endpoint was to demonstrate the superiority of QVA149 compared with SFC
for the standardised area under the curve from 0 to 12 h post dose for forced
expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1 AUC0-12h) after 26 weeks of treatment. This
trial was registered at ClinicalTrial.gov, NCT01315249.
FINDINGS: Between March 25, 2011, and March 12, 2012, 259 patients were randomly 
assigned to receive QVA149 and 264 to receive SFC. At week 26, FEV1 AUC0-12h was 
significantly higher with QVA149 than with SFC (treatment difference 0·138 L; 95%
CI 0·100-0·176; p<0·0001). Overall incidence of adverse events (including COPD
exacerbations) was 55·4% (143 of 258) for the QVA149 group and 60·2% (159 of 264)
for the SFC group. Incidence of serious adverse events was similar between
treatment groups (QVA149, 13 of 258 [5·0%]; SFC 14 of 264 [5·3%]); COPD worsening
was the most frequent serious adverse event (one of 13 [0·4%] and three of 14
[1·1%], respectively).
INTERPRETATION: Once-daily QVA149 provides significant, sustained, and clinically
meaningful improvements in lung function versus twice-daily SFC, with significant
symptomatic benefit. These results indicate the potential of dual bronchodilation
as a treatment option for non-exacerbating symptomatic COPD patients.
FUNDING: Novartis Pharma AG.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S2213-2600(12)70052-8 
PMID: 24321804  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Lancet Respir Med. 2013 Mar;1(1):6-7. doi: 10.1016/S2213-2600(12)70055-3. Epub
2012 Dec 6.

Future of fixed-dose longacting β2-agonist and antimuscarinic combination therapy
in COPD.

Tashkin DP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles, 
CA 90095 USA. Electronic address: dtashkin@mednet.ucla.edu.

Comment on
    Lancet Respir Med. 2013 Mar;1(1):51-60.

DOI: 10.1016/S2213-2600(12)70055-3 
PMID: 24321790  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Ann Pharmacother. 2014 Feb;48(2):250-7. doi: 10.1177/1060028013512615. Epub 2013 
Nov 19.

Combination of fluticasone furoate and vilanterol for the treatment of chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease.

Bollmeier SG(1), Prosser TR.

Author information: 
(1)St Louis College of Pharmacy, St Louis, MO, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the efficacy and safety of the combination of fluticasone 
furoate/vilanterol (FF/VI) and compare it with other inhaled combination
corticosteroid/long-acting β₂-receptor agonists for maintenance treatment of
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
DATA SOURCES: A PubMed and EMBASE search in June 2013 using the MeSH terms
fluticasone and vilanterol identified trials using this combination for COPD.
Additional information was gathered from references cited in the identified
publications, the manufacturer, and package insert as well as the
ClinicalTrials.gov registry.
STUDY SELECTION/DATA EXTRACTION: Preference was given to randomized controlled
clinical trials. Data from animal trials, clinical trials for asthma, and
non-English sources were excluded.
DATA SYNTHESIS: Given once daily, FF/VI improves trough forced expiratory volume 
at 1 s by about 230 mL in a 28-day trial versus placebo. However, a more modest
increase (100-130 mL) was seen in 2 longer 28-week trials. In the longest trial
of 1 year, a slight but significant decrease in the yearly rate of moderate plus 
severe exacerbations, the time to first moderate or severe exacerbation, and the 
frequency of exacerbations requiring systemic corticosteroids was seen. There was
no difference in the rate of exacerbations requiring hospitalization. The product
appears to have the adverse effect profile typical of its class.
CONCLUSIONS: Of the inhaled corticosteroid/long-acting β₂ receptor agonist
combinations, VI/FF is the first allowing once-daily dosing. Similar to the other
combination products, it may slightly decrease the incidence of COPD
exacerbations in the patient subset with Global Initiative for Chronic
Obstructive Lung Disease risk category C or D. There are no direct safety or
efficacy data comparing this with other available inhaled combination products.
The once-daily dosing might improve adherence in select patients. The Ellipta
delivery device may assist some who are unable to use other devices correctly.

DOI: 10.1177/1060028013512615 
PMID: 24259654  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2013 Nov 10;(11):CD003794. doi:
10.1002/14651858.CD003794.pub4.

Combined corticosteroid and long-acting beta₂-agonist in one inhaler versus
placebo for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Nannini LJ(1), Poole P, Milan SJ, Holmes R, Normansell R.

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary Section, Hospital E Peron, Ruta 11 Y Jm Estrada, G. Baigorria, Santa
Fe - Rosario, Argentina, 2152.

Update of
    Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2007;(4):CD003794.

BACKGROUND: Both long-acting beta2-agonists (LABA) and inhaled corticosteroids
(ICS) have been recommended in guidelines for the treatment of chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Their coadministration in a combination
inhaler may facilitate adherence to medication regimens and improve efficacy.
OBJECTIVES: To determine the efficacy and safety of combined ICS and LABA for
stable COPD in comparison with placebo.
SEARCH METHODS: We searched the Cochrane Airways Group Specialised Register of
trials, reference lists of included studies and manufacturers' trial registries. 
The date of the most recent search was June 2013.
SELECTION CRITERIA: We included randomised and double-blind studies of at least
four weeks' duration. Eligible studies compared combined ICS and LABA
preparations with placebo.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Two review authors independently assessed study
risk of bias and extracted data. Dichotomous data were analysed as fixed-effect
odds ratios (OR) or rate ratios (RR) with 95% confidence intervals (95% CI), and 
continuous data as mean differences with 95% confidence intervals.
MAIN RESULTS: Nineteen studies met the inclusion criteria (with 10,400
participants randomly assigned, lasting between 4 and 156 weeks, mean 42 weeks). 
Studies used three different combined preparations (fluticasone/salmeterol,
budesonide/formoterol or mometasone/formoterol). The studies were generally at
low risk of bias for blinding but at unclear or high risk for attrition bias
because of participant dropouts. Compared with placebo, both
fluticasone/salmeterol and budesonide/formoterol reduced the rate of
exacerbations. Mometasone/formoterol reduced the number of participants
experiencing one or more exacerbation. Pooled analysis of the combined therapies 
indicated that exacerbations were less frequent when compared with placebo (Rate 
Ratio 0.73; 95% CI 0.69 to 0.78, 7 studies, 7495 participants); the quality of
this evidence when GRADE criteria were applied was rated as moderate.
Participants included in these trials had on average one or two exacerbations per
year, which means that treatment with combined therapy would lead to a reduction 
of one exacerbation every two to four years in these individuals. An overall
reduction in mortality was seen, but this outcome was dominated by the results of
one study (TORCH) of fluticasone/salmeterol. Generally, deaths in the smaller,
shorter studies were too few to contribute to the overall estimate. Further
longer studies on budesonide/formoterol and mometasone/formoterol are required to
clarify whether this is seen more widely. When a baseline risk of death of 15.2% 
from the placebo arm of TORCH was used, the three-year number needed to treat for
an additional beneficial outcome (NNTB) with fluticasone/salmeterol to prevent
one extra death was 42 (95% CI 24 to 775). All three combined treatments led to
statistically significant improvement in health status measurements, although the
mean differences observed are relatively small in relation to the minimum
clinically important difference. Furthermore, symptoms and lung function
assessments favoured combined treatments. An increase in the risk of pneumonia
was noted with combined inhalers compared with placebo treatment (OR 1.62, 95% CI
1.36 to 1.94), and the quality of this evidence was rated as moderate, but no
dose effect was seen. The three-year NNTH for one extra case of pneumonia was 17,
based on a 12.3% risk of pneumonia in the placebo arm of TORCH. Fewer
participants withdrew from the combined treatment arms for adverse events or lack
of efficacy.
AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: Combined inhaler therapy led to around a quarter fewer COPD
exacerbations than were seen with placebo. A significant reduction in all-cause
mortality was noted, but this outcome was dominated by one trial (TORCH),
emphasising the need for further trials of longer duration. Increased risk of
pneumonia is a concern; however, this did not translate into increased
exacerbations, hospitalisations or deaths. Current evidence does not suggest any 
major differences between inhalers in terms of effects, but nor is the evidence
strong enough to demonstrate that all are equivalent. To permit firmer
conclusions about the effects of combined therapy, more data are needed,
particularly in relation to the profile of adverse events and benefits in
relation to different formulations and doses of inhaled ICS. Head-to-head
comparisons are necessary to determine whether one combined inhaler is better
than the others.

DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD003794.pub4 
PMID: 24214176  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. J Am Pharm Assoc (2003). 2013 Nov-Dec;53(6):e219-29; quiz e230-1. doi:
10.1331/JAPhA.2013.13535.

COPD 2013: an update on treatment and newly approved medications for pharmacists.

Meyer KC.

OBJECTIVES: To educate pharmacists about the Global Strategy for the Diagnosis,
Management, and Prevention of Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (GOLD)
guidelines for treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), newly
approved medications, and recent developments since the guidelines were
published.
SUMMARY: The evidence-based GOLD guidelines provide recommendations for
clinicians managing patients with COPD. These guidelines were revised most
recently in 2013. Three new medications (indacaterol maleate, aclidinium bromide,
and fluticasone furoate/vilanterol) have been approved in the previous 2 years.
Adding to the armamentarium of medications for treating COPD is useful. Studies
also have been conducted to determine which inhaled agents are preferred for use 
when long-acting bronchodilators are needed as mono- and combination therapy. In 
addition, 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme A reductase inhibitors and
macrolides are being studied for use in COPD. An extensive COPD pipeline consists
of many oral and inhaled medications, including olodaterol and glycopyrronium
maleate, which are in Phase III clinical trials. Medication adherence is a very
important piece of COPD management. Pharmacists play an integral role in drug
selection and patient education to ensure the best possible outcomes.
CONCLUSION: The GOLD guidelines represent the standard of care for COPD
management. New drug approvals and recent research may affect practitioner
choices in managing the disease. Pharmacists can improve medication adherence and
selection in order to maximize therapeutic effectiveness and ensure that patients
are using inhalation delivery devices optimally.

DOI: 10.1331/JAPhA.2013.13535 
PMID: 24185438  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2014 Jan;348(1):12-24. doi: 10.1124/jpet.113.204586. Epub
2013 Oct 25.

Induction of regulator of G-protein signaling 2 expression by long-acting
β2-adrenoceptor agonists and glucocorticoids in human airway epithelial cells.

Holden NS(1), George T, Rider CF, Chandrasekhar A, Shah S, Kaur M, Johnson M,
Siderovski DP, Leigh R, Giembycz MA, Newton R.

Author information: 
(1)Airways Inflammation Research Group, Snyder Institute for Chronic Diseases,
Faculty of Medicine, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada (N.S.H.,
T.G., C.F.R., A.C., S.S., M.K., R.L., M.A.G., R.N.); GlaxoSmithKline Research and
Development, Uxbridge, Middlesex, United Kingdom (M.J.); and Department of
Physiology and Pharmacology, School of Medicine, West Virginia University,
Morgantown, West Virginia (D.P.S.).

In asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) multiple mediators act
on Gαq-linked G-protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) to cause bronchoconstriction.
However, acting on the airway epithelium, such mediators may also elicit
inflammatory responses. In human bronchial epithelial BEAS-2B cells (bronchial
epithelium + adenovirus 12-SV40 hybrid), regulator of G-protein signaling (RGS) 2
mRNA and protein were synergistically induced in response to combinations of
long-acting β2-adrenoceptor agonist (LABA) (salmeterol, formoterol) plus
glucocorticoid (dexamethasone, fluticasone propionate, budesonide). Equivalent
responses occurred in primary human bronchial epithelial cells. Concentrations of
glucocorticoid plus LABA required to induce RGS2 expression in BEAS-2B cells were
consistent with the levels achieved therapeutically in the lungs. As RGS2 is a
GTPase-activating protein that switches off Gαq, intracellular free calcium
([Ca(2+)]i) flux was used as a surrogate of responses induced by histamine,
methacholine, and the thromboxane receptor agonist U46619
[(Z)-7-[(1S,4R,5R,6S)-5-[(E,3S)-3-hydroxyoct-1-enyl]-3-oxabicyclo[2.2.1]heptan-6-
yl]hept-5-enoic acid]. This was significantly attenuated by salmeterol plus
dexamethasone pretreatment, or RGS2 overexpression, and the protective effect of 
salmeterol plus dexamethasone was abolished by RGS2 RNA silencing. Although
methacholine and U46619 induced interleukin-8 (IL-8) release and this was
inhibited by RGS2 overexpression, the repression of U46619-induced IL-8 release
by salmeterol plus dexamethasone was unaffected by RGS2 knockdown. Given a role
for Gαq-mediated pathways in inducing IL-8 release, we propose that RGS2 acts
redundantly with other effector processes to repress IL-8 expression. Thus, RGS2 
expression is a novel effector mechanism in the airway epithelium that is induced
by glucocorticoid/LABA combinations. This could contribute to the efficacy of
glucocorticoid/LABA combinations in asthma and COPD.

DOI: 10.1124/jpet.113.204586 
PMID: 24163441  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. BMJ Open. 2013 Oct 22;3(10):e003048. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2013-003048.

Shortness of Breath with Daily Activities questionnaire: validation and responder
thresholds in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Watkins ML(1), Wilcox TK, Tabberer M, Brooks JM, Donohue JF, Anzueto A, Chen WH, 
Crim C.

Author information: 
(1)Respiratory Medicines Development Center, GlaxoSmithKline, Research Triangle
Park, North Carolina, USA.

OBJECTIVES: To test the reliability, validity and responsiveness of the 13-item
Shortness of Breath with Daily Activities (SOBDA) questionnaire, and determine
the threshold for response and minimal important difference (MID).
DESIGN: 6 week, randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled study.
SETTING: 40 centres in the USA between 29 October 2009 and 1 July 2010.
PRIMARY AND SECONDARY OUTCOME MEASURES: 547 patients with chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD) were enrolled and 418 entered the 2-week run-in period. 
Data from the run-in period were collected to test internal consistency,
test-retest reliability, convergent validity and known-groups validity of the
SOBDA. Three hundred and sixty six patients were randomised 2:2:1 to fluticasone 
propionate/salmeterol 250/50 µg, salmeterol 50 µg or placebo, twice daily.
Results from the SOBDA questionnaire, Patient Global Assessment of Change
Question, modified Medical Research Council Dyspnoea Scale (mMRC), Clinician
Global Impression of Dysponea Severity (CGI-S), Clinician Global Impression of
Change Question and Chronic Respiratory Disease Questionnaire self-administered
standardised version (CRQ-SAS) were evaluated; spirometry and safety parameters
were measured. Study endpoints were selected to investigate the cross-sectional
and longitudinal validity of the SOBDA questionnaire in relation to the clinical 
criteria.
RESULTS: Internal consistency of the SOBDA questionnaire (Cronbach α) was 0.89.
Test-retest reliability (intraclass correlation) was 0.94. The SOBDA weekly
scores correlated with the patient-reported and clinician-reported mMRC, CGI-S
and CRQ-SAS dyspnoea domain scores (0.29, 0.24, 0.24 and -0.68, respectively).
The SOBDA weekly scores differentiated between the responders and the
non-responders as rated by the patients and the clinicians. Anchor-based and
supportive distribution-based analyses produced a range of the potential values
for the threshold for the responders and MID.
CONCLUSIONS: The 13-item SOBDA questionnaire is reliable, valid and responsive to
change in patients with COPD. On using anchor-based methods, the proposed
responder threshold shows a -0.1 to -0.2 score change. A specific threshold value
will be identified as more data are generated from future clinical trials.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: NCT00984659; GlaxoSmithKline study number: ASQ112989.

DOI: 10.1136/bmjopen-2013-003048 
PMCID: PMC3808824
PMID: 24154513  [PubMed]


182. Respir Med. 2014 Feb;108(2):344-50. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2013.10.004. Epub 2013
Oct 10.

Changes in oscillatory impedance and nitrogen washout with combination
fluticasone/salmeterol therapy in COPD.

Timmins SC(1), Diba C(2), Schoeffel RE(3), Salome CM(4), King GG(5), Thamrin
C(6).

Author information: 
(1)The Woolcock Institute of Medical Research, Glebe, NSW 2037, Australia;
Department of Respiratory Medicine Royal North Shore Hospital, St Leonards, NSW
2065, Australia; The Sydney Medical School, The University of Sydney, NSW 2006,
Australia; Cooperative Research Centre for Asthma and Airways, Glebe, NSW 2037,
Australia. Electronic address: stimmins@med.usyd.edu.au. (2)The Woolcock
Institute of Medical Research, Glebe, NSW 2037, Australia; Cooperative Research
Centre for Asthma and Airways, Glebe, NSW 2037, Australia. Electronic address:
chantale@woolcock.org.au. (3)The Woolcock Institute of Medical Research, Glebe,
NSW 2037, Australia; Department of Respiratory Medicine Royal North Shore
Hospital, St Leonards, NSW 2065, Australia; The Sydney Medical School, The
University of Sydney, NSW 2006, Australia. Electronic address:
rschoeff@nssachs.health.nsw.gov.au. (4)The Woolcock Institute of Medical
Research, Glebe, NSW 2037, Australia; The Sydney Medical School, The University
of Sydney, NSW 2006, Australia; Cooperative Research Centre for Asthma and
Airways, Glebe, NSW 2037, Australia. Electronic address: cms@woolcock.org.au.
(5)The Woolcock Institute of Medical Research, Glebe, NSW 2037, Australia;
Department of Respiratory Medicine Royal North Shore Hospital, St Leonards, NSW
2065, Australia; The Sydney Medical School, The University of Sydney, NSW 2006,
Australia; Cooperative Research Centre for Asthma and Airways, Glebe, NSW 2037,
Australia. Electronic address: ggk@woolcock.org.au. (6)The Woolcock Institute of 
Medical Research, Glebe, NSW 2037, Australia. Electronic address:
cindy.thamrin@woolcock.org.au.

INTRODUCTION: Combination inhaled corticosteroid/long-acting bronchodilator
(ICS/LABA) therapy reduces the exacerbation rate and improves spirometry and
quality of life in COPD. We hypothesized that ICS/LABA therapy also improves
small airway function measured by FOT.
METHODS: 14 subjects with COPD were commenced on combination fluticasone
propionate/salmeterol therapy for 3 months. At baseline, subjects completed the
St George Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ) and underwent standard pulmonary
function tests as well as forced oscillation technique (FOT) and single and
multiple breath nitrogen washouts. All tests were repeated at the completion of 3
months of therapy.
RESULTS: Subjects were of mean (SD) age 65.9 years (8.4), BMI 30.0 (5.6), pack
years 51.4 (21.1), post-bronchodilator FEV1% predicted 62.7 (20). At baseline,
mean SGRQ total was 39.0 (17.7) and FRC% predicted 125.4 (31.3). From FOT,
Rrs-total was 5.69 (1.29) cmH2O/L/s, Xrs-total -3.48 (2.16) cmH2O/L/s, EFL Index 
3.51 (2.45) cmH2O/L/s. After 3 months of therapy, there were significant
improvements in SGRQ score (-13.81, p < 0.0001) despite no change in FEV1
(+40 mL, p = 0.14). From FOT, total resistance (-0.63 cmH2O/L/s, p = 0.0004),
reactance (+1.2 cmH2O/L/s, p = 0.013), and expiratory flow limitation
(-1.21 cmH2O/L/s, p = 0.02) also improved. There were no significant changes in
ventilation heterogeneity indices.
CONCLUSION: Combination therapy is associated with improvements in small airways 
function in COPD, despite an absence of change in FEV1. FOT may be a clinically
useful marker of small airway function in COPD that is responsive to treatment.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2013.10.004 
PMID: 24144670  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Exp Ther Med. 2013 Sep;6(3):747-752. Epub 2013 Jul 1.

Expression levels of induced sputum IL-8 and IL-10 and drug intervention effects 
in patients with acute exacerbated COPD complicated with chronic cor pulmonale at
high altitude.

Feng E(1), Wan R, Yang S, Yan Z, Wang S, He W, Zhang Y, Yin H, Chen Z, Liu R.

Author information: 
(1)Center of Respiratory Medicine, The Fourth Hospital of PLA, Lanzhou Command,
Xining, Qinghai 810007, P.R. China.

The aim of this study was to assess the expression levels of induced sputum
interleukin (IL)-8 and IL-10 levels in patients with acute exacerbated chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (AECOPD) complicated with chronic cor pulmonale
(CCP) at high altitude, and to evaluate the intervention effects of an inhaled
corticosteroid (ICS) and a β2-adrenoceptor agonist in this disease. A total of
186 patients with AECOPD complicated with CCP were randomly divided into three
groups, with 62 cases in each. With regard to the two treatment groups, group A
was treated with salmeterol/fluticasone (50 μg/250 μg, respectively) by airway
inhalation twice daily, while group B received budesonide (1 mg) as a spray
inhalation, twice daily. The routine treatment group (group C) received only
routine treatment. The levels of IL-8 and IL-10 in the induced sputum and the
predicted percentage of forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV1%pred),
partial pressure of oxygen in arterial blood (PaO2) and partial pressure of
carbon dioxide in arterial blood (PaCO2) were examined on admission and at a
stable stage two weeks following treatment. Forty healthy volunteers served as a 
control group (group D). Compared with group D values, the IL-8 induced sputum
level and the PaCO2 were significantly increased, while the level of IL-10,
FEV1%pred and the PaO2 were markedly decreased in the three COPD groups prior to 
treatment. Following treatment, the induced sputum IL-8 level and the PaCO2 were 
significantly decreased, while the induced sputum IL-10 level, FEV1%pred and the 
PaO2 were markedly increased in the three treatment groups compared with the
values pre-therapy (all P<0.01). The post-treatment parameters were significantly
different among the three groups (P<0.01). The results indicate that IL-8 and
IL-10 are involved in the airway inflammation of AECOPD complicated by CCP.
Treatment with an ICS was demonstrated to be a successful method of reducing the 
local expression of IL-8 and increasing the local expression of IL-10; however,
ICS combined with a long-acting β2-adrenoceptor agonist (LABA) was more effective
than the sole administration of ICS in patients with AECOPD complicated by CCP at
high altitude.

DOI: 10.3892/etm.2013.1192 
PMCID: PMC3786877
PMID: 24137259  [PubMed]


184. Eur Respir J. 2014 Mar;43(3):773-82. doi: 10.1183/09031936.00064513. Epub 2013
Oct 17.

Once-daily fluticasone furoate alone or combined with vilanterol in persistent
asthma.

O'Byrne PM(1), Bleecker ER, Bateman ED, Busse WW, Woodcock A, Forth R, Toler WT, 
Jacques L, Lötvall J.

Author information: 
(1)Hamilton, ON, Canada.

The inhaled corticosteroid fluticasone furoate (FF) and the long-acting β₂
agonist vilanterol (VI) are in development as a combined once-daily therapy for
asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Our study objectives were to
compare the efficacy and safety of once-daily FF/VI with FF alone and twice-daily
fluticasone propionate (FP) in patients aged ≥12 years with moderate-to-severe
persistent asthma. Patients (n=586) received FF/VI 200/25 μg or FF 200 μg
once-daily (evening dosing), or FP 500 μg twice-daily for 24 weeks. Co-primary
end-points were change from baseline in trough forced expiratory volume in 1 s
(FEV₁) weighted mean (wm) 0-24 h serial FEV1. Secondary end-points included
change from baseline in percentage of rescue-free 24-h periods, percentage of
symptom-free 24-h periods and total Asthma Quality of Life Questionnaire (AQLQ). 
Safety assessments included adverse events, 24-h urinary cortisol excretion,
vital signs and ECG. FF/VI significantly improved trough FEV1 and wmFEV₁ versus
FF and FP. Significantly more rescue-free and symptom-free 24-h periods were
reported with FF/VI versus FF. Treatment differences for AQLQ were not
significant. Incidence of adverse events was similar across groups. No clinically
significant differences were seen for 24-h urinary cortisol excretion, vital
signs or ECG. FF/VI resulted in statistically greater improvements in lung
function and symptomatic end-points versus FF, and was well tolerated in this
asthma population.

DOI: 10.1183/09031936.00064513 
PMCID: PMC3938760
PMID: 24136330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Respir Med. 2014 Jan;108(1):122-8. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2013.08.016. Epub 2013 Aug
30.

Adiponectin is associated with dynamic hyperinflation and a favourable response
to inhaled glucocorticoids in patients with COPD.

Leivo-Korpela S(1), Lehtimäki L(2), Vuolteenaho K(3), Nieminen R(3), Kööbi L(4), 
Järvenpää R(4), Kankaanranta H(5), Saarelainen S(6), Moilanen E(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Tampere University Hospital, PL 2000,
33521 Tampere, Finland; The Immunopharmacology Research Group, University of
Tampere School of Medicine, Tampere University Hospital, 33014 University of
Tampere, Finland. Electronic address: sirpa.leivo-korpela@uta.fi. (2)Allergy
Centre, Tampere University Hospital, PL 2000, 33521 Tampere, Finland; The
Immunopharmacology Research Group, University of Tampere School of Medicine,
Tampere University Hospital, 33014 University of Tampere, Finland. (3)The
Immunopharmacology Research Group, University of Tampere School of Medicine,
Tampere University Hospital, 33014 University of Tampere, Finland. (4)Department 
of Radiology, Tampere University Hospital, PL 2000, 33521 Tampere, Finland.
(5)The Immunopharmacology Research Group, University of Tampere School of
Medicine, Tampere University Hospital, 33014 University of Tampere, Finland;
Department of Respiratory Medicine, Seinäjoki Central Hospital, 60220 Seinäjoki, 
Finland. (6)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Tampere University Hospital, PL
2000, 33521 Tampere, Finland.

OBJECTIVES: Adipokines are protein mediators first described as products of
adipose tissue regulating energy metabolism and appetite. Recently, adipokines
have also been found to modulate inflammation and smooth muscle cell responses.
Therefore we investigated the association of two adipokines, adiponectin and
leptin, with the degree of emphysema, pulmonary function, symptoms and
glucocorticoid responsiveness in patients with COPD.
METHODS: Plasma adiponectin and leptin levels, spirometry, body plethysmography
and symptoms were measured in 43 male COPD patients with smoking history ≥ 20
pack-years, post bronchodilator FEV1/FVC < 0.7 and pulmonary emphysema on HRCT.
The measurements were repeated in a subgroup of patients after 4 weeks' treatment
with inhaled fluticasone.
RESULTS: In patients with COPD, plasma adiponectin levels correlated positively
with airway resistance (Raw) (r = 0.362, p = 0.019) and functional residual
capacity (FRC) (r = 0.355, p = 0.046). Furthermore, the baseline adiponectin
concentration correlated negatively with the fluticasone induced changes in St
George's Respiratory questionnaire (SGRQ) symptom score (r = -0.413, p = 0.040)
and in FRC % pred (r = -0.428, p = 0.003), i.e. a higher baseline plasma
adiponectin level was associated with more pronounced alleviation of symptoms and
dynamic hyperinflation. Plasma leptin levels were not related to the measures of 
lung function, symptoms or glucocorticoid responsiveness.
CONCLUSIONS: Plasma adiponectin levels were associated with peripheral airway
obstruction and dynamic hyperinflation in patients with COPD. A higher
adiponectin level predicted more favourable relief of symptoms and hyperinflation
during glucocorticoid treatment. Adiponectin may have a role in the COPD
pathogenesis; it may also be a biomarker of disease severity and treatment
responses in this disease.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2013.08.016 
PMID: 24135487  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Thorax. 2013 Nov;68(11):1029-36. doi: 10.1136/thoraxjnl-2012-202872.

Inhaled corticosteroids in COPD and the risk of serious pneumonia.

Suissa S(1), Patenaude V, Lapi F, Ernst P.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Epidemiology and Biostatistics and of Medicine, Center for
Clinical Epidemiology, Lady Davis Research Institute, Jewish General Hospital,
McGill University, , Montreal, Québec, Canada.

Comment in
    Evid Based Med. 2014 Jun;19(3):116.
    Dtsch Med Wochenschr. 2014 Jan;139(3):76.
    Praxis (Bern 1994). 2014 Apr 23;103(9):539.

BACKGROUND: Inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) are known to increase the risk of
pneumonia in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). It is
unclear whether the risk of pneumonia varies for different inhaled agents,
particularly fluticasone and budesonide, and increases with the dose and
long-term duration of use.
METHODS: We formed a new-user cohort of patients with COPD treated during
1990-2005. Subjects were identified using the Quebec health insurance databases
and followed through 2007 or until a serious pneumonia event, defined as a first 
hospitalisation for or death from pneumonia. A nested case-control analysis was
used to estimate the rate ratio (RR) of serious pneumonia associated with current
ICS use, adjusted for age, sex, respiratory disease severity and comorbidity.
RESULTS: The cohort included 163 514 patients, of which 20 344 had a serious
pneumonia event during the 5.4 years of follow-up (incidence rate 2.4/100/year). 
Current use of ICS was associated with a 69% increase in the rate of serious
pneumonia (RR 1.69; 95% CI 1.63 to 1.75). The risk was sustained with long-term
use and declined gradually after stopping ICS use, disappearing after 6 months
(RR 1.08; 95% CI 0.99 to 1.17). The rate of serious pneumonia was higher with
fluticasone (RR 2.01; 95% CI 1.93 to 2.10), increasing with the daily dose, but
was much lower with budesonide (RR 1.17; 95% CI 1.09 to 1.26).
CONCLUSIONS: ICS use by patients with COPD increases the risk of serious
pneumonia. The risk is particularly elevated and dose related with fluticasone.
While residual confounding cannot be ruled out, the results are consistent with
those from recent randomised trials.

DOI: 10.1136/thoraxjnl-2012-202872 
PMCID: PMC3812880
PMID: 24130228  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2013;8:453-9. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S48298. Epub
2013 Oct 3.

A study to assess COPD Symptom-based Management and to Optimise treatment
Strategy in Japan (COSMOS-J) based on GOLD 2011.

Betsuyaku T(1), Kato M, Fujimoto K, Hagan G, Kobayashi A, Hitosugi H, James M,
Jones PW.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary Medicine, Department of Medicine, Keio University,
Tokyo, Japan.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: The Global initiative for chronic Obstructive Lung
Disease (GOLD) Committee has proposed a chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD) assessment framework focused on symptoms and on exacerbation risk. This
study will evaluate a symptom and exacerbation risk-based treatment strategy
based on GOLD in a real-world setting in Japan. Optimal management of COPD will
be determined by assessing symptoms using the COPD Assessment Test (CAT) and by
assessing the frequency of exacerbations.
METHODS: This study (ClinicalTrials.gov identifier: NCT01762800) is a 24-week,
multicenter, randomized, double-blind, double-dummy, parallel-group study. It
aims to recruit 400 patients with moderate-to-severe COPD. Patients will be
randomized to receive treatment with either salmeterol/fluticasone propionate
(SFC) 50/250 μg twice daily or with tiotropium bromide 18 μg once daily. Optimal 
management of patients will be assessed at four-weekly intervals and, if patients
remain symptomatic, as measured using the CAT, or experience an exacerbation,
they have the option to step up to treatment with both drugs, ie, SFC twice daily
and tiotropium once daily (TRIPLE therapy). The primary endpoint of the study
will be the proportion of patients who are able to remain on the randomized
therapy.
RESULTS: No data are available. This paper summarizes the methodology of the
study in advance of the study starting.
CONCLUSION: The results of this study will help physicians to understand whether 
TRIPLE therapy is more effective than either treatment strategy alone in
controlling symptoms and exacerbations in patients with moderate-to-severe COPD. 
It will also help physicians to understand the GOLD recommendation work in Japan.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S48298 
PMCID: PMC3795054
PMID: 24124358  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Eur Respir J. 2014 Mar;43(3):763-72. doi: 10.1183/09031936.00054213. Epub 2013
Oct 10.

A comparison of the efficacy and safety of once-daily fluticasone
furoate/vilanterol with twice-daily fluticasone propionate/salmeterol in moderate
to very severe COPD.

Agustí A(1), de Teresa L, De Backer W, Zvarich MT, Locantore N, Barnes N,
Bourbeau J, Crim C.

Author information: 
(1)Hospital Clinic, IDIBAPS, University of Barcelona, Barcelona.

Fluticasone furoate/vilanterol trifenatate (FF/VI) is a once-daily inhaled
corticosteroid/long-acting β₂-agonist combination in development for chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) treatment. We compared the efficacy and
safety of FF/VI versus fluticasone propionate/salmeterol (FP/SAL) twice daily
over 12 weeks. Moderate to very severe COPD patients received FF/VI 100/25 μg
once daily in the morning (n=266) or FP/SAL 500/50 μg twice daily (n=262). The
primary end-point was a change from baseline in 0-24 h weighted mean forced
expiratory volume in 1 s (wmFEV₁) at 12 weeks. Additional end-points included
time to 100 mL improvement from baseline on day 1 and a change from baseline in
St George's Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ). Safety was also assessed. wmFEV₁
(mean 130 mL) was greater and time to 100 mL improvement shorter (median 16 min) 
with FF/VI than FP/SAL (weighted mean 108 mL, median 28 min). Health status (SGRQ
total score) improved in both groups (FF/VI -4.3 units, FP/SAL -3.0 units).
Differences between treatments were not statistically significant. Six patients
in the FF/VI (2%) and three in the FP/SAL (1%) arm experienced serious adverse
events, none of which were considered to be drug related. Improvements in lung
function and health status were not significantly different between FF/VI 100/25 
μg once daily and FP/SAL 500/50 μg twice daily; there was no apparent difference 
between the safety profiles of either therapy.

DOI: 10.1183/09031936.00054213 
PMID: 24114969  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. J Aerosol Med Pulm Drug Deliv. 2014 Aug;27(4):279-89. doi:
10.1089/jamp.2013.1040. Epub 2013 Sep 28.

Pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of fluticasone propionate and salmeterol
delivered as a combination dry powder from a capsule-based inhaler and a
multidose inhaler in asthma and COPD patients.

Daley-Yates PT(1), Mehta R, Chan RH, Despa SX, Louey MD.

Author information: 
(1)1 GlaxoSmithKline , Stockley Park, Uxbridge, UK .

BACKGROUND: The object of this study was to assess whether a capsule-based and
multidose dry powder inhaler containing salmeterol (as xinafoate salt) 50 μg plus
fluticasone propionate (FP) 250 μg [combination (SFC 50/250)] could be equivalent
in terms of in vivo drug delivery and systemic exposure.
METHODS: This was a randomized, double-blind, double-dummy, replicate treatment
design comparative bioavailability study of SFC 50/250 delivered in a
capsule-based inhaler (Rotahaler®) and a multidose dry powder inhaler (Diskus®). 
Subjects with asthma or chronic obstructive pulmonary (COPD) disease (n=60) were 
randomized to receive twice-daily SFC 50/250 via a Rotahaler and via Diskus each 
for two 10-day treatment periods (GlaxoSmithKline Protocol ASR114334).
RESULTS: For FP and salmeterol, the in vitro aerodynamic particle size profiles
were within±15% of Diskus for the fine particle mass (FPM) and emitted dose (ED) 
using the Andersen Cascade Impactor, and ED, mass median aerodynamic diameter,
and geometric standard deviation using the New Generation Impactor (NGI). This
was also the case for FP but not salmeterol for FPM and fine particle dose using 
the NGI. For the combined asthma and COPD subjects, the plasma AUC and Cmax for
FP and salmeterol were higher for Rotahaler:Rotahaler/Diskus geometric mean
ratios (90% confidence intervals) for FP AUC0-τ of 1.52 (1.37-1.67) and Cmax of
1.94 (1.75-2.10) and salmeterol AUC0-τ of 1.15 (1.09-1.21) and Cmax of 1.56
(1.42-1.67). Corresponding values for the primary pharmacodynamic endpoint,
weighted mean (0-12 hr) serum cortisol, were 0.928 (0.886-0.971). Inhaled
FP/salmeterol via both inhalers was well-tolerated. One serious adverse event,
considered possibly related to study medication, resulted in subject withdrawal
from the study.
CONCLUSIONS: The in vitro tests and systemic pharmacodynamic endpoints revealed
no major differences between the two inhalers, but lacked predictive power and
sensitivity to guide in vivo drug delivery performance and systemic exposure.
Based on pharmacokinetic endpoints, the inhalers were not considered
bioequivalent in terms of systemic exposure. Further studies to refine the
Rotahaler performance are ongoing.

DOI: 10.1089/jamp.2013.1040 
PMID: 24074143  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2013 Nov;132(5):1166-73. doi: 10.1016/j.jaci.2013.07.038.
Epub 2013 Sep 23.

Inhaled long-acting β2 agonists enhance glucocorticoid receptor nuclear
translocation and efficacy in sputum macrophages in COPD.

Haque R(1), Hakim A, Moodley T, Torrego A, Essilfie-Quaye S, Jazrawi E, Johnson
M, Barnes PJ, Adcock IM, Usmani OS.

Author information: 
(1)Airway Disease Section, National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College
London and Royal Brompton Hospital, London, United Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: Combination inhaled therapy with long-acting β2 agonists (LABAs) and 
corticosteroids is beneficial in treating asthma and chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD).
OBJECTIVE: In asthma, LABAs enhance glucocorticoid receptor (GR) nuclear
translocation in the presence of corticosteroids. Whether this biological
mechanism occurs in COPD, a relatively corticosteroid-resistant disease, is
uncertain.
METHODS: Eight patients with mild/moderate COPD participated in a double-blind,
placebo-controlled, crossover study and inhaled single doses of fluticasone
propionate (FP) 100 μg, FP 500 μg, salmeterol xinafoate (SLM) 50 μg, and
combination FP 100 μg + SLM 50 μg. One hour postinhalation, sputum was induced,
nuclear proteins isolated from purified macrophages, and levels of activated
nuclear GR quantified by using a GR-glucocorticoid response element ELISA-based
assay.
RESULTS: Nuclear GR significantly increased after the inhalation of FP 500 μg (P 
< .01), but not after the inhalation of FP 100 μg or SLM 50 μg, compared with
placebo. Interestingly, SLM in combination with FP 100 μg increased nuclear GR
levels equivalent to those of FP 500 μg alone. This was significantly greater
than either FP 100 μg (P < .05) or SLM 50 μg (P < .01) alone. In vitro in a human
macrophage cell line, SLM (10(-8) mol/L) enhanced FP (10(-9) mol/L)-induced
mitogen-activated protein kinase phosphatase-1 mRNA (5.8 ± 0.6 vs 8.4 ± 1.1 ×
10(-6) copies, P < .05) and 2 × glucocorticoid response element-luciferase
reporter gene activity (250.1 ± 15.6 vs 103.1 ± 23.6-fold induction, P < .001).
Addition of SLM (10(-9) mol/L) to FP (10(-11) mol/L) significantly enhanced
FP-mediated suppression of IL-1β-induced CXCL8 (P < .05).
CONCLUSIONS: Addition of SLM 50 μg to FP 100 μg enhanced GR nuclear translocation
equivalent to that seen with a 5-fold higher dose of FP in sputum macrophages
from patients with COPD. This may account for the superior clinical effects of
combination LABA/corticosteroid treatment compared with either as monotherapy
observed in COPD.

Copyright © 2013 American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. Published by
Mosby, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaci.2013.07.038 
PMID: 24070494  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. P T. 2013 Jul;38(7):389-403.

Pharmaceutical approval update.

Goldenberg MM.

Fluticasone furoate/vilanterol inhalation powder (Breo Ellipta) for chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease; atorvastatin/ezetimibe tablets (Liptruzet) for
reducing low-density lipoproteincholesterol; and radium 223 dichloride (Xofigo)
injection for late-stage, castrationresistant prostate cancer.


PMCID: PMC3776487
PMID: 24049424  [PubMed]


192. Respirology. 2013 Nov;18(8):1165-6. doi: 10.1111/resp.12180.

Are salmeterol's beneficial effects on corticosteroid action in the airways
executed at the epithelial barrier?

Heijink IH(1), van den Berge M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Allergology and Pulmonary Diseases, University of Groningen,
Groningen, The Netherlands; Department of Pathology and Medical Biology,
University Medical Center Groningen, University of Groningen, Groningen, The
Netherlands; GRIAC Research Institute, Groningen, The Netherlands.

Comment on
    Respirology. 2013 Nov;18(8):1197-201.

DOI: 10.1111/resp.12180 
PMID: 24033891  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2013 Oct 15;305(8):L582-9. doi:
10.1152/ajplung.00152.2013. Epub 2013 Aug 30.

Differential effects of fluticasone on extracellular matrix production by airway 
and parenchymal fibroblasts in severe COPD.

Brandsma CA(1), Timens W, Jonker MR, Rutgers B, Noordhoek JA, Postma DS.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Pathology and Medical Biology, Univ. Medical Center Groningen, P.O.
Box 30.001, 9700 RB, Groningen, the Netherlands. c.a.brandsma@umcg.nl.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is characterized by abnormal repair 
in the lung resulting in airway obstruction associated with emphysema and
peripheral airway fibrosis. Because the presence and degree of airways disease
and emphysema varies between COPD patients, this may explain the heterogeneity in
the response to treatment. It is currently unknown whether and to what extent
inhaled steroids can affect the abnormal repair process in the airways and lung
parenchyma in COPD. We investigated the effects of fluticasone on transforming
growth factor (TGF)-β- and cigarette smoke-induced changes in mothers against
decapentaplegic homolog (Smad) signaling and extracellular matrix (ECM)
production in airway and parenchymal lung fibroblasts from patients with severe
COPD. We showed that TGF-β-induced ECM production by pulmonary fibroblasts, but
not activation of the Smad pathway, was sensitive to the effects of fluticasone. 
Fluticasone induced decorin production by airway fibroblasts and partly reversed 
the negative effects of TGF-β treatment. Fluticasone inhibited biglycan
production in both airway and parenchymal fibroblasts and procollagen 1
production only in parenchymal fibroblasts, thereby restoring the basal
difference in procollagen 1 production between airway and parenchymal
fibroblasts. Our findings suggest that the effects of steroids on the airway
compartment may be beneficial for patients with severe COPD, i.e., restoration of
decorin loss around the airways, whereas the effects of steroids on the
parenchyma may be detrimental, since the tissue repair response, i.e., biglycan
and procollagen production, is inhibited. More research is needed to further
disentangle these differential effects of steroid treatment on the different lung
compartments and its impact on tissue repair and remodeling in COPD.

DOI: 10.1152/ajplung.00152.2013 
PMID: 23997174  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Med Lett Drugs Ther. 2013 Sep 2;55(1424):69-71, 45-8.

Breo Ellipta: An Inhaled Fluticasone/ Vilanterol Combination for COPD.

[Article in English, French]

[No authors listed]


PMID: 26839934  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2013 Aug 30;(8):CD006826. doi:
10.1002/14651858.CD006826.pub2.

Combined corticosteroid and long-acting beta(2)-agonist in one inhaler versus
inhaled corticosteroids alone for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Nannini LJ(1), Poole P, Milan SJ, Kesterton A.

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary Section, Hospital E Peron, Ruta 11 Y Jm Estrada, G. Baigorria, Santa
Fe - Rosario, Argentina, 2152.

Update of
    Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2007;(4):CD006826.

BACKGROUND: Both long-acting beta(2)-agonists and inhaled corticosteroids have
been recommended in guidelines for the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD). Their co-administration in a combined inhaler is intended to
facilitate adherence to medication regimens and to improve efficacy. Three
preparations are currently available: fluticasone propionate/salmeterol (FPS).
budesonide/formoterol (BDF) and mometasone furoate/formoterol (MF/F).
OBJECTIVES: To assess the efficacy and safety of combined long-acting
beta2-agonist and inhaled corticosteroid (LABA/ICS) preparations, as measured by 
clinical endpoints and pulmonary function testing, compared with inhaled
corticosteroids (ICS) alone, in the treatment of adults with chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD).
SEARCH METHODS: We searched the Cochrane Airways Group Specialised Register of
trials, which is compiled from systematic searches of multiple literature
databases. The search was conducted in June 2013. In addition, we checked the
reference lists of included studies and contacted the relevant manufacturers.
SELECTION CRITERIA: Studies were included if they were randomised and
double-blind. Compared studies combined LABA/ICS with the ICS component.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Two review authors independently assessed trial
quality and extracted data. The primary outcomes were exacerbations, mortality
and pneumonia. Health-related quality of life (as measured by validated scales), 
lung function and side effects were secondary outcomes. Dichotomous data were
analysed as fixed-effect odds ratios with 95% confidence intervals (CIs), and
continuous data as mean differences or rate ratios and 95% CIs.
MAIN RESULTS: A total of 15 studies of good methodological quality met the
inclusion criteria by randomly assigning 7814 participants with predominantly
poorly reversible, severe COPD. Data were most plentiful for the FPS combination.
Exacerbation rates were significantly reduced with combination therapies (rate
ratio 0.87, 95% CI 0.80 to 0.94, 6 studies, N = 5601) compared with ICS alone.
The mean exacerbation rate in the control (ICS) arms of the six included studies 
was 1.21 exacerbations per participant per year (range 0.88 to 1.60), and we
would expect this to be reduced to a rate of 1.05 (95% CI 0.97 to 1.14) among
those given combination therapy. Mortality was also lower with the combination
(odds ratio (OR) 0.78, 95% CI 0.64 to 0.94, 12 studies, N = 7518) than with ICS
alone, but this was heavily weighted by a three-year study of FPS. When this
study was removed, no significant mortality difference was noted. The reduction
in exacerbations did not translate into significantly reduced rates of
hospitalisation due to COPD exacerbation (OR 0.93, 95% CI 0.80 to 1.07, 10
studies, N = 7060). Lung function data favoured combination treatment in the FPS,
BDF and MF/F trials, but the improvement was small. Small improvements in
health-related quality of life were measured on the St George's Respiratory
Questionnaire (SGRQ) with FPS or BDF compared with ICS, but this was well below
the minimum clinically important difference. Adverse event profiles were similar 
between the two treatments arms, and rates of pneumonia when it was diagnosed by 
chest x-ray (CXR) were lower than those reported in earlier trials.
AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: Combination ICS and LABA offer some clinical benefits in
COPD compared with ICS alone, especially for reduction in exacerbations. This
review does not support the use of ICS alone when LABAs are available. Adverse
events were not significantly different between treatments. Further long-term
assessments using practical outcomes of current and new 24-hour LABAs will help
determine their efficacy and safety. For robust comparisons as to their relative 
effects, long-term head-to-head comparisons are needed.

DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD006826.pub2 
PMID: 23990350  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Respiration. 2013;86(4):275-6. doi: 10.1159/000353553. Epub 2013 Aug 28.

Do we need three players in COPD treatment?

Maestrelli P(1), Mason P, Costa F, Paggiaro P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiologic, Thoracic and Vascular Sciences, University of
Padua, Padua, Italy.

Comment on
    Respiration. 2013;86(4):280-7.

DOI: 10.1159/000353553 
PMID: 23988429  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. FASEB J. 2013 Nov;27(11):4510-9. doi: 10.1096/fj.12-222604. Epub 2013 Aug 9.

Importin-7 mediates glucocorticoid receptor nuclear import and is impaired by
oxidative stress, leading to glucocorticoid insensitivity.

Hakim A(1), Barnes PJ, Adcock IM, Usmani OS.

Author information: 
(1)1National Heart and Lung Institute, Airway Disease Section, Imperial College
London and Royal Brompton Hospital, Dovehouse St., London, SW3 6LY, UK.
a.hakim08@imperial.ac.uk.

Some patients with severe inflammatory disease fail to respond to
glucocorticoids, and oxidative stress contributes to this insensitivity. Importin
receptors are associated with nuclear translocation of the glucocorticoid
receptor (GR), which is essential for glucocorticoid function. We hypothesized
that importin-7 is central to GR nuclear translocation and glucocorticoid
sensitivity. We investigated the effects of importin-7 siRNA on fluticasone
propionate (FP)-induced GR nuclear localization and suppression of IL-1β-induced 
CXCL8 and the effects of hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) plus IL-1β costimulation on
importin-7 expression, function, and glucocorticoid responsiveness in a human
macrophagecell line (U937). H2O2 significantly reduced FP-induced GR nuclear
localization (3.4±0.51- vs. 5.7±0.85-fold increase, P<0.05) and suppression of
IL-1β-induced CXCL8 (62.3±2.3 vs. 85.1±7.0%, P<0.05). Knockdown of importin-7 by 
38.4 ± 11.5% (compared with control siRNA) significantly reduced FP-mediated GR
nuclear localization (3.5±0.5- vs. 5.7±0.85-fold increase, P<0.05) and
suppression of IL-1β-induced CXCL8 expression (40.2±16.1 vs. 68.4±3.0%, P<0.05). 
H2O2 plus IL-1β had no direct effect on importin-7 but caused a significant loss 
(61.2±12.6% compared with baseline) of nuclear RanGTP, an essential cofactor for 
importin-7-mediated nuclear import of cargo proteins. The importin-7 complex is
essential for glucocorticoid function, and the expression of its cofactor RanGTP 
is reduced during oxidative stress-induced glucocorticoid insensitivity.

DOI: 10.1096/fj.12-222604 
PMID: 23934279  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Thorax. 2014 Jan;69(1):14-23. doi: 10.1136/thoraxjnl-2012-202878. Epub 2013 Aug
7.

Airway gene expression in COPD is dynamic with inhaled corticosteroid treatment
and reflects biological pathways associated with disease activity.

van den Berge M(1), Steiling K, Timens W, Hiemstra PS, Sterk PJ, Heijink IH, Liu 
G, Alekseyev YO, Lenburg ME, Spira A, Postma DS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonary Diseases, University of Groningen, University Medical 
Center Groningen, , Groningen, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: A core feature of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is the
accelerated decline in forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV1). The recent 
Groningen and Leiden Universities study of Corticosteroids in Obstructive Lung
Disease (GLUCOLD) study suggested that particular phenotypes of COPD benefit from
fluticasone±salmeterol by reducing the rate of FEV1 decline, yet the underlying
mechanisms are unknown.
METHODS: Whole-genome gene expression profiling using the Affymetrix Gene ST
array (V.1.0) was performed on 221 bronchial biopsies available from 89 COPD
patients at baseline and after 6 and 30 months of fluticasone±salmeterol and
placebo treatment in GLUCOLD.
RESULTS: Linear mixed effects modelling revealed that the expression of 138 genes
decreased, whereas the expression of 140 genes significantly upregulated after
both 6 and 30 months of treatment with fluticasone±salmeterol versus placebo. A
more pronounced treatment-induced change in the expression of 50 and 55 of these 
278 genes was associated with a lower rate of decline in FEV1 and Saint George
Respiratory Questionnaire, respectively. Genes decreasing with treatment were
involved in pathways related to cell cycle, oxidative phosphorylation, epithelial
cell signalling, p53 signalling and T cell signalling. Genes increasing with
treatment were involved in pathways related to focal adhesion, gap junction and
extracellular matrix deposition. Finally, the fluticasone-induced gene expression
changes were enriched among genes that change in the airway epithelium in smokers
with versus without COPD in an independent data set.
CONCLUSIONS: The present study suggests that gene expression in biological
pathways of COPD is dynamic with treatment and reflects disease activity. This
study opens the gate to targeted and molecular phenotype-driven therapy of COPD.

DOI: 10.1136/thoraxjnl-2012-202878 
PMCID: PMC3888587
PMID: 23925644  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Eur Respir J. 2013 Aug;42(2):539-41. doi: 10.1183/09031936.00074113.

Effect of fluticasone propionate/salmeterol plus tiotropium versus tiotropium on 
walking endurance in COPD.

Maltais F, Mahler DA, Pepin V, Nadreau E, Crater GD, Morris AN, Emmett AH, Ferro 
TJ.

DOI: 10.1183/09031936.00074113 
PMID: 23904549  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Expert Opin Pharmacother. 2013 Oct;14(14):1993-2002. doi:
10.1517/14656566.2013.823949. Epub 2013 Jul 31.

Evaluation of salmeterol xinafoate plus fluticasone propionate for the treatment 
of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Restrepo RD(1), Tate A, Coquat J.

Author information: 
(1)The University of Texas Health Science Center, Department of Respiratory Care 
, MSC 6248, San Antonio TX 78229 , USA restrepor@uthscsa.edu.

INTRODUCTION: Current clinical guidelines recommend long-acting bronchodilators
as the mainstay of the pharmacotherapy of patients with chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD). Inhaled corticosteroids (ICS), in conjunction with
long-acting beta-agonists (LABA), are routinely considered at severe and very
severe stages of COPD when patients lack adequate response to single-therapy with
LABAs. Although the study methodologies evaluating the clinical effectiveness of 
the combination therapy using salmeterol and fluticasone (SAL/FLU) for patients
with COPD have been questioned, a number of studies have suggested that using
ICS, in combination with a LABA agent, may improve survival of patients with
COPD.
AREAS COVERED: This article attempts to review the most current evidence for
using SAL/FLU in the management of COPD and summarizes the results of outcome
measures reported in randomized controlled trials.
EXPERT OPINION: Until new forms of drug combinations are made available, the use 
of dual-therapy containing a LABA and ICS remain as the most logical and
appropriate approach for the treatment of patients suffering from severe and very
severe COPD with repeated exacerbations.

DOI: 10.1517/14656566.2013.823949 
PMID: 23898819  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Am J Rhinol Allergy. 2013 Jul-Aug;27(4):273-7. doi: 10.2500/ajra.2013.27.3887.

Effect of nasal anti-inflammatory treatment in chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease.

Callebaut I(1), Hox V, Bobic S, Bullens DM, Janssens W, Dupont L, Hellings PW.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Immunology, Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Catholic
University of Leuven, Belgium.

BACKGROUND: Sinonasal inflammation and symptoms are often underdiagnosed in
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) patients. So far, it is not known to
what extent anti-inflammatory nasal treatment may reduce sinonasal symptoms in
COPD patients. This study was designed to examine the effects of nasal
anti-inflammatory treatment on sinonasal symptoms and cough in COPD patients.
METHODS: Thirty-three COPD patients on stable bronchial therapy
(salmeterol/fluticasone propionate 50/500 mg b.i.d. for >6 weeks) were randomized
to receive fluticasone furoate (FF) or placebo nasal spray at 110 μg once daily
for 12 weeks. Sinonasal symptoms and cough were monitored at baseline, at 6 and12
weeks of treatment, and at 4 weeks after cessation of the treatment using a
visual analog scale. Levels of cytokines were measured in nasal secretions.
RESULTS: In contrast to the placebo group (n = 13), FF patients (n = 14) reported
less nasal blockage (10.62 ± 4.21 mm versus 36.57 ± 8.01 mm; p = 0.0026),
postnasal drip (1.46 ± 0.29 score versus 2.83 ± 0.38 score; p = 0.03), and nasal 
discharge (0.23 ± 0.12 score versus 1.77 ± 0.43 score; p = 0.01) after 6 weeks of
treatment compared with baseline, which was still present at 12 weeks. FF
patients reported less cough compared with baseline (25.54 ± 4.46 mm versus 36.79
± 5.75 mm; p = 0.04), which was not the case in the placebo group (49.58 ± 10.44 
mm versus 42.00 ± 8.05 mm; p = 0.38). Nine of 14 patients in the FF group (64%)
reported slight to total relief of nasal symptoms, and this subgroup had a
significant decrease in IL-8 levels in nasal secretions after 6 weeks of
treatment (850.7 ± 207.2 pg/mL versus 1608 ± 696.5 pg/mL; p = 0.03) compared with
baseline.
CONCLUSION: Nasal FF treatment in COPD patients significantly reduced sinonasal
symptoms, in parallel with reduced IL-8 in nasal secretion levels and cough.

DOI: 10.2500/ajra.2013.27.3887 
PMID: 23883807  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Respiration. 2013;86(4):280-7. doi: 10.1159/000351116. Epub 2013 Jul 20.

Effects of tiotropium and salmeterol/fluticasone propionate on airway wall
thickness in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Hoshino M(1), Ohtawa J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Atami Hospital, International University
of Health and Welfare, Atami, Japan.

Comment in
    Respiration. 2013;86(4):275-6.

BACKGROUND: Triple inhalation therapy with tiotropium (Tio) and
salmeterol/fluticasone propionate combination (SFC) is widely used in the
treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). However, the effects
of triple therapy on airway structural changes remain unknown.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of the study was to assess the effects of Tio, salmeterol
(SM), SFC and Tio plus SFC on airway dimensions in COPD.
METHODS: A randomized, open-label, 4-way study (n = 60) was conducted comparing
16-week treatment periods of Tio (18 μg once daily), SM (50 μg twice daily), SFC 
(50/250 μg twice daily) and Tio (18 μg once daily) plus SFC (50/250 μg twice
daily). Airway dimensions were assessed by a validated CT technique, and airway
wall area (WA) corrected for body surface area (BSA), percentage WA (WA%), wall
thickness/√BSA and luminal area (Ai)/BSA at the right apical segmental bronchus
were measured. Pulmonary function and the St. George's Respiratory Questionnaire 
(SGRQ) were evaluated.
RESULTS: Tio plus SFC resulted in a significant decrease in WA corrected for BSA 
and WA% compared with Tio, SM and SFC (p < 0.05 for all). The changes in WA% and 
Ai/BSA were significantly correlated with changes in forced expiratory volume in 
1 s (r = -0.86, p < 0.001, and r = 0.48, p < 0.05, respectively). There were more
significant improvements in SGRQ scores after treatment with triple therapy than 
after the 3 other treatments.
CONCLUSIONS: Tio plus SFC therapy is more effective than Tio, SM and SFC for
reducing airway wall thickness in COPD.

Copyright © 2013 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000351116 
PMID: 23880883  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2013;8:295-304. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S42366. Epub
2013 Jun 27.

Inhaled corticosteroid use in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
and the risk of pneumonia: a retrospective claims data analysis.

Yawn BP(1), Li Y, Tian H, Zhang J, Arcona S, Kahler KH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Research, Olmsted Medical Center, Rochester, MN 55904, USA.
byawn@olmmed.org

BACKGROUND: The use of inhaled corticosteroids in patients with chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) has been associated with an increased risk
of pneumonia in controlled clinical trials and case-control analyses.
OBJECTIVE: Using claims databases as a research model of real-world diagnosis and
treatment, to determine if the use and dose of inhaled corticosteroids (ICS)
among patients with newly diagnosed COPD are associated with increased risk of
pneumonia.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: This was a retrospective cohort analysis of patients
diagnosed with COPD between January 01, 2006 and September 30, 2010, drawn from
databases (years 2006-2010). Patients (aged ≥45 years) were followed until first 
pneumonia diagnosis, end of benefit enrollment, or December 31, 2010, whichever
was earliest. A Cox proportional hazard model was used to assess the association 
of ICS use and risk of pneumonia, controlling for baseline characteristics. Daily
ICS use was classified into low, medium, and high doses (1 μg-499 μg, 500 μg-999 
μg, and ≥1000 μg fluticasone equivalents daily) and was modeled as a
time-dependent variable.
RESULTS: Among 135,445 qualifying patients with a total of 243,097 person-years, 
there were 1020 pneumonia incidences out of 5677 person-years on ICS (crude
incidence rate, 0.180 per person-year), and 27,730 pneumonia incidences out of
237,420 person-years not on ICS (crude incidence rate, 0.117 per person-year).
ICS use was associated with a dose-related increase in risk of pneumonia, with
adjusted hazard ratios (versus no use; (95% confidence interval) of 1.38
(1.27-1.49) for low-dose users, 1.69 (1.52-1.88) for medium-dose users, and 2.57 
(1.98-3.33) for high-dose users (P < 0.01 versus no use and between doses).
CONCLUSION: The use of ICS in newly diagnosed patients with COPD is potentially
associated with a dose-related increase in the risk of pneumonia.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S42366 
PMCID: PMC3699136
PMID: 23836970  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2013 May 31;(5):CD007891. doi:
10.1002/14651858.CD007891.pub3.

Combination inhaled steroid and long-acting beta2-agonist versus tiotropium for
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Welsh EJ(1), Cates CJ, Poole P.

Author information: 
(1)Population Health Sciences and Education, St George’s University of London,
London, UK. ewelsh@sgul.ac.uk.

Update of
    Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2010;(5):CD007891.

BACKGROUND: Combination therapy (inhaled corticosteroids and long-acting
beta2-agonists) and tiotropium are both used in the treatment of chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). There is uncertainty about the relative
benefits and harms of these treatments.
OBJECTIVES: To compare the relative effects of inhaled combination therapy and
tiotropium on markers of exacerbations, symptoms, quality of life, lung function,
pneumonia and serious adverse events in patients with chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease.
SEARCH METHODS: We searched the Cochrane Airways Group Specialised Register of
trials (November 2012) and reference lists of articles. We also contacted authors
of the studies.
SELECTION CRITERIA: We included only parallel, randomised controlled trials
comparing inhaled combination corticosteroid and long-acting beta2-agonist
against inhaled tiotropium bromide.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Two authors independently assessed trials for
inclusion and then extracted data on trial quality and outcome results. We
contacted study authors for additional information. We resolved discrepancies
through discussion.
MAIN RESULTS: One large, two-year trial (INSPIRE) and two smaller, shorter trials
on a total of 1528 participants were found. The results from these trials were
not pooled. The number of withdrawals from each arm of the INSPIRE trial was
large and imbalanced and outcome data were not collected for patients who
withdrew, raising concerns about the reliability of data from this study.In
INSPIRE, there were more deaths on tiotropium than on fluticasone/salmeterol
(Peto odds ratio (OR) 0.55; 95% confidence interval (CI) 0.33 to 0.93). This was 
a statistically significant difference, however the number of withdrawals from
each of the arms was 11 times larger than the observed number of deaths for
participants on fluticasone/salmeterol and seven times larger for participants on
tiotropium. There were more all-cause hospital admissions in patients on
fluticasone/salmeterol than those on tiotropium in INSPIRE (Peto OR 1.32; 95% CI 
1.04 to 1.67). There was no statistically significant difference in hospital
admissions due to exacerbations, the primary outcome of INSPIRE. There was no
significant difference in exacerbations in patients on fluticasone/salmeterol
compared to tiotropium when compared as either an odds ratio or a rate ratio
(mean number of exacerbations per patient per year). Exacerbations requiring
treatment with oral corticosteroids were less frequent in patients on
fluticasone/salmeterol (rate ratio 0.81; 95% CI 0.67 to 0.99). Conversely
exacerbations requiring treatment with antibiotics were more frequent in patients
treated with fluticasone/salmeterol (rate ratio 1.19; 95% CI 1.02 to 1.38). There
were more cases of pneumonia in patients on fluticasone/salmeterol than in those 
on tiotropium (Peto OR 2.13; 95% CI 1.33 to 3.40). Confidence intervals for these
outcomes do not reflect the additional uncertainty arising from unknown outcome
data for patients who withdrew.
AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: Since the proportion of missing outcome data compared to
the observed outcome data is enough to induce a clinically relevant bias in the
intervention effect, the relative efficacy and safety of combined inhalers and
tiotropium remains uncertain. Further large, long-term randomised controlled
trials comparing combination therapy to tiotropium are required, including
adequate follow-up of all participants randomised (similar to the procedures
undertaken in TORCH and UPLIFT). Additional studies comparing alternative inhaled
long-acting beta2-agonist/steroid combination therapies with tiotropium are also 
required.

DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD007891.pub3 
PMID: 23728670  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Am J Health Syst Pharm. 2013 Jun 15;70(12):1008. doi: 10.2146/news130042.

Fluticasone-vilanterol combination approved for COPD.

Traynor K.

DOI: 10.2146/news130042 
PMID: 23719869  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Clin Pharmacokinet. 2013 Oct;52(10):885-96. doi: 10.1007/s40262-013-0078-1.

The relationship between fluticasone furoate systemic exposure and cortisol
suppression.

Allen A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Pharmacology Modelling and Simulation, GlaxoSmithKline R&D,
Stevenage, Hertfordshire, SG1 2NY, UK, ann.allen@gsk.com.

INTRODUCTION: The inhaled corticosteroid (ICS) fluticasone furoate is in
development, in combination with the long-acting beta2-agonist vilanterol for the
once-daily treatment of asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and as a
monotherapy treatment for asthma. Corticosteroids, including ICSs, have the
potential to induce dose-dependent systemic effects on the
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis. Cortisol suppression has been observed
in asthma patients with normal HPA axis function at baseline on receiving high
doses of ICSs, and is associated with adverse effects on a number of
physiological processes. The measurement of 24-h serum cortisol and 24-h urinary 
cortisol excretion are sensitive methods for assessing adrenocortical activity,
and can evaluate cortisol suppression in a dose-dependent manner.
OBJECTIVE: The purpose of the meta-analysis presented here was to characterize
the population pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic relationship between fluticasone
furoate systemic exposure [as measured by area under the concentration-time curve
over 24 h postdose (AUC24)] and both 24-h weighted mean serum cortisol (WM24) and
24-h urine cortisol excretion in healthy subjects and subjects with asthma.
METHODS: The serum cortisol meta-analysis integrated eight studies; five Phase I 
studies in healthy subjects, two Phase IIa studies, and one Phase III study in
subjects with asthma. Each study included serial blood sampling for estimation of
WM24. The urine cortisol meta-analysis integrated three studies: one Phase I
study in healthy subjects, and one Phase IIb and one Phase III study in subjects 
with asthma. Each study included complete 0-24 h urine collection for estimation 
of urine cortisol excretion. All studies included blood sampling for estimation
of fluticasone furoate AUC24. A sigmoid maximum effect (E max) model was fitted
to fluticasone furoate AUC24 and serum cortisol and urine cortisol data using
nonlinear mixed-effect modeling with the computer program NONMEM(®).
RESULTS: Over a wide range of systemic fluticasone furoate exposure representing 
the therapeutic and supratherapeutic range, the relationship between fluticasone 
furoate AUC24 and WM24 and 24-h urine cortisol excretion was well described by an
E max model. The average estimate of AUC producing 50 % of maximum effect (AUC50)
was similar for the serum cortisol and urine cortisol models with values of 1,556
and 1,686 pg · h/mL, respectively. Although formulation/inhaler was shown to be a
significant covariate on the estimates of both WM24 at zero concentration (C0)
and AUC50 in the serum cortisol model, the differences were small and believed to
be due to study variability. Age was shown to be a significant covariate on the
estimates of both C 0 and AUC50 in the urine cortisol model, and was considered
to be a reflection of lower urine cortisol excretion in adolescents.
CONCLUSION: A pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic model has been established over a
wide range of systemic fluticasone furoate exposure representing the therapeutic 
and supratherapeutic range to both WM24 and 24-h urine cortisol excretion. The
values of AUC50 of 1,556 and 1,686 pg·h/mL, respectively, are several times
higher than average fluticasone furoate AUC24 values observed at clinical doses
of fluticasone furoate (≤200 μg). The models predict a fluticasone furoate AUC24 
of 1,000 pg·h/mL would be required to reduce 24-h serum cortisol or 24-h urine
cortisol excretion by 20 and 17 %, respectively.

DOI: 10.1007/s40262-013-0078-1 
PMCID: PMC3779313
PMID: 23719680  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. BMJ. 2013 May 29;346:f3306. doi: 10.1136/bmj.f3306.

Pneumonia and pneumonia related mortality in patients with COPD treated with
fixed combinations of inhaled corticosteroid and long acting β2 agonist:
observational matched cohort study (PATHOS).

Janson C(1), Larsson K, Lisspers KH, Ställberg B, Stratelis G, Goike H, Jörgensen
L, Johansson G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Sciences, Respiratory Medicine, Uppsala University,
Uppsala, Sweden. christer.janson@medsci.uu.se

Erratum in
    BMJ. 2013;346:f4375.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the occurrence of pneumonia and pneumonia related
events in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) treated with
two different fixed combinations of inhaled corticosteroid/long acting β2
agonist.
DESIGN: Observational retrospective pairwise cohort study matched (1:1) for
propensity score.
SETTING: Primary care medical records data linked to Swedish hospital, drug, and 
cause of death registry data for years 1999-2009.
PARTICIPANTS: Patients with COPD diagnosed by a physician and prescriptions of
either budesonide/formoterol or fluticasone/salmeterol.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Yearly pneumonia event rates, admission to hospital
related to pneumonia, and mortality.
RESULTS: 9893 patients were eligible for matching (2738 in the
fluticasone/salmeterol group; 7155 in the budesonide/formoterol group), yielding 
two matched cohorts of 2734 patients each. In these patients, 2115 (39%) had at
least one recorded episode of pneumonia during the study period, with 2746
episodes recorded during 19,170 patient years of follow up. Compared with
budesonide/formoterol, rate of pneumonia and admission to hospital were higher in
patients treated with fluticasone/salmeterol: rate ratio 1.73 (95% confidence
interval 1.57 to 1.90; P<0.001) and 1.74 (1.56 to 1.94; P<0.001), respectively.
The pneumonia event rate per 100 patient years for fluticasone/salmeterol versus 
budesonide/formoterol was 11.0 (10.4 to 11.8) versus 6.4 (6.0 to 6.9) and the
rate of admission to hospital was 7.4 (6.9 to 8.0) versus 4.3 (3.9 to 4.6). The
mean duration of admissions related to pneumonia was similar for both groups, but
mortality related to pneumonia was higher in the fluticasone/salmeterol group (97
deaths) than in the budesonide/formoterol group (52 deaths) (hazard ratio 1.76,
1.22 to 2.53; P=0.003). All cause mortality did not differ between the treatments
(1.08, 0.93 to 1.14; P=0.59).
CONCLUSIONS: There is an intra-class difference between fixed combinations of
inhaled corticosteroid/long acting β2 agonist with regard to the risk of
pneumonia and pneumonia related events in the treatment of patients with COPD.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: Clinical Trials.gov NCT01146392.


PMCID: PMC3666306
PMID: 23719639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Pulm Pharmacol Ther. 2014 Feb;27(1):70-5. doi: 10.1016/j.pupt.2013.05.002. Epub
2013 May 18.

Airway responsiveness to adenosine after a single dose of fluticasone propionate 
discriminates asthma from COPD.

Spicuzza L(1), Scuderi V(1), Morjaria JB(2), Prosperini G(3), Arcidiacono G(3),
Caruso M(3), Folisi C(1), Di Maria GU(1), Polosa R(4).

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Medicina Interna e Specialistica, Sez. Malattie Apparato
Respiratorio, Università di Catania, Catania, Italy. (2)Dept of Cardiovascular
and Respiratory Studies, Hull York Medical School, University of Hull, Castle
Hill Hospital, Cottingham, UK. (3)Dipartimento di Medicina Interna e
Specialistica, Sez. Medicina Interna, Università di Catania, Catania, Italy.
(4)Dipartimento di Medicina Interna e Specialistica, Sez. Medicina Interna,
Università di Catania, Catania, Italy. Electronic address: polosa@unict.it.

BACKGROUND: Regular treatment with inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) is known to
reduce airway hyperresponsiveness (AHR) to adenosine 5'-monophosphate (AMP) in
asthma even after a single dose of fluticasone propionate (FP).
AIM: To determine whether this rapid protective effect of a single dose of FP is 
also present in COPD.
METHODS: 23 mild asthmatic and 24 COPD subjects with documented AHR to both AMP
and methacholine took part in a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled,
crossover study to measure AHR to inhaled AMP and methacholine 2 h after either
1000 μg FP or matched placebo.
RESULTS: In subjects with asthma, 1000 μg FP in a single dose significantly
attenuated the constrictor response to AMP, geometric mean (range) PC20AMP values
increasing from a 19.2 (1.3-116.3) to 81.5 (9.6-1600.0) (p < 0.001; post-placebo 
vs post-FP) mg/ml. Change in the airways response to inhaled AMP after FP was
well within test variability in patients with COPD, with PC20AMP values 59.6
(11.3-183.9) and 76.3 (21.0-445.3) (p = 0.022; post-placebo vs post-FP) mg/ml.
Additionally, FP failed to significantly attenuate the bronchial response to
methacholine in both asthma and COPD subjects. A change in doubling dilution,
between placebo and following a single dose of FP, in AMP had a better
sensitivity and specificity of 95.8% and 65.2%, compared to methacholine of 79.2%
and 43.5% respectively in delineating between COPD and asthma.
CONCLUSION: A single dose of 1000 μg FP rapidly improves AHR to AMP in asthmatics
but not in COPD subjects. This may provide a convenient way by which provocation 
challenge with inhaled AMP may help in discriminating asthma from COPD.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pupt.2013.05.002 
PMID: 23688422  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. PLoS One. 2013 May 7;8(5):e63430. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0063430. Print 2013.

Inhaled steroids modulate extracellular matrix composition in bronchial biopsies 
of COPD patients: a randomized, controlled trial.

Kunz LI(1), Strebus J, Budulac SE, Lapperre TS, Sterk PJ, Postma DS, Mauad T,
Timens W, Hiemstra PS; GLUCOLD (Groningen Leiden Universities Corticosteroids in 
Obstructive Lung Disease) Study Group.

Collaborators: Kauffman HF, de Reus D, Boezen HM, Jansen DF, Vonk JM, Barentsen
MD, Timens W, Zeinstra-Smit M, Luteijn AJ, van der Molen T, ter Veen G, Gosman
MM, ten Hacken NH, Kerstjens HA, van Maaren MS, Postma DS, Veltman CA, Verbokkem 
A, Verhage I, Vink-Klooster HK, Thiadens HA, Snoeck-Stroband JB, Sont JK,
Gast-Strookman J, Hiemstra PS, Janssen K, Lapperre TS, Rabe KF, van Schadewijk A,
Schrumpf JA, Smit-Bakker J, Sterk PJ, Stolk J, Tiré AC, van der Veen H, Wijffels 
MM, Willems LN, Sterk PJ, Mauad T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The
Netherlands. L.I.Z.Kunz@lumc.nl

RATIONALE: Smoking and inflammation contribute to the pathogenesis of chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), which involves changes in extracellular
matrix. This is thought to contribute to airway remodeling and airflow
obstruction. We have previously observed that long-term treatment with inhaled
corticosteroids can not only reduce bronchial inflammation, but can also
attenuate lung function decline in moderate-severe COPD. We hypothesized that
inhaled corticosteroids and current smoking modulate bronchial extracellular
matrix components in COPD.
OBJECTIVE: To compare major extracellular matrix components (elastic fibers;
proteoglycans [versican, decorin]; collagens type I and III) in bronchial
biopsies 1) after 30-months inhaled steroids treatment or placebo; and 2) between
current and ex-smokers with COPD.
METHODS: We included 64 moderate-severe, steroid-naive COPD patients (24/40
(ex)-smokers, 62±7 years, 46 (31-54) packyears, post-bronchodilator forced
expiratory volume in one second (FEV1) 62±9% predicted) at baseline in this
randomized, controlled trial. 19 and 13 patients received 30-months treatment
with fluticasone or placebo, respectively. Bronchial biopsies collected at
baseline and after 30 months were studied using (immuno)histochemistry to
evaluate extracellular matrix content. Percentage and density of stained area
were calculated by digital image analysis.
RESULTS: 30-Months inhaled steroids increased the percentage stained area of
versican (9.6% [CI 0.9 to 18.3%]; p = 0.03) and collagen III (20.6% [CI 3.8 to
37.4%]; p = 0.02) compared to placebo. Increased collagen I staining density
correlated with increased post-bronchodilator FEV1 after inhaled steroids
treatment (Rs = 0.45, p = 0.04). There were no differences between smokers and
ex-smokers with COPD in percentages and densities for all extracellular matrix
proteins.
CONCLUSIONS: These data show that long-term inhaled corticosteroids treatment
partially changes the composition of extracellular matrix in moderate-severe
COPD. This is associated with increased lung function, suggesting that long-term 
inhaled steroids modulate airway remodeling thereby potentially preventing airway
collapse in COPD. Smoking status is not associated with bronchial extracellular
matrix proteins.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov NCT00158847.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0063430 
PMCID: PMC3646783
PMID: 23667615  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. BMJ Open. 2013 Apr 22;3(4). pii: e001838. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2012-001838. Print
2013.

Which patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease benefit from the
addition of an inhaled corticosteroid to their bronchodilator? A cluster
analysis.

Disantostefano RL(1), Li H, Rubin DB, Stempel DA.

Author information: 
(1)GlaxoSmithKline, Research Triangle Park, Durham, North Carolina, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To identify subsets of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)
patients who are more protected from exacerbations with the use of an inhaled
corticosteroid/long-acting β2 agonist (ICS/LABA) combination, compared with the
use of LABA monotherapy.
DESIGN: Post hoc cluster analysis of patients from two randomised clinical trials
of salmeterol/fluticasone propionate (SFC) and salmeterol (SAL) that had primary 
endpoints of moderate/severe exacerbation rates.
SETTING: Centres in North America.
PARTICIPANTS: 1543 COPD patients were studied.
INTERVENTIONS: SFC 50/250 µg or SAL 50 µg, twice daily.
PRIMARY AND SECONDARY OUTCOME MEASURES: The analysis identified clusters of COPD 
patients more responsive to SFC versus SAL with respect to the annual rate of
moderate/severe exacerbations and compared their baseline clinical
characteristics.
RESULTS: Overall, SFC significantly reduced the annual rate of moderate/severe
exacerbations as compared with SAL alone (rate ratio (RR)=0.701, p<0.001).
Three-patient clusters were identified: COPD patients receiving diuretics
(RR=0.56, p<0.001); patients not receiving diuretics but with forced expiratory
volume in 1 s (FEV1) reversibility ≥12% (RR=0.67, p<0.001) exhibited a
substantial reduction in the annual rate of moderate/severe exacerbations
relative to SAL. A third cluster, consisting of patients not receiving diuretics 
and without FEV1 reversibility, demonstrated no difference for SFC versus SAL.
Patients receiving diuretics had a significantly higher prevalence of comorbid
cardiovascular disease.
CONCLUSIONS: COPD patients receiving diuretics and those not receiving diuretics 
but with FEV1 reversibility >12% at baseline were significantly more likely to
experience a reduction in COPD-associated exacerbations with SFC versus SAL
alone.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: NCT00115492, NCT00144911.

DOI: 10.1136/bmjopen-2012-001838 
PMCID: PMC3641457
PMID: 23613569  [PubMed]


211. Cell Stress Chaperones. 2013 Nov;18(6):733-43. doi: 10.1007/s12192-013-0424-0.
Epub 2013 Apr 12.

Comparative cytoprotective effects of carbocysteine and fluticasone propionate in
cigarette smoke extract-stimulated bronchial epithelial cells.

Pace E(1), Ferraro M, Di Vincenzo S, Cipollina C, Gerbino S, Cigna D, Caputo V,
Balsamo R, Lanata L, Gjomarkaj M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedicine and Molecular Immunology, National Research
Council-Palermo, Palermo, Italy, pace@ibim.cnr.it.

Cigarette smoke extracts (CSE) induce oxidative stress, an important feature in
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), and oxidative stress contributes to
the poor clinical efficacy of corticosteroids in COPD patients. Carbocysteine, an
antioxidant and mucolytic agent, is effective in reducing the severity and the
rate of exacerbations in COPD patients. The effects of carbocysteine on
CSE-induced oxidative stress in bronchial epithelial cells as well as the
comparison of these antioxidant effects of carbocysteine with those of
fluticasone propionate are unknown. The present study was aimed to assess the
effects of carbocysteine (10(-4) M) in cell survival and intracellular reactive
oxygen species (ROS) production (by flow cytometry) as well as total glutathione 
(GSH), heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1), nuclear-related factor 2 (Nrf2) expression and
histone deacetylase 2 (HDAC-2) expression/activation in CSE-stimulated bronchial 
epithelial cells (16-HBE) and to compare these effects with those of fluticasone 
propionate (10(-8) M). CSE, carbocysteine or fluticasone propionate did not
induce cell necrosis (propidium positive cells) or cell apoptosis (annexin
V-positive/propidium-negative cells) in 16-HBE. CSE increased ROS production,
nuclear Nrf2 and HO-1 in 16-HBE. Fluticasone propionate did not modify
intracellular ROS production, GSH and HDCA-2 but reduced Nrf2 and HO-1 in
CSE-stimulated 16-HBE. Carbocysteine reduced ROS production and increased GSH,
HO-1, Nrf2 and HDAC-2 nuclear expression/activity in CSE-stimulated cells and was
more effective than fluticasone propionate in modulating the CSE-mediated
effects. In conclusion, the present study provides compelling evidences that the 
use of carbocysteine may be considered a promising strategy in diseases
associated with corticosteroid resistance.

DOI: 10.1007/s12192-013-0424-0 
PMCID: PMC3789875
PMID: 23580157  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. J Intern Med. 2013 Jun;273(6):584-94. doi: 10.1111/joim.12067. Epub 2013 Apr 1.

Combination of budesonide/formoterol more effective than fluticasone/salmeterol
in preventing exacerbations in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: the PATHOS 
study.

Larsson K(1), Janson C, Lisspers K, Jørgensen L, Stratelis G, Telg G, Ställberg
B, Johansson G.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Lung and Allergy Research, National Institute of Environmental
Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. kjell.larsson@ki.se

OBJECTIVES: Combinations of inhaled corticosteroids (ICSs) and long-acting β2
-agonists (LABAs) are recommended for patients with moderate and severe chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). However, it is not known whether different 
fixed combinations are equally effective. The aim of this study was to
investigate exacerbation rates in primary care patients with COPD treated with
budesonide/formoterol compared with fluticasone/salmeterol.
METHODS: Patients with physician-diagnosed COPD and a record of postdiagnosis
treatment with a fixed combination of budesonide/formoterol or
fluticasone/salmeterol were included. Data from primary care medical records were
linked to those from Swedish national hospital, drug and cause of death
registers. Pairwise (1 : 1) propensity score matching was carried out at the
index date (first prescription) by prescribed fixed ICS/LABA combination.
Exacerbations were defined as hospitalizations, emergency visits and collection
of oral steroids or antibiotics for COPD. Yearly event rates were compared using 
Poisson regression.
RESULTS: Matching of 9893 patients (7155 budesonide/formoterol and 2738
fluticasone/salmeterol) yielded two cohorts of 2734 patients, comprising 19 170
patient-years. The exacerbation rates were 0.80 and 1.09 per patient-year in the 
budesonide/formoterol and fluticasone/salmeterol groups, respectively (difference
of 26.6%; P < 0.0001); yearly rates for COPD-related hospitalizations were 0.15
and 0.21, respectively (difference of 29.1%; P < 0.0001). All other healthcare
outcomes were also significantly reduced with budesonide/formoterol versus
fluticasone/salmeterol.
CONCLUSIONS: Long-term treatment with fixed combination budesonide/formoterol was
associated with fewer healthcare utilization-defined exacerbations than
fluticasone/salmeterol in patients with moderate and severe COPD.

© 2013 The Association for the Publication of the Journal of Internal Medicine.

DOI: 10.1111/joim.12067 
PMID: 23495860  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2013 May 1;187(9):933-42. doi:
10.1164/rccm.201208-1449OC.

A dynamic bronchial airway gene expression signature of chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease and lung function impairment.

Steiling K(1), van den Berge M, Hijazi K, Florido R, Campbell J, Liu G, Xiao J,
Zhang X, Duclos G, Drizik E, Si H, Perdomo C, Dumont C, Coxson HO, Alekseyev YO, 
Sin D, Pare P, Hogg JC, McWilliams A, Hiemstra PS, Sterk PJ, Timens W, Chang JT, 
Sebastiani P, O'Connor GT, Bild AH, Postma DS, Lam S, Spira A, Lenburg ME.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Computational Biomedicine, Boston University School of Medicine,
Boston, MA 02118, USA.

Comment in
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2013 May 1;187(9):900-2.

RATIONALE: Molecular phenotyping of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) 
has been impeded in part by the difficulty in obtaining lung tissue samples from 
individuals with impaired lung function.
OBJECTIVES: We sought to determine whether COPD-associated processes are
reflected in gene expression profiles of bronchial airway epithelial cells
obtained by bronchoscopy.
METHODS: Gene expression profiling of bronchial brushings obtained from 238
current and former smokers with and without COPD was performed using Affymetrix
Human Gene 1.0 ST Arrays.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: We identified 98 genes whose expression levels
were associated with COPD status, FEV1% predicted, and FEV1/FVC. In silico
analysis identified activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4) as a potential
transcriptional regulator of genes with COPD-associated airway expression, and
ATF4 overexpression in airway epithelial cells in vitro recapitulates
COPD-associated gene expression changes. Genes with COPD-associated expression in
the bronchial airway epithelium had similarly altered expression profiles in
prior studies performed on small-airway epithelium and lung parenchyma,
suggesting that transcriptomic alterations in the bronchial airway epithelium
reflect molecular events found at more distal sites of disease activity. Many of 
the airway COPD-associated gene expression changes revert toward baseline after
therapy with the inhaled corticosteroid fluticasone in independent cohorts.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings demonstrate a molecular field of injury throughout the 
bronchial airway of active and former smokers with COPD that may be driven in
part by ATF4 and is modifiable with therapy. Bronchial airway epithelium may
ultimately serve as a relatively accessible tissue in which to measure biomarkers
of disease activity for guiding clinical management of COPD.

DOI: 10.1164/rccm.201208-1449OC 
PMCID: PMC3707363
PMID: 23471465  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Thorax. 2013 Jun;68(6):513-20. doi: 10.1136/thoraxjnl-2012-202606. Epub 2013 Feb 
25.

Safety and tolerability of the novel inhaled corticosteroid fluticasone furoate
in combination with the β2 agonist vilanterol administered once daily for 52
weeks in patients >=12 years old with asthma: a randomised trial.

Busse WW(1), O'Byrne PM, Bleecker ER, Lötvall J, Woodcock A, Andersen L, Hicks W,
Crawford J, Jacques L, Apoux L, Bateman ED.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI, USA.
wwb@medicine.wisc.edu

Comment in
    Thorax. 2013 Dec;68(12):1165-6.
    Thorax. 2013 Dec;68(12):1165.

BACKGROUND: The inhaled corticosteroid fluticasone furoate (FF) in combination
with the long-acting β2 agonist vilanterol (VI) is in development for asthma and 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
OBJECTIVE: To assess the safety and tolerability of FF/VI over 52 weeks in
patients with asthma.
METHODS: Patients (aged ≥12 years; on inhaled corticosteroid) were randomised
(2:2:1) to FF/VI 100/25 µg or FF/VI 200/25 µg once daily in the evening, or
fluticasone propionate (FP) 500 µg twice daily. Safety evaluations included
adverse events (AEs), non-fasting glucose, potassium, 24-h urinary cortisol
excretion, ophthalmic assessments, heart rate and pulse rate.
RESULTS: On-treatment AEs were similar across groups (FF/VI 66-69%; 73% FP). Oral
candidiasis/oropharyngeal candidiasis was more common with FF/VI (6-7%) than FP
(3%). Twelve serious AEs were reported; one (worsening hepatitis B on FP) was
considered drug related. Statistically significant cortisol suppression was seen 
with FP compared with both FF/VI groups at Weeks 12 and 28 (ratios [95% CI] to FP
ranged from 1.43 [1.11 to 1.84] to 1.67 [1.34 to 2.08]; p≤0.006), but not at Week
52 (ratios to FP were 1.05 [0.83 to 1.33] for FF/VI 100/25 µg and 1.09 [0.87 to
1.38] for FF/VI 200/25 µg). No clinically important changes in non-fasting
glucose, potassium, QT interval corrected using Fridericia's formula (QTc[F]) or 
ophthalmic assessments were reported. Pulse rate (10 min post dose [Tmax], Week
52) was significantly increased with FF/VI versus FP (3.4 bpm, 95% CI 1.3 to 5.6;
p=0.002 [FF/VI 100/25 µg]; 3.4 bpm, 95% CI 1.2 to 5.6; p=0.003 [FF/VI 200/25
µg]). Mean heart rate (24-h Holter monitoring) decreased from screening values in
all groups (0.2-1.1 bpm FF/VI vs 5 bpm FP; Week 52).
CONCLUSIONS: FF/VI (100/25 µg or 200/25 µg) administered once daily over 52 weeks
was well tolerated by patients aged ≥12 years with asthma. The overall safety
profile of FF/VI did not reveal any findings of significant clinical concern.
CLINICALTRIALS.GOV: NCT01018186.

DOI: 10.1136/thoraxjnl-2012-202606 
PMCID: PMC3664377
PMID: 23440247  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Respir Med. 2013 May;107(5):708-16. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2013.01.009. Epub 2013
Feb 17.

Effect of fluticasone/salmeterol combination on dyspnea and respiratory mechanics
in mild-to-moderate COPD.

Guenette JA(1), Webb KA, O'Donnell DE.

Author information: 
(1)Respiratory Investigation Unit, Department of Medicine, Queen's University and
Kingston General Hospital, Kingston, ON, Canada.

The purpose of this exploratory physiological study was to evaluate the effects
of inhaled fluticasone/salmeterol combination (FSC) on sensory and physiological 
responses to exercise in subjects with mild-to-moderate COPD. In a randomized,
double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover study, subjects underwent 6-week
treatments with FSC or placebo (PLA). Detailed pulmonary function and
constant-work rate cycle exercise tests were performed following each treatment
period. Fifteen subjects completed the study (mean ± SD): age 64 ± 10 years;
smoking history 47 ± 29 pack-years; post-bronchodilator forced expiratory volume 
in 1 s 86 ± 15 %predicted (10 mild and 5 moderate COPD); peak incremental oxygen 
uptake 71 ± 16 %predicted. Compared with PLA, FSC treatment was associated with
improved: FEV1 by 0.23 ± 0.18 L; inspiratory capacity by 0.18 ± 0.23 L;
functional residual capacity by -0.28 ± 0.30 L; and specific airways resistance
by -4.6 ± 4.5 cmH2O s (all p < 0.01). There were no significant changes in
dyspnea intensity throughout exercise and endurance time did not change
significantly (1.2 ± 3.0 min, p = 0.149). Following FSC, inspiratory capacity at 
rest and throughout exercise increased by 0.2-0.3 L with concomitant increases in
tidal volume and ventilation (p < 0.05). Compared with PLA, the work of breathing
and the ratio of respiratory muscle effort to tidal volume improved with FSC
during exercise (p < 0.05). In mild-to-moderate COPD, FSC was associated with
significant improvements in airway function at rest and during exercise. Despite 
important mechanical improvements, there were no significant effects on dyspnea
intensity and exercise endurance.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2013.01.009 
PMID: 23421968  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Curr Med Chem. 2013;20(12):1477-95.

Long-acting beta-agonists and their association with inhaled corticosteroids in
COPD.

Fuso L(1), Mores N, Valente S, Malerba M, Montuschi P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Geriatrics, Faculty of Medicine, Catholic 
University of the Sacred Heart, Rome, Italy.

Inhaled bronchodilators, including beta(2)-agonists and antimuscaric receptor
antagonists, are the mainstay of pharmacotherapy in chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD). The short-acting beta(2)-agonists, including salbutamol, and
fenoterol, have a rapid onset of action, a bronchodilating effect for 3-6 h and
are used on demand. The long-acting beta(2)-agonists (LABAs), including
salmeterol and formoterol, have 12-hour duration of action and are used with a
twice-daily dosing regimen for long-term COPD treatment. Unlike salmeterol,
formoterol has a rapid onset of action. Pharmacological characteristics required 
by novel inhaled LABAs include 24 h bronchodilator effect in vivo which would
make them suitable for once daily administration (ultra-LABA), high potency and
selectivity for beta(2)-adrenoceptors, rapid onset of action, low oral
bioavailability (< 5%) after inhalation, and high systemic clearance.
Indacaterol, which has been approved for long-term treatment of COPD in Europe
and in the USA, has a 24-h duration of action and a once-daily dosing regimen.
Newer ultra-LABAs, including olodaterol, vilanterol, milveterol, carmoterol, and 
abediterol, are in development. Combination with ICS (fluticasone/salmeterol,
budesonide/formoterol, beclomethasone/formoterol) appears to provide an
additional benefit over the monocomponent therapy, although the extent of this
benefit is variable and often not clinically significant in all the endpoints
assessed. In patients with COPD, treatment with ICS is associated with increased 
risk of pneumonia which should be carefully considered when assessing the
risk/benefit ratio of ICS/LABA combinations. Subphenotyping of patients with COPD
(e.g., frequent exacerbations, sputum eosinophilia, mixed asthma/COPD phenotype) 
might help identify those patients who are most likely to benefit from addition
of ICS to bronchodilating treatment. Ultra-LABA/ long-acting muscarinic receptor 
antagonist (LAMA) combination treatment is under development and is likely to
become a standard pharmacological strategy for COPD. Dual-pharmacology inhaled
muscarinic antagonist-beta(2) agonist (MABA) molecules provide a new approach to 
the treatment of COPD.


PMID: 23409722  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Mol Pharmacol. 2013 Apr;83(4):894-906. doi: 10.1124/mol.112.083493. Epub 2013 Feb
6.

Phosphodiesterase 4 inhibitors augment the ability of formoterol to enhance
glucocorticoid-dependent gene transcription in human airway epithelial cells: a
novel mechanism for the clinical efficacy of roflumilast in severe chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease.

Moodley T(1), Wilson SM, Joshi T, Rider CF, Sharma P, Yan D, Newton R, Giembycz
MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology & Pharmacology, University of Calgary, 3280 Hospital 
Drive NW, Calgary, Alberta, Canada T2N 4N1.

Post-hoc analysis of two phase III clinical studies found that the
phosphodiesterase 4 (PDE4) inhibitor, roflumilast, reduced exacerbation frequency
in patients with severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) who were
taking inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) concomitantly, whereas patients not taking
ICS derived no such benefit. In contrast, in two different trials also performed 
in patients with severe COPD, roflumilast reduced exacerbation rates in the
absence of ICS, indicating that PDE4 inhibition alone is sufficient for
therapeutic activity to be realized. Given that roflumilast is recommended as an 
"add-on" medication to patients with severe disease who will inevitably be taking
a long-acting β2-adrenoceptor agonist (LABA)/ICS combination therapy, we tested
the hypothesis that roflumilast augments the ability of glucocorticoids to induce
genes with anti-inflammatory activity. Using a glucocorticoid response element
(GRE) luciferase reporter transfected into human airway epithelial cells [both
bronchial epithelium + adenovirus 12 - SV40 hybrid (BEAS-2B) cells and primary
cultures], roflumilast enhanced fluticasone propionate-induced GRE-dependent
transcription. Roflumilast also produced a sinistral displacement of the
concentration-response curves that described the augmentation of GRE-dependent
transcription by the LABA formoterol. In BEAS-2B cells and primary airway
epithelia, roflumilast interacted with formoterol in a positive cooperative
manner to enhance the expression of several glucocorticoid-inducible genes that
have anti-inflammatory potential. We suggest that the ability of roflumilast and 
formoterol to interact in this way supports the concept that these drugs together
may impart clinical benefit beyond that achievable by an ICS alone, a PDE4
inhibitor alone, or an ICS/LABA combination therapy. Roflumilast may, therefore, 
be especially effective in patients with severe COPD.

DOI: 10.1124/mol.112.083493 
PMID: 23389862  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Respir Med. 2013 Apr;107(4):560-9. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2012.12.014. Epub 2013 Jan
23.

A randomised trial of fluticasone furoate/vilanterol (50/25 μg; 100/25 μg) on
lung function in COPD.

Kerwin EM(1), Scott-Wilson C, Sanford L, Rennard S, Agusti A, Barnes N, Crim C.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Research Institute of Southern Oregon, 3860 Crater Lake Avenue,
Medford, OR 97504, USA. ekerwin@allergyasthmaso.com

Erratum in
    Respir Med. 2013 Dec;107(12):2094.

BACKGROUND: Fluticasone furoate (FF)/vilanterol (VI) is a novel once-daily
inhaled corticosteroid/long-acting β2-agonist combination therapy for COPD. We
aimed to assess the efficacy and safety of two strengths of FF/VI (100/25 μg;
50/25 μg) vs. individual components (FF 100 μg, VI 25 μg) and placebo over 24
weeks.
METHODS: Multicentre, randomised, placebo-controlled, double-blind,
parallel-group study of patients (N = 1030) with moderate-to-severe COPD. All
medication was administered once daily in the morning. Co-primary efficacy
endpoints were: (1) weighted mean (wm) FEV1 (0-4 h post-dose on day 168) to
assess acute lung function effects; and (2) trough FEV1 (23-24 h post-dose on day
169) to assess long-lasting effects. Symptom-related outcomes were analysed and
adverse events (AEs) assessed.
RESULTS: Main findings were: (1) the combination of FF/VI at a strength of
100/25 μg significantly (p < 0.001) improved wm FEV1 (173 ml) and trough FEV1
(115 ml) vs. placebo. Similar effects were observed with FF/VI 50/25 μg; (2) no
significant difference was seen between FF/VI 100/25 μg and VI 25 μg for trough
FEV1 (48 ml, p = 0.082), while an effect was observed between FF/VI 100/25 μg and
FF 100 μg for wm FEV1 (120 ml, p < 0.001); (3) VI 25 μg over 24 weeks improved
lung function vs. placebo significantly for wm FEV1 (103 ml, p < 0.001) and
trough FEV1 (67 ml, p = 0.017); and (4) no safety signal was observed.
CONCLUSIONS: In subjects with moderate-to-severe COPD, FF/VI 100/25 μg provides
rapid and significant sustained bronchodilation at 24 weeks. Lung function is
improved to a similar extent with FF/VI 50/25 μg and to a somewhat lesser extent 
with VI 25 μg. All treatments were well tolerated. GSK study number: HZC112206.
ClinicalTrials.gov: NCT01053988.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2012.12.014 
PMID: 23352226  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Respir Med. 2013 Apr;107(4):542-9. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2012.12.020. Epub 2013 Jan
20.

Influence of salmeterol/fluticasone via single versus separate inhalers on
exacerbations in severe/very severe COPD.

Hagedorn C(1), Kässner F, Banik N, Ntampakas P, Fielder K.

Author information: 
(1)Respiratory Centre of Excellence, GlaxoSmithKline, Stockley Park West,
Uxbridge, Middlesex UB11 1BT, United Kingdom. cordula.c.hagedorn@gsk.com

BACKGROUND: Patients with severe or very severe chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD) frequently suffer repeated exacerbations generating high health
care utilization costs. Combined corticosteroid and bronchodilator treatment
using a single inhaler might - via improved compliance - reduce exacerbation
rates.
OBJECTIVES: Our aim was to obtain descriptive data on exacerbation rates in
patients with severe or very severe COPD (GOLD Stages III and IV as per GOLD 2009
classification) receiving salmeterol xinafoate/fluticasone propionate via a
single inhaler (SFC) or via separate inhalers (Sal/FP) in addition to individual 
existing therapy in order to investigate the potential benefit of a fixed
combination device as compared with two separate devices due to potentially
improved patients' compliance.
METHODS: This prospective, randomized, open-label, parallel-group, multi-center, 
exploratory study was conducted in Germany in 2007-2009. Patients were required
to have suffered ≥ 2 moderate/severe exacerbations in the preceding year.
RESULTS: 213 patients (SFC: 108 patients, Sal/FP: 105 patients) from 23 centers
were evaluated. Approximately 25% of patients showed COPD Stage IV. On average
patients had suffered 2.3 ± 0.6 moderate/severe exacerbations in the preceding
year. The annual rate of moderate/severe exacerbations observed in the study was 
similar in both treatment groups (SFC: 0.86 ± 0.13; Sal/FP: 0.86 ± 0.14;
exacerbation rate ratio SFC/Sal/FP: 1.00; p = 0.73; negative binomial model).
Compliance was high and comparable in both groups. Besides COPD exacerbations,
pneumonia (5.6%) and nasopharyngitis (5.2%) were the most common adverse events.
CONCLUSION: Observed exacerbation rates were lower than those reported at
baseline. No substantial difference was observed between administration of
salmeterol xinafoate/fluticasone propionate via a single inhaler and separate
inhalers. Treatment was safe and well tolerated. ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier:
NCT00527826.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2012.12.020 
PMID: 23337300  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Respir Med. 2013 Apr;107(4):550-9. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2012.12.016. Epub 2013 Jan
16.

Fluticasone furoate/vilanterol (100/25; 200/25 μg) improves lung function in
COPD: a randomised trial.

Martinez FJ(1), Boscia J, Feldman G, Scott-Wilson C, Kilbride S, Fabbri L, Crim
C, Calverley PM.

Author information: 
(1)University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA. fmartine@med.umich.edu

Erratum in
    Respir Med. 2013 Dec;107(12):2092-3.

BACKGROUND: Once-daily combination treatment is an attractive maintenance therapy
for COPD. However, the dose of inhaled corticosteroid to use in a once-daily
combination is unknown. We compared two strengths of fluticasone furoate (FF)
plus vilanterol (VI), the same strengths of the individual components, and
placebo.
METHODS: Multicentre, randomised, 24-week, double-blind, placebo-controlled,
parallel-group study in stable, moderate-to-severe COPD subjects (N = 1224).
Subjects were randomised to FF/VI (200/25 μg; 100/25 μg), FF (200 μg; 100 μg), VI
25 μg, or placebo, once daily in the morning. Co-primary efficacy endpoints; 0-4 
h weighted mean (wm) FEV(1) on day 168, and change from baseline in trough (23-24
h post-dose) FEV(1) on day 169. The primary safety objective was adverse events
(AEs).
RESULTS: There was a statistically significant (p < 0.001) increase in wm FEV(1) 
(209 ml) and trough FEV(1) (131 ml) for FF/VI 200/25 μg vs. placebo; similar
changes were seen for FF/VI 100/25 μg vs. placebo. Whereas the difference between
FF/VI 200/25 μg and VI 25 μg in change from baseline trough FEV(1) (32 ml) was
not statistically significant (p = 0.224), the difference between FF/VI 200/25 μg
and FF 200 μg for wm FEV(1) (168 ml) was significantly different (p < 0.001). VI 
25 μg significantly improved wm and trough FEV(1) vs. placebo (185 ml and 100 ml,
[corrected] respectively). No increase was seen in on-treatment AEs or serious
AEs (SAEs), with active therapy vs. placebo.
CONCLUSIONS: FF/VI provides rapid and significant sustained improvement in FEV(1)
in subjects with moderate-to-severe COPD, which was not influenced by the dose of
FF. These data suggest that FF/VI may offer clinical efficacy in COPD and
warrants additional study. GSK study number: HZC112207. ClinicalTrials.gov:
NCT01054885.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2012.12.016 
PMID: 23332861  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Pulm Pharmacol Ther. 2013 Apr;26(2):256-64. doi: 10.1016/j.pupt.2012.12.001. Epub
2012 Dec 8.

Vilanterol trifenatate, a novel inhaled long-acting beta2 adrenoceptor agonist,
is well tolerated in healthy subjects and demonstrates prolonged bronchodilation 
in subjects with asthma and COPD.

Kempsford R(1), Norris V, Siederer S.

Author information: 
(1)Respiratory & Immuno-Inflammation Medicine Development Centre, GlaxoSmithKline
R&D, Stevenage, Hertfordshire SG1 2NY, UK. rodger.d.kempsford@gsk.com

Vilanterol (VI; GW642444M) is a novel inhaled long-acting β2-agonist with
inherent 24 h activity in vitro in development as a combination with the inhaled 
corticosteroid fluticasone furoate for both COPD and asthma. These studies were
conducted to determine the safety, tolerability, pharmacodynamics and
pharmacokinetics of VI in healthy subjects and subjects with mild to moderate
persistent asthma and moderate to severe COPD. Single doses of VI (25-100 μg)
were given once daily to subjects with asthma and COPD and repeat doses once
daily for 14 days to healthy subjects. Adverse events (AEs), vital signs, ECGs,
pharmacodynamic endpoints, FEV(1) and VI plasma pharmacokinetics (AUC, Cmax and
Tmax) were determined following dosing. VI (25-100 μg) was well tolerated. The
incidence and severity of AEs were comparable to placebo. Following VI
administration there were no clinically significant abnormalities in vital signs,
12-lead ECG, Holter ECG, blood glucose or potassium. There were no statistically 
significant effects on QTc of single and repeat VI doses up to 50 μg; some
differences were seen following the 100 μg VI dose after single and repeat dose
in healthy subjects and single dose in asthmatic subjects. All VI doses produced 
increases in FEV(1) from as early as 5 min after dosing which were maintained up 
to 24 h post-dose in subjects with asthma and COPD. In all subjects VI was
rapidly absorbed (healthy subjects median Tmax at 5 min; asthma and COPD subjects
median Tmax at 10 min) with systemic exposure increasing in an approximately dose
proportional manner across the VI dose range. Marginal accumulation was seen on
repeat dosing. Single doses of inhaled VI in subjects with asthma and COPD and
repeat doses in healthy subjects were well tolerated with no clinically
significant unwanted systemic effects. VI produced a rapid and prolonged
bronchodilation over 24 h suggesting the potential for once daily administration.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pupt.2012.12.001 
PMID: 23232038  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Clin Pharmacokinet. 2013 Jan;52(1):37-42. doi: 10.1007/s40262-012-0021-x.

Fluticasone furoate, a novel inhaled corticosteroid, demonstrates prolonged lung 
absorption kinetics in man compared with inhaled fluticasone propionate.

Allen A(1), Bareille PJ, Rousell VM.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Pharmacology Modelling and Simulation, GlaxoSmithKline R&D, Gunnels
Wood Road, Stevenage, Hertfordshire, SG1 2NY, UK. ann.allen@gsk.com

BACKGROUND: Fluticasone furoate (FF; GW685698) is a novel inhaled corticosteroid 
that is active at 24 h and under development for once-daily administration in
combination with the long-acting β(2)-adrenoceptor agonist vilanterol (GW642444) 
for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and asthma. In vitro studies examining 
the respiratory tissue-binding properties of corticosteroids showed FF to have
the largest cellular accumulation and slowest rate of efflux compared with other 
clinically used inhaled corticosteroids, consistent with greater tissue
retention. The enhanced affinity of the glucocorticoid receptor binding of FF,
coupled with its extended tissue association, may be expected to lead to greater 
and more prolonged anti-inflammatory effects and should provide relevant
once-daily efficacy.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to assess the rate and extent of systemic
absorption of FF from the lung following inhaled administration of FF from three 
exploratory dry powder formulations (via DISKHALER(®)) compared with inhaled
fluticasone propionate (FP) [via DISKHALER(®)] using deconvolution analysis.
METHODS: This open-label, part-randomized, six-way crossover study evaluated
three early development dry powder inhaled formulations of FF administered as
single doses via DISKHALER(®). Healthy male subjects (n = 24) each received FF
(2,000 μg; three formulations), inhaled FP (1,000 μg; via DISKHALER(®)) and 250
μg of each molecule by intravenous infusion. The bioavailability of both inhaled 
FF and FP represents absorption from the lung as the oral bioavailability from
the swallowed portion of the inhaled dose is negligible (<1.5 %). To investigate 
the absorption kinetics from the lung, the inhaled concentration-time data were
subjected to deconvolution analysis using derived pharmacokinetic parameters from
fitting of the intravenous concentration-time data.
RESULTS: The terminal elimination half-life (t(½β)) for inhaled FF was
considerably longer (range 17-24 h) than the t(½β) estimated for intravenous FF
(14 h), whereas t(½β) for FP was similar whether inhaled or given intravenously
(11 and 14 h, respectively). This would suggest that FF is exhibiting absorption 
rate-limited pharmacokinetics following inhaled FF dosing and that the apparent
t(½β) is an estimate of absorption rate. The lung mean absorption time for FF was
approximately 7 h irrespective of formulation, which was considerably longer than
FP (2.1 h). The time for 90 % absorption from the lung was significantly longer
for FF (20-30 h) than for FP (8 h), indicating a significantly longer lung
retention time for FF.
CONCLUSION: In comparison with inhaled FP, inhaled FF (independent of
formulation) demonstrated prolonged absorption from the lung into the systemic
circulation, indicating a longer lung retention time and suggesting the potential
for maintained efficacy with once-daily administration.

DOI: 10.1007/s40262-012-0021-x 
PMCID: PMC3693428
PMID: 23184737  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. CJEM. 2012 Nov;14(6):378-81.

Lactic acidosis following intentional overdose by inhalation of salmeterol and
fluticasone.

Manara A(1), Hantson P, Vanpee D, Thys F.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Emergency Medicine and 3Intensive Care, Universite´ Catholique 
de Louvain, Cliniques Universitaires St-Luc, Brussels, Belgium.
alessandro.manara@uclouvain.be

Comment in
    CJEM. 2014 Jan;16(1):11.

Salmeterol, a long-acting β2-adrenergic receptor agonist used for the treatment
of asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, has an adverse effects
profile that is similar to that of salbutamol and other β2-agonists. We report a 
sympathomimetic syndrome with metabolic acidosis and hyperlactatemia after
intentional inhalation of salmeterol in a suicide attempt. A 16-year-old female
patient was admitted to the emergency department approximately 2 hours after
having inhaled 60 puffs of a combination of salmeterol xinafoate 25 μg and
fluticasone propionate 50 μg. She presented in an anxious state with complaints
of palpitations and chest pain. The electrocardiogram demonstrated sinus
tachycardia and ST-segment depression in the inferior and anterolateral leads.
Laboratory findings showed hypokalemia, hypophosphatemia, and lactic acidosis.
Cardiac troponin I and creatine kinase MB remained within the normal range.
Treatment was supportive and included intravenous fluids and cautious potassium
supplementation. The next day, electrocardiographic and laboratory findings
returned to normal. We hypothesize that stimulation of β2-adrenergic receptors by
inhalation of salmeterol caused this patient's lactic acidosis. This observation 
is consistent with the hypothesis that the hyperlactatemia observed during asthma
attacks is due in part to the administration of high doses of β2-agonists.
Salmeterol overdose by inhalation appears to be sufficient to cause lactic
acidosis.


PMID: 23131487  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Chang Gung Med J. 2012 Sep-Oct;35(5):373-81.

Comparison of respiratory parameters and plasma cytokine levels between treatment
with Salmeterol/fluticasone and ipratropium/terbutaline/budesonide in
mechanically ventilated COPD patients.

Wu HP(1), Liu YC, Lin SC, Chien MY, Liao FC, Chang SC, Shieh WB.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care and Sleep Medicine, Chang Gung Memorial
Hospital at Keelung, Chang Gung University College of Medicine, Taoyuan, Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: It is unknown whether the bronchodilation and anti-inflammatory
effects of inhaled salmeterol and fluticasone (SF) are better than those of
traditionally inhaled ipratropium, terbutaline and budesonide (ITB) in
mechanically ventilated patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD).
METHODS: Nineteen stable COPD patients with respiratory failure were randomly
enrolled into two groups. Patients were treated with inhaled SF delivered by a
metered-dose inhaler with a spacer or with inhaled nebulized ITB. Respiratory
parameters were measured for 7 days and plasma cytokine levels were measured on
days 1 and 7.
RESULTS: The kinetic curve of the rapid shallow index (RSI) from day 1 to day 7
was significant lower in the SF group than that in the ITB group. There were no
significant differences in minute ventilation, intrinsic positive end expiratory 
pressure, and airway resistance between the ITB and SF groups from day 1 to day
7. There were no differences in plasma interleukin (IL)-6, IL-10, IL- 12, and
transforming growth factor-beta1 levels between day 1 and day 7 in the ITB or SF 
group.
CONCLUSIONS: Patients with inhaled SF treatment had a lower RSI. The effects of
bronchodilators and anti-inflammation were similar between inhaled SF and ITB in 
COPD patients with ventilator support.


PMID: 23127342  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Thorax. 2013 Jun;68(6):540-3. doi: 10.1136/thoraxjnl-2012-202709. Epub 2012 Nov
2.

Number needed to treat in COPD: exacerbations versus pneumonias.

Suissa S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Clinical Epidemiology, Lady Davis Institute-Jewish General
Hospital, Montreal,Quebec, Canada.

Comment in
    Thorax. 2013 Sep;68(9):882-3.
    Thorax. 2013 Sep;68(9):882.

BACKGROUND: Several recent trials in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)
have assessed the effectiveness of the fluticasone-salmeterol combination inhaler
in preventing COPD exacerbations, while finding an increased risk of pneumonia.
The number needed to treat (NNT) is a simple measure to perform the comparative
benefit-risk impact, but its calculation involving repeated outcome events such
as COPD exacerbations has been incorrect. We describe the proper methods to
calculate the NNT and, using data from published trials, apply them to evaluate
the relative impact of fluticasone-salmeterol treatment on exacerbations and
pneumonias in patients with COPD.
METHODS: We review the fundamental definition of NNT and quantify it for
situations with varying follow-up times. We review the 'event-based' NNT,
proposed and used for repeated event outcomes, show its inaccuracy, describe its 
proper use and provide an approximate formula for its application.
RESULTS: We show that a 1-year trial of the fluticasone-salmeterol combination
versus salmeterol used the incorrect event-based approach to calculate the NNT as
two patients that need to be treated for 1 year to prevent one COPD exacerbation,
when the proper calculation results in a NNT of 14. In contrast, 20 patients need
to be treated to induce one pneumonia case. For the TORCH trial, the NNT is 44
patients treated for 3 years with fluticasone-salmeterol versus salmeterol to
prevent one exacerbation compared with 16 patients to induce one pneumonia case.
CONCLUSIONS: The NNT is a useful measure of the effect of drugs, but its proper
calculation is essential to prevent misleading clinical practice guidelines.

DOI: 10.1136/thoraxjnl-2012-202709 
PMID: 23125170  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Am J Geriatr Pharmacother. 2012 Dec;10(6):343-51. doi:
10.1016/j.amjopharm.2012.09.005. Epub 2012 Oct 17.

Effect of combination fluticasone propionate and salmeterol or inhaled
corticosteroids on asthma-related outcomes in a Medicare-eligible population.

Stanford RH(1), Blanchette CM, Roberts MH, Petersen H, Fuhlbrigge AL.

Author information: 
(1)GlaxoSmithKline, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709, USA.
richard.h.stanford@gsk.com

BACKGROUND: National asthma treatment guidelines recommend either the use of
inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) or ICS in combination with a long-acting
bronchodilator for the treatment of moderate to severe asthma. Even though asthma
is common among older adults, few studies have assessed the differences in
effectiveness between these two recommended therapies in patients over 65 years
of age.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to assess the association of the
fluticasone-salmeterol combination (FSC) or ICS initiation on asthma-related
events in Medicare-eligible asthma patients.
METHODS: This was a retrospective observational study using a large health claims
database (July 1, 2001 to June 30, 2008). Subjects 65 to 79 years of age with
12-month preindex and 3- to 12-month postindex eligibility, an asthma diagnosis
(ICD-493.xx), and with 1 or more FSC or ICS claims at index were included.
Subjects with an FSC or ICS claim in the preindex and any claim for chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease were excluded. Subjects were observed until they
had an event (emergency department [ED] inpatient hospitalization [IP], combined 
IP/ED or oral corticosteroid [OCS] use) or were no longer eligible in the
database, whichever came first. Cox proportional hazards regression was used to
assess risk of an asthma-related event (IP, ED, or IP/ED). Baseline
characteristics (age, sex, region, index season, comorbidities, preindex use of
short-acting β-agonists, OCS, other asthma controllers, and asthma-related ED/IP 
visits) were independent covariates in the model.
RESULTS: A total of 10,837 met the criteria (4843 ICS and 5994 FSC). Age (70.4
and 70.5 years, respectively) and the percentage of female subjects (65.5% and
64.8%, respectively) were similar. Asthma-related events were also similar at
baseline. Postindex unadjusted rates occurring after >30 days were ED (1.8% vs
1.5%, P = 0.18), IP (2.7% vs 1.7%, P < 0.001), and ED/IP (4.1% vs 2.8%, P <
0.001) for ICS and FSC, respectively. Subjects who received FSC were associated
with a 32% (adjusted HR = 0.68; 95% CI, 0.51-0.91) lower risk of experiencing an 
IP visit and a 22% (HR = 0.78; 95% CI, 0.62-0.98) lower risk of experiencing an
ED/IP visit. No differences were observed for ED visits (HR = 0.94; 95% CI,
0.68-1.29).
CONCLUSIONS: In Medicare-eligible asthma patients, FSC use was associated with
lower rates of asthma-related serious exacerbations compared with ICS.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier HS Journals, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.amjopharm.2012.09.005 
PMID: 23083688  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Eur Respir J. 2013 May;41(5):1017-22. doi: 10.1183/09031936.00087312. Epub 2012
Sep 27.

The Study to Understand Mortality and Morbidity in COPD (SUMMIT) study protocol.

Vestbo J(1), Anderson J, Brook RD, Calverley PM, Celli BR, Crim C, Haumann B,
Martinez FJ, Yates J, Newby DE.

Author information: 
(1)Dept of Respiratory Medicine J, Odense University Hospital and University of
Southern Denmark, Odense, Denmark. jvestbo@dadlnet.dk

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) often coexists with other chronic
diseases and comorbidities that can markedly influence patients' health status
and prognosis. This is particularly true for cardiovascular disease (CVD).
However, there have been no trials assessing the effect of COPD medications on
CVD in patients with both diseases. The "Study to Understand Mortality and
Morbidity in COPD" (SUMMIT) aims at determining the impact of fluticasone
furoate/vilanterol combination and the individual components on the survival of
patients with moderate COPD and either a history of CVD or at increased risk for 
CVD. SUMMIT is a multicentre, randomised, double-blind, parallel-group,
placebo-controlled trial of 16 000 patients with moderate COPD randomly assigned 
to once daily treatment with fluticasone furoate/vilanterol (100/25 μg),
fluticasone furoate (100 μg), vilanterol (25 μg) or matched placebo; mortality is
the primary end-point. The study is an event-driven trial powered by the
comparison of furoate/vilanterol versus placebo. Secondary end-points are decline
in forced expiratory volume in 1 s and effect on a composite cardiovascular
end-point. This article describes the design of the SUMMIT study.

DOI: 10.1183/09031936.00087312 
PMID: 23018908  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Eur J Pharmacol. 2012 Dec 5;696(1-3):136-42. doi: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2012.08.015.
Epub 2012 Sep 12.

Multidrug resistance-associated protein 1 and lung function decline with or
without long-term corticosteroids treatment in COPD.

Budulac SE(1), Postma DS, Hiemstra PS, Lapperre TS, Kunz LI, Vonk JM, Marike
Boezen H, Timens W; Glucold Study Group.

Collaborators: Kauffman HF, deReus D, Boezen HM, Jansen DF, Vonk JM, Barentsen
MD, Timens W, Zeinstra-Smit M, Luteijn AJ, vanderMolen T, terVeen G, Gosman MM,
tenHacken NH, Kerstjens HA, vanMaaren MS, Postma DS, Veltman CA, Verbokkem A,
Verhage I, Klooster HK, Snoeck-Stroband JB, Thiadens H, Sont JK, Bajema I,
Gast-Strookman J, Hiemstra PS, Janssen K, Lapperre TS, Rabe KF, vanSchadewijk A, 
Smit-Bakker J, Stolk J, Tiré AC, vanderVeen H, Wijffelsand MM, Willems LN, Sterk 
PJ, Mauad T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, University Medical Center Groningen, University of
Groningen, Hanzeplein 1, Groningen 9713 GZ, The Netherlands. s.budulac@umcg.nl

Multidrug resistance-associated protein-1 (MRP1) reduces the oxidative stress
generated by smoking, a risk factor for Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease
(COPD). We previously showed that MRP1 variants are associated with the level and
decline of annual forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV(1)) in the general 
population. Moreover, we showed that MRP1 variants are also associated with
FEV(1) level and inflammatory markers in COPD patients.We investigate in the
current study the association of MRP1 protein expression in bronchial biopsies
with FEV(1) decline in COPD patients using placebo, or inhaled corticosteroids
(ICS) with or without long-acting β2-agonists. Additionally we investigate the
association of MRP1 variants with FEV(1) decline. MRP1 variants (rs212093,
rs4148382, rs504348, rs4781699, rs35621) were genotyped in 110 COPD patients.
Associations of MRP1 variants and MRP1 protein expression in bronchial biopsies
(obtained at baseline, 6 and 30 months) with FEV(1) decline were analyzed using
linear mixed-effect models. During 30-month ICS treatment, subjects with a
moderate staining for MRP1 had less FEV(1) decline than those with a weak
staining. In subjects stopping ICS after 6 months followed by 24-month placebo,
moderate staining for MRP1 was associated with faster FEV(1) decline than in
those with a weak staining. None of the variants was associated with FEV(1)
decline. Our unique study suggests a role of MRP1 protein expression in bronchial
biopsies in FEV(1) decline occurring selectively in COPD patients with long-term 
(30-month) ICS therapy.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2012.08.015 
PMID: 22982023  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2012 Sep 12;(9):CD006829. doi:
10.1002/14651858.CD006829.pub2.

Combined corticosteroid and long-acting beta(2)-agonist in one inhaler versus
long-acting beta(2)-agonists for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Nannini LJ(1), Lasserson TJ, Poole P.

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary Section, Hospital E Peron, G. Baigorria, Argentina.
nanninilj@cimero.org.ar.

Comment in
    Ann Intern Med. 2013 Feb 19;158(4):JC9.

Update of
    Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2007;(4):CD006829.

BACKGROUND: Both inhaled steroids (ICS) and long-acting beta(2)-agonists (LABA)
are used in the management of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). This 
updated review compared compound LABA plus ICS therapy (LABA/ICS) with the LABA
component drug given alone.
OBJECTIVES: To assess the efficacy of ICS and LABA in a single inhaler with
mono-component LABA alone in adults with COPD.
SEARCH METHODS: We searched the Cochrane Airways Group Specialised Register of
trials. The date of the most recent search was November 2011.
SELECTION CRITERIA: We included randomised, double-blind controlled trials. We
included trials comparing compound ICS and LABA preparations with their component
LABA preparations in people with COPD.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Two authors independently assessed study risk of
bias and extracted data. The primary outcomes were exacerbations, mortality and
pneumonia, while secondary outcomes were health-related quality of life (measured
by validated scales), lung function, withdrawals due to lack of efficacy,
withdrawals due to adverse events and side-effects. Dichotomous data were
analysed as random-effects model odds ratios or rate ratios with 95% confidence
intervals (CIs), and continuous data as mean differences and 95% CIs. We rated
the quality of evidence for exacerbations, mortality and pneumonia according to
recommendations made by the GRADE working group.
MAIN RESULTS: Fourteen studies met the inclusion criteria, randomising 11,794
people with severe COPD. We looked at any LABA plus ICS inhaler (LABA/ICS) versus
the same LABA component alone, and then we looked at the 10 studies which
assessed fluticasone plus salmeterol (FPS) and the four studies assessing
budesonide plus formoterol (BDF) separately. The studies were well-designed with 
low risk of bias for randomisation and blinding but they had high rates of
attrition, which reduced our confidence in the results for outcomes other than
mortality.Primary outcomes There was low quality evidence that exacerbation rates
in people using LABA/ICS inhalers were lower in comparison to those with LABA
alone, from nine studies which randomised 9921 participants (rate ratio 0.76; 95%
CI 0.68 to 0.84). This corresponds to one exacerbation per person per year on
LABA and 0.76 exacerbations per person per year on ICS/LABA. Our confidence in
this effect was limited by statistical heterogeneity between the results of the
studies (I(2) = 68%) and a risk of bias from the high withdrawal rates across the
studies. When analysed as the number of people experiencing one or more
exacerbations over the course of the study, FPS lowered the odds of an
exacerbation with an odds ratio (OR) of 0.83 (95% CI 0.70 to 0.98, 6 studies,
3357 participants). With a risk of an exacerbation of 47% in the LABA group over 
one year, 42% of people treated with LABA/ICS would be expected to experience an 
exacerbation. Concerns over the effect of reporting biases led us to downgrade
the quality of evidence for this effect from high to moderate.There was no
significant difference in the rate of hospitalisations (rate ratio 0.79; 95% CI
0.55 to 1.13, very low quality evidence due to risk of bias, statistical
imprecision and inconsistency). There was no significant difference in mortality 
between people on combined inhalers and those on LABA, from 10 studies on 10,680 
participants (OR 0.92; 95% CI 0.76 to 1.11, downgraded to moderate quality
evidence due to statistical imprecision). Pneumonia occurred more commonly in
people randomised to combined inhalers, from 12 studies with 11,076 participants 
(OR 1.55; 95% CI 1.20 to 2.01, moderate quality evidence due to risk of bias in
relation to attrition) with an annual risk of around 3% on LABA alone compared to
4% on combination treatment. There were no significant differences between the
results for either exacerbations or pneumonia from trials adding different doses 
or types of inhaled corticosteroid.Secondary outcomes ICS/LABA was more effective
than LABA alone in improving health-related quality of life measured by the St
George's Respiratory Questionnaire (1.58 units lower with FPS; 2.69 units lower
with BDF), dyspnoea (0.09 units lower with FPS), symptoms (0.07 units lower with 
BDF), rescue medication (0.38 puffs per day fewer with FPS, 0.33 puffs per day
fewer with BDF), and forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV(1)) (70 mL
higher with FPS, 50 mL higher with BDF). Candidiasis (OR 3.75) and upper
respiratory infection (OR 1.32) occurred more frequently with FPS than SAL. We
did not combine adverse event data relating to candidiasis for BDF studies as the
results were very inconsistent.
AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: Concerns over the analysis and availability of data from
the studies bring into question the superiority of ICS/LABA over LABA alone in
preventing exacerbations. The effects on hospitalisations were inconsistent and
require further exploration. There was moderate quality evidence of an increased 
risk of pneumonia with ICS/LABA. There was moderate quality evidence that
treatments had similar effects on mortality. Quality of life, symptoms score,
rescue medication use and FEV(1) improved more on ICS/LABA than on LABA, but the 
average differences were probably not clinically significant for these outcomes. 
To an individual patient the increased risk of pneumonia needs to be balanced
against the possible reduction in exacerbations.More information would be useful 
on the relative benefits and adverse event rates with combination inhalers using 
different doses of inhaled corticosteroids. Evidence from head-to-head
comparisons is needed to assess the comparative risks and benefits of the
different combination inhalers.

DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD006829.pub2 
PMCID: PMC4170910
PMID: 22972099  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Occup Med (Lond). 2012 Oct;62(7):578-80. doi: 10.1093/occmed/kqs149. Epub 2012
Sep 4.

Acute respiratory symptoms following massive carbon black exposure.

Hailemariam Y(1), Amiri HM, Nugent K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center,
Lubbock, TX 79430, USA.

BACKGROUND: Chronic carbon black exposure in the work environment can cause both 
respiratory symptoms and changes in lung function. There is limited information
on the respiratory effects of acute exposure to carbon black.
METHODS: Case report and literature review.
RESULTS: A 44-year-old man had intense exposure to carbon black when his crane
ran into a truck with a trailer filled with carbon black. One week after this
exposure he developed shortness of breath and cough with sputum production. These
symptoms persisted and increased in intensity. Physical examination revealed
expiratory wheezes when in the supine position. Pulmonary function tests revealed
a mild obstructive ventilatory defect with a reduced FEV(1)/FVC ratio. The
patient responded to treatment with fluticasone and salmeterol with a reduction
in symptoms and improvement in his spirometry to a normal range.
CONCLUSIONS: Acute exposure to carbon black can cause respiratory symptoms and an
obstructive ventilatory defect. This presentation suggests a small airway disease
which improved over time with inhaled steroids and long-acting beta-agonists.
Patients with intense carbon black exposure following industrial accidents will
need frequent evaluation to manage any related respiratory tract injury.

DOI: 10.1093/occmed/kqs149 
PMID: 22949585  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Int Arch Allergy Immunol. 2013;160(1):27-36. doi: 10.1159/000338430. Epub 2012
Aug 31.

Corticosteroids plus long-acting β2-agonists prevent double-stranded RNA-induced 
upregulation of B7-H1 on airway epithelium.

Kan-O K(1), Matsumoto K, Inoue H, Fukuyama S, Asai Y, Watanabe W, Kurokawa M,
Araya J, Kuwano K, Nakanishi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute for Diseases of the Chest, Graduate School of Medical
Sciences, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Airway viral infections provoke exacerbations of asthma and chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease. B7-H1 is a costimulatory molecule that is
implicated in an escape mechanism of viruses from host immune systems. This
escape may be associated with the persistence of viral infection and lead to
exacerbation of underlying diseases. We have shown that an analog of viral
double-stranded RNA, polyinosinic-polycytidylic acid (poly IC), upregulated the
expression of B7-H1 on airway epithelial cells, an effect which was
corticosteroid-resistant. We investigated the effects of corticosteroids plus
long-acting β(2)-agonists (LABAs; fluticasone/salmeterol or
budesonide/formoterol) on the expression of B7-H1.
METHODS: BEAS-2B cells and primary airway epithelial cells were stimulated with
poly IC or respiratory syncytial virus. The expression of B7-H1 was assessed by
flow cytometry.
RESULTS: Poly IC upregulated the expression of B7-H1, which was suppressed by
high-concentration corticosteroids but not by LABAs. The upregulation was
suppressed by very low-concentration corticosteroids when used in combination
with LABAs. Their combination also suppressed the virus-induced upregulation of
B7-H1. Poly IC stimulation induced the nuclear translocation of nuclear factor ĸB
(NF-ĸB). Inhibitors of NF-ĸB activation prevented the poly IC-induced
upregulation of B7-H1. Low-concentration corticosteroids in combination with
LABAs enhanced the de novo induction of IĸBα, the endogenous inhibitor of NF-ĸB
activation.
CONCLUSIONS: Fluticasone/salmeterol or budesonide/formoterol attenuate the
virus-associated upregulation of B7-H1 on airway epithelial cells via suppression
of NF-ĸB activation.

Copyright © 2012 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000338430 
PMID: 22948082  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Ann Thorac Med. 2012 Jul;7(3):140-4. doi: 10.4103/1817-1737.98846.

Comparison of the effect of high-dose inhaled budesonide and fluticasone on
adrenal function in patients with severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Fahim A(1), Faruqi S, Wright CE, Kastelik JA, Morice AH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiovascular and Respiratory Studies, Department of Respiratory 
Medicine,Castle Hill Hospital, Cottingham, HU16 5JQ, UK.

INTRODUCTION: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a leading cause of 
respiratory-related morbidity and mortality. Inhaled steroids are frequently used
in patients with moderate to severe disease and may lead to adrenal suppression.
OBJECTIVES: The aim of this study was to compare the effect of inhaled
budesonide/formoterol with inhaled fluticasone/salmeterol in severe COPD.
METHODS: It was a prospective open-label crossover study of 22 patients. Adrenal 
suppression was measured by overnight urinary cortisol/creatinine ratio. The
measurements were taken while patients were on either combination for at least 4 
weeks.
RESULTS: A total of 12 patients completed the study. The mean age was 64 years (8
males, 4 females). The mean FEV1 was 1 L (range, 0.5-1.8). There was no
significant difference in adrenal suppression measured by overnight urinary
cortisol/creatinine ratio (budesonide 5.2 ± 4.3, fluticasone 4.7 ± 3.1; 95% CI
-2.2 to 1.2; P = 0.52) and urinary cortisol concentration (budesonide 51 ± 53,
fluticasone 43 ± 31 [nmol/l]; 95% CI -35 to 20; P = 0.56).
CONCLUSION: Inhaled budesonide and fluticasone have no significantly different
effect on adrenal function in moderate to severe COPD. The adverse event profile 
of high-dose inhaled steroids should not influence the choice of medication.

DOI: 10.4103/1817-1737.98846 
PMCID: PMC3425045
PMID: 22924071  [PubMed]


233. Respir Med. 2012 Nov;106(11):1487-93. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2012.07.011. Epub 2012 
Aug 15.

Risk of new onset diabetes mellitus in patients with asthma or COPD taking
inhaled corticosteroids.

O'Byrne PM(1), Rennard S, Gerstein H, Radner F, Peterson S, Lindberg B, Carlsson 
LG, Sin DD.

Author information: 
(1)Firestone Institute of Respiratory Health, Michael G DeGroote School of
Medicine, McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada. obyrnep@mcmaster.ca

BACKGROUND: A recent case-controlled study reported an increased risk of diabetes
mellitus in patients treated with inhaled corticosteroids for asthma or COPD,
versus age-matched controls.
OBJECTIVE: The purpose of the current study was to evaluate whether there was an 
increased risk of new onset diabetes mellitus or hyperglycaemia among patients
with asthma or COPD treated with inhaled corticosteroids.
METHODS: A retrospective analysis evaluated all double-blind, placebo-controlled,
trials in patients ≥4 years of age involving budesonide or budesonide/formoterol 
in asthma (26 trials; budesonide: n = 9067; placebo: n = 5926), and in COPD (8
trials; budesonide: n = 4616; non-ICS: n = 3643). A secondary dataset evaluated
all double-blind, controlled trials in asthma involving the use of inhaled
corticosteroids (60 trials; budesonide: n = 33,496; fluticasone: n = 2773).
RESULTS: In the primary asthma dataset, the occurrence of diabetes
mellitus/hyperglycaemia adverse events (AEs) was 0.13% for budesonide and 0.13%
for placebo (HR 0.98 [95% CI: 0.38-2.50], p = 0.96) and serious adverse events
(SAEs) was 0% for budesonide and 0.05% for placebo. In the secondary dataset, the
occurrence of diabetes/hyperglycaemia as AE and SAE was 0.19% and 0.03%,
respectively. In the COPD dataset, the occurrence of diabetes
mellitus/hyperglycaemia AEs was 1.3% for budesonide and 1.2% for non-ICS (HR 0.99
[95% CI: 0.67-1.46], p = 0.96) and SAEs was 0.1% for budesonide and 0.03% for
non-ICS.
CONCLUSION AND CLINICAL RELEVANCE: Treatment with inhaled corticosteroids in
patients with asthma or COPD was not associated with increased risk of new onset 
diabetes mellitus or hyperglycaemia.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2012.07.011 
PMID: 22902134  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2012;7:415-20. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S31526. Epub
2012 Jul 5.

Efficacy of indacaterol 75 μg versus fixed-dose combinations of
formoterol-budesonide or salmeterol-fluticasone for COPD: a network
meta-analysis.

Cope S(1), Kraemer M, Zhang J, Capkun-Niggli G, Jansen JP.

Author information: 
(1)MAPI Consultancy, Boston, MA 02114, USA.

BACKGROUND: The purpose of this study was to update our network meta-analysis in 
order to compare the efficacy of indacaterol 75 μg with that of a fixed-dose
combination of formoterol and budesonide (FOR/BUD) and a fixed-dose combination
salmeterol and fluticasone (SAL/FP) for the treatment of chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD) based on evidence identified previously in addition to
two new randomized clinical trials.
METHODS: Fifteen randomized, placebo-controlled clinical trials including COPD
patients were evaluated: indacaterol 75 μg once daily (n = 2 studies),
indacaterol 150 μg once daily (n = 5), indacaterol 300 μg once daily (n = 4),
FOR/BUD 9/160 μg twice daily (n = 2), FOR/BUD 9/320 μg twice daily (n = 2),
SAL/FP 50/500 μg twice daily (n = 4), and SAL/FP 50/250 μg twice daily (n = 1).
All trials were analyzed simultaneously using a Bayesian network meta-analysis
and relative treatment effects between all regimens were obtained.
Treatment-by-covariate interactions were included where possible to improve the
similarity of the trials. Outcomes of interest were trough forced expiratory
volume in 1 second (FEV(1)) and transitional dyspnea index at 12 weeks.
RESULTS: Based on the results without adjustment for covariates, indacaterol 75
μg resulted in a greater improvement in FEV(1) at 12 weeks compared with FOR/BUD 
9/160 μg (difference in change from baseline 0.09 L [95% credible interval
0.04-0.13]) and FOR/BUD 9/320 μg (0.07 L [0.03-0.11]) and was comparable with
SAL/FP 50/250 μg (0.00 L [-0.07-0.07]) and SAL/FP 50/500 μg (0.01 L
[-0.04-0.05]). For transitional dyspnea index, data was available only for
indacaterol 75 μg versus SAL/FP 50/500 μg (-0.49 points [-1.87-0.89]).
CONCLUSION: Based on results of a network meta-analysis with and without
covariates, indacaterol 75 μg is expected to be at least as efficacious as
FOR/BUD (9/320 μg and 9/160 μg) and comparable with SAL/FP (50/250 μg and 50/500 
μg) in terms of lung function. In terms of breathlessness (transitional dyspnea
index) at 12 weeks, the results are inconclusive given the limited data.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S31526 
PMCID: PMC3402062
PMID: 22848154  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Clin Ther. 2012 Aug;34(8):1655-66.e5. doi: 10.1016/j.clinthera.2012.06.005. Epub 
2012 Jul 11.

Effect of once-daily fluticasone furoate/vilanterol on 24-hour pulmonary function
in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: a randomized, three-way, 
incomplete block, crossover study.

Boscia JA(1), Pudi KK, Zvarich MT, Sanford L, Siederer SK, Crim C.

Author information: 
(1)CU Pharmaceutical Research, Union, South Carolina 29379, USA.
joseph@cupharmresearch.com

BACKGROUND: Available inhaled corticosteroid/long-acting β(2)-agonist
combinations for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) require twice-daily
administration. The combination of fluticasone furoate (FF) and vilanterol (VI)
FF/VI is being developed in a novel dry powder inhaler for the treatment of COPD 
and asthma with the potential for once-daily dosing. Results from Phase II
studies have shown clinically and statistically significant improvements over
placebo in trough (24-hour postdose) forced expiratory volume in 1 second
(FEV(1)) after once-daily dosing with FF or VI (VI concurrently with an inhaled
corticosteroid) in asthma and VI in COPD.
OBJECTIVES: This Phase III, multicenter, randomized, double-blind,
placebo-controlled study was designed based on guidance from drug regulators with
the goal of evaluating the 24-hour spirometric effect of once-daily FF/VI in
patients with COPD.
METHODS: Patients (aged ≥40 years) who completed a 2-week placebo run-in period
were randomized to 1 of 18 three-course sequences of placebo and 2 of 3 dose
combinations of FF/VI (50/25 μg, 100/25 μg, and 200/25 μg), dosed once daily in
the morning. Each 28-day treatment period was separated by a 2-week,
single-blind, placebo washout period. The primary end point was time-adjusted
(weighted mean) 0 to 24-hour FEV(1) (AUC) at the end of each 28-day treatment
period (period days 28-29). Safety profile assessments included incidence of
adverse events (AEs) (defined according to the Medical Dictionary for Regulatory 
Activities), 12-lead ECG outputs, vital signs (pulse rate, diastolic and systolic
blood pressure) and clinical laboratory assessments (including fasting serum
glucose and potassium) and 24-hour serum cortisol. The pharmacokinetics of FF and
VI were assessed at the end of each 28-day treatment period with FF/VI.
RESULTS: Eighty-seven patients were screened; 54 completed run-in and were
randomized to double-blind treatment. The mean patient age was 57.9 years, and
46% were male. The majority of patients were current smokers (83%) and were
receiving short-acting β(2)-agonists within the 3 months before screening (63%). 
All 3 strengths of once-daily FF/VI demonstrated significantly higher 0 to
24-hour (period days 28-29) change from period baseline weighted mean FEV(1) than
placebo: adjusted mean improvements from placebo in FEV(1) for FF/VI were 220 to 
236 mL (all, P < 0.001). Improvements versus placebo in change from period
baseline serial FEV(1) measures were observed at each time-point and with each
strength of FF/VI over the 0 to 25-hour period (period days 28-29), indicating
sustained bronchodilation. The overall incidence of on-treatment AEs was low
(10%-12% with FF/VI; 4% with placebo); 2 serious AEs were reported during washout
periods (1 AE after FF/VI 50/25 μg and 1 AE after placebo) but neither was
considered treatment related. No serious AEs were reported during the treatment
periods or during the follow-up period. No clinically or statistically
significant differences from placebo were reported for serum glucose or
potassium. No significant effects on vital signs, ECG, or 24-hour serial serum
cortisol were reported. The extent of systemic exposure to FF and VI at steady
state was low for all strengths of FF/VI.
CONCLUSIONS: FF/VI inhaled once daily in the morning for 28 days produced
significant improvements in pulmonary function with a prolonged (>24 hours')
duration of action in this population of patients with COPD. The combination was 
well tolerated. ClinicalTrials.gov identifier: NCT01072149.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier HS Journals, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clinthera.2012.06.005 
PMID: 22789766  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Thorax. 2013 Mar;68(3):256-62. doi: 10.1136/thoraxjnl-2012-201772. Epub 2012 Jul 
10.

Chronic respiratory disease, inhaled corticosteroids and risk of non-tuberculous 
mycobacteriosis.

Andréjak C(1), Nielsen R, Thomsen VØ, Duhaut P, Sørensen HT, Thomsen RW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Epidemiology, Institute of Clinical Medicine, Aarhus
University Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark.

BACKGROUND: Chronic respiratory disease and inhaled corticosteroid (ICS) therapy 
for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) increase the risk of pneumonia. 
Few data are available on the association of these risk factors with
non-tuberculous mycobacterial (NTM) pulmonary disease.
METHODS: This study examined chronic respiratory diseases and ICS use as risk
factors in a population-based case-control study encompassing all adults in
Denmark with microbiologically confirmed NTM pulmonary disease between 1997 and
2008. The study included 10 matched population controls per case. Conditional
logistic regression was used to compute adjusted ORs for NTM pulmonary disease
with regard to chronic respiratory disease history.
RESULTS: Overall, chronic respiratory disease was associated with a 16.5-fold
(95% CI 12.2 to 22.2) increased risk of NTM pulmonary disease. The adjusted OR
for NTM disease was 15.7 (95% CI 11.4 to 21.5) for COPD, 7.8 (95% CI 5.2 to 11.6)
for asthma, 9.8 (95% CI 2.03 to 52.8) for pneumoconiosis, 187.5 (95% CI 24.8 to
1417.4) for bronchiectasis, and 178.3 (95% CI 55.4 to 574.3) for tuberculosis
history. ORs were 29.1 (95% CI 13.3 to 63.8) for patients with COPD on current
ICS therapy and 7.6 (95% CI 3.4 to 16.8) for patients with COPD who had never
received ICS therapy. Among patients with COPD, ORs increased according to ICS
dose, from 28.1 for low-dose intake to 47.5 for high-dose intake (more than 800
μg/day). The OR was higher for fluticasone than for budesonide.
CONCLUSION: Chronic respiratory disease, particularly COPD treated with ICS
therapy, is a strong risk factor for NTM pulmonary disease.

DOI: 10.1136/thoraxjnl-2012-201772 
PMID: 22781123  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Respir Med. 2012 Oct;106(10):1413-20. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2012.05.011. Epub 2012 
Jun 28.

Effect of combination treatment on lung volumes and exercise endurance time in
COPD.

Magnussen H(1), Paggiaro P, Schmidt H, Kesten S, Metzdorf N, Maltais F.

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary Research Institute at Hospital Grosshansdorf, Center for Pneumology 
and Thoracic Surgery, Woehrendamm 80, D-22927 Grosshansdorf, Germany.
magnussen@pulmoresearch.de

BACKGROUND: Data comparing two bronchodilators vs. one bronchodilator plus
inhaled corticosteroid (ICS) on hyperinflation and exercise endurance in chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) are scarce, though these therapeutic
strategies are widely used in clinical practice.
METHODS: We performed a randomized, crossover clinical trial of two × 8 weeks
comparing tiotropium (18 μg once daily) + salmeterol (50 μg twice daily) (T + S) 
to salmeterol + fluticasone (50/500 μg twice daily) (S + F) in COPD (forced
expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV(1)) ≤65% predicted, and thoracic gas volume (TGV)
≥120% predicted). Coprimary endpoints were postbronchodilator TGV and exercise
endurance time (EET).
RESULTS: In 309 patients, at baseline, prebronchodilator FEV(1) was 1.36 L (46%
predicted), TGV was 5.42 L (165% predicted), and EET = 458 s. Relative to S + F, 
T + S lowered postdose TGV by 182 ± 44 ml after 4 weeks (p < 0.0001) and
87 ± 44 ml after 8 weeks (p < 0.05). EET was nonsignificantly increased following
T + S treatment (20 ± 15 s at 4 weeks, 15 ± 13 s at 8 weeks) vs. S + F. BORG
dyspnea score at exercise isotime was reduced in favor of T + S.
CONCLUSION: The two bronchodilators decreased hyperinflation significantly more
than one bronchodilator and ICS. This difference was not reflected in EET.
(ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT00530842).

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2012.05.011 
PMID: 22749044  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Clin Transl Allergy. 2012 Jun 27;2(1):11. doi: 10.1186/2045-7022-2-11.

Combined fluticasone furoate/vilanterol reduces decline in lung function
following inhaled allergen 23 h after dosing in adult asthma: a randomised,
controlled trial.

Oliver A(1), Quinn D, Goldfrad C, van Hecke B, Ayer J, Boyce M.

Author information: 
(1)GlaxoSmithKline Respiratory and Immuno-Inflammation Medicines Development
Centre, Stockley Park, London, UK. amanda.j.oliver@gsk.com.

BACKGROUND: There is a need for preventative asthma maintenance therapy that
provides lasting bronchoprotection against allergen provocation. Fluticasone
furoate (FF) is a novel inhaled once-daily corticosteroid, being investigated as 
monotherapy for asthma and in combination with vilanterol (VI), a novel inhaled
once-daily long-acting beta-agonist, for asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease.
METHODS: In a crossover study of 52 subjects with mild asthma, FF/VI 100/25mcg
and FF 100 dosed once-daily in the evening for 28 days were compared with placebo
to evaluate their capacity to provide bronchoprotection against the early
asthmatic response (EAR) stimulated by an inhaled allergen challenge.
Bronchoprotection was assessed by change from post-saline baseline in weighted
mean (wm) forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1) for the first 2 h post-allergen 
challenge, which was on Day 29 (22-23 h post final dose on Day 28). The EAR was
also assessed using maximum percent decrease from post-saline baseline and
minimum absolute FEV1; the incidence of adverse events was a secondary endpoint.
RESULTS: FF/VI 100/25 and FF 100 both provided significant bronchoprotection
against the EAR for all endpoints assessed. For wmFEV1 over the first 2 h
post-allergen challenge, a 162 mL (95% CI, 87 to 237 mL) difference was observed 
between placebo and FF 100, while a 145 mL (95% CI, 69 to 222 mL) difference was 
observed between placebo and FF/VI 100/25 treatment. No difference between active
treatments was observed (-17 mL; 95% CI, -91 to 57 mL). Both treatments were well
tolerated.
CONCLUSIONS: FF 100 alone and in combination with VI 25 provides significant
bronchoprotection against the EAR in subjects with mild asthma. That this
protection is provided at the trough of dosing, i.e. 23 h post last dose,
supports the utility of FF 100 and FF/VI 100/25 as viable once-daily therapies.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: Clinicaltrials.gov identifier: NCT01128569, GSK Study number:
HZA113090.

DOI: 10.1186/2045-7022-2-11 
PMCID: PMC3483689
PMID: 22738148  [PubMed]


239. Respir Res. 2012 Jun 6;13:44. doi: 10.1186/1465-9921-13-44.

Prediction and course of symptoms and lung function around an exacerbation in
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

van den Berge M(1), Hop WC, van der Molen T, van Noord JA, Creemers JP, Schreurs 
AJ, Wouters EF, Postma DS; COSMIC (COPD and Seretide: a Multi-Center Intervention
and Characterization) study group.

Collaborators: Aalbers R, Beaumont F, Boersma W, Bogaard J, Bunnik M, Creemers J,
Dalinghaus W, de Graaff C, de Jong J, de Jong P, de Munck D, de Vries D, de
Vries, Hertog W, Dik H, Dubois E, Eland M, Evers W, Gans S, Geraedts W, Heijerman
H, Hendriks A, Hol B, Kersbergen J, Los H, Luursema P, Pannekoek B, Pieters W,
Quanjel R, Quanjel-Wisselo E, Rammeloo R, Retera J, Roldaan A, Rudolphus A, Sala 
L, Schlösser N, Schols A, Schreurs A, Simons J, Sips A, Smeenk F, Strankinga W,
Utama I, van Beek F, van de Woude H, van den Berg P, van den Bosch J, van den
Bosch J, van der Brink W, van den Elshout F, van der Bruggen- Bogaarts B, van der
Zeijden J, van Harreveld A, van Keimpema A, van Noord J, van Pagée H, van
Snippenburg R, van Spiegel P, Verbraecken J, Westbroek J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, University Medical Center Groningen, GRIAC
Research Institute, University of Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.
m.van.den.berge@umcg.nl

BACKGROUND: Frequent exacerbations induce a high burden to Chronic Obstructive
Pulmonary Disease (COPD). We investigated the course of exacerbations in the
published COSMIC study that investigated the effects of 1-year withdrawal of
fluticasone after a 3-month run-in treatment period with salmeterol/fluticasone
in patients with COPD.
METHODS: In 373 patients, we evaluated diary cards for symptoms, Peak Expiratory 
Flow (PEF), and salbutamol use and assessed their course during exacerbations.
RESULTS: There were 492 exacerbations in 224 patients. The level of symptoms of
cough, sputum, dyspnea and nocturnal awakening steadily increased from 2 weeks
prior to exacerbation, with a sharp rise during the last week. Symptoms of cough,
sputum, and dyspnea reverted to baseline values at different rates (after 4, 4,
and 7 weeks respectively), whereas symptoms of nocturnal awakening were still
increased after eight weeks. The course of symptoms was similar around a first
and second exacerbation. Increases in symptoms and salbutamol use and decreases
in PEF were associated with a higher risk to develop an exacerbation, but with
moderate predictive values, the areas under the receiver operating curves ranging
from 0.63 to 0.70.
CONCLUSIONS: Exacerbations of COPD are associated with increased symptoms that
persist for weeks and the course is very similar between a first and second
exacerbation. COPD exacerbations are preceded by increased symptoms and
salbutamol use and lower PEF, yet predictive values are too low to warrant daily 
use in clinical practice.

DOI: 10.1186/1465-9921-13-44 
PMCID: PMC3494574
PMID: 22672621  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Respir Res. 2012 May 31;13:41. doi: 10.1186/1465-9921-13-41.

Observational study of the outcomes and costs of initiating maintenance therapies
in patients with moderate exacerbations of COPD.

Dalal AA(1), Shah MB, D'Souza AO, Lunacsek OE, Nagar SP, Crater GD.

Author information: 
(1)GlaxoSmithKline, Research Triangle Park, 5 Moore Dr, Bide West, Durham, NC
27709, USA. anand.a.dalal@gsk.com

BACKGROUND: There are limited data describing patients with moderate COPD
exacerbations and evaluating comparative effectiveness of maintenance treatments 
in this patient population. The study examined COPD patients with moderate COPD
exacerbations. COPD-related outcomes were compared between patients initiating
fluticasone propionate-salmeterol 250/50 mcg (FSC) vs anticholinergics (ACs)
following a moderate COPD exacerbation.
METHODS: This retrospective observational study used a large administrative
claims database (study period: 2003-2009) to identify and describe patients with 
an initial, moderate COPD exacerbation. A descriptive analysis of patients with
moderate COPD exacerbations was done evaluating maintenance treatment rates,
subsequent COPD exacerbation rates, and COPD-related costs during a 1-year
period. A cohort analysis compared COPD exacerbation rates and associated costs
during a variable-length follow-up period between patients initiating maintenance
therapy with FSC or ACs. COPD exacerbations were reported as rate per 100
patient-years, and monthly costs were reported (standardized to USD 2009). COPD
exacerbation rates between cohorts were evaluated using Cox proportional hazards 
models, and costs were analyzed using generalized linear models with log-link and
gamma distribution.
RESULTS: 21,524 patients with a moderate COPD exacerbation were identified. Only 
25% initiated maintenance therapy, and 13% had a subsequent exacerbation. Annual 
costs averaged $594 per patient. A total of 2,849 treated patients (FSC = 925;
AC = 1,924) were eligible for the cohort analysis. The FSC cohort had a
significantly lower rate of COPD exacerbations compared to the AC cohort (20.8 vs
32.8; P = 0.04). After adjusting for differences in baseline covariates, the FSC 
cohort had a 42% significantly lower risk of a COPD exacerbation (HR = 0.58; 95% 
CI: 0.38, 0.91). The FSC cohort incurred significantly higher adjusted pharmacy
costs per patient per month by $37 (95% CI: $19, $72) for COPD-related
medications vs the AC cohort. However, this increase was offset by a significant 
reduction in adjusted monthly medical costs per patient for the FSC vs the AC
cohort ($82 vs $112; P < 0.05). Total monthly COPD-related costs, as a result,
did not differ between cohorts.
CONCLUSIONS: Only a quarter of patients with a moderate COPD exacerbation were
subsequently treated with maintenance therapy. Initiation of FSC among those
treated was associated with better clinical and economic outcomes compared to AC.

DOI: 10.1186/1465-9921-13-41 
PMCID: PMC3490761
PMID: 22651541  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Respir Res. 2012 May 31;13:40. doi: 10.1186/1465-9921-13-40.

Inhaled fluticasone propionate impairs pulmonary clearance of Klebsiella
pneumoniae in mice.

Patterson CM(1), Morrison RL, D'Souza A, Teng XS, Happel KI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Section of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine,
Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center, New Orleans, LA, USA.

BACKGROUND: Recent trials demonstrate increased pneumonia risk in chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease patients treated with the inhaled corticosteroid
(ICS) fluticasone propionate (FP). There is limited work describing FP effects on
host defenses against bacterial pneumonia.
METHODS: C57BL/6 mice received daily, nose-only exposure to nebulized FP or
vehicle for 8 days, followed by pulmonary challenge with Klebsiella pneumoniae.
Bacterial burden, phagocytosis, leukocyte recruitment, cytokine expression,
nitric oxide release, and survival were measured.
RESULTS: Inhaled FP increased bacterial burden in lungs and blood 48 h after
infection but affected neither in vivo phagocytosis of bacteria by alveolar
macrophages (AM) nor alveolar neutrophil recruitment. AM from FP-treated mice
showed impaired expression of infection induced TNF-alpha, IP-10 (CXCL-10), and
interleukin 6 (IL-6), and AM also showed a trend towards impaired intracellular
pathogen control following in vivo infection. In vitro FP treatment resulted in a
dose-dependent impairment of cytokine expression by AM. Furthermore,
infection-induced nitric oxide (but not hydrogen peroxide) production was
impaired by FP in vivo and in vitro. FP decreased survival in this model.
CONCLUSIONS: Exposure to inhaled FP impairs pulmonary clearance of K. pneumoniae 
in mice, an effect associated with greater systemic bacteremia and death.
Decreased AM cytokine and nitric oxide expression parallel the failure to control
infection. These results support the study of ICS effects on human pulmonary host
defenses.

DOI: 10.1186/1465-9921-13-40 
PMCID: PMC3426464
PMID: 22651370  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Pneumonol Alergol Pol. 2012;80(3):255-62.

[The influence of treatment with formoterol, formoterol with tiotropium,
formoterol with inhaled glucocorticosteroid and tiotropium on lung functions,
tolerance of exercise and simple, morning everyday activities in patients with
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)].

[Article in Polish]

Szmidt M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Oddział Kliniczny Chorób Wewnętrznych i Alergologii, Katedra Nauk Klinicznych,
Wydział Nauk Biomedycznych i Kształcenia Podyplomowego Uniwersytetu Medycznego w 
Łodzi. mirszmidt@wp.pl

Bronchodilators - long-acting b2-adrenergic agonists (formoterol and salmeterol) 
and a long-acting antimuscarinic drug (tiotropium), are the main drugs applied in
symptomatic treatment of COPD. In patients with COPD, dyspnea is frequently
associated with simple everyday activities. Two questionnaires have been
published recently as a means of assessing the patients' ability to perform
morning activities and symptoms. Dynamic hyperinflation is the pathophysiological
disorder responsible for dyspnea and decreased exercise tolerance in COPD.
Formoterol is faster than salmeterol in diminishing air-trapping. It has been
shown that treatment with formoterol and tiotropium in COPD patients improves
FEV(1), FVC, IC, symptoms score and quality of life in comparison with tiotropium
applied alone. Among LABA and inhaled glucocorticosteroids combinations, those
containing formoterol have a more beneficial effect on the ability to perform
simple morning activities (budesonide/formoterol was better than
fluticasone/salmeterol). Beclomethasone/formoterol - 400/24 mcg/die, in
comparison with fluticasone/salmeterol - 500/100 mcg/die significantly reduced
air-trapping and dyspnea in COPD patients. The comparison of
budesonide/formoterol - 400/12 mcg 2 x die with beclomethasone/ /formoterol -
200/12 mcg 2 x die has shown similar influence of both combinations on FEV(1),
dyspnea, 6-minute walk test, symptoms score and quality of life. The addition of 
budesonide and formoterol combination to tiotropium gives further benefits:
reduces number of exacerbations, improves FEV1, symptoms score and performance of
simple morning routines. Doctors should pay more attention to symptoms and
limitations in simple activities in the morning and adequately adjust the
treatment.


PMID: 22562275  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Eur Respir J. 2012 Nov;40(5):1098-105. doi: 10.1183/09031936.00169711. Epub 2012 
Apr 20.

Clinical and inflammatory determinants of bronchial hyperresponsiveness in COPD.

van den Berge M(1), Vonk JM, Gosman M, Lapperre TS, Snoeck-Stroband JB, Sterk PJ,
Kunz LI, Hiemstra PS, Timens W, Ten Hacken NH, Kerstjens HA, Postma DS.

Author information: 
(1)Dept of Pulmonary Diseases, University Medical Center Groningen, University of
Groningen, Hanzeplein 1, 9713 GZ, Groningen, The Netherlands.
m.van.den.berge@long.umcg.nl

Comment in
    Eur Respir J. 2012 Nov;40(5):1067-9.

Bronchial hyperresponsiveness (BHR) is regarded as a hallmark of asthma, yet it
is also present in a considerable number of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD) patients. Epidemiological studies have shown that BHR provides
complementary information to forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV(1)) for
development and progression of COPD. We hypothesised that the severity of BHR and
its longitudinal changes associate with both clinical and airway inflammation
measures in COPD. Our hypothesis was tested in 114 COPD patients (median age 62.9
years, smoking exposure 45.9 pack-yrs) participating in the GLUCOLD (Groningen
Leiden Universities Corticosteroids in Obstructive Lung Disease) study, which
previously showed an improvement in BHR with fluticasone and
fluticasone/salmeterol. At baseline, and 6 and 30 months after treatment, we
investigated lung function, including body plethysmography, provocative
concentration of methacholine causing a 20% fall in FEV(1), sputum induction, and
bronchial biopsies. By performing both cross-sectional and longitudinal analyses,
we show that BHR in COPD is predominantly associated with residual volume/total
lung capacity (a measure of air trapping) and airway inflammation reflected by
the number of neutrophils, macrophages and lymphocytes in sputum and bronchial
biopsies. Our findings indicate that BHR is an independent trait in COPD and
provides important information on phenotype heterogeneity and disease activity.

DOI: 10.1183/09031936.00169711 
PMID: 22523354  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2012 Jun 15;302(12):L1250-61. doi:
10.1152/ajplung.00019.2012. Epub 2012 Apr 13.

Superiority of PC-SOD to other anti-COPD drugs for elastase-induced emphysema and
alteration in lung mechanics and respiratory function in mice.

Tanaka K(1), Sato K, Aoshiba K, Azuma A, Mizushima T.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Analytical Chemistry, Faculty of Pharmacy, Keio Univ., 1-5-30,
Shibakoen, Minato-ku, Tokyo 105-8512, Japan.

Bronchodilators (such as ipratropium bromide), steroids (such as fluticasone
propionate), and newly developed anti-inflammatory drugs (such as roflumilast)
are used for patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). We
recently reported that lecithinized superoxide dismutase (PC-SOD) confers a
protective effect in mouse models of COPD. We here examined the therapeutic
effect of the combined administration of PC-SOD with ipratropium bromide on
pulmonary emphysema and compared the effect of PC-SOD to other types of drugs.
The severity of emphysema in mice was assessed by various criteria. Lung
mechanics (elastance) and respiratory function (ratio of forced expiratory volume
in the first 0.05 s to forced vital capacity) were assessed. Administration of
PC-SOD by inhalation suppressed elastase-induced pulmonary emphysema, alteration 
of lung mechanics, and respiratory dysfunction. The concomitant intratracheal
administration of ipratropium bromide did not alter the ameliorating effects of
PC-SOD. Administration of ipratropium bromide, fluticasone propionate, or
roflumilast alone did not suppress the elastase-induced increase in the pulmonary
level of superoxide anion, pulmonary inflammatory response, pulmonary emphysema, 
alteration of lung mechanics, or respiratory dysfunction as effectively as did
PC-SOD. PC-SOD, but not the other drugs, showed a therapeutic effect even when
the drug was administered after the development of emphysema. PC-SOD also
suppressed the cigarette smoke-induced pulmonary inflammatory response and
increase in airway resistance. Based on these results, we consider that the
inhalation of PC-SOD would be therapeutically beneficial for COPD.

DOI: 10.1152/ajplung.00019.2012 
PMID: 22505669  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2012;7:221-33. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S27569. Epub
2012 Mar 22.

Clinical and economic outcomes in an observational study of COPD maintenance
therapies: multivariable regression versus propensity score matching.

Roberts MH(1), Dalal AA.

Author information: 
(1)Lovelace Respiratory Research Institute, Albuquerque, NM, USA.
melissa.roberts@lcfresearch.org

PURPOSE: To investigate equivalency of results from multivariable regression (MR)
and propensity score matching (PSM) models, observational research methods used
to mitigate bias stemming from non-randomization (and consequently unbalanced
groups at baseline), using, as an example, a large study of chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD) initial maintenance therapy.
METHODS: Patients were 32,338 health plan members, age ≥40 years, with COPD
initially treated with fluticasone propionate/salmeterol combination (FSC),
tiotropium (TIO), or ipratropium (IPR) alone or in combination with albuterol.
Using MR and PSM methods, the proportion of patients with COPD-related health
care utilization, mean costs, odds ratios (ORs), and incidence rate ratios (IRRs)
for utilization events were calculated for the 12 months following therapy
initiation.
RESULTS: Of 12,595 FSC, 9126 TIO, and 10,617 IPR patients meeting MR inclusion
criteria, 89.1% (8135) of TIO and 80.2% (8514) of IPR patients were matched to
FSC patients for the PSM analysis. Methods produced substantially similar
findings for mean cost comparisons, ORs, and IRRs for most utilization events. In
contrast to MR, for TIO compared to FSC, PSM did not produce statistically
significant ORs for hospitalization or outpatient visit with antibiotic or
significant IRRs for hospitalization or outpatient visit with oral
corticosteroid. As in the MR analysis, compared to FSC, ORs and IRRs for all
other utilization events, as well as mean costs, were less favorable for IPR and 
TIO.
CONCLUSION: In this example of an observational study of maintenance therapy for 
COPD, more than 80% of the original treatment groups used in the MR analysis were
matched to comparison treatment groups for the PSM analysis. While some sample
size was lost in the PSM analysis, results from both methods were similar in
direction and statistical significance, suggesting that MR and PSM were
equivalent methods for mitigating bias.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S27569 
PMCID: PMC3324998
PMID: 22500122  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Respir Med. 2012 Jun;106(6):829-37. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2011.11.012. Epub 2012
Mar 17.

Rehospitalization risks and outcomes in COPD patients receiving maintenance
pharmacotherapy.

Dalal AA(1), Shah M, D'Souza AO, Crater GD.

Author information: 
(1)GlaxoSmithKline, 5 Moore Dr., Bide West, Mail Stop B.3153, Research Triangle
Park, NC 27709, USA. anand.a.dalal@gsk.com

OBJECTIVE: To determine clinical and economic outcomes following COPD-related
hospitalization/emergency department (ED) care in patients receiving COPD
maintenance therapy.
METHODS: In this retrospective, observational study using administrative claims
data, we identified COPD patients age ≥40 years who received maintenance therapy 
within 30 days of an initial COPD-related hospitalization or ED visit with: (1)
fluticasone propionate/salmeterol combination (FSC 250 mcg/50 mcg) as new
therapy, or (2) an anticholinergic (AC; tiotropium or ipratropium with or without
albuterol). The FSC and AC patients were matched (1:3 ratio) on various baseline 
characteristics using propensity scores to mitigate selection bias at baseline.
The proportion of patients with COPD-related healthcare events, the mean event
rates, and the mean costs in the subsequent 12 months were calculated.
RESULTS: The FSC cohort (N = 484) had a significantly lower proportion of
rehospitalized patients during follow-up than did the AC cohort (N = 1452), 3.1% 
versus 4.6% (P = 0.047). The mean number of rehospitalizations was 0.03 in the
FSC cohort and 0.07 in the AC cohort (P = 0.001). The proportion of patients with
an exacerbation resulting in an ED or physician-outpatient visit and the mean
number of such visits did not differ between cohorts. Total annual COPD-related
medical costs were lower for FSC than for AC ($2080 versus $2636, P = 0.006),
with lower medical and higher pharmacy costs.
CONCLUSIONS: Patients receiving FSC as maintenance therapy following an initial
COPD-related hospitalization or ED visit experienced better clinical and economic
outcomes than patients receiving AC.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2011.11.012 
PMID: 22425138  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Pharmacoeconomics. 2012 Apr;30(4):271-302. doi: 10.2165/11589270-000000000-00000.

Cost effectiveness of pharmacological maintenance treatment for chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease: a review of the evidence and methodological
issues.

Rutten-van Mölken MP(1), Goossens LM.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Medical Technology Assessment/Institute for Healthcare Policy
and Management, Erasmus University Rotterdam, Rotterdam, the Netherlands.
M.Rutten@bmg.eur.nl

BACKGROUND: Over 200 million people have chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD) worldwide. The number of disease-year equivalents and deaths attributable 
to COPD are high. Guidelines for the pharmacological treatment of the disease
recommend an individualized step-up approach in which treatment is intensified
when results are unsatisfactory.
OBJECTIVE: Our objective was to present a systematic review of the cost
effectiveness of pharmacological maintenance treatment for COPD and to discuss
the methodological strengths and weaknesses of the studies.
METHODS: A systematic literature search for economic evaluations of drug therapy 
in COPD was performed in MEDLINE, EMBASE, the Economic Evaluation Database of the
UK NHS (NHS-EED) and the European Network of Health Economic Evaluation Databases
(EURONHEED). Full economic evaluations presenting both costs and health outcomes 
were included.
RESULTS: A total of 40 studies were included in the review. Of these, 16 were
linked to a clinical trial, 14 used Markov models, eight were based on
observational data and two used a different approach. The few studies on
combining short-acting bronchodilators were consistent in finding net cost
savings compared with monotherapy. Studies comparing inhaled corticosteroids
(ICS) with placebo or no maintenance treatment reported inconsistent results.
Studies comparing fluticasone with salmeterol consistently found salmeterol to be
more cost effective. The cost-effectiveness studies of tiotropium versus placebo,
ipratropium or salmeterol pointed towards a reduction in total COPD-related
healthcare costs for tiotropium in many but not all studies. All of these studies
reported additional health benefits of tiotropium. The cost-effectiveness studies
of the combination of inhaled long-acting β₂-agonists and ICS all report
additional health benefits at an increase in total COPD-related costs in most
studies. The cost-per-QALY estimates of this combination treatment vary widely
and are very sensitive to the assumptions on mortality benefit and time horizon.
CONCLUSIONS: The currently available economic evaluations indicate differences in
cost effectiveness between COPD maintenance therapies, but for a more meaningful 
comparison of results it is important to improve the consistency with respect to 
study methodology and choice of comparator.

DOI: 10.2165/11589270-000000000-00000 
PMID: 22409290  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Respir Res. 2012 Feb 17;13:15. doi: 10.1186/1465-9921-13-15.

Observational study on the impact of initiating tiotropium alone versus
tiotropium with fluticasone propionate/salmeterol combination therapy on outcomes
and costs in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Chatterjee A(1), Shah M, D'Souza AO, Bechtel B, Crater G, Dalal AA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Wake Forest University School of Medicine,
Medical Center Blvd, Winston-Salem, NC 27157, USA. achatter@wfubmc.edu

BACKGROUND: This retrospective cohort study compared the risks of exacerbations
and COPD-related healthcare costs between patients with chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD) initiating tiotropium (TIO) alone and patients
initiating triple therapy with fluticasone-salmeterol combination (FSC) added to 
TIO.
METHODS: Managed-care enrollees who had an index event of ≥ 1 pharmacy claim for 
TIO during the study period (January 1, 2003-April 30, 2008) and met other
eligibility criteria were categorized into one of two cohorts depending on their 
medication use. Patients in the TIO+FSC cohort had combination therapy with TIO
and FSC, defined as having an FSC claim on the same date as the TIO claim.
Patients in the TIO cohort had no such FSC use. The risks of COPD exacerbations
and healthcare costs were compared between cohorts during 1 year of follow-up.
RESULTS: The sample comprised 3333 patients (n = 852 TIO+FSC cohort, n = 2481 TIO
cohort). Triple therapy with FSC added to TIO compared with TIO monotherapy was
associated with significant reductions in the adjusted risks of moderate
exacerbation (hazard ratio 0.772; 95% confidence interval [CI] 0.641, 0.930) and 
any exacerbation (hazard ratio 0.763; 95% CI 0.646, 0.949) and a nonsignificant
reduction in COPD-related adjusted monthly medical costs.
CONCLUSIONS: Triple therapy with FSC added to TIO compared with TIO monotherapy
was associated with significant reductions in the adjusted risks of moderate
exacerbation and any exacerbation over a follow-up period of up to 1 year. These 
improvements were gained with triple therapy at roughly equal cost of that of TIO
alone.

DOI: 10.1186/1465-9921-13-15 
PMCID: PMC3305562
PMID: 22340019  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Can Fam Physician. 2012 Feb;58(2):149-50.

Not quite a breath of fresh air: use of combination inhalers in COPD.

Stabler S(1), Tejani AM, Bruchet N.

Author information: 
(1)Lower Mainland Pharmacy Services, Vancouver, BC, Canada.


PMCID: PMC3279263
PMID: 22337735  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Drugs. 2012 Feb 12;72(3):395-414. doi: 10.2165/11208460-000000000-00000.

Budesonide/formoterol Turbuhaler®: a review of its use in chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease.

Scott LJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Adis, Auckland, New Zealand. demail@adis.co.nz

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a highly heterogeneous,
progressive inflammatory disease that imposes considerable economic and
healthcare burdens on society, with the disease predicted to remain a leading
cause of morbidity and mortality worldwide in the future. Current pharmacological
treatment can improve symptoms of the disease, but not progression. Global
Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease guidelines recommend that
patients with moderate COPD should use one or more long-acting bronchodilators
(e.g. a long-acting β(2)-agonist) as required and, for those with severe and very
severe disease who are experiencing repeated COPD exacerbations, an inhaled
corticosteroid should be added as required. Budesonide/formoterol Turbuhaler®
(Symbicort® Turbuhaler®) is a dry powder inhaler (DPI) that combines these two
classes of drugs in a single inhaler, thereby making administration easier and
more convenient. Budesonide/formoterol Turbuhaler® (delivered dose 320 μg/9 μg)
is recommended for the symptomatic treatment of adult patients with severe COPD
(forced expiratory volume in 1 second <50% of predicted value) and a history of
repeated exacerbations, who have significant symptoms despite regular therapy
with long-acting bronchodilators. This article reviews the pharmacological
properties and clinical use of budesonide/formoterol Turbuhaler® in adult
patients with moderate to severe COPD. Budesonide/formoterol Turbuhaler®
(320 μg/9 μg twice daily) was effective and well tolerated in adult patients with
moderate to severe COPD participating in large, multicentre trials of up to 12
months' duration. Budesonide/formoterol Turbuhaler® improved lung function,
exacerbation rates, COPD symptom scores and health status from baseline to a
significantly greater extent than placebo and, in general, than the individual
monotherapies in these trials. Moreover, as reflected in the faster onset of
action of formoterol than salmeterol, budesonide/formoterol Turbuhaler® was more 
effective than salmeterol/fluticasone propionate DPI at improving the patient's
ability to perform morning activities in a short-term study. In the 12-week CLIMB
trial, adding budesonide/formoterol Turbuhaler® to inhaled tiotropium bromide
therapy was significantly more effective than adding placebo to tiotropium
bromide therapy. Thus, inhaled budesonide/formoterol, either alone or as add-on
therapy to other medications, continues to be a useful option for the management 
of COPD.

DOI: 10.2165/11208460-000000000-00000 
PMID: 22316354  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2012;7:11-9. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S27846. Epub 2012
Jan 18.

Clinical and economic outcomes for patients initiating fluticasone
propionate/salmeterol combination therapy (250/50 mcg) versus anticholinergics in
a comorbid COPD/depression population.

Dalal AA(1), Shah M, D'Souza AO, Chaudhari S, Crater G.

Author information: 
(1)GlaxoSmithKline, Research Triangle Park, NC, USA. anand.a.dalal@gsk.com

BACKGROUND: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is frequently associated
with comorbid depression and anxiety. Managing COPD symptoms and exacerbations
through use of appropriate and adequate pharmacotherapy in this population may
result in better COPD-related outcomes.
METHODS: This retrospective, observational study used administrative claims of
patients aged 40 years and older with COPD and comorbid depression/anxiety
identified from January 1, 2004 through June 30, 2008. Patients were assigned to 
fluticasone propionate/salmeterol 250/50 mcg combination (FSC) or
anticholinergics (AC) based on their first (index) prescription. The risks of
COPD exacerbations and healthcare utilization and costs were compared between
cohorts during 1 year of follow-up.
RESULTS: The adjusted risk of a COPD-related exacerbation during the 1-year
follow-up period was 30% higher in the AC cohort (n = 2923) relative to the FSC
cohort (n = 1078) (odds ratio [OR]: 1.30, 95% confidence interval [CI]:
1.08-1.56) after controlling for baseline differences in covariates. The risks of
COPD-related hospitalizations and emergency department visits were 56% and 65%
higher, respectively, in the AC cohort compared with the FSC cohort. The average 
number of COPD-related hospitalizations during the follow-up period was 46%
higher for the AC cohort compared with the FSC cohort (incidence rate ratio
[IRR]: 1.46, 95% CI: 1.01-2.09, P = 0.041). The savings from lower COPD-related
medical costs ($692 vs $1042, P < 0.050) kept the COPD-related total costs during
the follow-up period comparable to those in the AC cohort ($1659 vs $1677, P >
0.050) although the pharmacy costs were higher in the FSC cohort.
CONCLUSIONS: FSC compared with AC was associated with more favorable COPD-related
outcomes and lower COPD-related utilization and medical costs among patients with
COPD and comorbid anxiety/depression.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S27846 
PMCID: PMC3273366
PMID: 22315518  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Respir Care. 2012 Jul;57(7):1161-74. doi: 10.4187/respcare.01414. Epub 2012 Jan
23.

Nebulized corticosteroids in asthma and COPD. An Italian appraisal.

Melani AS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Fisiopatologia e Riabilitazione Respiratoria, Policlinico Le Scotte, Azienda
Ospedaliera Universitaria Senese, Siena, Italy. amelani@ao-siena.toscana.it

Inhaled corticosteroids (ICSs) are the mainstay of anti-inflammatory treatment in
subjects with asthma and COPD. This review evaluates the role of nebulizers as an
alternative to inhalers for delivering ICSs in asthma and COPD. I selected 16
randomized, placebo-controlled, blinded, long-term studies, mostly carried out in
asthma (n = 14) and COPD. Nebulized budesonide has been demonstrated to be
effective and safe in children ages 1-8 years, and, with less evidence, in
infants and adults with asthma. Other investigations, with the addition of in
vitro and in vivo comparison studies, have shown that nebulized beclomethasone,
fluticasone, and flunisolide are effective alternatives to nebulized budesonide
in asthma and COPD. Efficient delivery of nebulized ICSs requires that the
nebulizer system, the nebulized drug formulation, and the inhaling subject
interact properly. The practices of mixing nebulized ICSs with bronchodilators
and using nebulized ICSs in acute settings are promising, but require further
confirmations, and at present cannot be recommended. I conclude that nebulizers
may be considered as an effective alternative to inhalers for delivering ICSs and
can be recommended to asthmatic and COPD subjects who are unwilling or unable to 
use inhalers. Newer formulations could possibly offer a relevant advance for a
more efficient nebulization of ICSs.

DOI: 10.4187/respcare.01414 
PMID: 22272733  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. BMJ Open. 2012 Jan 19;2(1):e000370. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2011-000370. Print 2012.

Efficacy and safety of 4 weeks' treatment with combined fluticasone
furoate/vilanterol in a single inhaler given once daily in COPD: a
placebo-controlled randomised trial.

Lötvall J(1), Bakke PS, Bjermer L, Steinshamn S, Scott-Wilson C, Crim C, Sanford 
L, Haumann B.

Author information: 
(1)Krefting Research Centre, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden.

Background Fluticasone furoate/vilanterol (FF/VI) is a novel once-daily (OD)
inhaled corticosteroid/long-acting β(2) agonist combination in development for
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and asthma. Trial design A
multicentre, randomised, double-blind, parallel-group, placebo-controlled study. 
Methods Participants were patients with moderate-to-severe COPD treated with
placebo or FF/VI 400/25 μg OD for 4 weeks. Study objectives were to assess the
safety and efficacy of FF/VI 400/25 μg OD administered for 4 weeks via a novel
dry powder inhaler. Co-primary end points were change from baseline in weighted
mean (wm) heart rate 0-4 h postdose at day 28 and the incidence of adverse events
(AEs). Secondary end points included change from baseline in trough forced
expiratory volume in one second (FEV(1)) (23-24 h postdose; day 29) and wm FEV(1)
(0-4 h postdose; day 28). Patients were randomised to receive FF/VI 400/25 μg or 
placebo in a 2:1 ratio; all patients and investigators were blinded to active or 
placebo treatment. Results 60 patients (mean age 64 years) were randomised
(FF/VI: n=40; placebo: n=20), and all contributed data to the analysis. Mean
screening post-bronchodilator FEV(1) per cent predicted was comparable between
groups (FF/VI: 58.5%; placebo: 60.1%). The wm heart rate 0-4 h postdose was
similar between groups (difference: 0.6 beats per minute; 95% CI -3.9 to 5.1).
More on-treatment AEs were reported in the FF/VI group (68%) compared with the
placebo group (50%). The most common drug-related AEs in the FF/VI group were
oral candidiasis (8%) and dysphonia (5%). There were no clinically relevant
effects on laboratory values, including glucose and potassium, or on vital signs 
or ECGs/Holters. The FF/VI group had statistically greater improvements compared 
with placebo in trough FEV(1) (mean difference 183 ml) and 0-4 h postdose wm
FEV(1) (mean difference 236 ml). Conclusion FF/VI has a good safety and
tolerability profile and improves lung function compared with placebo in patients
with COPD. Trial registration number clinical trials.gov-NCT00731822.

DOI: 10.1136/bmjopen-2011-000370 
PMCID: PMC3263438
PMID: 22267687  [PubMed]


254. Br J Pharmacol. 2012 Oct;167(4):775-86. doi: 10.1111/j.1476-5381.2012.01864.x.

Corticosteroid insensitivity is reversed by formoterol via
phosphoinositide-3-kinase inhibition.

Rossios C(1), To Y, Osoata G, Ito M, Barnes PJ, Ito K.

Author information: 
(1)Airway Disease Section, NHLI, Imperial College, London, UK.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD) show a poor response to corticosteroids, which has been linked to
oxidative stress. Here we show that the long-acting β(2) -agonist formoterol (FM)
reversed corticosteroid insensitivity under oxidative stress via inhibition of
phosphoinositide-3-kinase (PI3K) signalling.
EXPERIMENTAL APPROACH: Responsiveness to corticosteroids dexamethasone (Dex),
budesonide (Bud) and fluticasone propionate (FP) was determined, as IC(50) values
on TNF-α-induced interleukin 8 release, in U937 monocytic cell line treated with 
hydrogen peroxide (H(2) O(2) ) or peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) from
patients with COPD or severe asthma.
KEY RESULTS: PBMCs from severe asthma and COPD were less sensitive to Dex
compared with those from healthy subjects. Both FM (10(-9)  M) and salmeterol
(SM, 10(-8)  M) reversed Dex insensitivity in severe asthma, but only FM restored
Dex sensitivity in COPD. Although H(2) O(2) exposure decreased steroid
sensitivity in U937 cells, FM restored responsiveness to Bud and FP while the
effects of SM were weaker. Additionally, FM, but not SM, partially inhibited H(2)
O(2) -induced PI3Kδ-dependent (PKB) phosphorylation. H(2) O(2) decreased
SM-induced cAMP production in U937 cells, but did not significantly affect the
response to FM. The reduction of SM effects by H(2) O(2) was reversed by
pretreatment with LY294002, a PI3K inhibitor, or IC87114, a PI3Kδ inhibitor.
CONCLUSION AND IMPLICATIONS: FM reversed oxidative stress-induced corticosteroid 
insensitivity and decreased β(2) adrenoceptor-dependent cAMP production via
inhibition of PI3Kδ signalling. FM will be more effective than SM, when combined 
with corticosteroids, for the treatment of respiratory diseases under conditions 
of high oxidative stress, such as in COPD.

© 2012 The Authors. British Journal of Pharmacology © 2012 The British
Pharmacological Society.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1476-5381.2012.01864.x 
PMCID: PMC3575778
PMID: 22251095  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Drugs. 2012 Jan 22;72(2):273-300. doi: 10.2165/11208620-000000000-00000.

Tiotropium bromide inhalation powder: a review of its use in the management of
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Keating GM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Adis, a Wolters Kluwer Business, Auckland, New Zealand. demail@adis.co.nz

The anticholinergic agent tiotropium bromide (Spiriva®) is a long-acting
bronchodilator that is indicated for the treatment of chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD). This article reviews the clinical efficacy and
tolerability of tiotropium bromide inhalation powder, administered using the
HandiHaler® device, in patients with COPD, as well as reviewing its
pharmacological properties and the results of pharmacoeconomic analyses.
Shorter-term placebo-controlled trials in patients with COPD demonstrated
significantly higher trough forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV(1))
responses with tiotropium bromide than with placebo, confirming it has a duration
of action of ≥24 hours and is suitable for once-daily administration. Lung
function improved to a greater extent with tiotropium bromide than with
ipratropium bromide or, in most instances, salmeterol. Indacaterol was shown to
be noninferior to tiotropium bromide in terms of the trough FEV(1) response. The 
large, 4-year UPLIFT® trial did not show a significant reduction in the annual
rate of decline in FEV(1) with tiotropium bromide versus placebo in patients with
COPD, although subgroup analyses demonstrated a significantly lower rate of
decline with tiotropium bromide than with placebo in some patient groups (e.g.
patients with moderate COPD, patients aged ≥50 years, patients not receiving
maintenance therapy at baseline). Tiotropium bromide prevented exacerbations in
patients with COPD, with a significantly lower exacerbation rate and a
significantly longer time to first exacerbation seen with tiotropium bromide than
with placebo or salmeterol. Exacerbation rates did not significantly differ
between patients receiving tiotropium bromide and those receiving
salmeterol/fluticasone propionate. Tiotropium bromide also had beneficial effects
on health-related quality of life (HR-QOL) and other endpoints, such as dyspnoea 
and rescue medication use. Combination therapy with tiotropium bromide plus
formoterol with or without budesonide improved lung function to a significantly
greater extent than tiotropium bromide alone in patients with COPD. In addition, 
exacerbation rates were lower and HR-QOL was improved with tiotropium bromide
plus budesonide/formoterol versus tiotropium bromide alone. Although the addition
of salmeterol/fluticasone propionate to tiotropium bromide did not reduce the
COPD exacerbation rate, it did improve lung function and HR-QOL. Tiotropium
bromide inhalation powder is generally well tolerated in patients with COPD, with
anticholinergic adverse events (e.g. dry mouth, constipation, gastrointestinal
obstruction, dysuria) among the most commonly reported adverse events. The
UPLIFT® trial showed no significant difference between tiotropium bromide and
placebo recipients in the risk of stroke, and the risk of serious cardiac adverse
events (including congestive heart failure and myocardial infarction) was
significantly lower with tiotropium bromide than with placebo. The absence of a
detrimental effect on cardiovascular outcomes was supported by the results of a
meta-analysis and pooled analyses. In addition, on-treatment mortality was lower 
with tiotropium bromide than with placebo in the UPLIFT® trial. Pooled analyses
showed significantly lower cardiovascular mortality with tiotropium bromide than 
with placebo, with a meta-analysis demonstrating no significant difference
between patients receiving tiotropium bromide and controls in cardiovascular
mortality. Results of modelled pharmacoeconomic analyses conducted from a
healthcare payer perspective in several developed countries suggest that
tiotropium bromide is a cost-effective option in patients with COPD. In
conclusion, tiotropium bromide inhalation powder is a useful option for the
maintenance treatment of patients with COPD.

DOI: 10.2165/11208620-000000000-00000 
PMID: 22217233  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. J Chromatogr B Analyt Technol Biomed Life Sci. 2012 Jan 1;880(1):6-11. doi:
10.1016/j.jchromb.2011.10.029. Epub 2011 Nov 16.

The determination of budesonide and fluticasone in human sputum samples collected
from COPD patients using LC-MS/MS.

Buscher BA(1), Jägfeldt H, Sandman H, Brust-van Schaik R, van Schaik F, Brüll LP.

Author information: 
(1)TNO Triskelion BV, Analytical Research Department, Zeist, The Netherlands.
brigitte.buscher@tno.nl

A bioanalytical method for the quantitative determination of budesonide and
fluticasone in human sputum was developed. Sputolysin(®) Reagent was added to the
sputum samples. After incubation (37°C; 60-70 min under shaking) and automated
solid phase extraction the extracts were analysed using LC-MS/MS. Budesonide and 
fluticasone showed good linearity (r>0.99) over the range 0.1-100 nM in the first
and second validation batch, and over the range 0.25-10,000 nM in the third and
fourth validation batch. The lower limit of quantification (LLOQ) achieved was 5 
nM for budesonide and fluticasone in 100 μL human sputum. Intra-run and inter-run
RSD for four quality control levels (5-100 nM) were within 6.9% (budesonide) and 
8.0% (fluticasone). The accuracy ranged from -11.4% to -1.6% (budesonide), and
from -11.8% to 0.4% (fluticasone). The validated method was applied to clinical
sputum samples from COPD patients.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jchromb.2011.10.029 
PMID: 22169057  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2011 Dec 7;(12):CD007033. doi:
10.1002/14651858.CD007033.pub3.

Inhaled corticosteroids versus long-acting beta(2)-agonists for chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease.

Spencer S(1), Karner C, Cates CJ, Evans DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Health and Medicine, Lancaster University, Bailrigg, Lancaster,
Lancashire, UK, LA1 4YD.

Update of
    Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2011;(10):CD007033.

BACKGROUND: Long-acting beta(2)-agonists and inhaled corticosteroids can be used 
as maintenance therapy by patients with moderate to severe chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease. These interventions are often taken together in a combination 
inhaler. However, the relative added value of the two individual components is
unclear.
OBJECTIVES: To determine the relative effects of inhaled corticosteroids (ICS)
compared to long-acting beta(2)-agonists (LABA) on clinical outcomes in patients 
with stable chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
SEARCH METHODS: We searched the Cochrane Airways Group Specialised Register of
trials (latest search August 2011) and reference lists of articles.
SELECTION CRITERIA: We included randomised controlled trials comparing inhaled
corticosteroids and long-acting beta(2)-agonists in the treatment of patients
with stable chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Three authors independently assessed trials for
inclusion and then extracted data on trial quality, study outcomes and adverse
events. We also contacted study authors for additional information.
MAIN RESULTS: We identified seven randomised trials (5997 participants) of good
quality with a duration of six months to three years. All of the trials compared 
ICS/LABA combination inhalers with LABA and ICS as individual components. Four of
these trials included fluticasone and salmeterol monocomponents and the remaining
three included budesonide and formoterol monocomponents. There was no
statistically significant difference in our primary outcome, the number of
patients experiencing exacerbations (odds ratio (OR) 1.22; 95% CI 0.89 to 1.67), 
or the rate of exacerbations per patient year (rate ratio (RR) 0.96; 95% CI 0.89 
to 1.02) between inhaled corticosteroids and long-acting beta(2)-agonists. The
incidence of pneumonia, our co-primary outcome, was significantly higher among
patients on inhaled corticosteroids than on long-acting beta(2)-agonists whether 
classified as an adverse event (OR 1.38; 95% CI 1.10 to 1.73) or serious adverse 
event (Peto OR 1.48; 95% CI 1.13 to 1.93). Results of the secondary outcomes
analysis were as follows. Mortality was higher in patients on inhaled
corticosteroids compared to patients on long-acting beta(2)-agonists (Peto OR
1.17; 95% CI 0.97 to 1.42), although the difference was not statistically
significant. Patients treated with beta(2)-agonists showed greater improvements
in pre-bronchodilator FEV(1) compared to those treated with inhaled
corticosteroids (mean difference (MD) 18.99 mL; 95% CI 0.52 to 37.46), whilst
greater improvements in health-related quality of life were observed in patients 
receiving inhaled corticosteroids compared to those receiving long-acting
beta(2)-agonists (St George's Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ) MD -0.74; 95% CI
-1.42 to -0.06). In both cases the differences were statistically significant but
rather small in magnitude. There were no statistically significant differences
between ICS and LABA in the number of hospitalisations due to exacerbations,
number of mild exacerbations, peak expiratory flow, dyspnoea, symptoms scores,
use of rescue medication, adverse events, all cause hospitalisations, or
withdrawals from studies.
AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: Placebo-controlled trials have established the benefits of 
both long-acting beta-agonist and inhaled corticosteroid therapy for COPD
patients as individual therapies. This review, which included trials allowing
comparisons between LABA and ICS, has shown that the two therapies confer similar
benefits across the majority of outcomes, including the frequency of
exacerbations and mortality. Use of long-acting beta-agonists appears to confer a
small additional benefit in terms of improvements in lung function compared to
inhaled corticosteroids. On the other hand, inhaled corticosteroid therapy shows 
a small advantage over long-acting beta-agonist therapy in terms of
health-related quality of life, but inhaled corticosteroids also increase the
risk of pneumonia. This review supports current guidelines advocating long-acting
beta-agonists as frontline therapy for COPD, with regular inhaled corticosteroid 
therapy as an adjunct in patients experiencing frequent exacerbations.

DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD007033.pub3 
PMID: 22161409  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Int Immunopharmacol. 2012 Jan;12(1):217-25. doi: 10.1016/j.intimp.2011.11.014.
Epub 2011 Dec 7.

Fluticasone propionate and Salmeterol combination induces SOCS-3 expression in
airway epithelial cells.

Nasreen N(1), Khodayari N, Sukka-Ganesh B, Peruvemba S, Mohammed KA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary Critical Care & Sleep Medicine, College of Medicine,
University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, United States.

Fluticasone propionate (FP) and Salmeterol (SAL) are commonly used in combination
therapy for patients with Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Clinical 
studies show that FP/SAL used in combination therapy was found to inhibit airway 
inflammation in COPD patients. However, the mechanisms associated with FP/SAL
induced anti-inflammatory effects were not clear. We have evaluated the effect of
FP/SAL and tobacco smoke (TS) on SOCS-3 and interleukine-6 expression in
bronchial airway epithelial cells (BAEpCs). Human BAEpCs were exposed to TS and
subsequently treated with FP or SAL alone or in combinations in the presence and 
absence of mitogen activated protein kinase (MAPK) inhibitors for either
Erk1/Erk2, or p38 or PI3 kinase. In BAEpCs, TS induced IL-6 expression via
ERK1/ERK2 MAPK pathway and FP/SAL inhibited TS mediated IL-6 expression. TS down 
regulated the SOCS-3 expression via activation of Erk1/Erk2, and p38 MAPK
signaling. When TS exposed BAEpCs were treated with FP/SAL SOCS-3 expression was 
restored. FP/SAL combinations induced significantly higher expression of SOCS-3
in BAEpCs when compared to individual drug. Pretreatment with Ly294002 a PI3 MAPK
inhibitor significantly attenuated FP/SAL induced SOCS-3 expression in BAEpCs.
Furthermore, FP/SAL blunted TS induced phosphorylation of Erk1/Erk2 and p38 MAPK 
in BAEpCs. Our study suggests that TS inhibits SOCS-3, combination of FP/SAL has 
a profound synergistic effect on SOCS-3 induction in BAEpCs and it is dependent
on PI3 kinase signaling pathway. SOCS-3 may represent a potential biomarker for
understanding the efficacy and a novel anti-inflammatory mechanism of FP/SAL
combination therapy in the treatment of COPD.

Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.intimp.2011.11.014 
PMID: 22155101  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. J Clin Pharmacol. 2012 Mar;52(3):416-24. doi: 10.1177/0091270010397050. Epub 2011
Nov 16.

An oral inhibitor of p38 MAP kinase reduces plasma fibrinogen in patients with
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Lomas DA(1), Lipson DA, Miller BE, Willits L, Keene O, Barnacle H, Barnes NC,
Tal-Singer R; Losmapimod Study Investigators.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Cambridge, Cambridge Institute for
Medical Research, Wellcome Trust/MRC Building, Hills Road, Cambridge, CB2 0XY,
UK. dal16@cam.ac.uk

The aims were to determine the effect of an oral inhibitor of the signaling
mediator p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (GW856553, losmapimod) on sputum
neutrophils, pulmonary function, and blood biomarkers of inflammation in chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Three hundred and two individuals with GOLD
stage II COPD were randomized to oral losmapimod 7.5 mg twice daily, inhaled
salmeterol/fluticasone propionate 50 µg/500 µg combination (SFC), or placebo in a
12-week, randomized, double-blind, double-dummy study (MKI102428/NCT00642148).
Neither losmapimod nor SFC had an effect on the primary end point of sputum
neutrophils. Losmapimod was well tolerated and reduced plasma fibrinogen by 11%
(-0.4 g/L, ratio of effect of losmapimod/placebo 0.89; 95% confidence interval,
0.83-0.96; P = .002) with nonsignificant reductions in interleukin-6,
interleukin-8, and C-reactive protein. There was evidence of improvement in
hyperinflation with losmapimod compared with placebo (overall P = .02). Inhaled
SFC significantly improved lung function and reduced serum CC-16 (ratio of effect
of SFC/placebo 0.87; 95% confidence interval, 0.82-0.93; P < .001). It was
concluded that oral losmapimod significantly reduced plasma fibrinogen in
patients with COPD.

DOI: 10.1177/0091270010397050 
PMID: 22090363  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Nihon Rinsho. 2011 Oct;69(10):1815-20.

[Evidence of pharmacotherapy in COPD--key findings from recently-conducted
randomized clinical studies].

[Article in Japanese]

Shimizu K(1), Nishimura M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Respiratory Medicine, Hokkaido University Graduate School of
Medicine.

The primary aim of pharmachotherapy in COPD is improvement of exertional dyspnea 
and quality of life through its bronchodilator effects. However, there is
emerging evidence that pharmacotherapy may reduce exacerbations, alleviate annual
decline of pulmonary function, and even favorably affect mortality, thus changing
natural history of COPD. The large-scaled randomized clinical trials, such as
TORCH, UPLIFT, have revealed that combination of long acting beta2 agonist (LABA)
and inhaled corticosteroids (ICS), LABA/ICS, and/or tiotropium alone may have
such effects. In addition, carbocisteine, which is a mucolytic and anti-oxidant
agent, has been shown to reduce exacerbations in COPD. Future directions on
pharmacotherapy are personalized medicine based on phenotyping of the disease and
development of new agents which may cure airway inflammation in COPD.


PMID: 22073579  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2011;6:503-9. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S23746. Epub
2011 Oct 4.

Effects of beclomethasone/formoterol fixed combination on lung hyperinflation and
dyspnea in COPD patients.

Tzani P(1), Crisafulli E, Nicolini G, Aiello M, Chetta A, Clini EM, Olivieri D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences, University of Parma, Parma, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a common disease
characterized by airflow obstruction and lung hyperinflation leading to dyspnea
and exercise capacity limitation.
OBJECTIVES: The present study was designed to evaluate whether an extra-fine
combination of beclomethasone and formoterol (BDP/F) was effective in reducing
air trapping in COPD patients with hyperinflation. Fluticasone salmeterol (FP/S) 
combination treatment was the active control.
METHODS: COPD patients with forced expiratory volume in one second <65% and
plethysmographic functional residual capacity ≥120% of predicted were randomized 
to a double-blind, double-dummy, 12-week, parallel group, treatment with either
BDP/F 400/24 μg/day or FP/S 500/100 μg/day. Lung volumes were measured with full 
body plethysmography, and dyspnea was measured with transition dyspnea index.
RESULTS: Eighteen patients were evaluable for intention to treat. A significant
reduction in air trapping and clinically meaningful improvement in transition
dyspnea index total score was detected in the BDP/F group but not in the FP/S
group. Functional residual capacity, residual volume (RV) and total lung capacity
significantly improved from baseline in the BDP/F group only. With regard to
group comparison, a significantly greater reduction in RV was observed with BDP/F
versus FP/S.
CONCLUSION: BDP/F extra-fine combination is effective in reducing air trapping
and dyspnea in COPD patients with lung hyperinflation.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S23746 
PMCID: PMC3206766
PMID: 22069361  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Respir Med. 2012 Jan;106(1):91-101. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2011.09.002. Epub 2011
Oct 29.

Benefits of adding fluticasone propionate/salmeterol to tiotropium in moderate to
severe COPD.

Hanania NA(1), Crater GD, Morris AN, Emmett AH, O'Dell DM, Niewoehner DE.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX, USA.

BACKGROUND: Combining maintenance medications with different mechanisms of action
may improve outcomes in COPD. In this study we evaluated the efficacy and safety 
of fluticasone/salmeterol (FSC) (250/50 mcg twice daily) when added to tiotropium
(18 mcg once daily) (TIO) in subjects with symptomatic moderate to severe COPD.
METHODS: This was a 24-week, randomized, double-blind, parallel group,
multi-center study. Subjects 40 years or older with cigarette smoking history ≥10
pack-years and with the diagnosis of COPD and post-bronchodilator FEV(1) ≥40 to ≤
80% of predicted normal and FEV(1)/FVC of ≤0.70 were enrolled. Following a 4-week
treatment with open-label TIO 18 mcg once daily, subjects were randomized in a
double-blind fashion to either the addition of FSC 250/50 DISKUS twice daily or
matching placebo. The primary efficacy endpoint was AM pre-dose FEV(1) and
secondary endpoints included other measures of lung function, rescue albuterol
use, health status and exacerbations.
RESULTS: The addition of FSC to TIO significantly improved lung function indices 
including AM pre-dose FEV(1), 2 h post-dose FEV(1), AM pre-dose FVC, 2 h
post-dose FVC and AM pre-dose IC compared with TIO alone. Furthermore, this
combination was superior to TIO alone in reducing rescue albuterol use. However, 
there were no significant differences between the treatment groups in health
status or COPD exacerbations. The incidence of adverse events was similar in both
groups.
CONCLUSIONS: The addition of FSC to subjects with COPD treated with TIO
significantly improves lung function without increasing the risk of adverse
events. NCT00784550.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2011.09.002 
PMID: 22040533  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Respir Res. 2011 Oct 28;12:142. doi: 10.1186/1465-9921-12-142.

Relationship between the anti-inflammatory properties of salmeterol/fluticasone
and the expression of CD4⁺CD25⁺Foxp3⁺ regulatory T cells in COPD.

Yang L(1), Ma QL, Yao W, Zhang Q, Chen HP, Wang GS, Wang CZ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Respiratory Diseases, the Second Hospital of the Third Military
Medical University of China, 183 Xinqiao Street, Chongqing 400037, P. R. China.

BACKGROUND: Salmeterol and fluticasone combination (SFC) has anti-inflammatory
effects and improves clinical symptoms in patients with chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD). However, the anti-inflammatory mechanism of SFC remains
unclear. In this study, we investigated the inflammatory responses of COPD, as
well as the relationship of the inflammatory factors with the levels of
CD4+CD25+Foxp3+ regulatory T cells (Foxp3+Tregs) after SFC therapy.
METHODS: Twenty-one patients with moderate or severe COPD received treatment with
50/500 μg of SFC twice a day for 12 weeks. Before and after treatment, the
patients were evaluated using the Modified Medical Research Council (MMRC)
dyspnea scale and by conducting a 6-min walk test. The number of neutrophils,
monocytes and lymphocytes in induced sputum were counted. Levels of cytokines,
including pre-inflammatory IL-8, TNF-α, IL-17A and cytokine IL-10, in the sputum 
supernatant and peripheral blood were measured by ELISA. The proportion of
Foxp3+Tregs in the total CD4+ T cell of the peripheral blood was determined by
flow cytometry. The relationship between IL-17A levels and the percentage of
Foxp3+Tregs was analyzed by statistical analysis.
RESULTS: After treatment with SFC, the forced expiratory volume in 1 s as a
percentage of predicted values (FEV1%) and the 6-min walk distance in the COPD
patients significantly increased, while dyspnea scores decreased. The total
number of cells, neutrophils, and the percentage of neutrophils in induced sputum
reduced notably, while the proportion of monocytes was significantly increased.
Levels of the inflammatory cytokines IL-8, TNF-α, and IL-17A in the sputum
supernatant and in the blood were markedly lowered, while IL-10 levels were
unchanged. The proportion of Foxp3+Tregs in the total CD4+T cell population in
the peripheral blood was drastically higher than that before treatment. The level
of IL-17A was negatively correlated with the proportion of Foxp3+Tregs in CD4+T
cells.
CONCLUSION: SFC can reduce the levels of inflammatory factors and improve
symptoms of COPD. The levels of inflammatory factors are associated with the
variation of Foxp3+Tregs in COPD.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: This study was registered with http://www.chictr.org (Chinese
Clinical Trial Register) as follows: ChiCTR-TNC-10001270.

DOI: 10.1186/1465-9921-12-142 
PMCID: PMC3234191
PMID: 22032685  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2011;6:467-76. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S14247. Epub
2011 Sep 16.

Long-term use of fluticasone propionate/salmeterol fixed-dose combination and
incidence of cataracts and glaucoma among chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
patients in the UK General Practice Research Database.

Miller DP(1), Watkins SE, Sampson T, Davis KJ.

Author information: 
(1)WorldWide Epidemiology, GlaxoSmithKline, Research Triangle Park, Durham, NC
27709-3398, USA.

OBJECTIVES: Some large population-based studies have reported a dose-related
increased risk of cataracts and glaucoma associated with use of inhaled
corticosteroids (ICS) in patients with asthma or chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD). We evaluated the association between use of ICS-containing
products, specifically fluticasone propionate/salmeterol fixed-dose combination
(FSC), and incidence of cataracts and glaucoma among patients with COPD in a
large electronic medical record database in the United Kingdom.
METHODS: We identified a cohort of patients aged 45 years and over with COPD in
the General Practice Research Database (GPRD) between 2003 and 2006. Cases of
incident cataracts or glaucoma were defined based on diagnosis and procedure
codes and matched to controls from the risk set to estimate odds ratios (OR) and 
95% confidence intervals (CI). The association with FSC or ICS exposure was
modeled using conditional logistic regression. Medication exposure was assessed
with respect to recency, duration, and number of prescriptions prior to the index
date. Average daily dose was defined as none, low (1-250 mcg), medium (251-500
mcg), high (501-1000 mcg), or very high (1001+ mcg) using fluticasone propionate 
(FP) equivalents.
RESULTS: We identified 2941 incident cataract cases and 327 incident glaucoma
cases in the COPD cohort (n = 53,191). FSC or ICS prescriptions were not
associated with risk of incident cataracts or glaucoma for any exposure category,
after adjusting for confounders. We observed a lack of a dose response in all
analyses, where low dose was the reference group. The odds of cataracts
associated with FSC dose were medium OR: 1.1 (95% CI: 0.9-1.4); high OR: 1.2 (95%
CI: 0.9-1.5); and very high OR: 1.2 (95% CI: 0.9-1.7). The odds of glaucoma
associated with FSC dose: medium OR: 1.0 (95% CI: 0.5-2.1); high OR: 1.0 (95% CI:
0.5-2.0); and very high OR: 1.0 (95% CI: 0.4-2.8).
CONCLUSIONS: FSC or other ICS exposure was not associated with an increased odds 
of cataracts or glaucoma, nor was a dose-response relationship observed in this
population-based nested case-control study of COPD patients in the United
Kingdom.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S14247 
PMCID: PMC3186745
PMID: 22003292  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2011 Oct 5;(10):CD007033. doi:
10.1002/14651858.CD007033.pub2.

Inhaled corticosteroids versus long-acting beta(2)-agonists for chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease.

Spencer S(1), Evans DJ, Karner C, Cates CJ.

Author information: 
(1)School of Health and Medicine, Lancaster University, Bailrigg, Lancaster,
Lancashire, UK, LA1 4YD.

Update in
    Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2011;(12):CD007033.

BACKGROUND: Long-acting beta(2)-agonists and inhaled corticosteroids can be used 
as maintenance therapy by patients with moderate to severe chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease. These interventions are often taken together in a combination 
inhaler. However, the relative added value of the two individual components is
unclear.
OBJECTIVES: To determine the relative effects of inhaled corticosteroids (ICS)
compared to long-acting beta(2)-agonists (LABA) on clinical outcomes in patients 
with stable chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
SEARCH STRATEGY: We searched the Cochrane Airways Group Specialised Register of
trials (latest search August 2011) and reference lists of articles.
SELECTION CRITERIA: We included randomised controlled trials comparing inhaled
corticosteroids and long-acting beta(2)-agonists in the treatment of patients
with stable chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Three authors independently assessed trials for
inclusion and then extracted data on trial quality, study outcomes and adverse
events. We also contacted study authors for additional information.
MAIN RESULTS: We identified seven randomised trials (5997 participants) of good
quality with a duration of six months to three years. All of the trials compared 
ICS/LABA combination inhalers with LABA and ICS as individual components. Four of
these trials included fluticasone and salmeterol monocomponents and the remaining
three included budesonide and formoterol monocomponents. There was no
statistically significant difference in our primary outcome, the number of
patients experiencing exacerbations (odds ratio (OR) 1.22; 95% CI 0.89 to 1.67), 
or the rate of exacerbations per patient year (rate ratio (RR) 0.96; 95% CI 0.89 
to 1.02) between inhaled corticosteroids and long-acting beta(2)-agonists. The
incidence of pneumonia, our co-primary outcome, was significantly higher among
patients on inhaled corticosteroids than on long-acting beta(2)-agonists whether 
classified as an adverse event (OR 1.38; 95% CI 1.10 to 1.73) or serious adverse 
event (Peto OR 1.48; 95% CI 1.13 to 1.93). Results of the secondary outcomes
analysis were as follows. Mortality was higher in patients on inhaled
corticosteroids compared to patients on long-acting beta(2)-agonists (Peto OR
1.17; 95% CI 0.97 to 1.42), although the difference was not statistically
significant. Patients treated with beta(2)-agonists showed greater improvements
in pre-bronchodilator FEV(1) compared to those treated with inhaled
corticosteroids (mean difference (MD) 18.99 mL; 95% CI 0.52 to 37.46), whilst
greater improvements in health-related quality of life were observed in patients 
receiving inhaled corticosteroids compared to those receiving long-acting
beta(2)-agonists (St George's Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ) MD -0.74; 95% CI
-1.42 to -0.06). In both cases the differences were statistically significant but
rather small in magnitude. There were no statistically significant differences
between ICS and LABA in the number of hospitalisations due to exacerbations,
number of mild exacerbations, peak expiratory flow, dyspnoea, symptoms scores,
use of rescue medication, adverse events, all cause hospitalisations, or
withdrawals from studies.
AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: Placebo-controlled trials have established the benefits of 
both long-acting beta-agonist and inhaled corticosteroid therapy for COPD
patients as individual therapies. This review, which included trials allowing
comparisons between LABA and ICS, has shown that the two therapies confer similar
benefits across the majority of outcomes, including the frequency of
exacerbations and mortality. Use of long-acting beta-agonists appears to confer a
small additional benefit in terms of improvements in lung function compared to
inhaled corticosteroids. On the other hand, inhaled corticosteroid therapy shows 
a small advantage over long-acting beta-agonist therapy in terms of
health-related quality of life, but inhaled corticosteroids also increase the
risk of pneumonia. This review supports current guidelines advocating long-acting
beta-agonists as frontline therapy for COPD, with regular inhaled corticosteroid 
therapy as an adjunct in patients experiencing frequent exacerbations.

DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD007033.pub2 
PMID: 21975759  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Respir Med. 2012 Mar;106(3):382-9. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2011.09.004. Epub 2011 Oct
4.

Comparison of tiotropium plus fluticasone propionate/salmeterol with tiotropium
in COPD: a randomized controlled study.

Jung KS(1), Park HY, Park SY, Kim SK, Kim YK, Shim JJ, Moon HS, Lee KH, Yoo JH,
Lee SD; Korean Academy of Tuberculosis and Respiratory Diseases study group;
Korea Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease study group.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary, Allergy and Critical Care Medicine, Department of
Medicine, Hallym University Sacred Heart Hospital, Hallym University Medical
School, Pyeongchon-dong, Dongan-gu, Anyang-si, Gyeonggido, Republic of Korea.

BACKGROUND: The combination of tiotropium and fluticasone propionate/salmeterol
(FSC) is commonly used to treat chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), but
no study had evaluated the effectiveness of tiotropium plus FSC with 250 μg of
fluticasone propionate. Our aim was to assess whether tiotropium (18 μg once
daily) plus FSC (250/50 μg twice daily) provides better clinical outcomes
compared to tiotropium monotherapy.
METHODS: In this 24-week, randomized, open label, multicenter two-arm parallel
study, 479 patients received tiotropium plus FSC (n = 237) or tiotropium alone
(n = 242).
RESULTS: After 24 weeks of treatment, the triple-inhaled treatment group had a
significant improvement in pre-bronchodilator FEV(1) (L) compared to the
tiotropium-only group (0.090 L vs. 0.038 L; P = 0.005). Regarding health-related 
quality of life, the mean change in total score on the St. George's Respiratory
Questionnaire for COPD patients (SGRQ-C) was -6.6 points in the tiotropium plus
FSC group, but -1.5 points in the tiotropium-only group (P = 0.001). In the
subgroup of GOLD stage II patients with COPD, treatment with tiotropium plus FSC 
also improved FEV(1) compared to tiotropium alone (0.088 L vs. 0.030 L;
P = 0.011) and improved the total SGRQ-C score than tiotropium alone (-4.5 points
vs. -1.0 points, respectively). This triple-inhaled treatment approach did not
induce more adverse events, such as pneumonia.
CONCLUSION: Over the course of 24 weeks, FSC (250/50 μg twice daily) added to
tiotropium provided greater improvement in lung function and quality of life in
patients with COPD (FEV(1) ≤ 65%) than tiotropium alone.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2011.09.004 
PMID: 21975275  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. BMC Pulm Med. 2011 Sep 30;11:46. doi: 10.1186/1471-2466-11-46.

Elevated placenta growth factor predicts pneumonia in patients with chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease under inhaled corticosteroids therapy.

Cheng SL(1), Wang HC, Cheng SJ, Yu CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Far Eastern Memorial Hospital, Pan-Chiao,
Taipei, Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: An increased incidence of pneumonia in patients with chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) under inhaled corticosteroid (ICS) therapy
was noticed in previous studies. We performed a prospective study to elucidate
the risk factors for the development of pneumonia in this group of patients.
METHODS: A prospective, non-randomized study with patients diagnosed as having
COPD from 2007 to 2008 identified in the Far Eastern Memorial Hospital were
recruited. We recorded data for all patients, including clinical features and
signs, demographic data, lung function status, and medications. Bio-markers such 
as C-reactive protein (CRP) and placenta growth factor (PlGF) were checked at
first diagnosis. Every acute exacerbation was also recorded, especially pneumonia
events, which were confirmed by chest radiography. Multivariate analysis was
performed with stepwise logistic regression for pneumonia risk factors.
RESULTS: 274 patients were diagnosed as having COPD during the study period and
29 patients suffered from pneumonia with a prevalence of 10.6%. The rate was
significantly higher in patients with ICS therapy (20/125, 16%) compared with
those without ICS (9/149, 6%) (p = 0.02). We stratified ICS therapy into medium
dose (500-999 ug/day fluticasone equivalent, 71 patients) and high dose (1000
ug/day and higher fluticasone equivalent, 54 patients) group. There was no
statistical difference in the incidence of pneumonia between these two group
(medium dose: 13/71, 18.3% vs. high dose: 7/54, 12.9%, p = 0.47). Multivariate
analysis was performed to identify the risk factors for developing pneumonia and 
included forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV1) less than 40% of predicted
(odds ratio (OR) 2.2, 95% confidence interval (CI): 1.1-6.9), ICS prescription
((OR) 2.4, 95% (CI): 1.3-8.7), the presence of diabetes mellitus (DM) (OR 2.6,
95% CI: 1.2-9.4) and PlGF level over 40 pg/L (OR 4.1, 95% CI: 1.5-9.9).
CONCLUSION: ICS therapy in patients with COPD increased the risk of pneumonia.
However, there was no relationship between the incidence of pneumonia and dosage 
of ICS. Additionally, advanced COPD status, DM and elevated PlGF level were
independent risk factors for the development of pneumonia. PlGF would be a good
novel biomarker for predicting pneumonia.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2466-11-46 
PMCID: PMC3195784
PMID: 21962211  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. J Med Econ. 2011;14(6):769-76. doi: 10.3111/13696998.2011.622817. Epub 2011 Sep
27.

Comparative effectiveness of budesonide/formoterol and fluticasone/salmeterol for
COPD management.

Roberts M(1), Mapel D, Petersen H, Blanchette C, Ramachandran S.

Author information: 
(1)Lovelace Clinic Foundation, Albuquerque, NM, USA. mroberts@lcfresearch.org

OBJECTIVE: To compare the effectiveness of budesonide/formoterol fumarate
dihydrate (BFC) and fluticasone propionate/salmeterol (FSC), two combination
inhaled corticosteroid/long-acting beta-agonist (ICS/LABA) products approved for 
the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) in the US with
respect to cost, therapy adherence, and related healthcare utilization. The
effectiveness of these two treatments has not previously been compared in a US
COPD population.
METHODS: A retrospective cohort study assessed COPD-related outcomes using
administrative claims data among ICS/LABA-naïve patients. Patients initiating BFC
were propensity matched to FSC patients. Cost and effectiveness were measured as 
total healthcare expenditures, exacerbation events (hospitalizations, emergency
department visits, or outpatient visits associated with oral corticosteroid or
antibiotic prescription fills), and treatment medication adherence. Differences
in COPD symptom control were assessed via proxy measure through claims for rescue
medications and outpatient encounters.
RESULTS: Of the 6770 patients (3385 BFC and 3385 FSC), fewer BFC patients had
claims for short-acting beta agonists (SABA) (34.7% vs 39.5%; p<0.001) and
ipratropium (7.8% vs 9.8%, p<0.005) than FSC patients, but no substantial
differences were seen in other clinical outcomes including tiotropium or
nebulized SABA claims, COPD-related outpatient visits, or exacerbation events.
There were no significant differences in total COPD-related medical costs in the 
6-month period after initiation of combination therapy.
LIMITATIONS: This was a retrospective observational study using claims data and
accuracy of COPD diagnoses could not be verified, nor was information available
on severity of disease. The results and conclusions of this study are limited to 
the population observed and the operational definitions of the study variables.
CONCLUSIONS: For most outcomes of interest, BFC and FSC showed comparable
real-world effectiveness.

DOI: 10.3111/13696998.2011.622817 
PMID: 21942463  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Eur J Pharmacol. 2011 Nov 16;670(1):244-51. doi: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2011.08.022.
Epub 2011 Sep 2.

Long-acting fluticasone furoate has a superior pharmacological profile to
fluticasone propionate in human respiratory cells.

Rossios C(1), To Y, To M, Ito M, Barnes PJ, Adcock IM, Johnson M, Ito K.

Author information: 
(1)Airway Disease Section, National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College
London, London SW3 6LY, United Kingdom.

Currently available glucocorticoids are relatively short acting and may be less
effective in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) where
high levels of oxidative stress are seen. Here we show that a novel
glucocorticoid, fluticasone furoate (FF), has a longer duration of action in
several cell systems compared with fluticasone propionate (FP) and budesonide,
and unlike FP, FF is resistant to oxidative stress. FF had similar or slightly
higher potency to FP and was 2-9 fold more potent than budesonide, when assessed 
at 4h, in inhibiting inflammatory cytokine production in epithelial cell lines
(BEAS2B, A549), primary bronchial epithelial cells and a monocytic cell line
(U937). The potency of FF was sustained beyond 16 h with or without washout
compared with FP or budesonide, such that it showed a greater duration of action 
in this range of cellular assays. The activated YFP-conjugated glucocorticoid
receptor was detectable in nuclei of FF treated BEAS2B cells for at least for 30 
h, and FF had a longer duration of action than FP in inhibiting activation of
transcription factors such as NF-κB and AP-1. In addition, FF showed superior
effects to FP in peripheral blood mononuclear cells from patients with COPD and
also in U937 cells or primary bronchial epithelial cells under conditions of
oxidative stress. The longer duration of action and oxidative stress
insensitivity of FF compared with FP has potential clinical implications for the 
control of inflammation in respiratory diseases, such as COPD.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2011.08.022 
PMID: 21920359  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Respir Med. 2011 Dec;105(12):1836-45. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2011.08.021. Epub 2011 
Sep 13.

Effect of adjunct fluticasone propionate on airway physiology during rest and
exercise in COPD.

Guenette JA(1), Raghavan N, Harris-McAllister V, Preston ME, Webb KA, O'Donnell
DE.

Author information: 
(1)Respiratory Investigation Unit, Department of Medicine, Queen's University and
Kingston General Hospital, Kingston, ON, Canada.

RATIONALE: Combination therapy with corticosteroid and long-acting β(2)-agonists 
(LABA) in a single inhaler is associated with superior effects on airway function
and exercise performance in COPD compared with LABA monotherapy. The
physiological effects of adding inhaled corticosteroid monotherapy to maintenance
bronchodilator therapy (long-acting anticholinergics and LABA singly or in
combination) in COPD are unknown.
METHODS: This was a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover study
(NCT00387036) to compare the effects of inhaled fluticasone propionate 500 μg
(FP500) twice-daily and placebo (PLA) on airway function during rest and
exercise, measured during constant work rate cycle exercise at 75% of maximum
incremental cycle work rate, in 17 patients with COPD (FEV(1) ≤ 70% predicted).
RESULTS: After treatment with FP500 compared to PLA, there were significant
increases in post-dose measurements of FEV(1) (+115 mL, P = 0.006) and the
FEV(1)/FVC ratio (+2.5%, P = 0.017), along with decreases in plethysmographic
residual volume (-0.32L; P = 0.031), functional residual capacity (-0.30L, P =
0.033), and total lung capacity (-0.30L, P = 0.027) but no changes in vital
capacity or inspiratory capacity (IC). Post-treatment comparisons demonstrated a 
significant improvement in endurance time by 188 ± 362 s with FP500 (P = 0.047)
with no concomitant increase in dyspnea intensity. End-inspiratory and
end-expiratory lung volumes were reduced at rest and throughout exercise with
FP500 compared with PLA (P < 0.05).
CONCLUSION: Inhaled FP500 monotherapy was associated with consistent and
clinically important improvements in FEV(1), static lung volumes, dynamic
operating lung volumes, and exercise endurance when added to established
maintenance long-acting bronchodilator therapy in patients with moderate to
severe COPD.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2011.08.021 
PMID: 21917440  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2011 Jun 14;91(22):1533-7.

[Relationship between SGRQ score and pulmonary function and its influencing
factors in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease].

[Article in Chinese]

Liu R(1), DU YP, He B.

Author information: 
(1)Respiratory Department, Peking University Third Hospital, Beijing 100191,
China.

OBJECTIVE: To study the correlation and influencing factors between the St.
George respiratory questionnaire (SGRQ) and lung functions in chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD) patients.
METHODS: Sixty-three stable COPD patients received pulmonary function tests and
SGRQ. A correlation analysis of the results was performed. They were divided into
two groups according to GOLD (global initiative for chronic obstructive lung
disease) classification scheme, 32 patients were in stage II (moderate) and 31 in
stages III and IV (severe & very severe). And the inter-group SGRQ scores were
compared. According to age, they were divided into < 70 years group (n = 31) and 
≥ 70 years group (n = 32). The correlations between the SGRQ score and pulmonary 
functions were analyzed in different age groups. Thirty-six patients willing to
participate in treatment and a 3-month follow-up were randomly divided into two
groups of treatment with either salmeterol/fluticasone (50 µg/500 µg) (n = 18) or
salbutamol/ipratropium bromide (120 µg/21 µg) (n = 18). The post-therapeutic
changes of SGRQ score and pulmonary functions were analyzed.
RESULTS: There were no significant differences in SGRQ total score and all
section score between two groups according to GOLD classification scheme. There
were mild to moderate correlations in the < 70 years group between lung functions
including FVC%, FEV(1)%, FEFMAX%, SVC% and the SGRQ score including total score, 
symptoms section score and activity section score. The range of correlation
coefficients was -0.341 to -0.534. However, the score only had some correlation
with IC% in the ≥ 70 years group. Compared with the salbutamol/ipratropium
bromide treatment group, the SGRQ score of the salmeterol/fluticasone treatment
group decreased significantly after therapy (P = 0.001).
CONCLUSION: Influenced by age, the SGRQ score can be used to evaluate the
clinical efficacy of medications in COPD patients.


PMID: 21914365  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Manag Care. 2011 Aug;20(8):46-50, 53-5.

Outcomes and costs associated with initial maintenance therapy with fluticasone
propionate-salmeterol xinafoate 250 microg/50 microg combination versus
tiotropium in commercially insured patients with COPD.

Dalal AA(1), Candrilli SD, Davis KL.

Author information: 
(1)U.S. Health Outcomes, GlaxoSmithKline, Research Triangle Park, 5 Moore Drive, 
Mail Stop B.3153, Durham, NC 27709, USA. anand.a.dalal@gsk.com

PURPOSE: To compare, in commercially-insured individuals 240 years old, the risk 
of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) exacerbations and COPD-related
health care utilization and costs in patients initiating maintenance treatment
with fluticasone propionate/salmeterol xinafoate 250 microg/50 microg (FSC) with 
those in patients initiating treatment with tiotropium bromide (TIO).
DESIGN: Retrospective observational cohort study.
METHODOLOGY: The risk of COPD exacerbation (moderate, severe, and any),
COPD-related health care utilization, and COPD-related costs (overall and by
service setting) were assessed over 12 months after the initiation of treatment
with FSC or TIO in commercially-insured patients > or =40 years old diagnosed
with COPD.
PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: After adjusting for covariates, treatment with FSC compared
with treatment with TIO was associated with a 14% reduction in risk of severe
exacerbation (p = 0.0406), defined as the occurrence of a COPD-related
hospitalization; with less health care utilization across several categories of
care; with 25% lower COPD-related medical costs ($1814 versus $2258 per patient, 
p < 0.0001); and with 10% lower COPD-related total costs ($2991 versus $3304 per 
patient, p < 0.0001) over a 12-month follow-up period. Pharmacy costs were
equivalent between FSC and TIO.
CONCLUSION: Initiation of maintenance therapy with FSC compared with TIO was
associated with significant reductions in the risk of severe exacerbations,
health care utilization, and COPD-related medical and total costs. Considered in 
the context of other findings, these data suggest that earlier maintenance
treatment with FSC offers clinical and economic benefits over maintenance
treatment with TIO.


PMID: 21887993  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Patient Prefer Adherence. 2011;5:375-88. doi: 10.2147/PPA.S19991. Epub 2011 Jul
26.

Outcomes associated with initiation of tiotropium or fluticasone/salmeterol in
patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Halpern R(1), Baker CL, Su J, Woodruff KB, Paulose-Ram R, Porter V, Shah H.

Author information: 
(1)Health Economics and Outcomes Research, OptumInsight, Eden Prairie, MN, USA;

INTRODUCTION: Adherence to long-acting bronchodilator therapy for management of
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a critical clinical and cost
issue. Low adherence is associated with relatively higher exacerbation rates and 
illness burden.
PURPOSE: To compare adherence between patients with COPD initiating therapy on
tiotropium or fluticasone/salmeterol and examine the association between
adherence and respiratory-related costs.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: This retrospective claims data analysis evaluated patients 
initiating tiotropium or combination fluticasone/salmeterol from December 1, 2004
to December 31, 2005. Patients had ≥1 COPD diagnosis (International
Classification of Diseases, 9th Revision, Clinical Modification [ICD-9-CM]
491.xx, 492.x, 496) and were observed during 6-month pre-index and variable
(12-18-month) post-index periods. Outcomes were adherence to and discontinuation 
of therapy, and respiratory-related inpatient, medical, and total health care
costs. Adherence was medication possession ratio ≥0.80. Discontinuation,
adherence, and costs were analyzed with Cox proportional hazards regression,
logistic regression, and generalized linear model regressions, respectively.
Regressions controlled for demographic, sociodemographic, and health status
factors.
RESULTS: The study population comprised 1561 tiotropium and 2976
fluticasone/salmeterol patients. In unadjusted comparisons: 19.5% and 8.5% of
tiotropium and fluticasone/salmeterol patients, respectively, were adherent (P < 
0.001); tiotropium patients versus fluticasone/salmeterol patients had higher
mean respiratory-related pharmacy costs (US$1080 versus US$974, P = 0.002) and
health care costs (US$3751 versus US$2932, P = 0.031). Regression analysis showed
tiotropium patients were 31.6% less likely to discontinue therapy (95% confidence
interval [CI]: 0.64-0.73) and had 2.25 times higher odds of adherence (CI:
1.85-2.73) versus fluticasone/salmeterol patients. The associations between index
therapy and costs were not significant. Adherence versus nonadherence was
associated with: 46.9% higher health care costs (CI: 1.13-1.91); 37.1% lower
medical costs (CI: 0.43-0.91); and 53.4% lower inpatient costs (CI: 0.30-0.72).
CONCLUSION: Patients with COPD initiating long-acting bronchodilator therapy were
more likely to be adherent to tiotropium than to fluticasone/salmeterol.
Adherence to either tiotropium or to fluticasone/salmeterol was associated with
lower respiratory-related medical and inpatient costs, and with higher
respiratory-related total health care costs.

DOI: 10.2147/PPA.S19991 
PMCID: PMC3150166
PMID: 21845037  [PubMed]


274. Thorax. 2012 Jan;67(1):35-41. doi: 10.1136/thoraxjnl-2011-200308. Epub 2011 Aug
9.

Fluticasone furoate demonstrates efficacy in patients with asthma symptomatic on 
medium doses of inhaled corticosteroid therapy: an 8-week, randomised,
placebo-controlled trial.

Busse WW(1), Bleecker ER, Bateman ED, Lötvall J, Forth R, Davis AM, Jacques L,
Haumann B, Woodcock A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Wisconsin, K4/910 CSC, 600 Highland
Avenue, Madison, WI 53792, USA. wwb@medicine.wisc.edu

BACKGROUND: Fluticasone furoate (FF) is a novel inhaled corticosteroid with 24 h 
activity. FF is being developed as a once-daily treatment in combination with the
long-acting β(2) agonist vilanterol trifenatate for asthma and chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease.
OBJECTIVES: To determine the optimal dose(s) of FF for treating patients with
asthma.
METHODS: An 8-week multicentre, randomised, double-blind study. 627 patients with
persistent moderate-to-severe asthma, symptomatic on medium-dose inhaled
corticosteroid therapy, were randomised to placebo, FF 200, 400, 600 or 800 μg
(once daily in the evening using a novel dry powder inhaler), or fluticasone
propionate 500 μg twice daily (via Diskus™/Accuhaler™). The primary efficacy
measure was mean change from baseline in pre-dose evening forced expiratory
volume in one second (FEV(1)). Other endpoints included morning and evening peak 
expiratory flow, and rescue/symptom-free 24 h periods.
RESULTS: Each dose was significantly superior to placebo for the primary endpoint
(p<0.001) with efficacy at least similar to that reported with fluticasone
propionate. There was no dose-response relationship across the FF doses studied. 
Peak expiratory flow improved in all groups (p<0.001 vs placebo), and there were 
significant treatment effects on rescue/symptom-free 24 h periods with all active
treatments. FF was generally well tolerated. The incidence of oral candidiasis
was higher with FF 800 μg than placebo; pharmacokinetic and 24 h urinary cortisol
analyses confirmed a higher systemic exposure of FF at this highest dose level.
CONCLUSIONS: FF doses <800 μg have a favourable therapeutic index. The absence of
an efficacy dose response suggests that 200 μg is an appropriate dose in patients
with moderate persistent asthma. CLINICALTRIALS.GOV IDENTIFIER: NCT00603746.

DOI: 10.1136/thoraxjnl-2011-200308 
PMID: 21828231  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Rev Prat. 2011 Jun;61(6):775-80.

[Treatment of COPD].

[Article in French]

Roche N(1), Huchon G.

Author information: 
(1)Service de pneumologie et réanimation, Hôtel-Dieu, AP-HP, université
Paris-Descartes, 75004 Paris. nicolas.roche@htd.aphp.fr

COPD treatment begins with smoking cessation and influenza and pneumococcal
vaccines. Bronchodilators are indicated when dyspnea on exertion is reported
(usually, FEV1 < 80% predicted). On-demand short-acting agents are chosen when
dyspnea is intermittent, daily long-acting agents are administered once dyspnea
occurs in daily life activities. In all cases, anticholinergics and beta2
agonists can be associated when one class is not sufficiently effective. In
patients with FEV1 < 50% predicted (budesonide-formoterol) or 60% predicted
(fluticasone-salmeterol), repeated exacerbations and symptoms despite maintenance
bronchodilators, fixed associations are indicated. When a handicap persists on
pharmacological treatment, respiratory rehabilitation centered on education and
exercise training has to be proposed. Care for COPD has to integrate treatment of
comorbidities such as cardio-vascular diseases, anxiety-depression, malnutrition,
muscle dysfunction, osteoporosis, anemia ... Ongoing research aims at identifying
new therapeutic targets, focusing on inflammation, remodeling,
protease-antiprotease balance, oxidative stress, lung regeneration/repair and
mucus production.


PMID: 21826920  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Front Pharmacol. 2011 Jul 18;2:36. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2011.00036. eCollection
2011.

Improvement of Airflow Limitation by Fluticasone Propionate/Salmeterol in Chronic
Obstructive Pulmonary Disease: What is the Specific Marker?

Akamatsu K(1), Matsunaga K, Sugiura H, Koarai A, Hirano T, Minakata Y, Ichinose
M.

Author information: 
(1)Third Department of Internal Medicine, School of Medicine, Wakayama Medical
University Wakayama, Japan.

BACKGROUNDS: Inhaled corticosteroids (ICS)/inhaled long-acting beta(2)-agonists
(LABA) combination drugs are widely used for the long-term management of chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). However, COPD is a heterogeneous condition 
and treatment with ICS is associated with a higher risk of pneumonia. The
identification of a specific marker for predicting the efficacy of ICS/LABA on
pulmonary function would be useful in the treatment of COPD.
METHODS: Fourteen COPD patients receiving tiotropium therapy participated
consecutively. The relationship between the baseline exhaled nitric oxide
(FE(NO)) levels as well as serum markers and changes in pulmonary function by
fluticasone propionate (FP)/salmeterol (SAL) were analyzed.
RESULTS: FP/SAL therapy significantly improved forced vital capacity, forced
expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV(1)), and the third phase slope of the single
nitrogen washout curve (ΔN(2)) as well as the FE(NO) level. The baseline FE(NO)
levels and positive specific IgE (atopy+) were significantly associated with
airway obstructive changes assessed by FEV(1) and ΔN(2). A baseline FE(NO) level 
>35 ppb yielded 80.0% sensitivity and 66.7% specificity for identifying the
subjects with significant improvement in FEV(1) (greater than 200 mL). An atopy+ 
yielded 60.0% sensitivity and 88.9% specificity for an improvement in FEV(1).
When combined with FE(NO) > 35 ppb and atopy+, it showed 40% sensitivity and
100.0% specificity for FEV(1) improvement. Alternatively, COPD subjects with
FE(NO) ≤ 35 ppb and atopy- did not show significant improvement in FEV(1).
CONCLUSION: Combining FE(NO) and specific IgE may be a useful marker for
predicting the response to ICS/LABA on airflow limitation in COPD.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2011.00036 
PMCID: PMC3140651
PMID: 21811461  [PubMed]


277. Ther Adv Respir Dis. 2011 Oct;5(5):345-57. doi: 10.1177/1753465811410100. Epub
2011 Jun 30.

Profiling the bronchodilator effects of the novel ultra-long-acting β2-agonist
indacaterol against established treatments in chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease.

Vogelmeier C(1), Magnussen H, LaForce C, Owen R, Kramer B.

Author information: 
(1)University Hospital Giessen und Marburg, Standort Marburg, Baldingerstrasse,
D-35043 Marburg, Germany. claus.vogelmeier@med.uni-marburg.de

Indacaterol is a novel, inhaled, ultra-long-acting β(2)-agonist providing 24-h
bronchodilation with once-daily (od) dosing for maintenance use in patients with 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). This article reviews the
bronchodilator properties of indacaterol compared with other treatments used in
COPD. Data from five published placebo-controlled studies were reviewed. Two
14-day crossover studies, the first comparing indacaterol 300 µg od with
salmeterol 50 µg twice daily (bid), the second comparing indacaterol 150 µg and
300 µg od with tiotropium 18 µg od, assessed forced expiratory volume in 1 s
(FEV(1)) at 24 h postdose (trough). Third, a 14-day crossover study evaluated
trough FEV(1) following indacaterol 300 µg dosed morning or evening compared with
salmeterol 50 µg bid. Fourth, a single-dose study of indacaterol 150 and 300 µg
measured FEV(1) at 5 min postdose compared with salmeterol/fluticasone 50/500 µg 
and salbutamol 200 µg. Finally, data from a 1-year study with indacaterol 300 µg 
and formoterol 12 µg bid were examined to determine whether bronchodilation was
maintained long term. In the first two studies, indacaterol increased trough
FEV(1) after 14 days by a statistically significant and clinically relevant
margin over placebo; indacaterol had a greater effect than salmeterol and a
similar effect to tiotropium. In the third study, indacaterol had the same effect
on trough FEV(1) whether dosed in the morning or evening. In the fourth study,
the onset of the bronchodilator effect of indacaterol was similar to that of
salbutamol. In the fifth study, the bronchodilator effect of indacaterol on
trough FEV(1) was maintained at a significant and clinically relevant level over 
52 weeks, whereas the bronchodilator effect of formoterol diminished over time.
To conclude, indacaterol is a highly effective bronchodilator that is superior to
or at least as effective as other available long-acting bronchodilators for COPD.

DOI: 10.1177/1753465811410100 
PMID: 21719531  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2011;6:329-44. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S18759. Epub
2011 Jun 8.

Comparative efficacy of indacaterol 150 μg and 300 μg versus fixed-dose
combinations of formoterol + budesonide or salmeterol + fluticasone for the
treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease--a network meta-analysis.

Cope S(1), Capkun-Niggli G, Gale R, Jardim JR, Jansen JP.

Author information: 
(1)Mapi Values, Boston, MA, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To compare efficacy of indacaterol to that of fixed-dose combination
(FDC) formoterol and budesonide (FOR/BUD) and FDC salmeterol and fluticasone
(SAL/FP) for the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) based 
on the available randomized clinical trials (RCTs).
METHODS: Fifteen placebo-controlled RCTs were included that evaluated:
indacaterol 150 μg (n = 5 studies), indacaterol 300 μg (n = 4), FOR/BUD 9/160 μg 
(n = 2), FOR/BUD 9/320 μg (n = 3), SAL/FP 50/500 μg (n = 5), and SAL/FP 50/250 μg
(n = 1). Outcomes of interest were trough forced expiratory volume in 1 second
(FEV(1)), total scores for St. George's Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ), and
transition dyspnea index (TDI). All trials were analyzed simultaneously using a
Bayesian network meta-analysis and relative treatment effects between all
regimens were obtained. Treatment-by-covariate interactions were included where
possible to improve the similarity of the trials.
RESULTS: Indacaterol 150 μg resulted in a higher change from baseline (CFB) in
FEV(1) at 12 weeks compared to FOR/BUD 9/160 μg (difference in CFB 0.11 L [95%
credible intervals: 0.08, 0.13]) and FOR/BUD 9/320 μg (0.09 L [0.06, 0.11]) and
was comparable to SAL/FP 50/250 μg (0.02 L [-0.04, 0.08]) and SAL/FP 50/500 μg
(0.03 L [0.00, 0.06]). Similar results were observed for indacaterol 300 μg at 12
weeks and indacaterol 150/300 μg at 6 months. Indacaterol 150 μg demonstrated
comparable improvement in SGRQ total score at 6 months versus FOR/BUD (both
doses), and SAL/FP 50/500 μg (-2.16 point improvement [-4.96, 0.95]). Indacaterol
150 and 300 μg demonstrated comparable TDI scores versus SAL/FP 50/250 μg (0.21
points (-0.57, 0.99); 0.39 [-0.39, 1.17], respectively) and SAL/FP 50/500 μg at 6
months.
CONCLUSION: Indacaterol monotherapy is expected to be at least as good as FOR/BUD
(9/320 and 9/160 μg) and comparable to SAL/FP (50/250 and 50/500 μg) in terms of 
lung function. Indacaterol is also expected to be comparable to FOR/BUD (9/320
and 9/160 μg) and SAL/FP 50/500 μg in terms of health status and to SAL/FP
(50/250 and 50/500 μg) in terms of breathlessness.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S18759 
PMCID: PMC3119108
PMID: 21697997  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Respir Med. 2011 Sep;105(9):1322-30. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2011.05.016. Epub 2011
Jun 22.

Effect of fluticasone propionate/salmeterol on arterial stiffness in patients
with COPD.

Dransfield MT(1), Cockcroft JR, Townsend RR, Coxson HO, Sharma SS, Rubin DB,
Emmett AH, Cicale MJ, Crater GD, Martinez FJ.

Author information: 
(1)University of Alabama Birmingham Lung Health Center, University of Alabama at 
Birmingham, The Birmingham VA Medical Center, Birmingham, AL, USA.
mdransfield99@msn.com

BACKGROUND: COPD is associated with increased arterial stiffness which may in
part explain the cardiovascular morbidity observed in the disease. A causal
relationship between arterial stiffness and cardiovascular events has not been
established, though their strong association raises the possibility that
therapies that reduce arterial stiffness may improve cardiovascular outcomes.
Prior studies suggest that fluticasone propionate/salmeterol (FSC) may improve
cardiovascular outcomes in COPD and we hypothesized that FSC would reduce
arterial stiffness in these patients.
METHODS: This multicenter, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study
compared the effects of FSC 250/50 μg twice-daily and placebo on aortic pulse
wave velocity (aPWV) as determined by ECG-gated carotid and femoral artery
waveforms. The primary endpoint was aPWV change from baseline at 12-weeks (last
measure for each patient).
RESULTS: 249 patients were randomized; the mean FEV(1) in each group was similar 
(55% predicted) and 60% of patients reported a cardiovascular disorder. At
12-weeks, aPWV between FSC and placebo was -0.42 m/s (95%CI -0.88, 0.03; p =
0.065). A statistically significant reduction in aPWV between FSC and placebo was
observed in those who remained on study drug throughout the treatment period
[-0.49 m/s (95%CI -0.98, -0.01; p = 0.045)]. A post hoc analysis suggested the
effect of FSC was greater in patients with higher baseline aPWV.
CONCLUSION: FSC does not reduce aPWV in all patients with moderate to severe
COPD, but may have effects in those with elevated arterial stiffness. Additional 
studies are required to determine if aPWV could serve as a surrogate for
cardiovascular events in COPD.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2011.05.016 
PMID: 21696934  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Int J Clin Pract. 2011 Jul;65(7):764-74. doi: 10.1111/j.1742-1241.2011.02685.x.

Budesonide/formoterol vs. salmeterol/fluticasone in COPD: a systematic review and
adjusted indirect comparison of pneumonia in randomised controlled trials.

Halpin DM(1), Gray J, Edwards SJ, Morais J, Singh D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Royal Devon & Exeter Hospital, Exeter, UK.

AIMS: This analysis was designed to provide a comparison between
budesonide/formoterol and salmeterol/fluticasone for the relative incidence of
pneumonia adverse events, pneumonia serious adverse events and pneumonia-related 
mortality in patients being treated for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
METHODS: An initial literature search revealed no suitable head-to-head trials
between budesonide/formoterol and salmeterol/fluticasone and therefore a
systematic review was conducted to find randomised controlled trials providing
data for input into an adjusted indirect comparison of the two combination
treatments using placebo as a common comparator. The Bucher adjusted indirect
comparison method was used to calculate odds ratios and 95% confidence intervals.
RESULTS: Eight salmeterol/fluticasone trials and four budesonide/formoterol
trials were identified as being relevant for the analyses. The proportion of
patients experiencing a pneumonia adverse event was significantly lower with
budesonide/formoterol than salmeterol/fluticasone (odds ratio, 0.47; 95%
confidence interval, 0.28-0.80). The proportion of patients experiencing a
pneumonia serious adverse event was also significantly lower with
budesonide/formoterol than salmeterol/fluticasone (odds ratio, 0.41; 95%
confidence interval, 0.19-0.86). However, there were too few events to draw any
firm conclusions on pneumonia-related mortality.
CONCLUSIONS: The results of the indirect comparison support the hypothesis that
budesonide/formoterol is associated with fewer pneumonia events than
salmeterol/fluticasone in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. The limitations 
of the analysis are that the results from a single study, TORCH, have a large
bearing on the overall findings of the analysis, and that there is heterogeneity 
in the length and the dosing of the included studies, although it does not appear
that heterogeneity affected the reported results. Another important limitation is
the lack of predefined diagnostic standards for pneumonia in these studies.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1742-1241.2011.02685.x 
PMID: 21676119  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Respir Res. 2011 May 31;12:71. doi: 10.1186/1465-9921-12-71.

Health status in the TORCH study of COPD: treatment efficacy and other
determinants of change.

Jones PW(1), Anderson JA, Calverley PM, Celli BR, Ferguson GT, Jenkins C, Yates
JC, Vestbo J, Spencer MD; TORCH investigators.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiac and Vascular Sciences, St George's Hospital, University 
of London, London, UK. pjones@sgul.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: Little is known about factors that determine health status decline in
clinical trials of COPD.
OBJECTIVES: To examine health status changes over 3 years in the TORCH study of
salmeterol+fluticasone propionate (SFC) vs. salmeterol alone, fluticasone
propionate alone or placebo.
METHODS: St George's Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ) was administered at
baseline then every 6 months.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: Data from 4951 patients in 28 countries were
available. SFC produced significant improvements over placebo in all three SGRQ
domains during the study: (Symptoms -3.6 [95% CI -4.8, -2.4], Activity -2.8 [95% 
CI -3.9, -1.6], Impacts -3.2 [95% CI -4.3, -2.1]) but the pattern of change over 
time differed between domains. SGRQ deteriorated faster in patients with Global
Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease (GOLD) stages III & IV relative
to GOLD stage II (p < 0.001). There was no difference in the relationship between
deterioration in SGRQ Total score and forced expiratory volume in one second
(FEV1) decline (as % predicted) in men and women. Significantly faster
deterioration in Total score relative to FEV1 % predicted was seen in older
patients (≥ 65 years) and there was an age-related change in Total score that was
independent of change in FEV1. The relationship between deterioration in FEV1 and
SGRQ did not differ in different world regions, but patients in Asia-Pacific
showed a large improvement in score that was unrelated to FEV1 change.
CONCLUSIONS: In addition to treatment effects, health status changes in clinical 
trials may be influenced by demographic and disease-related factors.
Deterioration in health status appears to be fastest in older persons and those
with severe airflow limitation.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov: NCT00268216.

DOI: 10.1186/1465-9921-12-71 
PMCID: PMC3117702
PMID: 21627828  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2011 Sep;338(3):860-9. doi: 10.1124/jpet.111.181016. Epub
2011 May 27.

Inflammatory stimuli inhibit glucocorticoid-dependent transactivation in human
pulmonary epithelial cells: rescue by long-acting beta2-adrenoceptor agonists.

Rider CF(1), King EM, Holden NS, Giembycz MA, Newton R.

Author information: 
(1)Airways Inflammation Research Group, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada.

By repressing inflammatory gene expression, glucocorticoids are the most
effective treatment for chronic inflammatory diseases such as asthma. However, in
some patients with severe disease, or who smoke or suffer from chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease, glucocorticoids are poorly effective. Although
many investigators focus on defects in the repression of inflammatory gene
expression, glucocorticoids also induce (transactivate) the expression of
numerous genes to elicit anti-inflammatory effects. Using human bronchial
epithelial (BEAS-2B) and pulmonary (A549) cells, we show that cytokines [tumor
necrosis factor α (TNFα) and interleukin 1β], mitogens [fetal calf serum (FCS)
and phorbol ester], cigarette smoke, and a G(q)-linked G protein-coupled receptor
agonist attenuate simple glucocorticoid response element (GRE)-dependent
transcription. With TNFα and FCS, this effect was not overcome by increasing
concentrations of dexamethasone, budesonide, or fluticasone propionate. Thus, the
maximal ability of the glucocorticoid to promote GRE-dependent transcription was 
reduced, and this was shown additionally for the glucocorticoid-induced gene
p57(KIP2). The long-acting β(2)-adrenoceptor agonists (LABAs) formoterol fumarate
and salmeterol xinafoate enhanced simple GRE-dependent transcription to a level
that could not be achieved by glucocorticoid alone. In the presence of TNFα or
FCS, which repressed glucocorticoid responsiveness, these LABAs restored
glucocorticoid-dependent transcription to levels that were achieved by
glucocorticoid alone. Given the existence of genes, such as p57(KIP2), which may 
mediate anti-inflammatory actions of glucocorticoids, we propose that repression 
of transactivation represents a mechanism for glucocorticoid resistance and for
understanding the clinical benefit of LABAs as an add-on therapy in asthma and
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

DOI: 10.1124/jpet.111.181016 
PMID: 21622733  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Thorax. 2011 Aug;66(8):699-708. doi: 10.1136/thx.2011.160028. Epub 2011 May 20.

Risk of fractures with inhaled corticosteroids in COPD: systematic review and
meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials and observational studies.

Loke YK(1), Cavallazzi R, Singh S.

Author information: 
(1)School of Medicine, University of East Anglia, Norwich NR4 7TJ, UK.
y.loke@uea.ac.uk

Comment in
    Evid Based Med. 2012 Jun;17(3):90-1.
    Ann Intern Med. 2012 Mar 20;156(6):JC3-7.

BACKGROUND: The effect of inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) on fracture risk in
patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) remains uncertain. The
aim of this study was to evaluate the association between ICS and fractures in
COPD.
METHODS: MEDLINE, EMBASE, regulatory documents and company registries were
searched up to August 2010. Randomised controlled trials (RCTs) of budesonide or 
fluticasone versus control treatment for COPD (≥24 weeks duration) and controlled
observational studies reporting on fracture risk with ICS exposure vs no exposure
in COPD were included. Peto OR meta-analysis was used for fracture risk from RCTs
while ORs from observational studies were pooled using the fixed effect inverse
variance method. Dose-response analysis was conducted using variance-weighted
least squares regression in the observational studies. Heterogeneity was assessed
using the I(2) statistic.
RESULTS: Sixteen RCTs (14 fluticasone, 2 budesonide) with 17,513 participants,
and seven observational studies (n=69,000 participants) were included in the
meta-analysis. ICSs were associated with a significantly increased risk of
fractures (Peto OR 1.27; 95% CI 1.01 to 1.58; p=0.04; I(2)=0%) in the RCTs. In
the observational studies, ICS exposure was associated with a significantly
increased risk of fractures (OR 1.21; 95% CI 1.12 to 1.32; p<0.001; I(2)=37%),
with each 500 μg increase in beclomethasone dose equivalents associated with a 9%
increased risk of fractures, OR 1.09 (95% CI 1.06 to 1.12; p<0.001).
CONCLUSION: Among patients with COPD, long-term exposure to fluticasone and
budesonide is consistently associated with a modest but statistically significant
increased likelihood of fractures.

DOI: 10.1136/thx.2011.160028 
PMID: 21602540  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2011 Sep;128(3):635-45.e1-2. doi:
10.1016/j.jaci.2011.03.045. Epub 2011 May 14.

IκB kinase-driven nuclear factor-κB activation in patients with asthma and
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Gagliardo R(1), Chanez P, Profita M, Bonanno A, Albano GD, Montalbano AM, Pompeo 
F, Gagliardo C, Merendino AM, Gjomarkaj M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedicine and Molecular Immunology, Unit of Immunopathology and
Pharmacology of Respiratory System, Italian National Research Council, Palermo,
Italy. gagliardo@ibim.cnr.it

BACKGROUND: Nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB) is a transcriptional factor of different
inflammatory patterns involved in asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD) that is tightly controlled by IκB kinase (IKK) complex.
OBJECTIVE: We investigated the dysregulation of IKK-driven NF-κB activation in
patients with asthma and COPD.
METHODS: We assessed IKKα and IKKβ expression and activation, their regulation by
glucocorticosteroids, and their involvement in IL-8 synthesis in PBMCs isolated
from asthmatic patients, healthy smokers (HSs), patients with COPD, and control
subjects. PBMCs from control subjects were stimulated with TNF-α and cigarette
smoke extract in the presence or absence of fluticasone propionate (FP),
L-glutathione reduced, or both, and IKK activation and IL-8 release were
evaluated.
RESULTS: IKKα activity was higher in patients with COPD and HSs than in asthmatic
patients and control subjects. IKKβ activity was higher in asthmatic patients,
HSs, and patients with COPD than in control subjects. In vitro FP treatment
induced inhibition of both IKKα and IKKβ activity in PBMCs from asthmatic
patients, patients with COPD, and HSs, although IKKβ activity was more sensitive 
to FP than that of IKKα. FP reduced the IL-8 released from PBMCs of asthmatic
patients, patients with COPD, and HSs, although IL-8 inhibition was higher in
asthmatic patients than in patients with COPD and HSs. FP reduced IKKα and IKKβ
activities in TNF-α and cigarette smoke extract-treated PBMCs, with higher levels
of inhibition for IKKβ than IKKα activity. L-glutathione reduced improved the
downregulatory effects of FP on IKKα and IL-8 levels.
CONCLUSION: Based on differential activation of IKKα and IKKβ, our findings
suggest a different profile in the upstream regulation of the IKK-driven NF-κB
system in asthmatic patients and patients with COPD. These differences in the
regulation of the inflammatory process may explain, at least in part, the
different pharmacologic responses in these patients.

Copyright © 2011 American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. Published by
Mosby, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaci.2011.03.045 
PMID: 21571356  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Am J Med Sci. 2011 Aug;342(2):160-7. doi: 10.1097/MAJ.0b013e31820879ae.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease megatrials: taking the results into office 
practice.

Stoloff SW(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Family and Community Medicine, University of Nevada-Reno, Carson
City, Nevada, USA. drstoloff@sbcglobal.net

Primary care specialists provide first-line care of chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD), characterized by progressive, partially reversible airflow
limitation induced mainly by smoking. Spirometry and questionnaires are important
for COPD diagnosis, staging and prognosis. Smoking cessation, immunizations,
pulmonary rehabilitation and self-management action plans comprise
nonpharmacologic COPD management. The Understanding Potential Long-term Impacts
on Function with Tiotropium (UPLIFT®) and Towards a Revolution in COPD Health
(TORCH) megatrials provide evidence for maintenance pharmacotherapy to reduce
exacerbations and improve patient symptoms and health-related quality of life.
Although the primary outcomes--lung function decline (UPLIFT®) and mortality
(TORCH)--were negative, long-acting bronchodilators in both trials reduced
exacerbation rates and improved health status. Tiotropium added to usual care (in
UPLIFT®) and salmeterol/fluticasone therapy (in TORCH) improved key
patient-centered outcomes with no significant mortality risk or excess in serious
cardiac adverse events associated with the study drugs. These results provide
strong evidence of efficacy and acceptable safety profiles of maintenance
pharmacotherapies in patient-centered outcomes and support combination drug
regimens in patients with moderate to very severe COPD.

DOI: 10.1097/MAJ.0b013e31820879ae 
PMID: 21512392  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Pneumonol Alergol Pol. 2011;79(3):227-31.

Mega trials in COPD--clinical data analysis and design issues.

Suissa S(1), Ernst P.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Clinical Epidemiology, Lady Davis Institute, Jewish General
Hospital, Department of Epidemiology, McGill University, Montreal, Canada.
samy.suissa@mcgill.ca

The TORCH and UPLIFT randomised controlled trials have provided important data on
the benefits of COPD treatments, but also some lessons in study design and data
analysis that we will here review. Firstly, it is fundamental that the study
question be answerable by the study design. The question in the TORCH study was
aimed at a comparison with 'usual care', but the placebo group was not 'usual
care'. Secondly, TORCH and UPLIFT were among the first trials to follow the
intent-to-treat principle, fundamental to avoid bias in randomised trials.
However, this principle was followed for the mortality outcome, but not for lung 
function, so that the findings related to lung function decline are subject to
bias from regression to the mean. Finally, a re-analysis of the TORCH study
(performed to fully exploit the data as a 2 × 2 factorial trial) shows that a
mortality benefit is entirely accounted for by the effect of the long-acting
beta-agonist salmeterol, with no effect attributable to the inhaled
corticosteroid fluticasone component of the combination therapy. Together, these 
data suggest that long-acting bronchodilators, including anticholinergics such as
tiotropium and beta-agonists, are associated with lower mortality of patients
with COPD, but not inhaled corticosteroids. With COPD one of the major causes of 
morbidity and mortality worldwide, mega trials such as TORCH and UPLIFT are much 
needed, but must achieve the utmost scientific rigour in their design and
analysis.


PMID: 21509736  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Am J Manag Care. 2011 Mar 1;17(3):e55-65.

COPD-related healthcare utilization and costs after discharge from a
hospitalization or emergency department visit on a regimen of fluticasone
propionate-salmeterol combination versus other maintenance therapies.

Dalal AA(1), Shah M, D'Souza AO, Mapel DW.

Author information: 
(1)GlaxoSmith-Kline, Research Triangle Park, Durham, NC 27709, USA.
anand.a.dalal@gsk.com

OBJECTIVES: To quantify healthcare use and costs associated with chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) among patients discharged from a
COPD-related hospitalization or emergency department (ED) visit on a regimen of
fluticasone propionate-salmeterol combination versus other inhaled maintenance
therapies.
STUDY DESIGN: Retrospective cohort study.
METHODS: Managed care enrollees with an index hospitalization (with a primary or 
secondary [ie, in the second position] diagnosis of COPD) or ED visit (with a
primary diagnosis of COPD) were identified for placement into study cohorts
during a 60-day period following the index date. Time to COPD-related events and 
healthcare costs were compared during up to 1 year of follow-up between the 2
cohorts.
RESULTS: The sample comprised 5677 patients (1291 in the fluticasone
propionate-salmeterol cohort and 4386 in the other maintenance therapies cohort).
The adjusted rate of COPD-related hospitalizations or ED visits was 35% lower in 
the fluticasone propionate-salmeterol cohort (P <.05). Adjusted COPD-related
total (medical plus pharmacy) costs were lower in the fluticasone
propionate-salmeterol cohort ($240 vs $279 per patient per month, P <.05), mostly
because of lower medical costs ($113 vs $160 per patient per month, P <.05).
Pharmacy costs did not differ between fluticasone propionate-salmeterol and other
maintenance therapies. Results were similar in the subset of patients 65 years or
older.
CONCLUSIONS: Initiation of fluticasone propionate-salmeterol after discharge from
a COPD-related hospitalization or ED visit significantly reduced the risk of a
recurrent event during the ensuing months and decreased COPD-related medical
costs, without an increase in COPD-related pharmacy costs, in a real-world
setting.


PMID: 21504260  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. J Vet Intern Med. 2011 May-Jun;25(3):549-57. doi:
10.1111/j.1939-1676.2011.0717.x. Epub 2011 Apr 12.

Effect of long-term fluticasone treatment on immune function in horses with
heaves.

Dauvillier J(1), Felippe MJ, Lunn DP, Lavoie-Lamoureux A, Leclère M, Beauchamp G,
Lavoie JP.

Author information: 
(1)Faculté de Médecine Vétérinaire, Université de Montréal, Saint-Hyacinthe, QC, 
Canada.

Erratum in
    J Vet Intern Med. 2012 Mar-Apr;26(2):444. Dosage error in article text.

BACKGROUND: Corticosteroids currently are the most effective pharmacological
treatment available to control heaves in horses. Systemically administered
corticosteroids have been shown to alter immune response in horses, humans, and
other species. Aerosolized administration theoretically minimizes systemic
adverse effects, but the effect of inhaled corticosteroids on immune function has
not been evaluated in horses.
OBJECTIVES: To evaluate the effects of prolonged administration of inhaled
fluticasone on the immune system of heaves-affected horses.
ANIMALS: Heaves-affected horses were treated with inhaled fluticasone (n = 5) for
11 months or received environmental modifications only (n = 5).
METHODS: Prospective analysis. Clinical parameters and CBC, lymphocyte
subpopulations and function, and circulating neutrophil gene expression were
sequentially measured. Primary and anamnestic immune responses also were
evaluated by measuring antigen-specific antibodies in response to vaccination
with bovine viral antigen and tetanus toxoid, respectively.
RESULTS: No clinical adverse effects were observed and no differences in immune
function were detected between treated and untreated horses.
CONCLUSIONS AND CLINICAL IMPORTANCE: The treatment of heaves-affected horses with
inhaled fluticasone at therapeutic dosages for 11 months has no significant
detectable effect on innate and adaptive (both humoral and cell-mediated) immune 
parameters studied. These results suggest that prolonged administration of
fluticasone would not compromise the systemic immune response to pathogens nor
vaccination in adult horses.

Copyright © 2011 by the American College of Veterinary Internal Medicine.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1939-1676.2011.0717.x 
PMID: 21488960  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. J Korean Med Sci. 2011 Mar;26(3):379-85. doi: 10.3346/jkms.2011.26.3.379. Epub
2011 Feb 25.

Predictors of pulmonary function response to treatment with
salmeterol/fluticasone in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Lee JS(1), Huh JW, Chae EJ, Seo JB, Ra SW, Lee JH, Kim EK, Lee YK, Kim TH, Kim
WJ, Lee JH, Lee SM, Lee S, Lim SY, Shin TR, Yoon HI, Sheen SS, Oh YM, Lee SD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Asthma Center, and
Clinical Research Center for Chronic Obstructive Airway Diseases, University of
Ulsan College of Medicine, 86 Asanbyeongwon-gil,Seoul, Korea.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a heterogeneous disease and
responses to therapies are highly variable. The aim of this study was to identify
the predictors of pulmonary function response to 3 months of treatment with
salmeterol/fluticasone in patients with COPD. A total of 127 patients with stable
COPD from the Korean Obstructive Lung Disease (KOLD) Cohort, which were
prospectively recruited from June 2005 to September 2009, were analyzed
retrospectively. The prediction models for the FEV(1), FVC and IC/TLC changes
after 3 months of treatment with salmeterol/fluticasone were constructed by using
multiple, stepwise, linear regression analysis. The prediction model for the
FEV(1) change after 3 months of treatment included wheezing history,
pre-bronchodilator FEV(1), post-bronchodilator FEV(1) change and emphysema extent
on CT (R = 0.578). The prediction models for the FVC change after 3 months of
treatment included pre-bronchodilator FVC, post-bronchodilator FVC change (R =
0.533), and those of IC/ TLC change after 3 months of treatment did
pre-bronchodilator IC/TLC and post-bronchodilator FEV(1) change (R = 0.401).
Wheezing history, pre-bronchodilator pulmonary function, bronchodilator
responsiveness, and emphysema extent may be used for predicting the pulmonary
function response to 3 months of treatment with salmeterol/fluticasone in
patients with COPD.

DOI: 10.3346/jkms.2011.26.3.379 
PMCID: PMC3051085
PMID: 21394306  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Arch Bronconeumol. 2010;46 Suppl 8:25-30. doi: 10.1016/S0300-2896(10)70064-8.

[Triple therapy in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease].

[Article in Spanish]

Baloira A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Neumología. Complejo Hospitalario de Pontevedra, Pontevedra,
Spain. adolfo.baloira.villar@sergas.es

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is one of the most important
respiratory diseases, characterized by its multicomponent complexity, with
chronic inflammation, increased airway resistance and exacerbations. Several
drugs are currently available for its treatment, which act on distinct targets.
Bronchodilators, especially prolonged-action bronchodilators, are the most potent
and there are two groups: beta-2 mimetics and anticholinergics. Inhaled
corticosteroids are the main anti-inflammatory drugs but have modest efficacy and
their use is reserved for patients with severe disease and frequent exacerbations
and/or asthma traits. Associating these three drugs can improve symptom control, 
improve quality of life and reduce the number of exacerbations. The present
article reviews the evidence supporting this triple combination, as well as
published studies.

Copyright © 2010 Sociedad Española de Neumología y Cirugía Torácica. Published by
Elsevier Espana. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S0300-2896(10)70064-8 
PMID: 21334553  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2011 Jan 7;6:29-34. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S15358.

Vitamin D and responses to inhaled fluticasone in severe chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease.

Kunisaki KM(1), Rector TS.

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary Section, Minneapolis Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Minneapolis,
MN 55417, USA. kunis001@umn.edu

BACKGROUND: Patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)
demonstrate variable responses to inhaled corticosteroids (ICS). The factors
contributing to this variability are not well understood. Data from patients with
asthma have suggested that low 25-hydroxyvitamin D [25(OH)D] levels contribute to
a lack of ICS response in asthma. The objective of this study was to determine
whether serum levels of 25(OH)D were related to ICS responses in patients with
COPD.
METHODS: A total of 60 exsmokers with severe COPD (mean forced expiratory volume 
in one second [FEV(1)] 1.07 L, 36% of predicted) spent 4 weeks free of any ICS,
followed by 4 weeks of ICS use (fluticasone propionate 500 μg twice daily).
Spirometry was performed prior to and after 4 weeks of ICS use. Blood 25(OH)D
levels were measured prior to ICS use and examined for relationships to changes
in FEV(1) following the 4 weeks of ICS use.
RESULTS: The mean 25(OH)D level was 23.3 ± 9.3 ng/mL. There was a high prevalence
of vitamin D insufficiency (35%) and deficiency (40%). There was no relationship 
between baseline 25(OH)D and changes in FEV(1) following 4 weeks of ICS.
CONCLUSION: Baseline 25(OH)D does not contribute to the variation in short-term
FEV(1) responses to ICS in patients with severe COPD.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S15358 
PMCID: PMC3034285
PMID: 21311691  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2010 Dec 31;6:13-22. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S15455.

Comparative cost-effectiveness of a fluticasone-propionate/salmeterol combination
versus anticholinergics as initial maintenance therapy for chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease.

Dalal AA(1), Roberts MH, Petersen HV, Blanchette CM, Mapel DW.

Author information: 
(1)US Health Outcomes, GlaxoSmithKline, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709, USA.
anand.a.dalal@gsk.com

PURPOSE: Relative costs and utilization-related outcomes of a fluticasone
propionate 250 μg + salmeterol 50 μg combination (FSC), tiotropium bromide, and
ipratropium as initial maintenance therapy in COPD have not been compared in a
commercially-insured population.
METHODS: This retrospective, observational cohort study used health care claims
data from January 2004 to June 2009 from a large administrative database for
patients aged ≥40 years with COPD. Time-to-first COPD-related health care event
beginning 30 days following therapy initiation with FSC (n = 16,684), ipratropium
alone or in fixed dose combination with albuterol (n = 14,449), or tiotropium (n 
= 12,659) was estimated using Cox proportional hazard models that controlled for 
differences in patient demographic characteristics, health care utilization, and 
comorbidities at baseline. Mean adjusted costs and numbers of COPD-related health
care encounters and prescription medication fills were compared among patients
with 12 months of follow-up (FSC, n = 12,595; ipratropium, n = 10,617;
tiotropium, n = 9126).
RESULTS: With FSC as the reference, risk for a COPD-related hospitalization
and/or emergency department visit was significantly higher for ipratropium
(hazard ratio [HR] 1.64, 95% confidence interval [CI] 1.50-1.79) and tiotropium
(HR 1.29, CI 1.17-1.41). Mean adjusted 12-month COPD-related total health care
costs were lower for FSC ($2068, standard deviation [SD] $1190) than for
ipratropium ($2841, SD $1858) and tiotropium ($2408, SD $1511, both P <0.05).
Mean number of COPD-related hospitalizations, emergency department visits, and
outpatient visits associated with an oral corticosteroid or antibiotic were also 
lower for FSC than for ipratropium and tiotropium (all P <0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: In this retrospective "real-world" observational sample of COPD
patients, initiating treatment with FSC was associated with significantly better 
clinical and economic outcomes compared with short- and long-acting
anticholinergic therapy. Consistent with the goal of preventing and reducing
exacerbations advocated by global guidelines, the findings suggest that
initiation of maintenance treatment with FSC may afford clinical benefits at a
lower cost than anticholinergic treatment.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S15455 
PMCID: PMC3034283
PMID: 21311689  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. J Med Econ. 2011;14(2):147-58. doi: 10.3111/13696998.2011.552582. Epub 2011 Feb
2.

Respiratory-related medical expenditure and inpatient utilisation among COPD
patients receiving long-acting bronchodilator therapy.

Cao Z(1), Zou KH, Baker CL, Su J, Paulose-Ram R, Durden E, Shi N, Shah H.

Author information: 
(1)Thomson Reuters, Cambridge, MA, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)-related
expenditure and hospitalisation in COPD patients treated with tiotropium versus
alternative long-acting bronchodilators (LABDs).
METHODS: Data were from the Thomson Reuters MarketScan Research Databases. COPD
patients ≥ 35 years with at least one LABD claim between July 1, 2004 and June
30, 2006 were classified into five cohorts based on index LABD: monotherapy with 
tiotropium, salmeterol/fluticasone propionate, formoterol fumarate, or salmeterol
or combination therapy. Demographic and clinical characteristics were evaluated
for a 6-month pre-period and COPD-related utilisation and total costs were
evaluated for a 12-month follow-up period. LABD relationship to COPD-related
costs and hospitalisations were estimated by multivariate generalised linear
modelling (GLM) and multivariate logistic regression, respectively.
RESULTS: Of 52,274 patients, 53% (n = 27,457) were male, 71% (n = 37,271) were ≥ 
65 years, and three LABD cohorts accounted for over 90% of the sample [53% (n =
27,654) salmeterol/fluticasone propionate, 23% (n = 11,762) tiotropium, and 15%
(n = 7755) combination therapy]. Patients treated with salmeterol/fluticasone
propionate (p < 0.001), formoterol fumarate (p = 0.032), salmeterol (p = 0.004), 
or with combination therapy (p < 0.001) had higher COPD-related costs and a
greater risk of inpatient admission (p < 0.01 for all) versus tiotropium.
LIMITATIONS: These data are based on administrative claims and as such do not
include clinical information or information on risk factors, like smoking status,
that are relevant to this population.
CONCLUSIONS: Patients treated with tiotropim had lower COPD-related expenditures 
and risk of hospitalisation than patients treated with other LABDs.

DOI: 10.3111/13696998.2011.552582 
PMID: 21288057  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Pharmacol Ther. 2011 May;130(2):114-43. doi: 10.1016/j.pharmthera.2010.12.008.
Epub 2011 Jan 27.

The use of long acting β₂-agonists, alone or in combination with inhaled
corticosteroids, in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD): a risk-benefit 
analysis.

Cave AC(1), Hurst MM.

Author information: 
(1)Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency, 151 Buckingham Palace
Road, London SW1W9SZ , United Kingdom. Alison.Cave@mhra.gsi.gov.uk

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a slowly progressive, largely
non-reversible pulmonary disease which is characterised by airflow limitation. It
is one of the few diseases with an increasing mortality rate and by 2020 it is
predicted to be the third leading cause of death. The mainstays of current
treatment are long acting β₂ agonists (LABAs) coupled with an increasing reliance
on inhaled corticosteroids (ICS). Two LABAs (salmeterol and formoterol) are
currently licensed for COPD both as monotherapy and in combination with ICS
(fluticasone propionate (FP) and budesonide respectively). A comprehensive review
of the risk-benefit of these medicines in COPD is provided here which concludes
that there is limited efficacy for LABAs in COPD either alone or in combination
with ICS and no overall modification of the disease process. However, where
directly compared, combination therapy usually provides an advantage over
monotherapy. Importantly the apparent effectiveness of treatment may
significantly depend upon the outcome measure chosen with some measures possibly 
underestimating the extent of benefit. ICS benefit may also be greater in those
patients who respond to treatment. Set against this benefit are recent concerns
that a number of issues related to the clinical trial design such as prior use of
ICS and different withdrawal rates between groups may be significantly
influencing results. Furthermore there is no evidence of a dose response
relationship with regard to ICS dose. A key issue with combination therapy is the
excess risk of pneumonia conferred by the use of an ICS in this patient
population. This risk does not appear to be proportional to the ICS dose but may 
differ between FP and budesonide. We conclude that further studies are required
to identify the optimal dose of ICS, in terms of both risk and benefit, and to
confirm their benefit in steroid naïve patients. Furthermore it will be important
to determine whether the risk of pneumonia is apparent with both FP and
budesonide and to identify factors which may predict steroid responsiveness in
COPD.

Crown Copyright © 2011. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pharmthera.2010.12.008 
PMID: 21276815  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Open Respir Med J. 2010 Oct 21;4:86-91. doi: 10.2174/1874306401004010086.

Safety and efficacy of fluticasone propionate/salmeterol hydrofluoroalkane 134a
metered-dose-inhaler compared with fluticasone propionate/salmeterol diskus in
patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Koser A(1), Westerman J, Sharma S, Emmett A, Crater GD.

Author information: 
(1)Greenville Pharmaceutical Research, Greenville, SC 864-770-0890, USA.

PURPOSE: To provide information on the efficacy and safety of Fluticasone
Propionate/Salmeterol Hydrofluoroalkane 134a Metered-Dose-Inhaler 230/42mcg (FSC 
MDI) and its comparable dose of Fluticasone Propionate/Salmeterol DISKUS
250/50mcg (FSC DISKUS) in patients with COPD.
METHODS: This multicenter, randomized, double-blind, 12 week study was designed
to evaluate FSC MDI treatment responses as compared with FSC DISKUS. The primary 
comparison of interest was non-inferiority between the FSC MDI treatment group
and the FSC DISKUS treatment group assessed in terms of 2-hour post-dose FEV(1)
change from baseline at endpoint. The non-inferiority criterion bound was 75mL
(lower confidence limit of -75mL).
INCLUSION CRITERIA: Male or female aged ≥ 40, post-bronchodilator FEV(1) ≤ 70%
predicted normal, FEV(1)/FVC ≤ 70% and ≥ 10 pack years smoking history. Adverse
events were recorded by patients throughout the study on daily diary cards.
Adverse events were collected in eCRFs at all clinic visits and during a final
follow-up phone call.
RESULTS: Patients (N=247) were randomized to FSC MDI (FEV(1)% 49.3 ± 12.3,
FEV(1)/FVC 50.5 ± 10.0) and FSC DISKUS (FEV(1)% 48.4 ± 11.0, FEV(1)/FVC 50.3 ±
10.3). From an ANCOVA model the least squares (LS) mean difference (FSC MDI- FSC 
DISKUS) for the 2-hour post dose FEV(1) at endpoint was -2.0mL (95% CI -64mL,
59mL). Pre-dose FEV(1), FVC, PEF, and albuterol use were also similar between the
two formulations. The most common adverse events (AE) during treatment were
headache (8% and 6% of patients), nasopharyngitis (4% and 6%), cough (3% and 4%),
and sinusitis (2% and 5%) for FSC MDI and FSC DISKUS, respectively. Pneumonia was
recorded as an AE for 2 (2%) patients in the FSC DISKUS arm.
CONCLUSION: This is the first study to demonstrate that FSC MDI has a similar
efficacy and safety profile to FSC DISKUS in COPD patients.

DOI: 10.2174/1874306401004010086 
PMCID: PMC3023060
PMID: 21253451  [PubMed]


296. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2011 Apr;337(1):137-44. doi: 10.1124/jpet.110.173641. Epub 
2011 Jan 4.

In vivo characterization of GSK256066, a high-affinity inhaled phosphodiesterase 
4 inhibitor.

Nials AT(1), Tralau-Stewart CJ, Gascoigne MH, Ball DI, Ranshaw LE, Knowles RG.

Author information: 
(1)UK Discovery Biology, Respiratory Centre of Excellence for Drug Discovery,
GlaxoSmithKline Research and Development Ltd, Medicines Research Centre, Gunnels 
Wood Road, Stevenage, Hertfordshire, United Kingdom SG1 2NY. tony.t.nials@gsk.com

Oral phosphodiesterase (PDE) 4 inhibitors have demonstrated clinical efficacy in 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and asthma. Preclinical and clinical
investigation of inhaled PDE4 inhibitors is ongoing.
6-({3-[(Dimethylamino)carbonyl]phenyl}sulfonyl)-8-methyl-4-{[3-methyloxy)phenyl]a
mino}-3-quinolinecarboxamide (GSK256066) is an exceptionally high-affinity and
selective inhibitor of PDE4 designed for inhaled delivery. The aim of these
studies was to investigate the potency, duration of action, and therapeutic index
of GSK256066 in animal models of pulmonary inflammation. The effects of
intratracheally administered GSK256066 were investigated in rat
lipopolysaccharide (LPS)- and ovalbumin (OVA)-induced models of acute pulmonary
inflammation. In some studies, fluticasone propionate (FP) was included as a
comparator. The therapeutic index (anti-inflammatory effect versus emesis) of
GSK256066 was studied in ferrets where acute pulmonary inflammation was induced
with inhaled LPS. In rats, GSK256066 and FP caused significant (p < 0.05)
inhibition of LPS-induced pulmonary neutrophilia. The duration of action of
GSK256066 at 10 × ED(50) dose (10 μg/kg) was 12 h. GSK256066 and FP also
inhibited LPS-induced increases in exhaled nitric oxide (ED(50) 35 and 92 μg/kg, 
respectively). In addition, GSK256066 inhibited pulmonary eosinophilia in rats
exposed to OVA (ED(50) 0.4 μg/kg). In ferrets, inhaled GSK256066 inhibited
LPS-induced pulmonary neutrophilia (ED(50) 18 μg/kg), and no emetic episodes were
observed. Thus, GSK256066 may have an improved therapeutic index compared with
oral PDE4 inhibitors, e.g., cilomilast and roflumilast. In summary, GSK256066
demonstrates potent and long-lasting anti-inflammatory effects in animal models
of pulmonary inflammation and does not induce emetic episodes in ferrets.
GSK256066 has potential as an inhaled therapeutic for the treatment of asthma and
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

DOI: 10.1124/jpet.110.173641 
PMID: 21205924  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2011 Apr;337(1):145-54. doi: 10.1124/jpet.110.173690. Epub 
2011 Jan 4.

GSK256066, an exceptionally high-affinity and selective inhibitor of
phosphodiesterase 4 suitable for administration by inhalation: in vitro, kinetic,
and in vivo characterization.

Tralau-Stewart CJ(1), Williamson RA, Nials AT, Gascoigne M, Dawson J, Hart GJ,
Angell AD, Solanke YE, Lucas FS, Wiseman J, Ward P, Ranshaw LE, Knowles RG.

Author information: 
(1)Drug Discovery Institute, Faculty of Medicine, Imperial College London,
London, United Kingdom.

Oral phosphodiesterase (PDE) 4 inhibitors such as roflumilast have established
the potential of PDE4 inhibition for the treatment of respiratory diseases.
However, PDE4 inhibitor efficacy is limited by mechanism-related side effects
such as emesis and nausea. Delivering the inhibitor by the inhaled route may
improve therapeutic index, and we describe
6-({3-[(dimethylamino)carbonyl]phenyl}sulfonyl)-8-methyl-4-{[3-methyloxy)
phenyl]amino}-3-quinolinecarboxamide (GSK256066), an exceptionally high-affinity 
inhibitor of PDE4 designed for inhaled administration. GSK256066 is a slow and
tight binding inhibitor of PDE4B (apparent IC(50) 3.2 pM; steady-state IC(50)
<0.5 pM), which is more potent than any previously documented compound, for
example, roflumilast (IC(50) 390 pM), tofimilast (IC(50) 1.6 nM), and cilomilast 
(IC(50) 74 nM). Consistent with this, GSK256066 inhibited tumor necrosis factor α
production by lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-stimulated human peripheral blood
monocytes with 0.01 nM IC(50) (compared with IC(50) values of 5, 22, and 389 nM
for roflumilast, tofimilast, and cilomilast, respectively) and by LPS-stimulated 
whole blood with 126 pM IC(50). GSK256066 was highly selective for PDE4
(>380,000-fold versus PDE1, PDE2, PDE3, PDE5, and PDE6 and >2500-fold against
PDE7), inhibited PDE4 isoforms A-D with equal affinity, and had a substantial
high-affinity rolipram binding site ratio (>17). When administered
intratracheally to rats, GSK256066 inhibited LPS-induced pulmonary neutrophilia
with ED(50) values of 1.1 μg/kg (aqueous suspension) and 2.9 μg/kg (dry powder
formulation) and was more potent than an aqueous suspension of the corticosteroid
fluticasone propionate (ED(50) 9.3 μg/kg). Thus, GSK256066 has been demonstrated 
to have exceptional potency in vitro and in vivo and is being clinically
investigated as a treatment for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

DOI: 10.1124/jpet.110.173690 
PMID: 21205923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Eur Respir J. 2011 Jan;37(1):206-9. doi: 10.1183/09031936.00062210.

Dose-response for inhaled fluticasone on airway and systemic inflammation in
COPD.

Williamson PA, Menzies D, Clearie KL, Vaidyanathan S, Lipworth BJ.

DOI: 10.1183/09031936.00062210 
PMID: 21205715  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Zhonghua Jie He He Hu Xi Za Zhi. 2010 Oct;33(10):750-3.

[Attitudes and actions of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease patients on
treatment:a national multi-center investigative study].

[Article in Chinese]

Chen YH(1), Yao WZ, Kang J, Cai BQ, Zhou X, Liu Z, Chen P, Sun DJ, Zheng JP, Wang
GY, Feng YL, Xu YJ, Jia Y, Lu M, Chang C, Wang XH.

Author information: 
(1)Respiratory Department, Peking University Third Hospital, Beijing 100191,
China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the attitudes and actions of patients with chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) on treatment.
METHODS: A nation-wide multi-center, questionnaire study was carried out to
investigate the patient understanding and experience of COPD treatment between
Sep. 2007 and Dec. 2008. The questionnaire included the patients' understanding
of goal of COPD treatment, previous treatment, and expectation on drugs. The data
were analyzed by descriptive statistical methods.
RESULTS: 2072 patients with COPD in 11 centers were interviewed in the study. The
final effective questionnaires were collected from 1698 cases. 653 patients had
known of COPD. The attitudes and actions on treatment were analyzed based on
these patients. The patients had different understanding of goals for COPD
treatment, including 59.1% (384/650) for relieving symptoms. In recent 3 months, 
the most commonly used drugs were theophylline (53.7%, 351/653), iprotropium
(39.8%, 260/653), tiotropium (27.1%, 177/653). 72.0% (465/646) patients used the 
drugs according to the prescriptions. There were more than 80% patients who did
not understand the side effects of anti-cholinergics, β-adrenergic agonists,
inhaled steroids, inhaled steroid/long-acting β-agonist combination therapy, or
theophyllines. 37.4% (240/641) patients were afraid of side effects of inhaled
steroids. 42.2% (274/650) patients often took antibiotics. There was no oxygen
supply at home in 60.1% (391/651) patients. 70.5% (457/648) did not have
pulmonary rehabilitation. Requirement of long-term regular treatment was
considered in 77.4% (500/646) patients. The most important thing about patients' 
attitude on ideal drugs for COPD was drug efficacy (79.6%, 481/604). The most
ideal drug used in the past was fluticasone/salmeterol or tiotropium (16.9%,
78/461).
CONCLUSIONS: Patients had different attitudes and actions on COPD treatment.
Patient education should be strengthened to realize treatment goals for COPD.


PMID: 21176506  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Clin Respir J. 2011 Jan;5(1):44-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1752-699X.2010.00198.x.

Bias due to withdrawal in long-term randomised trials in COPD: evidence from the 
TORCH study.

Vestbo J(1), Anderson JA, Calverley PM, Celli B, Ferguson GT, Jenkins C, Yates
JC, Jones PW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology and Respiratory Medicine, Hvidovre Hospital and
University of Copenhagen, Hvidovre, Denmark. joergen.vestbo@hvh.regionh.dk

INTRODUCTION: Randomised controlled trials (RCTs) are considered the least biased
method for evaluating drug efficacy and several large long-term RCTs in chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease have been published. These usually include drugs
with symptomatic benefits and have significant withdrawal rates.
OBJECTIVES: We aimed at examining bias due to differential withdrawal in the
Towards a Revolution in COPD Health (TORCH) trial.
METHODS: We did an observational study nested in the TORCH trial, a
placebo-controlled trial of salmeterol/fluticasone propionate combination (SFC)
therapy in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. We included 3057 patients
randomly allocated to placebo or SFC in the analyses. We examined rates of
withdrawal from the study and analysed change in effect parameters over time and 
in relation to withdrawal, as well as medication uptake after withdrawal.
RESULTS: There was differential withdrawal with a significantly higher withdrawal
rate from the group allocated to placebo than to SFC, 44% compared with 34%.
Regardless of treatment group, withdrawal was associated with worse baseline lung
function and more frequent exacerbations, leading to selection of a study
population in better health than those originally recruited. As a result,
annualized exacerbation rates in the first 6 months of the study compared with
the last 6 months of the study decreased from 6.8 to 0.9 in the placebo group and
from 3.0 to 0.8 in the SFC group. Also, use of medications under test in the
study was frequent in patients after withdrawal.
CONCLUSION: Significant bias may occur in long-term RCTs of registered
medications with symptomatic benefits as a result of differential withdrawal.

© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1752-699X.2010.00198.x 
PMID: 21159140  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Phys Sportsmed. 2010 Dec;38(4):19-27. doi: 10.3810/psm.2010.12.1821.

Long-term use of fluticasone propionate/salmeterol fixed-dose combination and
incidence of nonvertebral fractures among patients with COPD in the UK General
Practice Research Database.

Miller DP(1), Watkins SE, Sampson T, Davis KJ.

Author information: 
(1)GlaxoSmithKline, Research Triangle Park, NC, USA.

INTRODUCTION: There has been inconsistent evidence on the association between use
of inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) and increased risk of nonvertebral fractures in 
patients with asthma or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). In a large 
population-based study in the United Kingdom, we estimated the association
between fluticasone propionate/salmeterol fixed-dose combination (FSC) and other 
ICS use and nonvertebral fracture incidence among patients with COPD.
METHODS: We identified a cohort of patients aged ≥ 45 years with COPD in the
General Practice Research Database (GPRD) between 2003 and 2006. We used a nested
case-control design to estimate the odds of incident nonvertebral fractures
associated with prior prescriptions of FSC and other ICS, applying conditional
logistic regression and controlling for potential confounders. Exposure to FSC
and other ICS was assessed by recency, duration, and number of prescriptions.
Average daily dose was defined as low, medium, high, or very high using
fluticasone propionate equivalents.
RESULTS: We identified 1523 nonvertebral fracture cases among 53 191 patients
with COPD at risk in the cohort. Use of FSC in the year prior to the index date
was associated with a statistically significant increase in the odds of
nonvertebral fractures (odds ratio [OR], 1.25; 95% confidence interval [CI],
1.07-1.47); however, there was no increase in the odds of nonvertebral fractures 
for other ICS use (OR, 1.12; 95% CI, 0.97-1.30). When examining results by the
recent use of prescriptions, an exposure that occurred farther from the index
date was associated with a significant increase in nonvertebral fracture (26-52
days prior OR, 1.36; 95% CI, 1.04-1.77; 53-365 days prior OR, 1.39; 95% CI,
1.07-1.78), whereas categories of more recent use (0-12 days prior or 13-25 days 
prior) were not associated with nonvertebral fractures relative to no FSC use. No
pattern of association between increasing levels of FSC or other ICS average
daily dose and increased odds of nonvertebral fracture was observed.
CONCLUSION: We did not observe a consistent association between prescriptions of 
FSC or other ICS in terms of recent use or average daily dose in the prior year
and increases in the odds of nonvertebral fractures in patients with COPD,
although ever use of FSC was associated with a slight elevation in the odds.

DOI: 10.3810/psm.2010.12.1821 
PMID: 21150138  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Eur Respir J. 2010 Sep;36(3):692; author reply 692. doi:
10.1183/09031936.00058310.

Exhaled nitric oxide and COPD.

Taylor DR, Dummer J.

Comment on
    Eur Respir J. 2010 Jan;35(1):72-8.

DOI: 10.1183/09031936.00058310 
PMID: 20930207  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Respirology. 2011 Jan;16(1):95-101. doi: 10.1111/j.1440-1843.2010.01869.x.

Effects of adding salmeterol/fluticasone propionate to tiotropium on airway
dimensions in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Hoshino M(1), Ohtawa J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Atami Hospital, International University
of Health and Welfare, Atami, Japan. hoshino@iuhw.ac.jp

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Although salmeterol/fluticasone propionate combination 
(SFC) therapy has been widely used for the treatment of COPD, the relationship
between airway dimensions and improvement in pulmonary function remains unknown. 
The aim of this study was to compare the effects of SFC in combination with
tiotropium (Tio) and Tio alone, on airway dimensions and pulmonary function in
COPD patients.
METHODS: Thirty COPD patients were randomized to receive inhaled Tio (18 µg once 
daily) or inhaled SFC (50/250 µg twice daily) plus Tio for 12 weeks. Spirometry
and CT were performed, and the St. George's Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ) was 
completed, before and after the trial. Airway dimensions were assessed by a
validated CT technique, and airway wall area (WA) corrected for body surface area
(BSA), percentage wall area (WA%), absolute wall thickness T/√BSA, and luminal
area Ai/BSA at the right apical segmental bronchus, were measured.
RESULTS: Treatment with SFC plus Tio significantly decreased WA/BSA (P < 0.05),
WA% (P < 0.01) and T/√BSA (P < 0.01), and increased Ai/BSA (P < 0.01), whereas
treatment with Tio alone had no effect. The changes in WA/BSA and Ai/BSA were
significantly correlated with increases in FEV1 (r = 0.48, P < 0.05, and
r = 0.36, P < 0.05, respectively). There were significant improvements in SGRQ
scores after treatment with SFC plus Tio.
CONCLUSIONS: Airway wall thickening and airway narrowing decreased after
treatment with SFC plus Tio, and the changes in airway dimensions were
proportional to the improvements in FEV1 . These results suggest that SFC plus
Tio is more effective than Tio alone in the management of COPD patients.

© 2010 The Authors. Respirology © 2010 Asian Pacific Society of Respirology.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1440-1843.2010.01869.x 
PMID: 20920142  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2011 Mar 1;183(5):589-95. doi:
10.1164/rccm.201005-0694OC. Epub 2010 Oct 1.

Risks of pneumonia in patients with asthma taking inhaled corticosteroids.

O'Byrne PM(1), Pedersen S, Carlsson LG, Radner F, Thorén A, Peterson S, Ernst P, 
Suissa S.

Author information: 
(1)Firestone Institute for Respiratory Health, Michael G. DeGroote School of
Medicine, Faculty of Health Sciences, McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario,
Canada. obyrnep@mcmaster.ca

RATIONALE: Inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) are the mainstay of asthma treatment.
Studies in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease reported increased rates of
pneumonia with ICS. Concerns exist about an increased pneumonia risk in patients 
with asthma taking ICS.
OBJECTIVES: To evaluate the risks of pneumonia in patients with asthma taking
ICS.
METHODS: A retrospective analysis evaluated studies of the ICS budesonide in
asthma. The primary data set were all double-blind, placebo-controlled trials
lasting at least 3 months, involving budesonide (26 trials, n = 9,067 for
budesonide; n = 5,926 for the comparator) sponsored by AstraZeneca. A secondary
data set evaluated all double-blind trials lasting at least 3 months but without 
placebo control (60 trials, n = 33,496 for budesonide, n = 2,773 for fluticasone 
propionate). Cox proportional hazards regression modeling was used to estimate
the relative effect of ICS on pneumonia adverse events (AEs) or serious adverse
events (SAEs).
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: In the primary data set, the occurrence of
pneumonia AEs was 0.5% (rate 10.0 events/1,000 patient-years [TPY]) for
budesonide and 1.2% (19.3 per TPY) for placebo (hazard ratio, 0.52; 95%
confidence interval, 0.36-0.76; P < 0.001); the occurrence of pneumonia SAEs was 
0.15% (2.9 per TPY) for budesonide and 0.13% (2.1 per TPY) for placebo (hazard
ratio, 1.29; 95% confidence interval, 0.53-3.12; P = 0.58). In the secondary data
set, the percentage of patients reporting pneumonia AEs was 0.70% (12.7 per TPY),
whereas the percentage of patients reporting pneumonia SAEs was 0.17% (3.1 per
TPY). There was no increased risk with higher budesonide doses or any difference 
between budesonide and fluticasone.
CONCLUSIONS: There is no increased risk of pneumonia in patients with asthma,
identified as an AE or SAE, in clinical trials using budesonide.

DOI: 10.1164/rccm.201005-0694OC 
PMID: 20889908  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Clin Respir J. 2010 Oct;4(4):241-7. doi: 10.1111/j.1752-699X.2010.00185.x.

The effect of inhaled salmeterol, alone and in combination with fluticasone
propionate, on management of COPD patients.

Mansori F(1), Nemat Khorasani A, Boskabady MH, Boskabady M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Medical School, Kermanshah University of Medical
Sciences, Mashhad, Iran.

INTRODUCTION:   Airway inflammation is a known pathological feature of chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). We examined the effect of inhaled
salmeterol, alone and in combination with fluticasone propionate, on the
management of patients with COPD.
METHODS:   Forty male COPD patients were randomly divided into two groups; group 
1 (n=20) were treated with long-acting ß2-agonist, and group 2 (n=20) with
long-acting ß2-agonist and inhaled glucocoticoid each day for 3 months. Pulmonary
function tests (PFTs), including forced vital capacity (FVC), forced expiratory
volume in 1s (FEV1) and peak expiratory flow (PEF), were measured at the
beginning, 1 and 2 months after treatment and at the end of the study. The
frequency of using inhaled salbutamol/day and the 6-min walk distance were also
measured at four different visits. The frequency of exacerbation was also
recorded during the 90-day treatment period in the two groups.
RESULTS:   FEV(1) , FVC and PEF were significantly higher after 30 days of
treatment with fluticasone propionate (mean change from baseline in group 2:
155mL, 200mL and 70L/s, respectively; P<0.001). Six-minute walk distance also
increased significantly (mean change from baseline: 160 m; P < 0.001), and there 
was a 70%-80% reduction in the use of inhaled salbutamol (P<0.001). All
improvements were maintained over the remainder of the study period.
Exacerbations over the 90-day treatment period were significantly fewer than in
the same 90-day period in the previous year (2.8±0.7 vs 0.8±0.9; P<0.001). In
contrast, only PEF increased significantly with treatment in group 1 (salmeterol 
treatment alone).
CONCLUSIONS:   These results indicated that inhaled corticosteroids may be
beneficial in some patients with COPD.

© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1752-699X.2010.00185.x 
PMID: 20887348  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Am J Med. 2010 Nov;123(11):1001-6. doi: 10.1016/j.amjmed.2010.06.019. Epub 2010
Oct 1.

Inhaled corticosteroids and the risks of diabetes onset and progression.

Suissa S(1), Kezouh A, Ernst P.

Author information: 
(1)Lady Davis Research Institute, Jewish General Hospital, Montreal, Quebec,
Canada. samy.suissa@mcgill.ca

BACKGROUND: Systemic corticosteroids are known to increase diabetes risk, but the
effects of high-dose inhaled corticosteroids are unknown. We assessed whether the
use and dose of inhaled corticosteroids increase the risk of diabetes onset and
progression.
METHODS: We formed a new-user cohort of patients treated for respiratory disease 
during 1990-2005, identified using the Quebec health insurance databases and
followed through 2007 or until diabetes onset. The subcohort treated with oral
hypoglycemics was followed until diabetes progression. A nested case-control
analysis was used to estimate the rate ratios of diabetes onset and progression
associated with current inhaled corticosteroid use, adjusted for age, sex,
respiratory disease severity, and co-morbidity.
RESULTS: The cohort included 388,584 patients, of whom 30,167 had diabetes onset 
during 5.5 years of follow-up (incidence rate 14.2/1000/year), and 2099
subsequently progressed from oral hypoglycemic treatment to insulin (incidence
rate 19.8/1000/year). Current use of inhaled corticosteroids was associated with 
a 34% increase in the rate of diabetes (rate ratio [RR] 1.34; 95% confidence
interval [CI], 1.29-1.39) and in the rate of diabetes progression (RR 1.34; 95%
CI, 1.17-1.53). The risk increases were greatest with the highest inhaled
corticosteroid doses, equivalent to fluticasone 1000 μg per day or more (RR 1.64;
95% CI, 1.52-1.76 and RR 1.54; 95% CI, 1.18-2.02; respectively).
CONCLUSIONS: In patients with respiratory disease, inhaled corticosteroid use is 
associated with modest increases in the risks of diabetes onset and diabetes
progression. The risks are more pronounced at the higher doses currently
prescribed in the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.amjmed.2010.06.019 
PMID: 20870201  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Postgrad Med. 2010 Sep;122(5):150-64. doi: 10.3810/pgm.2010.09.2212.

Innovations to achieve excellence in COPD diagnosis and treatment in primary
care.

Fromer L(1), Barnes T, Garvey C, Ortiz G, Saver DF, Yawn B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Family Medicine, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of 
California, Los Angeles, CA, USA. lf@grouppracticeforum.com

Recognition of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is often missed or
delayed in primary care. Once recognized, COPD is often undertreated or
episodically treated, focusing on acute exacerbations without establishing
maintenance treatment to control ongoing disease. Diagnostic and therapeutic
pessimism result in missed opportunities to reduce exacerbations, maintain
physical functioning, and reduce emergent health care requirements. Proactive
diagnosis and evidence-based management can alleviate the impact of COPD on
patients' lives. Smoking cessation has been proven to slow the rate of lung
function decline. Maintenance pharmacotherapy and immunizations reduce
exacerbations. Pulmonary rehabilitation improves respiratory symptoms and
physical functioning and reduces rehospitalizations after exacerbations.
Self-management education improves health-related quality of life and reduces
inpatient and emergency care usage. Maintenance treatment with long-acting
inhaled bronchodilators is appropriate beginning in moderate COPD to maintain
airway patency and reduce exacerbations. Tiotropium is US Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) approved to treat bronchospasm and reduce exacerbations in
patients with COPD; salmeterol/fluticasone is FDA approved to treat airflow
obstruction in COPD and reduce exacerbations in patients with a history of
exacerbations. Other maintenance long-acting bronchodilators-salmeterol,
formoterol, and budesonide/formoterol-are FDA approved to treat airway
obstruction in COPD but lack an approved indication against exacerbations. FDA
warnings on the use of long-acting beta-adrenergic agents (LABAs) in asthma
specifically exempt COPD and do not apply to LABA/inhaled corticosteroid
combinations used in COPD. The actual effectiveness achieved in practice with any
COPD therapies depends on patients' inhaler technique, adherence, and
persistence. Medication usage rates and inhaler proficiency may be improved by
concordance, in which the health care provider and patient collaborate to make
treatment plans sustainable in the patient's daily life. Practice redesign for
whole-patient primary care provides additional tools for comprehensive COPD
management. Innovations such as group visits and the patient-centered medical
home provide newer ways to interact with COPD patients and their families.
Patient-focused and evidence-based options enable primary care practices to
manage COPD longitudinally and improve patient outcomes through the course of the
disease.

DOI: 10.3810/pgm.2010.09.2212 
PMID: 20861599  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2010 Sep 7;5:311-8.

Onset of action of indacaterol in patients with COPD: comparison with salbutamol 
and salmeterol-fluticasone.

Balint B(1), Watz H, Amos C, Owen R, Higgins M, Kramer B; INSURE Study
Investigators.

Author information: 
(1)Csongrád Megyei OnkormányzatMellkasi Betegségek Szakkórháza, Deszk, Hungary.

BACKGROUND: indacaterol is a novel, inhaled once-daily ultra-long-acting
β(2)-agonist for the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
OBJECTIVES: this study compared the onset of action of single doses of
indacaterol 150 and 300 μg with salbutamol 200 μg, salmeterol-fluticasone 50/500 
μg, and placebo in moderate-to-severe COPD patients.
METHODS: this was a multicenter, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled
crossover study. The primary variable was forced expiratory volume in one second 
(FEV(1)) at five minutes postdose.
RESULTS: out of 89 patients randomized (mean age 62 years), 86 completed the
study. At five minutes postdose, both indacaterol doses were statistically and
clinically superior to placebo (P < 0.001), with treatment-placebo differences in
FEV(1) of 100 (95% confidence interval [CI] 70-130) mL and 120 (95% CI 90-150) mL
for indacaterol 150 and 300 μg, respectively. FEV(1) at five minutes postdose
with both indacaterol doses was numerically higher than for salbutamol (10 and 30
mL for indacaterol 150 and 300 μg, respectively) and significantly higher than
for salmeterol-fluticasone (50 mL, P = 0.003; 70 mL, P < 0.001, respectively).
Moreover, both indacaterol doses showed significantly higher FEV(1) than placebo 
(P < 0.001) at all postdose time points. The numbers of patients with an FEV(1)
increase of at least 12% and 200 mL at five minutes postdose were 16 (18.8%), 24 
(27.6%), 20 (23.3%), 8 (9.1%), and 3 (3.4%) for indacaterol 150 and 300 μg,
salbutamol 200 μg, salmeterol-fluticasone 50/500 μg, and placebo, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: single doses of indacaterol 150 and 300 μg demonstrated a fast onset
of action similar to that for salbutamol and faster than that for
salmeterol-fluticasone.


PMCID: PMC2939686
PMID: 20856830  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. J Biol Chem. 2010 Sep 17;285(38):29101-10. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.0999952.

TNFα and IFNγ synergistically enhance transcriptional activation of CXCL10 in
human airway smooth muscle cells via STAT-1, NF-κB, and the transcriptional
coactivator CREB-binding protein.

Clarke DL(1), Clifford RL, Jindarat S, Proud D, Pang L, Belvisi M, Knox AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Nottingham Respiratory Biomedical Research Unit, City Hospital, University of 
Nottingham, Nottingham NG5 1PB, United Kingdom. ClarkeD@MedImmune.com

Asthmatic airway smooth muscle (ASM) expresses interferon-γ-inducible protein-10 
(CXCL10), a chemokine known to mediate mast cell migration into ASM bundles that 
has been reported in the airways of asthmatic patients. CXCL10 is elevated in
patients suffering from viral exacerbations of asthma and in patients with
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), diseases in which corticosteroids
are largely ineffective. IFNγ and TNFα synergistically induce CXCL10 release from
human ASM cells in a steroid-insensitive manner, via an as yet undefined
mechanism. We report that TNFα activates the classical NF-κB (nuclear factor κB) 
pathway, whereas IFNγ activates JAK2/STAT-1α and that inhibition of the JAK/STAT 
pathway is more effective in abrogating CXCL10 release than the steroid
fluticasone. The synergy observed with TNFα and IFNγ together, however, did not
lie at the level of NF-κB activation, STAT-1α phosphorylation, or in vivo binding
of these transcription factors to the CXCL10 promoter. Stimulation of human ASM
cells with TNFα and IFNγ induced histone H4 but not histone H3 acetylation at the
CXCL10 promoter, although no synergism was observed when both cytokines were
combined. We show, however, that TNFα and IFNγ exert a synergistic effect on the 
recruitment of CREB-binding protein (CBP) to the CXCL10, which is accompanied by 
increased RNA polymerase II. Our results provide evidence that synergism between 
TNFα and IFNγ lies at the level of coactivator recruitment in human ASM and
suggest that inhibition of JAK/STAT signaling may be of therapeutic benefit in
steroid-resistant airway disease.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M109.0999952 
PMCID: PMC2937941
PMID: 20833730  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Chin Med J (Engl). 2010 Jul;123(13):1652-7.

Salmeterol/fluticasone treatment reduces circulating C-reactive protein level in 
patients with stable chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Tang YJ(1), Wang K, Yuan T, Qiu T, Xiao J, Yi Q, Feng YL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, West China Hospital, Sichuan University,
Chengdu, Sichuan 610041, China.

BACKGROUND: Evidence suggests that systemic inflammation may play an important
role in the progression and morbidity of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
It remains controversial whether inhaled corticosteroid in combination with a
long-acting beta(2)-adrenoceptor agonist can attenuate systemic inflammation. We 
evaluated the effect of salmeterol/fluticasone propionate on circulating
C-reactive protein level in stable chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
patients.
METHODS: An open-label clinical trial was conducted to recruit 122 outpatients
with stable moderate-to-severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease from
department of respiratory medicine in two teaching hospitals between June 2007
and March 2008. Patients were randomized into two groups (1:1) to receive either 
the combination of 50 microg salmeterol and 500 microg fluticasone twice daily (n
= 61), or the combination of 206 microg albuterol and 36 microg ipratropium q.i.d
(n = 61) over 6 months. Circulating C-reactive protein concentrations were
measured before randomization and during the follow-up. The efficacy of treatment
was also assessed by spirometry, as well as health status and dyspnea score at
baseline and after 6-month treatment.
RESULTS: Baseline characteristics of two groups were similar. Compared with
ipratropium/albuterol, the combination of salmeterol/fluticasone significantly
reduced circulating level of C-reactive protein (-1.73 vs. 0.08 mg/L,
respectively, P < 0.05) after 6-month treatment. Forced expiratory volume in one 
second (FEV(1)) and health status also improved significantly in
salmeterol/fluticasone group compared with ipratropium/albuterol.
Salmeterol/fluticasone treatment subjects who had a decrease of circulating
C-reactive protein level had a significant improvement in FEV(1) and St George's 
Respiratory Questionnaire total scores compared with those who did not (185 vs.
83 ml and -5.71 vs. -1.79 units, respectively, both P < 0.01).
CONCLUSION: Salmeterol/fluticasone treatment reduced circulating C-reactive
protein concentration in clinically stable moderate-to-severe chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease patients after 6-month treatment.


PMID: 20819623  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Curr Med Res Opin. 2010 Oct;26(10):2421-9. doi: 10.1185/03007995.2010.516284.

Adherence to controller therapy for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: a
review.

Charles MS(1), Blanchette CM, Silver H, Lavallee D, Dalal AA, Mapel D.

Author information: 
(1)Lovelace Respiratory Research Institute, Kannapolis, North Carolina 28081,
USA. cblanchette@LRRI.org

OBJECTIVE: While several studies have examined adherence to controller
medications for the treatment of COPD, few systematic reviews have taken the
translational step to identifying important and necessary areas for further
research. The objective of this study was to review data on the outcomes of
adherence to various controller therapies in patients with COPD in an effort to
help prescribers understand adherence properties for each therapy.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: This is a systematic review of studies investigating
adherence to an array of controller pharmaceutical regimens. The studies were
obtained from PubMed during 2008 and 2009 using the following key words: chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease, COPD, adherence, controller medication, and
persistence. Only articles encompassing adherence or persistence data to
controller medications and published after 1990 were utilized.
RESULTS: After the search results were filtered for only the articles that
pertained to adherence or persistence measurements in COPD, 35 articles remained;
and finally, discounting those articles not published in English, articles which 
did not compare treatments for COPD, as well as those which were review articles,
ten applicable articles remained. Each of these found low levels of medication
adherence and/or persistence among patients receiving medications for COPD.
Patients receiving fluticasone/salmeterol (FSC) and tiotropium (TIO) for
treatment showed the highest adherence among all controller medications. Patients
who were married, older, and white were more likely to adhere to their
medications.
CONCLUSION: Characteristics of the medication used (i.e. dosing schedule,
formulation, etc.) as well as patient characteristics affect the
adherence/persistence to medications for the treatment of COPD. Further patient
education is necessary in order to effectively improve disease management and
patient outcomes in COPD. There is a need for future research and educational
efforts to improve adherence in COPD and more clearly identify specific
behavioral and treatment characteristics associated with specific COPD
medications that can facilitate adherence.

DOI: 10.1185/03007995.2010.516284 
PMID: 20815661  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2011 Feb 1;183(3):317-22. doi:
10.1164/rccm.201004-0665OC. Epub 2010 Sep 2.

Sex differences in mortality and clinical expressions of patients with chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease. The TORCH experience.

Celli B(1), Vestbo J, Jenkins CR, Jones PW, Ferguson GT, Calverley PM, Yates JC, 
Anderson JA, Willits LR, Wise RA; Investigators of the TORCH Study.

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary and Critical Care Division, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA
02115, USA. bcelli@copdnet.org

RATIONALE: There is limited knowledge regarding sex differences and outcomes in
patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
OBJECTIVES: Determine sex differences in survival, causes of death, and
patient-centered outcomes in the 3-year Toward a Revolution in COPD Health
(TORCH) study.
METHODS: A total of 1,481 women and 4,631 men with COPD were enrolled in TORCH, a
trial comparing salmeterol, 50 μg, plus fluticasone propionate, 500 μg, twice a
day and each component individually. Causes of death were determined by an
endpoint committee. Sex differences in survival were explored using a Cox
proportional hazards model adjusted for other baseline factors. Exacerbation rate
was compared using a negative binomial model. Dyspnea was evaluated using the
Medical Research Council scale and health status using the St. George's
Respiratory Questionnaire.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: At baseline, women were younger (63 vs. 66 yr),
had higher FEV(1) (47% vs. 44% predicted), and worse St. George's Respiratory
Questionnaire (51.3 vs. 48.7) and Medical Research Council score. During the
study, 707 (15.3%) men and 168 (11.3%) women died. After adjusting for
differences in baseline factors, the risk of dying was 16% higher in men than in 
women; however, this was not statistically significant (hazard ratio 1.16 [95%
CI, 0.98-1.39]). Causes of death were similar in women and men. Exacerbation rate
was 25% higher in women than in men.
CONCLUSIONS: Women enrolled in TORCH had a lower mortality rate than men but
similar causes of death. The risk of dying was similar in women and men after
adjusting for important baseline variables. Women reported more exacerbations,
and worse dyspnea and health status scores than men. Clinical trial registered
with www.clinicaltrials.gov (NCT00268216).

DOI: 10.1164/rccm.201004-0665OC 
PMID: 20813884  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2010 Aug 9;5:189-95.

An overview of the benefits and drawbacks of inhaled corticosteroids in chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease.

Singh S(1), Loke YK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland 21287, USA. ssingh31@jhu.edu

BACKGROUND: The benefit harm profile of inhaled corticosteroids, and their effect
on patient oriented outcomes and comorbid pneumonia, osteoporosis and
cardiovascular disease in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
remain uncertain.
METHODS: An overview of the evidence on the risks and benefits of inhaled
corticosteroids (fluticasone and budesonide) in chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease from recent randomized controlled trials and systematic reviews.
Observational studies on adverse effects were also evaluated.
RESULTS: Evidence from recent meta-analysis suggests a modest benefit from
inhaled corticosteroid long-acting beta-agonist combination inhalers on the
frequency of exacerbations, (rate ratio [RR], 0.82; 95% confidence interval [CI]:
0.78 to 0.88), in improvements in quality of life measures, and forced expiratory
volume in one second when compared to long-acting beta-agonists alone. On the
outcome of pneumonia, our updated meta-analysis of trials (n = 24 trials; RR,
1.56; 95% CI: 1.40-1.74, P < 0.0001) and observational studies (n = 4 studies;
RR, 1.44; 95% CI: 1.20-1.75, P = 0.0001) shows a significant increase in the risk
of pneumonia with the inhaled corticosteroids currently available (fluticasone
and budesonide). Evidence for any intraclass differences in the risk of pneumonia
between currently available formulations is inconclusive due to the absence of
head to head trials. Inhaled corticosteroids have no cardiovascular effects.
CONCLUSIONS: Among patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease,
clinicians should carefully balance these long-term risks of inhaled
corticosteroid against their symptomatic benefits.


PMCID: PMC2921686
PMID: 20714372  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2010 Aug 9;5:179-87.

Cost-effectiveness of combination fluticasone propionate-salmeterol 250/50 microg
versus salmeterol in severe COPD patients.

Dalal AA(1), St Charles M, Petersen HV, Roberts MH, Blanchette CM,
Manavi-Zieverink K.

Author information: 
(1)US Health Outcomes, GlaxoSmithKline, Research Triangle Park, NC, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To estimate the cost-effectiveness of fluticasone
propionate-salmeterol combination (FSC) compared to salmeterol for maintenance
therapy in severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
STUDY DESIGN: Pooled economic analysis.
METHODS: We performed an economic analysis of pooled data from two randomized
clinical trials (combined N = 1554) that evaluated the effect of maintenance
therapy with FSC (250/50 microg twice daily) or salmeterol (50 microg twice
daily) on exacerbation rates in patients with severe COPD. We calculated
exacerbation rates and applied standardized costs to exacerbation-related health 
care utilization reported in the trials (office, urgent care, and emergency
department visits; hospitalizations; and oral corticosteroids and antibiotics) to
determine cost differences between FSC and salmeterol treatment outcomes.
RESULTS: Annual rates of any exacerbation and moderate/severe exacerbation were
lower in the FSC group than the salmeterol group (4.91 vs 5.78 and 1.32 vs 2.00
respectively, both P < 0.05). Total adjusted annual COPD related exacerbation and
therapeutic costs were $4,842 (95% CI; $4,731-$4,952) in the FSC group and $5,066
(95% CI; $4,937-$5,195) in the salmeterol group.
CONCLUSIONS: FSC combination therapy is associated with reduced risk of any
exacerbation and moderate/severe exacerbation, and incurs lower annual
COPD-related health care costs compared to treatment with salmeterol. This
analysis demonstrates that FSC therapy may be advantageous from both a clinical
and cost-benefit standpoint for patients with severe COPD.


PMCID: PMC2921685
PMID: 20714371  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Respir Med. 2011 Feb;105(2):250-8. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2010.07.009. Epub 2010 Aug
10.

Predictive factors for evaluation of response to fluticasone
propionate/salmeterol combination in severe COPD.

Tonnel AB(1), Tillie-Leblond I, Attali V, Bavelele Z, Lagrange O.

Author information: 
(1)Hôpital Albert Calmette, Boulevard du Pr Jules Leclercq, 59037 Lille Cedex,
France. andretonnel@aol.com

BACKGROUND: The predictive factors for treatment response in patients with severe
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) are unknown. We investigated
predictive factors for response to fluticasone propionate/salmeterol (FSC) in
severe COPD patients.
METHODS: This prospective, open-label, non-comparative study included 921 adult
patients with severe COPD (baseline forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV(1)) <50%
of predicted), a history of repeated exacerbations, and symptoms despite
bronchodilator treatment. FSC (500 μg/50 μg) was delivered via an inhaler, twice 
a day, for 12 weeks. The primary efficacy endpoint was the response rate for
inspiratory capacity (IC), FEV(1), or quality of life (QoL), assessed with the
Saint George's respiratory questionnaire, at week 6 and week 12.
RESULTS: The overall response rate to FSC at 6 and 12 weeks was 79%. The
corresponding rates for FEV(1), IC, and QoL were 38%, 55%, and 62%, respectively.
More than 40% of patients showed a response for IC and/or QoL without being
responders for FEV(1.) Overall lung function and QoL were improved. FSC was well 
tolerated with a safety profile consistent with that observed previously.
CONCLUSION: Nearly 80% of patients responded to FSC treatment in this real-life
study. Improvements in IC and QoL at 12 weeks revealed a clinically relevant
response in patients with no improvement in FEV(1). IC reversibility to
salbutamol before treatment might represent, better than FEV1, a prognostic
factor of response to FSC in severe COPD. Moreover these tests are easy to
perform routinely and in large numbers of patients.

Copyright Â© 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2010.07.009 
PMID: 20702076  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Thorax. 2010 Aug;65(8):719-25. doi: 10.1136/thx.2010.136077.

Cardiovascular events in patients with COPD: TORCH study results.

Calverley PM(1), Anderson JA, Celli B, Ferguson GT, Jenkins C, Jones PW, Crim C, 
Willits LR, Yates JC, Vestbo J; TORCH Investigators.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University Hospital Aintree, Longmoor Lane, Liverpool,
UK. pmacal@liverpool.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: Previous studies have suggested that long-term use of beta agonists
to treat chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) may increase the risk of
cardiovascular adverse events. In this post hoc analysis, data from the TOwards a
Revolution in COPD Health (TORCH) study were used to investigate whether use of
the long-acting beta(2) agonist salmeterol over 3 years increased the risk of
cardiovascular adverse events in patients with moderate to severe COPD.
METHODS: TORCH was a randomised, double-blind, placebo controlled study conducted
at 444 centres in 42 countries. Patients (n=6184; safety population) received
twice daily combined salmeterol 50 microg plus fluticasone propionate 500 microg 
(SFC), either component alone, or placebo. Adverse events were recorded every 12 
weeks for 3 years.
RESULTS: The probability of having a cardiovascular adverse event by 3 years was 
24.2% for placebo, 22.7% for salmeterol, 24.3% for fluticasone propionate and
20.8% for SFC. Although a history of myocardial infarction doubled the
probability of cardiovascular adverse events, the event rates remained similar
across treatment groups.
CONCLUSION: Post hoc analysis of the 3-year TORCH dataset showed that salmeterol 
alone or in combination (SFC) did not increase the risk of cardiovascular events 
in patients with moderate to severe COPD.

DOI: 10.1136/thx.2010.136077 
PMID: 20685748  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Clin Ther. 2010 May;32(5):965-72. doi: 10.1016/j.clinthera.2010.05.004.

Impact of prior authorization for asthma medications on the use of emergency
health services: a retrospective cohort study among newly diagnosed patients with
asthma.

Guénette L(1), Gaudet M.

Author information: 
(1)Direction Scientifique du Suivi et de L'usage Optimal, Conseil du Médicament
du Québec, Québec City, Québec, Canada. line.guenette@msss.gouv.qc.ca

Comment in
    Clin Ther. 2010 May;32(5):962-4.

BACKGROUND: A prior authorization process to limit the nonoptimal use of
medications combining inhaled corticosteroids and long-acting bronchodilators was
introduced in the province of Québec, Canada, on October 1, 2003.
OBJECTIVE: We assessed the impact of this administrative measure on the rate of
asthma-related emergency department (ED) visits and hospitalizations.
METHODS: A retrospective cohort study was conducted using Régie de l'assurance
maladie du Québec administrative databases. We identified all persons aged 6 to
44 years with an incident asthma diagnosis in the 2-year periods preceding
(October 1, 2001-September 30, 2003) and following (October 1, 2003-September 30,
2005) the introduction of the process. Children aged < or = 5 years at the time
of the first encountered diagnosis were excluded because it is difficult to make 
an objective asthma diagnosis until 6 years of age. People aged > or = 45 years
at the time of the first encountered diagnosis were also excluded to avoid the
inclusion of persons who might also have had chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease. Two groups were created based on their prescription drug insurance
(private or public). Publicly insured persons were considered exposed to the
process while privately insured persons were considered not exposed. Cox
proportional hazards regression was used to assess, for each insurance group, the
hazard ratio (HR) for an asthma-related first hospitalization or ED visit between
the 2 periods. The use of medication, quality of life, and visits to physicians' 
offices were not considered in the analysis. The interaction between group and
period was assessed to test whether the change in risk between the preprocess and
postprocess periods differed by insurance group; statistical models were adjusted
for sex, age, region, presence of a comorbidity other than asthma, and discipline
of diagnosing physician.
RESULTS: There were 47,579 publicly insured persons and 93,177 privately insured 
persons with incident asthma during the study period. The risk of an
asthma-related first hospitalization or ED visit remained unchanged in the 2
periods evaluated among both the publicly insured (adjusted HR, 0.95 [95% CI,
0.88-1.03]) and the privately insured (adjusted HR, 1.03 [95% CI, 0.96-1.03]).
The change in risk between the preprocess and postprocess periods was not
significantly different between insurance groups.
CONCLUSIONS: The prior authorization process introduced to limit the nonoptimal
use of combination products (formoterol/budesonide and salmeterol/fluticasone)
had no apparent impact on first asthma-related hospitalization or ED visit in
these patients newly diagnosed with asthma who were covered by Québec's public
prescription drug insurance plan.

Copyright 2010 Excerpta Medica Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clinthera.2010.05.004 
PMID: 20685505  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. G Ital Med Lav Ergon. 2010 Apr-Jun;32(2):145-8.

[Professional eosinophilic bronchitis: considerations and new diagnostic methods 
in a clinical case].

[Article in Italian]

Pala G(1), Pignatti P, Gentile E, Caminati M, Perfetti L, Moscato G.

Author information: 
(1)Servizio Autonomo di Allergologia e Immunologia Clinica, Fondazione "Salvatore
Maugeri", IRCCS, Istituto Scientifico di Pavia, Italia. giannipalass@libero.it

Nonasthmatic eosinophilic bronchitis (NAEB) is a condition characterized by
corticosteroid-responsive chronic cough, sputum eosinophilia and absence of
symptoms or objective evidence of variable airflow obstruction and airway
hyper-responsiveness. Like asthma, NAEB can be associated with exposure to
occupational sensitizers and can be considered as being a variant of occupational
asthma when it develops as a consequence of work exposure. Few case reports of
NAEB caused by workplace exposure have been reported. Bakers are at high risk of 
developing occupational respiratory disorders and three cases of occupational
NAEB have been described. We describe the first case of occupational NAEB due to 
storage mites in a baker in which the offending agent was identified by means of 
the basophil activation test (BAT), a new tool which has never been proposed in
diagnostic procedures of occupational respiratory allergy. BAT's results allowed 
the recognition of the offending agent, that is mandatory for diagnosis.


PMID: 20684434  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Clin Ther. 2010 Jul;32(7):1320-8. doi: 10.1016/j.clinthera.2010.06.022.

Relative effectiveness of budesonide/formoterol and fluticasone
propionate/salmeterol in a 1-year, population-based, matched cohort study of
patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD): Effect on
COPD-related exacerbations, emergency department visits and hospitalizations,
medication utilization, and treatment adherence.

Blais L(1), Forget A, Ramachandran S.

Author information: 
(1)University of Montreal, Quebec, Canada. lucie.blais@umontreal.ca

BACKGROUND: According to evidence-based guidelines, the combination of inhaled
corticosteroids and inhaled long-acting beta(2)-agonists in a single inhaler is
recommended for patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) who
are experiencing exacerbations. The relative effectiveness of combination
products such as budesonide/formoterol (BUD/FM) and fluticasone
propionate/salmeterol (FP/SM) has not been well documented.
OBJECTIVE: This study was conducted to investigate the different outcomes
associated with the use of either BUD/FM or FP/SM in a single inhaler in patients
with COPD. Outcomes included rates of exacerbations, emergency department (ED)
visits and hospitalizations for COPD, medication utilization, and treatment
adherence.
METHODS: A 1-year, population-based, matched cohort study was conducted using
administrative health care databases from the Canadian province of Quebec.
Patients treated with BUD/FM were matched (1:1) to patients treated with FP/SM
based on the following criteria: age group, sex, calendar year of treatment
initiation, the number of COPD exacerbations in the year before treatment
initiation, and use of inhaled short acting beta(2)-agonists (SABAs) and
ipratropium bromide in the 3 months before treatment initiation. COPD
exacerbations were defined as a claim for a short-course (< or =14 days)
prescription of oral corticosteroids, or an ED visit or a hospitalization for
COPD. Events occurring within 15 days were counted as a single exacerbation.
Between-group comparisons of the number of exacerbations, ED visits, and
hospitalizations for COPD, as well as claims for oral corticosteroids, were
performed using Poisson regression models. Between-group comparisons of the mean 
number of doses of SABAs and ipratropium bromide per day were performed using
linear regression models. Treatment adherence was also assessed.
RESULTS: Of the 2262 patients in the matched cohort, 78.1% were aged > or =65
years and 52.1% were men. COPD exacerbations, claims for oral corticosteroids,
use of SABAs, and patient adherence to treatment did not differ significantly
between the BUD/FM and FP/SM groups. However, the BUD/FM group was significantly 
less likely to have an ED visit (adjusted relative risk [RR] = 0.75; 95% CI, 0.58
to 0.97) or hospitalization (adjusted RR = 0.61; 95% CI, 0.47 to 0.81) for COPD
and had fewer claims for prescriptions for tiotropium (adjusted RR = 0.71; 95%
CI, 0.57 to 0.89). The BUD/FM group also used fewer doses of ipratroprium bromide
than the FP/SM group (adjusted mean difference, -0.2 dose; 95% CI, -0.3 to -0.1).
CONCLUSIONS: These COPD patients treated with BUD/FM were less likely to have ED 
visits and hospitalizations for COPD and used fewer doses of anticholinergic
medication than patients treated with FP/SM in the year after treatment
initiation. However, due to the observational nature of the study design, we
cannot conclude with certainty that the medication was the only factor
responsible for the observed differences.

2010 Excerpta Medica Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clinthera.2010.06.022 
PMID: 20678680  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2010 Jun 3;5:165-78.

The role of fluticasone propionate/salmeterol combination therapy in preventing
exacerbations of COPD.

Yawn BP(1), Raphiou I, Hurley JS, Dalal AA.

Author information: 
(1)Olmsted Medical Center, University of Minnesota, Rochester, Minnesota, USA.

Exacerbations contribute significantly to the morbidity of COPD, leading to an
accelerated decline in lung function, reduced functional status, reduced health
status and quality of life, poorer prognosis and increased mortality. Prevention 
of exacerbations is thus an important goal of COPD management. In patients with
COPD, treatment with a combination of the inhaled corticosteroid fluticasone
propionate (250 microg) and the long-acting beta(2)-agonist salmeterol (50
microg) in a single inhaler (250/50 microg) is an effective therapy option that
has been shown to reduce the frequency of exacerbations, to improve lung
function, dyspnea and health status, and to be relatively cost-effective as a
COPD maintenance therapy. Importantly, results of various studies suggest that
fluticasone propionate and salmeterol have synergistic effects when administered 
together that improve their efficacy in controlling symptoms and reducing
exacerbations. The present non-systematic review summarizes the role of
fluticasone propionate/salmeterol combination therapy in the prevention of
exacerbations of COPD and its related effects on lung function, survival, health 
status, and healthcare costs.


PMCID: PMC2898089
PMID: 20631816  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Am J Med Sci. 2010 Oct;340(4):309-18. doi: 10.1097/MAJ.0b013e3181e40cd1.

Primary care management of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease to reduce
exacerbations and their consequences.

Anzueto A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Texas, San Antonio Health Science
Center, San Antonio, TX, USA. anzueto@uthscsa.edu

Exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)-acute worsenings of
dyspnea, cough and/or sputum production beyond daily symptom variations,
necessitating a change in treatment-account for most COPD-related morbidity, care
burden and direct costs. Frequent exacerbations (especially those requiring
emergency, inpatient or intensive care) reduce physical activity, accelerate lung
function decline and increase mortality. This review profiles exacerbation
diagnosis, treatment and reduction measures for primary care physicians. Chronic 
maintenance pharmacotherapy is important to reduce exacerbations. Tiotropium, a
long-acting anticholinergic, and salmeterol/fluticasone, a long-acting
β-agonist/inhaled corticosteroid combination, are Food and Drug
Administration-approved maintenance therapies to reduce exacerbations of COPD.
Influenza and pneumonia vaccinations reduce infectious triggers; pulmonary
rehabilitation reduces exacerbation recurrence. Acute exacerbation treatment
(short-acting bronchodilators, systemic corticosteroids and/or antibiotics)
should be complemented by long-term COPD maintenance therapy to reduce future
exacerbations. Recognition of a COPD exacerbation signals primary care physicians
to establish long-term COPD management to reduce morbidity, disability and
mortality.

DOI: 10.1097/MAJ.0b013e3181e40cd1 
PMID: 20625276  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Chest. 2011 Mar;139(3):505-12. doi: 10.1378/chest.09-2992. Epub 2010 Jun 24.

Reported pneumonia in patients with COPD: findings from the INSPIRE study.

Calverley PM(1), Stockley RA, Seemungal TA, Hagan G, Willits LR, Riley JH,
Wedzicha JA; Investigating New Standards for Prophylaxis in Reduction of
Exacerbations (INSPIRE) Investigators.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Science Centre, University Hospital Aintree, Longmoor Lane, Liverpool
L9 7AL, England. pmacal@liverpool.ac.uk

Comment in
    Chest. 2011 Mar;139(3):483-5.

BACKGROUND: Pneumonia is an important complication of COPD and is reported more
often in patients receiving inhaled corticosteroids (ICSs). Little is known about
the clinical course and factors predisposing to pneumonia in patients with COPD. 
We investigated patient characteristics and symptoms occurring before pneumonia
reports in the Investigating New Standards for Prophylaxis in Reduction of
Exacerbations (INSPIRE) study.
METHODS: This was a 2-year, double-blind, double-dummy parallel study of 1,323
patients randomized to salmeterol/fluticasone propionate 50/500 μg bid (SFC) or
tiotropium 18 μg once daily (Tio). Baseline demographics, including serum
C-reactive protein (CRP) levels, were measured, and daily record cards (DRCs)
were completed.
RESULTS: We identified 87 pneumonia reports from adverse event records (SFC=62;
Tio=25) in 74 patients (SFC=50; Tio=24), compared with 2,255 exacerbations
(SFC=1,185; Tio=1,070). Pneumonia was more common in patients with severe dyspnea
and in those with a baseline CRP level>10 mg/L. Numbers of de novo pneumonias
(events that were not preceded by symptoms of an exacerbation) were similar
between treatment groups, but pneumonia was more likely after either a treated or
untreated unresolved exacerbation in patients receiving ICSs (SFC=32; Tio=7).
Similar results were seen when analysis was confined to radiologically confirmed 
events.
CONCLUSIONS: Pneumonia is much less frequent than exacerbation in COPD. The
excess of events with ICS treatment appears to be associated with protracted
symptomatic exacerbations. Earlier identification and treatment of these events
to prevent pneumonia merits further investigation.
TRIAL REGISTRY: ClinicalTrials.gov; No.: NCT00361959; Study No.: SC040036; URL:
clinicaltrials.gov.

DOI: 10.1378/chest.09-2992 
PMID: 20576732  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Med Lett Drugs Ther. 2010 May 31;52(1339):41-2.

Safety of inhaled corticosteroids in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD).

[No authors listed]


PMID: 20508579  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. COPD. 2010 Jun;7(3):179-85. doi: 10.3109/15412555.2010.481695.

Accuracy of death certificates in COPD: analysis from the TORCH trial.

Drummond MB(1), Wise RA, John M, Zvarich MT, McGarvey LP.

Author information: 
(1)Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Division of Pulmonary and
Critical Care Medicine, 5501 Hopkins Bayview Circle, Baltimore, MD 21224, USA.
mdrummo3@jhmi.edu

The Towards a Revolution in COPD Health (TORCH) trial was an international
clinical trial of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) patients where
cause of death was assigned by an independent committee. Comparison of death
certificate data and adjudicated cause of death allows a unique opportunity to
determine death certificate accuracy and frequency of COPD listing on death
certificates of COPD patients. In this analysis, the authors determine the
concordance between adjudicated cause of death and primary and secondary cause of
death from death certificates. In 317 (80%) of informative deaths, the primary or
secondary cause of death from certificates agreed with adjudicated cause of
death. Only 229 (58%) of death certificates in these COPD patients listed COPD on
the certificate. COPD was not listed on the death certificate in 21% of deaths
adjudicated to be caused by COPD exacerbation. Compared with pulmonary causes,
the listing of COPD on certificates occurred with less frequency than
cardiovascular, cancer and other categories of death. The combined primary and
secondary listing on death certificates has good concordance with actual cause of
death. COPD is under-reported on death certificates, and this under-reporting is 
more frequent when the primary cause of death is not pulmonary.

DOI: 10.3109/15412555.2010.481695 
PMCID: PMC4802970
PMID: 20486816  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Hosp Pract (1995). 2010 Apr;38(2):92-3.

TORCH study results: pharmacotherapy reduces lung function decline in patients
with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

McDonough C(1), Blanchard AR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine,
Medical College of Georgia, 1120 15th Street, BBR 5513, Augusta, GA 30912, USA.

Comment on
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2008 Aug 15;178(4):332-8.


PMID: 20469618  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2010 May 12;(5):CD007891. doi:
10.1002/14651858.CD007891.pub2.

Combination inhaled steroid and long-acting beta2-agonist versus tiotropium for
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Welsh EJ(1), Cates CJ, Poole P.

Author information: 
(1)Community Health Sciences, St George's, University of London, Cranmer Terrace,
London, UK, SW17 0RE.

Update in
    Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2013;5:CD007891.

BACKGROUND: Combination therapy (inhaled corticosteroids and long-acting
beta(2)-agonists) and tiotropium are both used in the treatment of chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). There is uncertainty about the relative
benefits and harms of these treatments.
OBJECTIVES: To assess the relative effects of inhaled combination therapy and
tiotropium on patients with COPD.
SEARCH STRATEGY: We searched the Cochrane Airways Group Specialised Register of
trials (March 2010) and reference lists of articles. We also contacted authors of
the studies.
SELECTION CRITERIA: We included only parallel, randomised controlled trials
comparing inhaled combination corticosteroid and long-acting beta(2)-agonist
against inhaled tiotropium bromide.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Two authors independently assessed trials for
inclusion and then extracted data on trial quality and outcome results. We
contacted study authors for additional information. Discrepancies were resolved
through discussion.
MAIN RESULTS: One large two year trial (INSPIRE) and two smaller, shorter trials 
(Dawber 2005; SCO40034) were found. The results from these trials were not
pooled. The number of withdrawals from each arm of the INSPIRE trial was large
and imbalanced and outcome data was not collected for patients who withdrew,
raising concerns about the reliability of data from this study.In INSPIRE, there 
were more deaths on tiotropium than on fluticasone/salmeterol (Peto OR 0.55; 95% 
CI 0.33 to 0.93). This was a statistically significant difference, however the
number of withdrawals from each of the arms was eleven times larger than the
observed number of deaths for participants on fluticasone/salmeterol and seven
times larger for participants on tiotropium. There were more all cause hospital
admissions in patents on fluticasone/salmeterol than those on tiotropium in
INSPIRE (Peto OR 1.32; 95% CI 1.04 to 1.67). There was no statistically
significant difference in hospital admissions due to exacerbations, the primary
outcome of INSPIRE. There was no significant difference in exacerbations in
patients on fluticasone/salmeterol compared to tiotropium. Exacerbations
requiring treatment with oral corticosteroids were less frequent in patients on
fluticasone/salmeterol (Rate Ratio 0.81; 95% CI 0.67 to 0.99). Conversely
exacerbations requiring treatment with antibiotics were more frequent in patients
treated with fluticasone/salmeterol (Rate Ratio 1.19; 95% CI 1.02 to 1.38). There
were more cases of pneumonia in patients on fluticasone/salmeterol than those on 
tiotropium (Peto OR 2.13; 95% CI 1.33 to 3.40). Confidence intervals for these
outcomes do not reflect the additional uncertainty arising from unknown outcome
data for patients who withdrew.
AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: Since the proportion of missing outcome data compared to
the observed outcome data is enough to induce a clinically relevant bias in the
intervention effect, the relative efficacy and safety of combined inhalers and
tiotropium remains uncertain. Further large, long-term randomised controlled
trials comparing combination therapy to tiotropium are required, including
adequate follow-up of all participants randomised (similar to the procedures
undertaken in TORCH and UPLIFT). Additional studies comparing alternative inhaled
LABA/steroid combination therapies with tiotropium are also required.

DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD007891.pub2 
PMID: 20464758  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Respir Res. 2010 May 11;11:56. doi: 10.1186/1465-9921-11-56.

The effects of long-acting bronchodilators on total mortality in patients with
stable chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Kliber A(1), Lynd LD, Sin DD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine (Respiratory Division), University of British Columbia,
6040 Iona Drive, Vancouver, V6T 2E8, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is the 4th leading cause
of mortality worldwide. Long-acting bronchodilators are considered first line
therapies for patients with COPD but their effects on mortality are not well
known. We performed a comprehensive systematic review and meta-analysis to
evaluate the effects of long-acting bronchodilators on total mortality in stable 
COPD.
METHODS: Using MEDLINE, EMBASE and Cochrane Systematic Review databases, we
identified high quality randomized controlled trials of tiotropium, formoterol,
salmeterol, formoterol/budesonide or salmeterol/fluticasone in COPD that had a
follow-up of 6 months or longer and reported on total mortality. Two reviewers
independently abstracted data from the original trials and disagreements were
resolved by iteration and consensus.
RESULTS: Twenty-seven trials that included 30,495 patients were included in the
review. Relative risk (RR) for total mortality was calculated for each of the
study and pooled together using a random-effects model. The combination of
inhaled corticosteroid (ICS) and long-acting beta-2 agonist (LABA) therapy was
associated with reduced total mortality compared with placebo (RR, 0.80; p =
0.005). Neither tiotropium (RR, 1.08; p = 0.61) nor LABA by itself (RR, 0.90; p =
0.21) was associated with mortality.
CONCLUSIONS: A combination of ICS and LABA reduced mortality by approximately
20%. Neither tiotropium nor LABA by itself modifies all-cause mortality in COPD.

DOI: 10.1186/1465-9921-11-56 
PMCID: PMC2876086
PMID: 20459831  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Expert Rev Pharmacoecon Outcomes Res. 2010 Apr;10(2):115-7. doi:
10.1586/erp.10.10.

Adherence to inhaled therapy in COPD: effects on survival and exacerbations.

Antoniu SA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Gr T Popa University of Medicine and Pharmacy Iasi, Department of Internal
Medicine II-Pulmonary Disease, Pulmonary Disease University Hospital, 30 Dr I
Cihac Str, 700115 Iasi, Romania. sabina.antonela.antoniu@pneum.umfiasi.ro

Comment on
    Thorax. 2009 Nov;64(11):939-43.

Evaluation of: Vestbo J, Anderson JA, Calverley PMA et al. Adherence to inhaled
therapy, mortality and hospital admission in COPD. Thorax 64, 939-943 (2009). In 
chronic diseases, adherence to inhaled therapy can impact treatment effectiveness
and can influence disease mortality and morbidity. In chronic respiratory
diseases in general, and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) in
particular, adherence to inhaled therapy can potentially influence disease
prognosis, as demonstrated in the analyses discussed in this article and a 3-year
study assessing the effects of inhaled salmeterol, inhaled fluticasone and an
inhaled combination over placebo in patients with moderate-to-severe COPD
patients. It is demonstrated that good adherence to inhaled therapy can reduce
all-cause mortality and hospital admissions. Such results are very useful in
clinical practice to motivate patients to adhere to their inhaled treatment.

DOI: 10.1586/erp.10.10 
PMID: 20384558  [PubMed]


329. Chest. 2010 Jun;137(6):1338-44. doi: 10.1378/chest.09-2363. Epub 2010 Mar 18.

Treatment effects of low-dose theophylline combined with an inhaled
corticosteroid in COPD.

Ford PA(1), Durham AL, Russell RE, Gordon F, Adcock IM, Barnes PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Airways Disease Section, National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College
London, Dovehouse Street, London SW3 6LY, England. p.ford@imperial.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: Inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) have proved disappointing at reducing
airway inflammation in COPD. However, previous studies indicate that low doses of
theophylline enhance the activity of a key corticosteroid-associated corepressor 
protein, histone deacetylase (HDAC)2, which is reduced in COPD. This may account,
at least in part, for the relative corticosteroid resistance. Thus, combination
therapy with an ICS and low-dose theophylline may be of benefit in the treatment 
of COPD.
METHODS: To test the hypothesis that ICS and theophylline have a greater
therapeutic effect than theophylline alone, 30 patients with COPD were treated
with placebo theophylline capsules and either inhaled fluticasone propionate (FP)
(500 microg bid) or inhaled placebo for 4 weeks in a double-dummy, randomized,
double-blind, parallel study. After a 2-week washout, patients were given active 
theophylline capsules (plasma level of 8.8-12.4 mg/L).
RESULTS: In an across-arm comparison, combination treatment with FP and
theophylline did not reduce total sputum neutrophils but significantly reduced
total sputum eosinophils (P < .05). Additional across-arm comparisons suggest a
further reduction in percentage sputum neutrophils and sputum chemokine (C-X-C
motif) ligand 8/IL-8 (P < .05). Furthermore, within-arm observational data also
demonstrated increases in forced midexpiratory flow rate and FEV(1)% predicted (P
< .05) following combination treatment only. In an open-label study, low-dose
theophylline when added to inhaled FP increased total HDAC activity in peripheral
blood monocytes ninefold (P < .01) compared with FP alone from the same patients 
with COPD.
CONCLUSIONS: Combination therapy with an inhaled corticosteroid and low-dose
theophylline may attenuate airway inflammation in patients with COPD.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: clinicaltrials.gov; Identifier NCT00241631.

DOI: 10.1378/chest.09-2363 
PMID: 20299628  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Rev Mal Respir. 2010 Feb;27(2):125-40. doi: 10.1016/j.rmr.2009.09.002. Epub 2010 
Feb 8.

[Long-term trials assessing pharmacological treatments in COPD: lessons and
limitations].

[Article in French]

Marchand E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Service de pneumologie, cliniques universitaires de Mont-Godinne, université
catholique de Louvain, 1, avenue du Dr Therasse, 5530 Yvoir, Belgique.
eric.marchand@uclouvain.be

Comment in
    Rev Mal Respir. 2010 Feb;27(2):106-7.

INTRODUCTION: Several long-term studies designed to assess pharmacological
treatments for Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD) have been published
recently. Only such long-term studies allow an accurate analysis of the effect of
treatments on criteria of effectiveness such as survival or decline in pulmonary 
function. A review of these studies is opportune.
BACKGROUND: The high drop out rate, which is not a random event, leads to serious
methodological problems that are of importance in the interpretation of these
studies. Post hoc analysis of both the TORCH and UPLIFT trials suggest a positive
effect of long-acting bronchodilators on survival. Up to now, no treatment has
convincingly demonstrated an effect on the rate of decline of FEV(1). The
treatments evaluated lead to a decrease in exacerbation rates and an improvement 
in quality of life although the effects of inhaled corticosteroids are subject to
methodological concerns. The treatments are all well tolerated.
VIEWPOINT: The design of future studies should avoid the withdrawal of treatments
at enrolment into a study in order to limit the number of drop outs.
CONCLUSION: Long-term studies have made important progress in the knowledge, not 
only of the effects of the treatments assessed but also of the methodological
issues which need to be addressed.

Copyright 2009 SPLF. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmr.2009.09.002 
PMID: 20206061  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Rev Mal Respir. 2010 Feb;27(2):106-7. doi: 10.1016/j.rmr.2010.01.013.

[Debates surrounding COPD].

[Article in French]

Tillie-Leblond I, Housset B.

Comment on
    Rev Mal Respir. 2010 Feb;27(2):125-40.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmr.2010.01.013 
PMID: 20206057  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. J Asthma. 2010 Mar;47(2):214-6. doi: 10.3109/02770900903483832.

Does low-dose seretide reverse chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and are the 
benefits sustained over time? An open-label Swedish crossover cohort study
between 1999 and 2005.

Rustscheff S(1), Rydén L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Varnamo General Hospital, Varnamo, 33185
Sweden. stefan.rustscheff@lj.se

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) still poses a formidable challenge
to patients and clinicians alike. A fixed-dose dry powder combination inhaler,
Seretide/Advair, containing salmeterol and fluticasone, is licensed in the
European Community for the treatment of moderate to severe COPD in the strength
of 50/500 microg twice daily (BID). Several studies have investigated the effects
of this combination and show improved forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV(1)),
quality of life, and a decrease of exacerbations. Most of the studies have run
for less than 1 year. The aim of this investigator-initiated, independent study
was to elucidate if the combination containing 50 microg of salmeterol and 250
microg of fluticasone BID could be shown to have the same beneficial effect as
the higher dosage, and if the effect could be sustained over time.

DOI: 10.3109/02770900903483832 
PMID: 20170332  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Arch Bronconeumol. 2009;45 Suppl 5:14-20. doi: 10.1016/S0300-2896(09)72950-3.

[Impact of efficacy and mortality studies (TORCH and UPLIFT) in bronchodilator
treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease].

[Article in Spanish]

Soler-Cataluña JJ(1), García MA.

Author information: 
(1)Unidad de Neumología, Servicio de Medicina Interna, Hospital General de
Requena, Valencia, España. jjsoler@telefonica.net

The TORCH and UPLIFT studies are probably the most ambitious clinical trials
performed to date in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Unfortunately,
the main objectives were not achieved. Compared with placebo, combination therapy
with salmeterol and fluticasone did not significantly reduce all-cause mortality,
nor did tiotropium slow lung function deterioration over 4 years. However,
careful analysis of the results reduces the initial disappointment to a minimum
and leads to moderate optimism, as both trials showed a decrease in the number of
exacerbations, improvement in health-related quality of life (HRQoL) and, in
general, a good safety profile throughout the studies. Moreover, some benefits on
survival were noted. This latter observation opens new horizons as it suggests
that, apart from lung function, there are other therapeutic targets with
prognostic importance. When analyzed overall, the UPLIFT and TORCH studies
confirm and highlight the key role of prolonged action bronchodilators in the
management of COPD. Although inhaled corticosteroids, administered in
monotherapy, reduce exacerbations and improve HRQoL, these drugs show no benefit 
on survival and increase the risk of adverse effects. Nevertheless, when inhaled 
corticosteroids are associated with bronchodilator treatment, their benefits seem
to be enhanced.

Copyright © 2009 Sociedad Española de Neumología y Cirugía Torácica. Published by
Elsevier Espana. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S0300-2896(09)72950-3 
PMID: 20116757  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Lancet. 2009 Dec 19;374(9707):2050; author reply 2051-2. doi:
10.1016/S0140-6736(09)62144-9.

Budesonide and risk of pneumonia.

Singanayagam A, Chalmers JD.

Comment on
    Lancet. 2009 Aug 29;374(9691):712-9.

DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(09)62144-9 
PMID: 20109824  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. Prim Care Respir J. 2010 Jun;19(2):109-17. doi: 10.4104/pcrj.2009.00072.

Pneumonia among COPD patients using inhaled corticosteroids and long-acting
bronchodilators.

Mapel D(1), Schum M, Yood M, Brown J, Miller D, Davis K.

Author information: 
(1)Lovelace Clinic Foundation, Albuquerque, New Mexico 87106, USA.
dmapel@comcast.net

AIM: To assess the risk of pneumonia among COPD patients using
salmeterol/fluticasone propionate combination inhalers (SFC), inhaled
corticosteroids (ICS), or long-acting beta-agonists (LABA), alone or in
combination, compared to those using only short-acting bronchodilators (SABD).
METHOD: The study population comprised 5245 individuals using inhaled treatment
for COPD, identified from the databases of three large regional managed care
organisations from different parts of the USA. Longitudinally-collected
administrative data were obtained on their clinical histories and treatments.
Nested case-control methods were used to calculate adjusted odds ratios (OR) for 
the risk of pneumonia while on therapy.
RESULTS: 2154 patients had at least one diagnosed case of pneumonia between 1st
September 2001 and 31st August 2003. Relative to SABD, the only treatment
associated with a non-significant increased risk of pneumonia was ICS used alone 
(OR=1.29; 95%CI: 0.96-1.73; p=0.09). Users of LABA alone (OR=0.92; 95%CI:
0.69-1.22) or SFC (OR=1.03; 95%CI: 0.74-1.42) had no increased risk for pneumonia
relative to SABD. Advanced age and severity of lung disease were strongly
associated with increased risk for pneumonia.
CONCLUSION: Treatment with ICS or an ICS/LABA combination inhaler was not
associated with a significantly increased risk of developing pneumonia.

DOI: 10.4104/pcrj.2009.00072 
PMID: 20082059  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. Medicine (Baltimore). 2010 Jan;89(1):53-61. doi: 10.1097/MD.0b013e3181cafcd3.

Use of high-dose inhaled corticosteroids is associated with pulmonary
tuberculosis in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Shu CC(1), Wu HD, Yu MC, Wang JT, Lee CH, Wang HC, Wang JY, Lee LN, Yu CJ, Yang
PC; Taiwan Anti-Mycobacteria Investigation (TAMI) Group.

Collaborators: Wang JY, Lee LN, Yu CJ, Yang PC, Su WJ, Shu CC, Lai HC, Lee CH, Yu
MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Traumatology, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei,
Taiwan.

The use of high-dose inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) in patients with chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) has recently been shown to increase the
incidence of pneumonia. However, to our knowledge, the impact of high-dose ICS on
pulmonary tuberculosis (TB) has never been investigated. To study that impact, we
conducted a retrospective study including patients aged more than 40 years old
with irreversible airflow limitation between August 2000 and July 2008 in a
medical center in Taiwan. Of the 36,684 patients who underwent pulmonary function
testing, we included 554 patients. Among them, patients using high-dose ICS
(equivalent to >500 microg/d of fluticasone) were more likely to have more severe
COPD and receive oral corticosteroids than those using medium-dose, low-dose, or 
no ICS. Sixteen (3%) patients developed active pulmonary TB within a follow-up of
25,544 person-months. Multivariate Cox regression analysis revealed that the use 
of high-dose ICS, the use of 10 mg or more of prednisolone per day, and prior
pulmonary TB were independent risk factors for the development of active
pulmonary TB. Chest radiography and sputum smear/culture for Mycobacterium
tuberculosis should be performed before initiating high-dose ICS and regularly
thereafter.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0b013e3181cafcd3 
PMID: 20075705  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Expert Opin Investig Drugs. 2010 Feb;19(2):257-64. doi:
10.1517/13543780903505084.

Potential for long-acting muscarinic antagonists in chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease.

Joos GF(1).

Author information: 
(1)Ghent University Hospital, Department of Respiratory Medicine, De Pintelaan
185, Gent 9000, Belgium. guy.joos@ugent.be

IMPORTANCE OF THE FIELD: The prevention and relief of symptoms by regular use of 
bronchodilators is central to the pharmacological management of chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
AREAS COVERED IN THIS REVIEW: The aim of this article is to review the effects of
inhaled muscarinic antagonists in the treatment of stable COPD.
WHAT THE READER WILL GAIN: An update of the clinical studies performed with the
long-acting inhaled muscarinic antagonist (LAMA) tiotropium bromide in patients
with COPD is given. In recent years, combinations of a LAMA and a long-acting
inhaled beta2-agonist (LABA), and 'triple therapy' consisting of a LAMA, a LABA, 
and an inhaled steroid are being developed. Issues of safety of inhaled
anticholinergics in COPD are discussed and a short overview of new LAMAs being
developed for COPD is given.
TAKE HOME MESSAGES: The importance of anticholinergic drug treatment in COPD was 
largely advanced by the development of the first LAMA, tiotropium bromide. The
vast experience obtained with tiotropium bromide has paved the way for new LAMAs 
such as aclidinium bromide and glycopyrrolate (NVA-237).

DOI: 10.1517/13543780903505084 
PMID: 20047505  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2009;4:431-6. Epub 2009 Nov 29.

Predictive value and utility of oral steroid testing for treatment of COPD in
primary care: the COOPT study.

Chavannes NH(1), Schermer TR, Wouters EF, Akkermans RP, Dekhuijzen RP, Muris JW, 
van Weel C, van Schayck OC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Public health and Primary Care, Leiden University Medical
Center, The Netherlands. n.h.chavannes@lumc.nl

BACKGROUND: The oral prednisolone test is widely used to distinguish chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) patients who might benefit from inhaled
steroid treatment. Previous studies used selected patient groups that did not
represent the large COPD population in primary care.
METHODS: The study included smokers and exsmokers with chronic bronchitis or COPD
from primary care, who underwent prednisolone testing (30 mg for 14 days) before 
randomization in a three-year follow-up randomized controlled trial (COOPT
Study). Spirometry was performed before and after the test. Responders and
nonresponders were classified according to international criteria. Effectiveness 
of inhaled fluticasone relative to placebo was compared in terms of health status
(Chronic Respiratory Disease Questionnaire), exacerbations, and
postbronchodilator forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV(1)), using
repeated measurement analysis.
RESULTS: Two hundred eighty-six patients recruited from 44 primary care practices
were randomized. Nine percent to 16% of the COPD population was classified as
responder, depending on the international guideline criteria used. On average,
responders did not reach the minimum clinically important difference in health
status (0.29 points/year, P = 0.05), although a borderline significant effect of 
inhaled fluticasone was noted. Possible clinically relevant reductions in
exacerbation rate (rate ratio 0.67) and FEV(1) decline (39 mL/year) occurred in
responders, but did not reach statistical significance.
CONCLUSIONS: Oral steroid testing identifies a limited proportion of COPD
patients, but does not reveal any clinically relevant benefit from inhaled
steroid treatment on health status. No significant effects on exacerbation rate
and lung function decline occurred.


PMCID: PMC2793071
PMID: 20037682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Am J Geriatr Pharmacother. 2009 Oct;7(5):262-70. doi:
10.1016/j.amjopharm.2009.11.003.

Burden of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease in Medicare beneficiaries
residing in long-term care facilities.

Simoni-Wastila L(1), Blanchette CM, Qian J, Yang HW, Zhao L, Zuckerman IH, Pak
GH, Silver H, Dalal AA.

Author information: 
(1)Peter Lamy Center on Drug Therapy and Aging, University of Maryland Baltimore 
School of Pharmacy, Baltimore, Maryland 21201, USA. lsimoniw@rx.umaryland.edu

BACKGROUND: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a leading cause of
morbidity and mortality worldwide. COPD increases health care resource
utilization and spending and adversely affects quality of life. Data from the
clinical and economic outcomes in Medicare beneficiaries with COPD who reside in 
long-term care (LTC) facilities are limited.
OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this study was to investigate the clinical and economic
outcomes associated with COPD in Medicare beneficiaries residing in LTC
facilities.
METHODS: This retrospective cohort study analyzed data from MarketScan Medicaid, 
a large US administrative claims database containing data on Medicaid programs in
8 states. The study cohort comprised LTC facility residents aged > or =60 years
who had a diagnosis of COPD. Eligible patients also had a prescription filled
between January 1, 2003, and June 30, 2005, for one of the following COPD
treatments: fluticasone propionate + salmeterol xinafoate, tiotropium bromide,
ipratropium bromide, or ipratropium bromide + albuterol sulfate. The date of the 
first prescription fill was considered the index date. Measures of health care
resource utilization included COPD-related and all-cause hospitalizations and
emergency department (ED) visits. Cost analysis outcomes included COPD-related
and all-cause inpatient, outpatient, pharmacy, LTC, and total costs during the
12-month postindex period.
RESULTS: Data from 3037 patients were included (63.0% women; 82.2% white; mean
[SD] age, 78.1 [10.0] years). A total of 43.3% of patients had > or =1
hospitalization; 90.0%, > or =1 ED visit. With the exception of age <70 years,
age was associated with all-cause hospitalization (age 70-<75 years, hazard ratio
[HR] = 1.31 [95% CI, 1.03-1.68]; age 75-<80 years, HR = 1.40 [95% CI, 1.11-1.78];
age > or =80 years, HR = 1.48 [95% CI, 1.19-1.85]). Age was not associated with
COPD-related hospitalization, all-cause ED visits, or COPD-related ED visits. The
risk for all-cause hospitalization in white patients was significantly lower
compared with that in nonwhite patients (HR = 0.79 [95% CI, 0.69-0.91]). Patients
with comorbid asthma had a higher risk for a COPD-related ED visit (HR = 1.34
[95% CI, 1.08-1.66]) than did patients without asthma. Preindex all-cause
hospitalization was associated with COPD-related hospitalization (HR = 1.78 [95% 
CI, 1.49-2.14]) and all-cause hospitalization (HR = 2.05 [95% CI, 1.932.19]).
Twelve-month COPD-related and all-cause direct expenditures per beneficiary were 
US $7391 and $48,183. In COPD-related and all-cause estimates, mean (SD) LTC
costs were the largest cost components ($5629 [$12,562] and $32,966 [$14,871],
respectively), followed by pharmacy costs ($956 [$957] and $5565 [$3873]),
inpatient costs ($466 [$3393] and $6436 [$22,603]), and outpatient costs ($341
[$1793] and $3216 [$6458]).
CONCLUSION: This study found that the utilization of health care resources and
economic burden of LTC residents with COPD were primarily due to LTC, pharmacy,
and inpatient costs.

DOI: 10.1016/j.amjopharm.2009.11.003 
PMID: 19948302  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Br J Clin Pharmacol. 2009 Nov;68(5):731-6. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2125.2009.03517.x.

Inhaled tiotropium bromide and risk of stroke.

Grosso A(1), Douglas I, Hingorani AD, MacAllister R, Hubbard R, Smeeth L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy, University College London Hospitals NHS Foundation
Trust, London, UK. anthony.grosso@uclh.nhs.uk

AIMS: A recent communication from the United States Food and Drug Administration 
highlighted a possible increased risk of stroke associated with use of the
relatively new inhaled anticholinergic drug, tiotropium bromide. Using the United
Kingdom General Practice Research Database, we set out to assess the risk of
stroke in individuals exposed to inhaled tiotropium bromide and two other inhaled
treatments for airways disease.
METHODS: We used the self-controlled case-series that reduces confounding and
minimizes the potential for biases in the quantification of risk estimates.
RESULTS: Of 1043 people with a diagnosis of incident stroke who had had at least 
one prescription for tiotropium bromide, 980 satisfied inclusion criteria. The
age-adjusted incidence rate ratio for all-cause stoke in individuals exposed to
tiotropium bromide (n = 980), ipratropium bromide (n = 4181) and fluticasone
propionate/salmeterol xinafoate (n = 1000) was 1.1 [95% confidence interval (CI) 
0.9, 1.3], 0.8 (95% CI 0.7, 0.9) and 1.0 (95% CI 0.9, 1.2), respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: We found no evidence of an increased risk of all-cause stroke for
individuals exposed to commonly prescribed inhaled treatments for chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2125.2009.03517.x 
PMCID: PMC2791979
PMID: 19916997  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2009 Nov;124(5):873-80; quiz 881-2. doi:
10.1016/j.jaci.2009.09.040.

Management of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: moving beyond the asthma
algorithm.

Gordon E(1), Lazarus SC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, University of California,
San Francisco, Calif 94143-0111, USA.

For many years, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) was considered a
disease of fixed airflow obstruction for which there was no good treatment. Out
of desperation and frustration, health care providers extrapolated from asthma to
COPD, and standard asthma therapy was adopted without evidence for efficacy. In
recent years, we have gained a better understanding of the pathophysiologic
differences between asthma and COPD, and prospective controlled trials have
provided a rationale for therapy. Smoking cessation is critically important, both
as primary prevention and as an effective way to slow the decrease in lung
function in patients with established disease. beta(2)-Adrenergic and
anticholinergic agonists improve lung function and relieve symptoms in most
patients. Tiotropium improves exercise tolerance and quality of life and reduces 
exacerbations and hospitalizations. The increase in lung function seen with
tiotropium is sustained with continued use over at least 3 to 4 years. Inhaled
corticosteroids decrease exacerbations and improve quality of life, and their
effect seems greatest in patients with lower lung function and in
exacerbation-prone patients. There is no evidence that inhaled corticosteroids
alone affect mortality, despite the reduction in exacerbations and increased risk
of pneumonia. In some patient populations, inhaled fluticasone, salmeterol, or
the combination might slow the rate of loss of lung function. Rather than
reflexively using effective asthma therapy in the patient with COPD, current and 
future therapy for COPD is increasingly evidence based and targeted to specific
inflammatory pathways that are important in patients with COPD.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaci.2009.09.040 
PMID: 19895979  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. Respir Med. 2010 Mar;104(3):412-7. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2009.10.005. Epub 2009 Nov
4.

Combining triple therapy and pulmonary rehabilitation in patients with advanced
COPD: a pilot study.

Pasqua F(1), Biscione G, Crigna G, Auciello L, Cazzola M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary Rehabilitation, San Raffaele Hospital, Velletri (Rome), 
Italy.

BACKGROUND: The synergistic interactions between pharmacotherapy and pulmonary
rehabilitation has been provided, but it remains to be established whether this
may also apply to more severe patients.
OBJECTIVES: We have examined whether tiotropium enhances the effects of exercise 
training in patients with advanced COPD (FEV(1)</=60% predicted, hypoxemia at
rest corrected with oxygen supplementation, and limitations of physical
activity).
METHODS: We enrolled 22 patients that were randomised to tiotropium 18mug or
placebo inhalation capsules taken once daily. Both groups (11 patients in each
group) underwent an in patient pulmonary rehabilitation program and were under
regular treatment with salmeterol/fluticasone twice daily. Each rehabilitation
session was held 5 days per week (3h/day) for a total of 4 weeks.
RESULTS: Compared to placebo, tiotropium had larger impact on pulmonary function 
(FEV(1)+0.164L, FVC +0.112L, RV -0.544L after tiotropium, FEV(1)+0.084L, FVC
-0.039L, RV -0.036L after placebo). The addition of tiotropium allowed a longer
distance walked in 6min (82.3m vs. 67.7m after placebo) and reduced dyspnoea
(Borg score) (-0.4 vs. +0.18 after placebo) when compared with baseline (pre
pulmonary rehabilitation program). The changes in SGRQ from baseline to the end
of treatment were: total score -28.3U, activity -27.8U, impact -14.5U, and
symptoms -33.4U in the placebo group; and total score -19.1U, activity -18.9U,
impact -16.4U, and symptoms -33.8U in the tiotropium group.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study clearly indicates that there is an advantage in combining 
pulmonary rehabilitation with an aggressive drug therapy in more severe patients.

Copyright 2009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2009.10.005 
PMID: 19892540  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Eur Respir J. 2009 Nov;34(5):1018-23. doi: 10.1183/09031936.00122608.

Methods for therapeutic trials in COPD: lessons from the TORCH trial.

Keene ON(1), Vestbo J, Anderson JA, Calverley PM, Celli B, Ferguson GT, Jenkins
C, Jones PW.

Author information: 
(1)GlaxoSmithKline Research and Development, Stockley Park, 1-3 Iron Bridge Road,
Uxbridge, Middlesex UB11 1BU, UK. oliver.n.keene@gsk.com

The TORCH (Towards a Revolution in COPD Health) trial has highlighted some
important issues in the design and analysis of long term trials in chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease. These include collection of off-treatment
exacerbation data, analysis of exacerbation rates and the effect of inclusion of 
patients receiving inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) prior to randomisation. When
effective medications are available to patients who withdraw, inclusion of
off-treatment data can mask important treatment effects on exacerbation rates.
Analysis of on-treatment data avoids this bias but it needs to be combined with
careful analysis of withdrawal patterns across treatments. The negative binomial 
model is currently the best approach to statistical analysis of exacerbation
rates, while analysis of time to exacerbation can supplement this approach. In
the TORCH trial, exacerbation rates were higher among patients with previous use 
of ICS compared to those with no prior use on all study treatments. Retrospective
subgroup analysis suggests ICS reduced exacerbation rates compared with placebo, 
regardless of prior use of ICS before entry to the study. Factorial analysis
provides an alternative analysis for trials with combinations of treatments, but 
assumes no interaction between treatments, an assumption which cannot be verified
by a significance test. No definitive conclusions can yet be drawn on whether ICS
treatment has an effect on mortality.

DOI: 10.1183/09031936.00122608 
PMID: 19880616  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Respir Res. 2009 Oct 31;10:104. doi: 10.1186/1465-9921-10-104.

The bioavailability and airway clearance of the steroid component of
budesonide/formoterol and salmeterol/fluticasone after inhaled administration in 
patients with COPD and healthy subjects: a randomized controlled trial.

Dalby C(1), Polanowski T, Larsson T, Borgström L, Edsbäcker S, Harrison TW.

Author information: 
(1)Respiratory Medicine Unit, City Hospital Campus, Nottingham University,
Nottingham, UK. chris.dalby@nuh.nhs.uk

BACKGROUND: Airway absorption and bioavailability of inhaled corticosteroids
(ICSs) may be influenced by differences in pharmacokinetic properties such as
lipophilicity and patient characteristics such as lung function. This study aimed
to further investigate and clarify the distribution of budesonide and fluticasone
in patients with severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) by measuring
the systemic availability and sputum concentration of budesonide and fluticasone,
administered via combination inhalers with the respective long-acting
beta2-agonists, formoterol and salmeterol.
METHODS: This was a randomized, double-blind, double-dummy, two-way crossover,
multicenter study. Following a run-in period, 28 patients with severe COPD (mean 
age 65 years, mean forced expiratory volume in 1 second [FEV1] 37.5% predicted
normal) and 27 healthy subjects (mean age 31 years, FEV1 103.3% predicted normal)
received two single-dose treatments of budesonide/formoterol (400/12 microg) and 
salmeterol/fluticasone (50/500 microg), separated by a 4-14-day washout period.
ICS concentrations were measured over 10 hours post-inhalation in plasma in all
subjects, and over 6 hours in spontaneously expectorated sputum in COPD patients.
The primary end point was the area under the curve (AUC) of budesonide and
fluticasone plasma concentrations in COPD patients relative to healthy subjects.
RESULTS: Mean plasma AUC values were lower in COPD patients versus healthy
subjects for budesonide (3.07 microM x hr versus 6.21 microM x hr) and
fluticasone (0.84 microM x hr versus 1.50 microM x hr), and the dose-adjusted AUC
(geometric mean) ratios in healthy subjects and patients with severe COPD for
plasma budesonide and fluticasone were similar (2.02 versus 1.80; primary end
point). In COPD patients, the Tmax and the mean residence time in the systemic
circulation were shorter for budesonide versus fluticasone (15.5 min versus 50.8 
min and 4.41 hrs versus 12.78 hrs, respectively) and Cmax was higher (1.08 microM
versus 0.09 microM). The amount of expectorated fluticasone (percentage of
estimated lung-deposited dose) in sputum over 6 hours was significantly higher
versus budesonide (ratio 5.21; p = 0.006). Both treatments were well tolerated.
CONCLUSION: The relative systemic availabilities of budesonide and fluticasone
between patients with severe COPD and healthy subjects were similar. In patients 
with COPD, a larger fraction of fluticasone was expectorated in the sputum as
compared with budesonide.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: Trial registration number NCT00379028.

DOI: 10.1186/1465-9921-10-104 
PMCID: PMC2780403
PMID: 19878590  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. COPD. 2009 Oct;6(5):320-9.

Effect of fluticasone propionate/salmeterol (250/50) on COPD exacerbations and
impact on patient outcomes.

Anzueto A(1), Ferguson GT, Feldman G, Chinsky K, Seibert A, Emmett A, Knobil K,
O'Dell D, Kalberg C, Crater G.

Author information: 
(1)University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio, San Antonio, TX,
78230, USA. anzueto@uthscsa.edu

Prevention and treatment of COPD exacerbations are recognized as key goals in
disease management. This randomized, double-blind, parallel-group, multicenter
study evaluated the effect of fluticasone propionate/salmeterol 250 mcg/50 mcg
(FSC 250/50) and salmeterol 50 mcg (SAL) twice-daily on moderate/severe
exacerbations. Subjects received treatment with FSC 250/50 during a one month
run-in, followed by randomization to FSC 250/50 or SAL for 52 weeks.
Moderate/severe exacerbations were defined as worsening symptoms of COPD
requiring antibiotics, oral corticosteroids and/or hospitalization. In 797
subjects with COPD (mean FEV(1) = 0.98L, 34% predicted normal), treatment with
FSC 250/50 significantly reduced the annual rate of moderate/severe exacerbations
by 30.4% compared with SAL (1.10 and 1.59 per subject per year, respectively, p <
0.001), the annual rate of exacerbations requiring oral corticosteroids by 34% (p
< 0.001) and the annual rate of moderate/severe exacerbations requiring
hospitalization by 36% (p = 0.043). Clinical improvements observed during run-in 
treatment with FSC 250/50 were better maintained over 52 weeks with FSC 250/50
compared to SAL. Statistically significant reductions in albuterol use, dyspnea
scores, and nighttime awakenings and numerical benefits on quality of life were
seen with FSC 250/50 compared with SAL. The incidence of adverse events was
similar across groups. Pneumonia was reported more frequently with FSC 250/50
compared with SAL (7% vs. 2%). FSC 250/50 is more effective than SAL at reducing 
the rate of moderate/severe exacerbations. These data confirm the beneficial
effect of FSC on the management of COPD exacerbations and support the use of FSC 
in patients with COPD.


PMID: 19863361  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Ann Intern Med. 2009 Oct 20;151(8):517-27.

Effect of fluticasone with and without salmeterol on pulmonary outcomes in
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: a randomized trial.

Lapperre TS(1), Snoeck-Stroband JB, Gosman MM, Jansen DF, van Schadewijk A,
Thiadens HA, Vonk JM, Boezen HM, Ten Hacken NH, Sont JK, Rabe KF, Kerstjens HA,
Hiemstra PS, Timens W, Postma DS, Sterk PJ; Groningen Leiden Universities
Corticosteroids in Obstructive Lung Disease Study Group.

Collaborators: Kauffman HF, de Reus D, Boezen HM, Jansen DF, Vonk JM, Barentsen
MD, Timens W, Zeinstra-Smit M, Luteijn AJ, van der Molen T, ter Veen G, Gosman
MM, ten Hacken NH, Kerstjens HA, van Maaren MS, Postma DS, Veltman CA, Verbokkem 
A, Verhage I, Vink-Klooster HK, Thiadens HA, Snoeck-Stroband JB, Sont JK,
Gast-Strookman J, Hiemstra PS, Janssen K, Lapperre TS, Rabe KF, van Schadewijk A,
Schrumpf JA, Smit-Bakker J, Sterk PJ, Stolk J, Tiré AC, van der Veen H, Wijffels 
MM, Willems LN, Sterk PJ, Mauad T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The
Netherlands.

Summary for patients in
    Ann Intern Med. 2009 Oct 20;151(8):I21.

BACKGROUND: Inhaled corticosteroids (ICSs) and long-acting beta(2)-agonists
(LABAs) are used to treat moderate to severe chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD).
OBJECTIVE: To determine whether long-term ICS therapy, with and without LABAs,
reduces inflammation and improves pulmonary function in COPD.
DESIGN: Randomized, placebo-controlled trial. (ClinicalTrials.gov registration
number: NCT00158847)
SETTING: 2 university medical centers in The Netherlands.
PATIENTS: 114 steroid-naive current or former smokers with moderate to severe
COPD.
MEASUREMENTS: Cell counts in bronchial biopsies and sputum (primary outcome);
methacholine responsiveness at baseline, 6, and 30 months; and clinical outcomes 
every 3 months.
INTERVENTION: Random assignment by minimization method to receive fluticasone
propionate, 500 microg twice daily, for 6 months (n = 31) or 30 months (n = 26); 
fluticasone, 500 microg twice daily, and salmeterol, 50 microg twice daily, for
30 months (single inhaler; n = 28); or placebo twice daily (n = 29).
RESULTS: 101 patients were greater than 70% adherent to therapy. Fluticasone
therapy decreased counts of mucosal CD3(+) cells (-55% [95% CI, -74% to -22%]; P 
= 0.004), CD4(+) cells (-78% [CI, -88% to 60%]; P < 0.001), CD8(+) cells (-57%
[CI, -77% to -18%]; P = 0.010), and mast cells (-38% [CI, -60% to -2%]; P =
0.039) and reduced hyperresponsiveness (P = 0.036) versus placebo at 6 months,
with effects maintained after 30 months. Fluticasone therapy for 30 months
reduced mast cell count and increased eosinophil count and percentage of intact
epithelium, with accompanying reductions in sputum neutrophil, macrophage, and
lymphocyte counts and improvements in FEV(1) decline, dyspnea, and quality of
life. Reductions in inflammatory cells correlated with clinical improvements.
Discontinuing fluticasone therapy at 6 months increased counts of CD3(+) cells
(120% [CI, 24% to 289%]; P = 0.007), mast cells (218% [CI, 99% to 407%]; P <
0.001), and plasma cells (118% [CI, 9% to 336%]; P = 0.028) and worsened clinical
outcome. Adding salmeterol improved FEV(1) level.
LIMITATIONS: The study was not designed to evaluate clinical outcomes.
Measurement of primary outcome was not available for 24% of patients at 30
months.
CONCLUSION: ICS therapy decreases inflammation and can attenuate decline in lung 
function in steroid-naive patients with moderate to severe COPD. Adding LABAs
does not enhance these effects. .


PMID: 19841453  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Ann Intern Med. 2009 Oct 20;151(8):I21.

Summaries for patients. Effect of treatment with fluticasone with and without
salmeterol on airway inflammation and lung function in patients with chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease: a randomized trial.

[No authors listed]

Original report in
    Ann Intern Med. 2009 Oct 20;151(8):517-27.


PMID: 19841438  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. J Med Econ. 2009;12(4):339-47. doi: 10.3111/13696990903369135.

Healthcare costs associated with initial maintenance therapy with fluticasone
propionate 250 μg/salmeterol 50 μg combination versus anticholinergic
bronchodilators in elderly US Medicare-eligible beneficiaries with COPD.

Dalal AA(1), Petersen H, Simoni-Wastila L, Blanchette CM.

Author information: 
(1)GlaxoSmithKline, Research Triangle Park, NC, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To compare, in elderly Medicare beneficiaries, chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD)-related healthcare costs for patients initiating
treatment with fluticasone propionate/salmeterol 250 μg/50 μg (FSC) with those
for patients initiating treatment with ipratropium bromide/albuterol (IPA),
ipratropium bromide (IPR), and tiotropium bromide (TIO).
METHODS: In this retrospective, observational, cohort study, COPD-related medical
costs (inpatient/emergency department, outpatient) and pharmacy costs were
assessed in Medicare beneficiaries ≥ 65 years old who were enrolled in a
commercial Medicare health maintenance organization plan and had a diagnosis of
COPD (ICD-9-CM codes 491.xx, 492.xx, or 496.xx) within 12 months before initial
treatment with FSC, IPA, IPR, or TIO.
RESULTS: In these ≥ 65-year-old patients (N=14,689), initial maintenance
treatment with FSC was associated with total COPD-related cost savings (medical +
pharmacy) of $295 versus IPA, $1,235 versus IPR, and $110 versus TIO (p<0.05,
each comparison) over a 1-year follow-up period.
CONCLUSIONS: Initiation of maintenance therapy with FSC was associated with
significant reduction in total costs (medical + pharmacy) relative to costs
associated with the short-acting anticholinergic bronchodilators IPR and IPA and 
the long-acting anticholinergic bronchodilator TIO in an elderly
Medicare-eligible population. These data considered in the context of the
substantial efficacy and effectiveness data suggest that early introduction of
maintenance treatment with FSC has both clinical and economic benefits.
Limitations inherent in handling of administrative data include lack of objective
clinical measures such as spirometry and smoking status. Furthermore, accuracy of
diagnosis codes cannot be verified.

DOI: 10.3111/13696990903369135 
PMID: 19827993  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Chest. 2010 Mar;137(3):575-84. doi: 10.1378/chest.09-1522. Epub 2009 Oct 9.

Central and peripheral airway sites of nitric oxide gas exchange in COPD.

Gelb AF(1), Flynn Taylor C, Krishnan A, Fraser C, Shinar CM, Schein MJ, Osann K.

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary Division, Department of Medicine, Lakewood Regional Medical Center, 
Lakewood, CA, USA. afgelb@msn.com

BACKGROUND: This study investigated sites of nitric oxide (NO) gas exchange and
response to inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) in patients with COPD and varying
extents of emphysema.
METHODS: This was a prospective, randomized, single-blind, crossover study in
treated, stable, ex-smoking patients with COPD who were ICS and leukotriene
receptor antagonists naive. Lung function, high-resolution thin-section CT scan
of the lung, and exhaled NO were measured at 50, 100, 150, and 200 mL/s. Airway
NO was adjusted for NO axial backdiffusion.
RESULTS: In 39 (18 women), clinically stable ex-smokers with COPD aged 73 +/- 9
years (mean +/- SD) on salmeterol 50 microg (S50) bid, after 180 microg
aerosolized albuterol, FEV(1) (L) was 52% +/- 12% predicted and FEV(1)/FVC was
55% +/- 6%. Compared with 20 (12 men) age-matched controls, 39 patients with COPD
had normal large airway NO flux and small airway/alveolar NO. Subsequently, 19
patients with COPD (Group A) were randomized and continued on S50, and 20 (Group 
B) were randomized to fluticasone propionate 250 microg (F250)/S50 bid for 86 +/-
16 days. Group A (S50) patients were then switched to F250/S50, and 12 of 19
completed 77 +/- 15 days; there was significant (P < .001) reduction only in the 
exhaled fraction of NO (FENO) at 50 mL/s and large airway NO flux. In 20 patients
with COPD initially randomized to F250/S50 (Group B), after 57 +/- 22 days of S50
in 16 of 20 patients there was a significant (P = .04) increase only in (FENO) at
50 mL/s and large airway NO flux, which was not reduced after 60 +/- 23 days of
fluticasone propionate 100 microg (F100)/S50(P = .07). There was no correlation
between NO gas exchange and CT-scored emphysema.
CONCLUSIONS: In COPD, there was normal NO gas exchange in both large and small
airways/alveoli and only large airway NO flux was suppressed with F250/S50 but
not F100/S50, despite varying extents of emphysema. Peripheral NO must be
corrected for axial NO backdiffusion to avoid spurious conclusions.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: NCT #00568347.

DOI: 10.1378/chest.09-1522 
PMID: 19820080  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Chest. 2010 Mar;137(3):558-65. doi: 10.1378/chest.09-0197. Epub 2009 Oct 9.

Parasternal muscle activity decreases in severe COPD with salmeterol-fluticasone 
propionate.

Easton PA(1), Hawes HG, Doig CJ, Johnson MW, Yokoba M, Wilde ER.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Critical Care Medicine, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB,
Canada. peaston@ucalgary.ca

BACKGROUND: The effect of the long acting beta(2)-agonist/corticosteroid
combination salmeterol-fluticasone propionate (SFC) on respiratory muscles and
ventilation in severe COPD is unknown. As COPD hyperinflation worsens, diaphragm 
efficiency decreases, and a compensatory increase in chest wall inspiratory
muscle activity occurs. If a bronchodilator successfully alleviates
hyperinflation and improves diaphragm efficiency in severe COPD, then the
extraordinary activation of the chest wall may be relieved. We examined directly 
the effect on the parasternal intercostal respiratory chest wall muscle and
ventilation of four puffs of salmeterol 25 microg and fluticasone propionate 125 
microg via the metered dose combination inhaler in 12 patients with severe Global
Initiative on Obstructive Lung Disease stage III-IV COPD, mean FEV(1) = 0.91 L
(32% predicted).
METHODS: We measured parasternal intercostal electromyogram (EMG) recorded from
implanted fine-wire electrodes, ventilation, and breathing pattern, during
resting and CO(2)-stimulated breathing. Full pulmonary function tests were
recorded at the beginning and end of the study.
RESULTS: In this patient group, severe airflow obstruction and hyperinflation
were poorly reversible after SFC: FEV(1) increased 4.2%, functional residual
capacity decreased 1.4%, and inspiratory capacity increased 5.9%. However, with
SFC there was a significant increase in minute ventilation, tidal volume, and
mean inspiratory flow. There was a very large decrease in directly recorded
parasternal EMG, with parasternal EMG disappearing completely in some patients
after SFC.
CONCLUSIONS: In severe COPD, with minimal change in hyperinflation or pulmonary
mechanics, salmeterol-fluticasone induced a significant decrease in activity of
the chest wall parasternal inspiratory muscle. This may be of practical benefit
to reverse the extensive use of the chest wall muscles and alleviate dyspnea in
severe COPD.

DOI: 10.1378/chest.09-0197 
PMID: 19820074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. J Aerosol Med Pulm Drug Deliv. 2010 Apr;23(2):91-5. doi: 10.1089/jamp.2009.0762.

Prevalence and associated factors of oropharyngeal side effects in users of
inhaled corticosteroids in a real-life setting.

Molimard M(1), Le Gros V, Robinson P, Bourdeix I.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM , Unité 657, IFR 99, Bordeaux, France.
mathieu.molimard@pharmaco.u-bordeaux2.fr

BACKGROUND: Inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) are extensively used to treat asthma,
and more recently, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Oropharyngeal
disorders represent the most frequent side effect of these drugs, which may have 
a negative impact on adherence.
OBJECTIVES: To evaluate the prevalence of oropharyngeal disorders in users of ICS
in a real-life setting and investigate the factors associated with their
occurrence.
METHODS: For this observational cross-sectional study, general practitioners and 
pulmonologists were contacted and asked to include patients suffering from asthma
or COPD treated by ICS. Physicians collected data during a medical examination. A
multivariate regression model for the occurrence of oropharyngeal disorders was
constructed.
RESULTS: A total of 1778 physicians included 6740 patients. The mean (SD) age was
51.3 (18.5) years, 44.0% had no smoking history, and the ICS indication was
asthma in 63.9% of subjects. Of the study subjects, 52.3% used beclometasone
(43.4% without a long-acting ss(2)-agonist, LABA); 22.1% used budesonide (18.8%
with a LABA), and 25.6% used fluticasone (19.3% with a LABA in a single inhaler).
One-third (34.7%) of subjects suffered from at least one oropharyngeal disorder; 
the most frequently reported were hoarseness, tingling, mouth irritation, and
reddening. Multivariate regression analysis found that the factors positively
associated with oropharyngeal disorders were COPD indication [odds ratio (OR)
1.600; 95% confidence intervals (95% CI) 1.391, 1.839], nominal daily dose (OR = 
1.388; 95% CI 1.227, 1.569), decreased adherence (OR = 1.318; 95% CI 1.104,
1.574) and the use of fluticasone (OR = 1.176; 95% CI 1.008, 1.372), whereas
those negatively associated were the absence of smoking history (OR = 0.837; 95% 
CI 0.742, 0.945), increased adherence (OR = 0.663; 95% CI 0.581, 0.755), and
beclometasone use (OR = 0.630; 95% CI 0.543, 0.732).
CONCLUSIONS: The high prevalence of oropharyngeal disorders and the association
of adherence with these must be taken into account by prescribers, especially in 
patients suffering from COPD, a relatively new group of ICS users.

DOI: 10.1089/jamp.2009.0762 
PMID: 19778267  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. Curr Med Res Opin. 2009 Nov;25(11):2729-35. doi: 10.1185/03007990903267157.

Hospital and emergency department utilization associated with treatment for
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease in a managed-care Medicare population.

Simoni-Wastila L(1), Yang HW, Blanchette CM, Zhao L, Qian J, Dalal AA.

Author information: 
(1)Long-Term Care Research Initiative, University of Maryland School of Pharmacy,
220 Arch Street, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA. lsimoniw@rx.umaryland.edu

BACKGROUND: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a highly prevalent
condition with high morbidity and mortality among older and disabled adults. Few 
studies have examined the comparative effectiveness of maintenance therapies for 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) in this vulnerable population.
OBJECTIVES: The study aims to compare healthcare resource utilization associated 
with hospitalization or emergency department (ED) visits between FDA-approved
inhaled corticosteroid/long-acting beta-agonist combinations [fluticasone
propionate 250 microg/salmeterol 50 microg combination (FSC)] and anticholinergic
treatments (ATC) in managed-care Medicare beneficiaries with COPD.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: Data from the Integrated Health Care Information
Systems (IHCIS) National Managed Care Benchmark Database was used in this
retrospective, observational cohort study. The cohort consisted of managed-care
Medicare beneficiaries with a diagnosis of COPD [International Classification of 
Disease, 9th revision, Clinical Modification (ICD-9-CM) codes 491.xx, 492.xx, or 
496.xx] without evidence of comorbid asthma (ICD-9-CM 493.xx) who received
treatment with FSC or ATC between 2003 and 2005. Cox proportional hazards
regression models were conducted to examine the risk of all-cause and
COPD-related hospitalizations and emergency department (ED) visits.
RESULTS: COPD patients treated with FSC had a 18% lower risk of a COPD-related
hospitalization (HR = 0.82; 95% CI = 0.75, 0.89) and an ED visit (HR = 0.82; 95% 
CI = 0.76, 0.89) compared to patients treated with ATC. Findings were similar for
all-cause utilization (hospitalization HR = 0.83; 95% CI = 0.78, 0.88; ED visit
HR = 0.84; 95% CI = 0.80, 0.88).
CONCLUSIONS: FSC is associated with a lower risk of COPD-related exacerbation
events relative to ATC in managed-care Medicare beneficiaries with COPD. Findings
from this study are only generalizable to managed-care Medicare beneficiaries
residing in the community.

DOI: 10.1185/03007990903267157 
PMID: 19778165  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. Ther Adv Respir Dis. 2009 Aug;3(4):1-11. doi: 10.1177/1753465809344870. Epub 2009
Sep 4.

Effect on lung function and morning activities of budesonide/formoterol versus
salmeterol/fluticasone in patients with COPD.

Partridge MR(1), Schuermann W, Beckman O, Persson T, Polanowski T.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Medicine, Imperial College London, NHLI Division at Charing Cross
Hospital, London, UK. m.partridge@imperial.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: Patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) often
experience symptoms and problems with activities early in the morning. This is
the first study to compare the effect of budesonide/formoterol and
salmeterol/fluticasone on lung function, symptoms and activities early in the
morning.
METHODS: Lung function (peak expiratory flow [PEF] and forced expiratory volume
in 1 second [FEV( 1)]) and symptoms were measured at bedside and activities were 
measured during the morning using a six-item questionnaire concerning basic
morning routines. In a randomised, double-blind, multicentre, cross-over study,
442 patients with COPD aged >or=40 years (pre-bronchodilator FEV(1) <or=50%;
FEV(1)/vital capacity <70%) received budesonide/formoterol (320/9 microg, one
inhalation twice daily) dry powder inhaler (DPI) or salmeterol/fluticasone
(50/500 microg, one inhalation twice daily) DPI daily, for 1 week each, separated
by a 1- to 2-week washout. Lung function (PEF and FEV(1)) shortly after rising
from bed in the morning, symptoms and basic morning activities were assessed by
electronic diary (e-Diary) recordings.
RESULTS: Budesonide/formoterol and salmeterol/fluticasone treatment increased
morning PEF 5 minutes post-dose, measured as a mean improvement from baseline
over the full study period (primary endpoint; adjusted mean change: 15.1 l/min
and 14.2 l/min, respectively [difference 1.0 l/min; p = 0.603]). Mean morning
FEV(1) improved more following budesonide/ formoterol treatment versus
salmeterol/fluticasone at 5 minutes (0.12 l versus 0.09 l; p = 0.090) and 15
minutes (0.14 l versus 0.10 l; p < 0.05) post-dose. Budesonide/formoterol
demonstrated a more rapid onset of effect as reflected by increases in
e-Diary-recorded PEF and FEV( 1) from pre-dose to 5 and 15 minutes post-dose (all
p < 0.001) and spirometry at the clinic measured after the first dose (FEV(1) p <
0.001; 5 minutes post-dose). Improvements in symptom scores within 15 minutes
after drug administration were similar for both drugs, but budesonide/formoterol 
treatment resulted in significantly greater improvements in total morning
activities score (getting washed, dried, dressed, eating breakfast and walking
around the home; 0.22 versus 0.12 respectively, p < 0.05). Both treatments were
well tolerated.
CONCLUSIONS: Short-term treatment with budesonide/formoterol DPI or
salmeterol/fluticasone DPI was effective in patients with COPD.
Budesonide/formoterol had a more rapid onset of effect compared with
salmeterol/fluticasone and resulted in greater improvements in ability to perform
morning activities despite the lower inhaled corticosteroid dose.

DOI: 10.1177/1753465809344870 
PMID: 19734176  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Eur Respir J. 2010 Mar;35(3):532-9. doi: 10.1183/09031936.00153108. Epub 2009 Aug
28.

Is treatment with ICS and LABA cost-effective for COPD? Multinational economic
analysis of the TORCH study.

Briggs AH(1), Glick HA, Lozano-Ortega G, Spencer M, Calverley PM, Jones PW,
Vestbo J; TOwards a Revolution in COPD Health (TORCH) investigators.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Public Health & Health Policy, University of Glasgow, 1 Lilybank
Gardens, Glasgow, G12 8RZ, UK. a.briggs@clinmed.gla.ac.uk

The TOwards a Revolution in COPD Health (TORCH) study was a 3-yr multicentre
trial of 6,112 patients randomised to salmeterol (Salm), fluticasone propionate
(FP), a Salm/FP combination (SFC) or placebo (P). Here the cost-effectiveness of 
treatments evaluated in the TORCH study is assessed. For four regions, 3-yr
all-cause hospitalisation, medication and outpatient care costs were calculated. 
The sample was restricted to the 21 countries (n = 4,237) in which European
quality of life five-dimension (EQ-5D) data were collected in order to estimate
the number of quality-adjusted life years (QALYs). Regression models were fitted 
to survival, study medication cost, other medication cost and EQ-5D data in order
to estimate total cost, number of QALYs and cost per QALY, adjusted for missing
data and region. SFC had a trial-wide estimate of cost per QALY of 43,600 US
dollars (USD) compared with P (95% confidence interval 21,400-123,500 USD).
Estimates for Salm versus P (197,000 USD) and FP versus P (78,000 USD) were less 
favourable. The US estimates were greater than those from other regions; for SFC 
versus P, the cost per QALY was 77,100 (46,200-241,700) USD compared to 24,200
(15,200-56,100) USD in Western Europe. Compared with P, SFC has a lower
incremental cost-effectiveness ratio than either FP or Salm used alone, and is,
therefore, preferred to these monotherapies on the grounds of cost-effectiveness.

DOI: 10.1183/09031936.00153108 
PMID: 19717476  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Thorax. 2009 Nov;64(11):939-43. doi: 10.1136/thx.2009.113662. Epub 2009 Aug 23.

Adherence to inhaled therapy, mortality and hospital admission in COPD.

Vestbo J(1), Anderson JA, Calverley PM, Celli B, Ferguson GT, Jenkins C, Knobil
K, Willits LR, Yates JC, Jones PW.

Author information: 
(1)Respiratory Medicine Research Group, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK.
jorgen.vestbo@manchester.ac.uk

Comment in
    Thorax. 2009 Nov;64(11):922-3.
    Expert Rev Pharmacoecon Outcomes Res. 2010 Apr;10(2):115-7.

BACKGROUND: Little is known about adherence to inhaled medication in chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and the impact on mortality and morbidity.
METHODS: Data on drug adherence from a randomised double-blind trial comparing
inhaled salmeterol 50 microg + fluticasone propionate 500 microg twice daily with
placebo and each drug individually in 6112 patients with moderate to severe COPD 
over 3 years in the TORCH study were used. All-cause mortality and exacerbations 
leading to hospital admission were primary and secondary end points. The study of
adherence was not specified a priori as an ancillary study.
RESULTS: Of the 4880 patients (79.8%) with good adherence defined as >80% use of 
study medication, 11.3% died compared with 26.4% of the 1232 patients (20.2%)
with poor adherence. The annual rates of hospital admission for exacerbations
were 0.15 and 0.27, respectively. The association between adherence and mortality
remained unchanged and statistically significant after adjusting for other
factors related to prognosis (hazard ratio 0.40 (95% CI 0.35 to 0.46), p<0.001). 
The association was even stronger when analysing on-treatment deaths only.
Similarly, the association between adherence and hospital admission remained
unchanged and significant in a multivariate analysis (rate ratio 0.58 (95% CI
0.44 to 0.73, p<0.001). The association between increased adherence and improved 
mortality and reduction in hospital admission was independent of study treatment.
The effect of treatment was more pronounced in patients with good adherence than 
in those with poor adherence.
CONCLUSION: Adherence to inhaled medication is significantly associated with
reduced risk of death and admission to hospital due to exacerbations in COPD.
Further research is needed to understand these strong associations.

DOI: 10.1136/thx.2009.113662 
PMID: 19703830  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. Pulm Pharmacol Ther. 2009 Dec;22(6):574-9. doi: 10.1016/j.pupt.2009.08.002. Epub 
2009 Aug 14.

Additional effects of pranlukast in salmeterol/fluticasone combination therapy
for the asthmatic distal airway in a randomized crossover study.

Ohbayashi H(1), Shibata N, Hirose T, Adachi M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Allergy and Respiratory Medicine, Tohno-Kousei Hospital, 76-1
Toki-cho, Mizunami City, Gifu Pref. 509-6101, Japan. ohbayasi@nn.iij4u.or.jp

BACKGROUND: Salmeterol/fluticasone combination (SFC) therapy is used to control
inflammation in the distal airway of patients with well-controlled asthma, but
the efficacy of this approach is unclear.
OBJECTIVES: The goal of the study was to evaluate the effect of pranlukast, a
leukotriene receptor antagonist (LTRA), on distal airway inflammation and
pulmonary resistance in patients with asthma that was well-controlled using SFC
therapy alone.
METHODS: The subjects were 32 patients with well-controlled asthma (age
61.1+/-17.8 years old, Step 3 in the GINA guidelines, Asthma Control Test score
23.2+/-1.8 points) based on use of SFC therapy alone for more than 3 months.
These subjects were randomly assigned to groups receiving SFC alone or SFC+LTRA
(pranlukast 450 mg daily) and then switched to the opposite group after 4 weeks
in a crossover manner. Eosinophilic inflammation in induced sputum samples was
assessed after each treatment period. Sputum was induced by inhalation of 10%
hypertonic saline for 15 min. Impulse oscillometry parameters (R5, R20, X5 and
AX) and spirometry were examined during each period. The Asthma-related Quality
of Life Questionnaire (AQLQ) was also administered in each period.
RESULTS: The ECP levels in late-phase sputum were significantly higher than those
in early-phase sputum with SFC therapy alone (178.3+/-166.0 vs. 65.5+/-68.9
microg/l, p<0.001), whereas these values did not differ significantly with
SFC+LTRA treatment (70.9+/-95.1 vs. 54.6+/-65.7, p=0.554). ECP levels in
late-phase sputum with SFC therapy were also significantly higher than those with
SFC+LTRA (p=0.045). The values of R5, R20, R5-R20 (kPa/(L/s)), and AX (kPa/L) all
significantly improved during with SFC+LTRA treatment compared with SFC alone
(median (25-75 percentile)): 0.350 (0.283-0.440) vs. 0.340 (0.280-0.378),
p=0.036; 0.280 (0.233-0.365) vs. 0.270 (0.240-0.318), p=0.019; 0.050
(0.030-0.110) vs. 0.500 (0.030-0.073), p=0.032; and 0.570 (0.308-1.045) vs. 0.410
(0.263-0.820), p=0.014; respectively. Pulmonary function indexes did not differ
significantly between the two treatments, but the symptom and activity limitation
domains of the AQLQ were significantly improved by SFC+LTRA treatment.
CONCLUSION: This study suggests that the combination of SFC and LTRA may give
better control of residual eosinophilic inflammation in the distal airway
compared with SFC therapy alone.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pupt.2009.08.002 
PMID: 19683591  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Adv Ther. 2009 Aug;26(8):762-75. doi: 10.1007/s12325-009-0056-z. Epub 2009 Aug 8.

Outcomes and costs of patients with persistent asthma treated with beclomethasone
dipropionate hydrofluoroalkane or fluticasone propionate.

Lage MJ(1), Gross GN, Brewster C, Spalitto A.

Author information: 
(1)HealthMetrics Outcomes Research, 120 Anchorage Circle, Groton, CT 06340, USA. 
lagemj@hlthmetrics.com

OBJECTIVE: Examine outcomes and costs of patients with persistent asthma who
initiated treatment with beclomethasone dipropionate hydrofluoroalkane (BDP-HFA) 
or fluticasone propionate (FP).
METHODS: MedStat's Commercial Claims and Encounters database (July 1, 2002-June
30, 2007) was utilized. Patients (n=13,968) were included if they initiated
treatment with BDP-HFA or FP (first use=index date). Patients also met these
criteria: (a) no receipt of other study medication in the 1-year post-period; (b)
persistent asthma in the 1-year pre-period; (c) age 5-64 years; (d) no diagnosis 
of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease; and (e) continuous insurance coverage
from 1 year pre-period to 1 year post-period. Multivariate regressions examined
the probability of an ER visit or hospitalization, probability of reaching
alternative adherence thresholds, and costs.
RESULTS: Receipt of BDP-HFA, compared with FP, was associated with a 17%
reduction in the odds of an ER visit (OR=0.834, 95% CI 0.751 to 0.925), a 30%
reduction in the odds of an asthma-related ER visit (OR=0.697, 95% CI 0.571 to
0.852), and an increase in the odds of obtaining a medication possession ratio
(MPR) of at least 50% (OR=1.324; 95% CI 1.164 to 1.506) or 75% (OR=1.311; 95% CI 
1.072 to 1.604). Total medical costs ($5063 vs. $5377, P=0.0042), prescription
drug costs ($2336 vs. $2581, P<0.0001), and ER costs ($185 vs. $249, P<0.0001)
were significantly lower among the BDP-HFA cohort. Asthma-related outpatient
($191 vs. $224, P<0.0001) and ER costs ($28 vs. $45, P<0.001) were significantly 
lower in the BDP-HFA group, while asthma-related inpatient ($101 vs. $59,
P<0.0001) and drug costs ($451 vs. $540, P<0.0001) were significantly lower in
the FP cohort.
CONCLUSIONS: Results indicate that receipt of BDP-HFA, compared with receipt of
FP, is associated with a decreased probability of ER visits or asthma-related ER 
visits and higher odds of reaching a medical possession ratio threshold of 50% or
75%. Receipt of BDP-HFA was also associated with lower total drug costs and lower
total medical costs.

DOI: 10.1007/s12325-009-0056-z 
PMID: 19669630  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2009;4:253-63. Epub 2009 Jul 20.

A systematic review of the cardiovascular risk of inhaled anticholinergics in
patients with COPD.

Hilleman DE(1), Malesker MA, Morrow LE, Schuller D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy Practice, Creighton University School of Pharmacy and
Health Professions, Omaha, Nebraska 68178, USA. hilleman@creighton.edu

The long-term use of inhaled anticholinergic agents has recently been suggested
to be associated with an excess risk of adverse cardiovascular (CV) outcomes in
patients with COPD. We identified 15 published studies that reported on the
association between long-term inhaled anticholinergic use and adverse CV
outcomes. Only 3 of the studies were adequately designed randomized controlled
trials (RCTs). The first RCT that suggested that anticholinergic agents increased
the risk of adverse CV outcomes was the Lung Health Study (LHS). Smokers
randomized to inhaled ipratropium had a significantly increased risk of CV death 
than smokers receiving placebo. The LHS results have been questioned as the
statistical tests used in the study were not adjusted for multiple tests and
endpoints, a convincing dose-effect relationship between ipratropium use and the 
adverse CV outcomes was not established, and most of the CV deaths in the
ipratropium group occurred in patients who were non-compliant to ipratropium. The
Investigating New Standards for Prophylaxis in Reducing Exacerbations (INSPIRE)
was a RCT that compared the combination of salmeterol plus fluticasone against
tiotropium in patients with COPD. All-cause mortality was significantly lower in 
the salmeterol plus fluticasone group (3%) compared to the tiotropium group (6%).
Fatal CV events occurred in 1% of the salmeterol plus fluticasone group compared 
to 3% in the tiotropium group. The INSPIRE trial was not designed to be a
mortality trial, lacked adequate adjudication of fatal outcomes, and lacked a
full intention-to-treat analysis of the data. The Understanding Potential
Long-Term Impacts on Function with Tiotropium (UPLIFT) trial was a RCT comparing 
tiotropium and placebo in patients with COPD. Follow-up in UPLIFT was planned for
1440 days (4 years) plus 30 days (1470 days) of post-treatment follow-up. At 1440
days with 95% of patient outcome accounted for, tiotropium was associated with a 
significant 13% reduction in all-cause mortality compared to placebo. However, at
1470 days with only 75% of patient outcome accounted for, tiotropium was
associated with a non-significant 11% reduction in all-cause mortality compared
to placebo. The relative risks for serious CV events, heart failure, and
myocardial infarction were all significantly lower with tiotropium than placebo. 
It is not certain why such a wide disparity in findings exists among the
published studies evaluating the CV risks of inhaled anticholinergic agents.
Prospective, adequately powered RCTs are needed to provide more evidence for the 
CV safety of tiotropium.


PMCID: PMC2719255
PMID: 19657399  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. Eur J Clin Pharmacol. 2009 Nov;65(11):1165-6. doi: 10.1007/s00228-009-0697-5.
Epub 2009 Jul 15.

Seretide withdrawal increases airway inflammation in moderate COPD patients.

Borrill Z, Roy K, Kolsum U, Southworth T, Vestbo J, Singh D.

DOI: 10.1007/s00228-009-0697-5 
PMID: 19603154  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. Chest. 2009 Dec;136(6):1456-65. doi: 10.1378/chest.08-3016. Epub 2009 Jul 6.

Prevalence and progression of osteoporosis in patients with COPD: results from
the TOwards a Revolution in COPD Health study.

Ferguson GT(1), Calverley PM, Anderson JA, Jenkins CR, Jones PW, Willits LR,
Yates JC, Vestbo J, Celli B.

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary Research Institute of Southeast Michigan, 28815 Eight Mile Rd, Suite
103, Livonia, MI 48152, USA. garytferguson@msn.com

Comment in
    Chest. 2009 Dec;136(6):1448-9.

BACKGROUND: Osteoporosis is common in patients with COPD, but its prevalence and 
progression are not well characterized. Concerns have been raised over the
possible deleterious effect of long-term therapy with inhaled corticosteroids
(ICSs) on bone density in this population. Here, we investigated the long-term
effects of therapy with fluticasone propionate (FP) alone, salmeterol (SAL)
alone, and a SAL/FP combination (SFC) on bone mineral density (BMD) and bone
fractures in patients with moderate-to-severe COPD in the TOwards a Revolution in
COPD Health (TORCH) study.
METHODS: A randomized, double-blind, parallel-group, placebo-controlled study
conducted at 88 US centers involving 658 patients (a subset of 6,184
international subjects in TORCH). Therapy with placebo, SAL (50 microg), FP (500 
microg), or SFC (SAL 50 microg/FP 500 microg) twice daily was administered for 3 
years. Baseline and yearly measurements of BMD at the hip and lumbar spine were
performed. The incidence of traumatic and nontraumatic bone fractures was
recorded.
RESULTS: At baseline, 18% of men and 30% of women had osteoporosis, and 42% of
men and 41% of women had osteopenia based on BMD assessments. Forty-three percent
of subjects completed all testing. The changes in BMD at the hip and lumbar spine
over 3 years were small. No significant differences were observed between
treatment arms (adjusted mean percent change from baseline at hip was -3.1% for
placebo, -1.7% for SAL, -2.9% for FP, and -3.2% for SFC therapy, respectively;
while, the corresponding changes for the lumbar spine were 0, 1.5%, -0.3%, and
-0.3% for placebo, respectively, SAL, FP, and SFC therapy). The incidence of
fractures was low and was similar for all treatments (5.1% to 6.3%).
CONCLUSIONS: Osteoporosis is highly prevalent in patients with COPD, irrespective
of gender. In the TORCH study, no significant effect on BMD was detected for ICS 
therapy compared with placebo.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NTC00268216.

DOI: 10.1378/chest.08-3016 
PMID: 19581353  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. Eur Respir J. 2010 Jan;35(1):72-8. doi: 10.1183/09031936.00177508. Epub 2009 Jul 
2.

Bronchial nitric oxide is related to symptom relief during fluticasone treatment 
in COPD.

Lehtimäki L(1), Kankaanranta H, Saarelainen S, Annila I, Aine T, Nieminen R,
Moilanen E.

Author information: 
(1)The Immunopharmacology Research Group, Medical School, University of Tampere, 
Tampere, Finland. lauri.lehtimaki@uta.fi

Comment in
    Eur Respir J. 2010 Sep;36(3):692; author reply 692.

High levels of exhaled nitric oxide (NO) predict favourable response to inhaled
corticosteroids in asthma, but the ability of exhaled NO or inflammatory markers 
in exhaled breath condensate (EBC) to predict steroid responsiveness in chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is not known. We measured alveolar and
bronchial NO output, levels of leukotriene B(4) (LTB(4)), cysteinyl leukotrienes 
(cysLTs) and 8-isoprostane in EBC, spirometry, body plethysmography and symptoms 
in 40 subjects with COPD before and after 4 weeks of treatment with inhaled
fluticasone (500 microg b.i.d.). Five subjects (12.5%) with COPD had significant 
improvement in lung function during fluticasone treatment, whereas 20 subjects
(50%) had significant decrease in symptoms. High baseline bronchial NO flux was
associated with higher increase in forced expiratory volume in 1 s to forced
vital capacity ratio (r = 0.334, p = 0.038) and more symptom relief (r = -0.317, 
p = 0.049) during the treatment. Baseline EBC levels of LTB(4), cysLTs or
8-isoprostane were not related to response to fluticasone treatment. Inhaled
fluticasone decreased bronchial NO flux but not alveolar NO concentration or
markers in EBC. High levels of bronchial NO flux are related to symptom relief
and improvement of airway obstruction during treatment with inhaled fluticasone
in COPD. Markers of inflammation or oxidative stress in EBC are not related to
steroid responsiveness in COPD.

DOI: 10.1183/09031936.00177508 
PMID: 19574327  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. Respir Res. 2009 Jun 30;10:59. doi: 10.1186/1465-9921-10-59.

Efficacy of salmeterol/fluticasone propionate by GOLD stage of chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease: analysis from the randomised, placebo-controlled
TORCH study.

Jenkins CR(1), Jones PW, Calverley PM, Celli B, Anderson JA, Ferguson GT, Yates
JC, Willits LR, Vestbo J.

Author information: 
(1)Woolcock Institute of Medical Research, Sydney, Australia. crj@med.usyd.edu.au

BACKGROUND: The efficacy of inhaled salmeterol plus fluticasone propionate (SFC) 
in patients with severe or very severe COPD is well documented. However, there
are only limited data about the influence of GOLD severity staging on the
effectiveness of SFC, particularly in patients with milder disease.
METHODS: TORCH was a 3-year, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial of 6112
patients with moderate/severe COPD with pre-bronchodilator FEV1 < 60% predicted
(mean age 65 years, 76% male, mean 44% predicted FEV1, 43% current smokers). To
understand the relative efficacy of SFC and its components by GOLD stages, we
conducted a post-hoc analysis of the TORCH dataset using baseline
post-bronchodilator FEV1 to segment patients into three groups: moderate COPD
(GOLD stage II and above: >or= 50%; n = 2156), severe COPD (GOLD stage III: 30%
to < 50%; n = 3019) and very severe COPD (GOLD stage IV: < 30%; n = 937).
RESULTS: Compared with placebo, SFC improved post-bronchodilator FEV1: 101 ml
(95% confidence interval [CI]: 71, 132) in GOLD stage II, 82 ml (95% CI: 60, 104)
in GOLD stage III and 96 ml (95% CI: 54, 138) in GOLD stage IV patients, and
reduced the rate of exacerbations: 31% (95% CI: 19, 40) in GOLD stage II, 26%
(95% CI: 17, 34) in GOLD stage III and 14% (95% CI: -4, 29) in GOLD stage IV. SFC
improved health status to a greater extent than other treatments regardless of
baseline GOLD stage. Similarly, SFC reduced the risk of death by 33% (hazard
ratio [HR] 0.67; 95% CI: 0.45, 0.98) for GOLD stage II, 5% (HR 0.95; 95% CI:
0.73, 1.24) for GOLD stage III, and 30% (HR 0.70; 95% CI: 0.47, 1.05) for GOLD
stage IV. The rates of adverse events were similar across treatment arms and
increased with disease severity. Overall, there was a higher incidence of
pneumonia in the fluticasone propionate and SFC arms, compared with other
treatments in all GOLD stages.
CONCLUSION: In the TORCH study, SFC reduced moderate-to-severe exacerbations and 
improved health status and FEV1 across GOLD stages. Treatment with SFC may be
associated with reduced mortality compared with placebo in patients with GOLD
stage II disease. The effects were similar to those reported for the study as a
whole. Thus, SFC is an effective treatment option for patients with GOLD stage II
COPD.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: Clinicaltrial.gov registration NCT00268216; Study number:
SCO30003.

DOI: 10.1186/1465-9921-10-59 
PMCID: PMC2714501
PMID: 19566934  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. Eur J Clin Pharmacol. 2009 Sep;65(9):853-71. doi: 10.1007/s00228-009-0682-z. Epub
2009 Jun 26.

Inhaled corticosteroids as combination therapy with beta-adrenergic agonists in
airways disease: present and future.

Chung KF(1), Caramori G, Adcock IM.

Author information: 
(1)Airway Disease Section, National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College
London, Dovehouse Street, London SW36LY, UK. f.chung@imperial.ac.uk

Inhaled corticosteroid (ICS) therapy in combination with long-acting
beta-adrenergic agonists represents the most important treatment for chronic
airways diseases such as asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
ICS therapy forms the basis for treatment of asthma of all severities, improving 
asthma control, lung function and preventing exacerbations of disease. Use of ICS
has also been established in the treatment of COPD, particularly symptomatic
patients, who experience useful gains in quality of life, likely from an
improvement in symptoms such as breathlessness and in reduction in exacerbations,
and an attenuation of the yearly rate of deterioration in lung function. The
addition of long-acting beta-agonist (LABA) therapy with ICS increases the
efficacy of ICS effects in moderate-to-severe asthma. Thus, a 800 mug daily dose 
of the ICS budesonide reduced severe exacerbation rates by 49% compared to a low 
dose of 200 mug daily, and addition of the LABA formoterol to budesonide (800
mug) led to a 63% reduction. In COPD, the effects of ICS are less prominent but
there are beneficial effects on the decline in FEV(1) and the rate of
exacerbations. A reduction in the rate of decline in FEV(1) of 16 ml/year with a 
25% reduction in exacerbation rate has been reported with the salmeterol and
fluticasone combination. A non-significant 17.5% reduction in all-cause mortality
rate with ICS and LABA is reported. Chronic inflammation is a feature of both
asthma and COPD, although there are site and characteristic differences. ICS
targets this inflammation although this effect of ICS is less effective in
patients with severe asthma and with COPD; however, addition of LABA may
potentiate the anti-inflammatory effects of ICS. An important consideration is
the presence of corticosteroid insensitivity in these patients. Currently
available ICS have variably potent binding activities to specific glucocorticoid 
receptors, leading to inhibition of gene expression by either binding to DNA and 
inducing anti-inflammatory genes or by repressing the induction of
pro-inflammatory mediators. Local side effects of ICS include oral candidiasis,
hoarseness and dysphonia, while systemic side effects, such as easy bruising and 
reduction in growth velocity or bone mineral densitometry, are usually restricted
to doses above maximally recommended doses. Use of LABA alone in patients with
asthma increases the risk of asthma-related events including deaths, but this is 
less observed with the combination of ICS and LABA. Therefore, use of LABA alone 
is not recommended for asthma therapy. Future progress in ICS development will be
characterised by the introduction of ICS with greater efficacy with a limited
side-effect profile, and by longer-acting ICS that can be used in combination
with once-daily LABAs. Other agents that could improve the efficacy of
corticosteroids or reverse corticosteroid insensitivity may be added to ICS. ICS 
in combination with LABAs will continue to remain the main focus of treatment of 
airways diseases.

DOI: 10.1007/s00228-009-0682-z 
PMID: 19557399  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2009;4:185-201. Epub 2009 May 7.

Insights into interventions in managing COPD patients: lessons from the TORCH and
UPLIFT studies.

Miravitlles M(1), Anzueto A.

Author information: 
(1)Fundació Clínic, Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer
(IDIBAPS), Hospital Clinic, Barcelona, Spain. marcm@clinic.ub.es

Influencing the progression of COPD has long been an elusive goal of drug
therapy. Directly or indirectly, this has again been investigated in two of the
largest, long-term drug trials in COPD: Towards a Revolution in COPD Health
(TORCH) and Understanding Potential Long-Term Impacts on Function with Tiotropium
(UPLIFT). Neither trial achieved statistical significance in their respective
primary outcomes; however, both make considerable contributions to understanding 
of how the progression of COPD may be influenced. The objective of this article
is to review the data from these different trials with a view to what can be
learnt about the management of COPD. The long-term improvements in lung function,
health-related quality of life, and possibly survival from the use of long-acting
bronchodilators in these trials suggest an influence on progression of the
disease. With the more optimistic view of benefits from drug treatment of COPD
that these trials provide, a review of prescribing practices is warranted.


PMCID: PMC2685145
PMID: 19516917  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2009 Aug;330(2):377-88. doi: 10.1124/jpet.108.147538. Epub 
2009 May 28.

Novel tight-binding inhibitory factor-kappaB kinase (IKK-2) inhibitors
demonstrate target-specific anti-inflammatory activities in cellular assays and
following oral and local delivery in an in vivo model of airway inflammation.

Sommers CD(1), Thompson JM, Guzova JA, Bonar SL, Rader RK, Mathialagan S,
Venkatraman N, Holway VW, Kahn LE, Hu G, Garner DS, Huang HC, Chiang PC,
Schindler JF, Hu Y, Meyer DM, Kishore NN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Inflammation, Pfizer St Louis Laboratories, Chesterfield,
Missouri 63017, USA. cynthia.d.sommers@pfizer.com

Nuclear factor-kappaB (NF-kappaB) is one of the major families of transcription
factors activated during the inflammatory response in asthma and chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease. Inhibitory factor-kappaB kinase 2 (IKK-2) has been
shown to play a pivotal role in cytokine-induced NF-kappaB activation in airway
epithelium and in disease-relevant cells. Nevertheless, the potential toxicity of
specific IKK-2 inhibitors may be unacceptable for oral delivery in chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease. Therefore, local delivery to the lungs is an
attractive alternative that warrants further exploration. Here, we describe
potent and selective small-molecule IKK-2 inhibitors
[8-(5-chloro-2-(4-methylpiperazin-1-yl)isonicotinamido)-1-(4-fluorophenyl)-4,5-di
hydro-1H-benzo[g]indazole-3-carboxamide (PHA-408) and
8-(2-(3,4-bis(hydroxymethyl)-3,4-dimethylpyrrolidin-1-yl)-5-chloroisonicotinamido
)-1-(4-fluorophenyl)-4,5-dihydro-1H-benzo-[g]indazole-3-carboxamide (PF-184)]
that are competitive for ATP have slow off-rates from IKK-2 and display broad in 
vitro anti-inflammatory activities resulting from NF-kappaB pathway inhibition.
Notably, PF-184 has been designed to have high systemic clearance, which limits
systemic exposure and maximizes the effects locally in the airways. We used an
inhaled lipopolysaccharide-induced rat model of neutrophilia to address whether
inhibiting NF-kappaB activation locally within the airways would show
anti-inflammatory effects in the absence of systemic exposure. PHA-408, a
low-clearance compound previously shown to be efficacious orally in a rodent
model of arthritis, dose-dependently attenuated inhaled
lipopolysaccharide-induced cell infiltration and cytokine production.
Interestingly, PF-184 produced comparable dose-dependent anti-inflammatory
activity by intratracheal administration and was as efficacious as
intratracheally administered fluticasone propionate (fluticasone). Together,
these results support the potential therapeutic utility of IKK-2 inhibition in
inflammatory pulmonary diseases and demonstrate anti-inflammatory efficacy of an 
inhaled IKK-2 inhibitor in a rat airway model of neutrophilia.

DOI: 10.1124/jpet.108.147538 
PMID: 19478133  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. Ther Adv Respir Dis. 2009 Apr;3(2):73-80. doi: 10.1177/1753465809336697. Epub
2009 May 22.

The effects of inhaled and oral corticosteroids on serum inflammatory biomarkers 
in COPD: an exploratory study.

Man SF(1), Xuekui Zhang, Vessey R, Walker T, Lee K, Park D, Sin DD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Several studies suggest that inhaled and oral corticosteroids repress
systemic inflammation in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). However,
the cytokines that may respond to these medications are unclear.
METHOD: We used data from 41 patients with a history of stable moderate COPD
(average age 64 years) who were randomised to inhaled fluticasone (500 microg
twice daily from a Diskus inhaler), oral prednisone (30 mg daily) or placebo for 
2 weeks. Using a multiplexed array system, different serum cytokines that have
been implicated in COPD pathogenesis were measured.
RESULTS: We found that compared with placebo, inhaled fluticasone significantly
reduced levels of soluble tumour necrosis factor receptor-2 (sTNF-R2) by 24% (95%
CI, 7-38%; p = 0.01), monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 by 20% (95% CI, 5-32%; p
= 0.01), interferon gamma inducible CXCL10 (IP-10) by 43% (95% CI, 3-66%; p =
0.04), and soluble L-selectin levels by 15% (95% CI, 1-28%; p = 0.04). Compared
with placebo, oral prednisone reduced levels of sTNF-R2 by 26% (95% CI, 15-36%; p
< 0.001), L-selectin by 22% (95% CI, 8-34%; p = 0.004), intercellular adhesion
molecule-1 by 31% (95% CI, 9-48%; p = 0.01), pulmonary and activation-regulated
chemokine (PARC) by 18% (95% CI, 2-32%; p = 0.03) and IP-10 by 40% (95% CI,
0-64%; p = 0.05). sTNF-R2, L-selectin and IP-10 were significantly reduced by
both oral and inhaled corticosteroids. The other cytokines were not significantly
repressed by either oral or inhaled corticosteroids.
CONCLUSIONS: In summary, inhaled and oral corticosteroids significantly repressed
a selected number of systemic cytokines in patients with stable, moderate COPD;
most of the steroid-responsive cytokines appear to be chemoattractants.

DOI: 10.1177/1753465809336697 
PMID: 19465442  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. Eur Respir J. 2009 Sep;34(3):641-7. doi: 10.1183/09031936.00193908. Epub 2009 May
14.

Pneumonia risk in COPD patients receiving inhaled corticosteroids alone or in
combination: TORCH study results.

Crim C(1), Calverley PM, Anderson JA, Celli B, Ferguson GT, Jenkins C, Jones PW, 
Willits LR, Yates JC, Vestbo J.

Author information: 
(1)GlaxoSmithKline, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709-3398, USA.
courtney.c.crim@gsk.com

Inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) are important in reducing exacerbation frequency
associated with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). However, little is 
known about the risk of associated infections. In a post hoc analysis of the
TOwards a Revolution in COPD Health (TORCH) study, we analysed and identified
potential risk factors for adverse event reports of pneumonia in this randomised,
double-blind trial comparing twice-daily inhaled salmeterol (SAL) 50 microg,
fluticasone propionate (FP) 500 microg, and the combination (SFC) with placebo in
6,184 patients with moderate-to-severe COPD over 3 yrs. Despite a higher
withdrawal rate in the placebo arm, after adjusting for time on treatment, a
greater rate of pneumonia was reported in the FP and SFC treatment arms (84 and
88 per 1,000 treatment-yrs, respectively) compared with SAL and placebo (52 and
52 per 1,000 treatment-yrs, respectively). Risk factors for pneumonia were age > 
or =55 yrs, forced expiratory volume in 1 s <50% predicted, COPD exacerbations in
the year prior to the study, worse Medical Research Council dyspnoea scores and
body mass index <25 kg.m(-2). No increase in pneumonia deaths with SFC was
observed; this could not be concluded for FP. Despite the benefits of
ICS-containing regimens in COPD management, healthcare providers should remain
vigilant regarding the possible development of pneumonia as a complication in
COPD patients receiving such therapies.

DOI: 10.1183/09031936.00193908 
PMID: 19443528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. Ther Adv Respir Dis. 2009 Apr;3(2):59-63. doi: 10.1177/1753465809104677. Epub
2009 May 14.

Value of adding a polyvalent mechanical bacterial lysate to therapy of COPD
patients under regular treatment with salmeterol/fluticasone.

Cazzola M(1), Noschese P, Di Perna F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University Tor Vergata, Rome, Italy.
mario.cazzola@uniroma2.it

BACKGROUND: This study investigated the value of adding Ismigen, a polyvalent
mechanical bacterial lysate, to therapy of COPD patients (FEV(1) <60% predicted) 
under regular treatment with salmeterol/fluticasone (SFC).
METHODS: 63 patients enrolled from September to December 2007 were randomly
divided into two groups (A and B). All patients were treated with
salmeterol/fluticasone (SFC) 50/500 microg BID. Thirty-three subjects also
received Ismigen one capsule daily the first 10 days of three consecutive months 
(group B). This treatment was reaped three months after the end of the first
course. We assessed at inclusion and at scheduled (every 2 months) or
intercurrent visit: symptoms (amount and colour of sputum, severity of dyspnoea, 
frequency of cough, fever), diagnosis of exacerbation, concomitant medications
(antibiotics and oral corticosteroids) and hospitalization.
RESULTS: During the course of the study two patients died. At the end of the
observation period (12 months), another six patients could not be visited because
they had withdrawn. Compared with SFC, adding on Ismigen reduced the total number
of exacerbations (23 out of 30 patients in group A and 21 out of 33 patients in
group B), the number (rate) of exacerbations per patient per year (18 out of 27
patients [0.67] in group A and 15 out of 28 patients [0.54] in group B), the
number of exacerbations that needed treatment with oral corticosteroids (12 out
of 23 [52%] in group A and 9 out of 21 [43%] in group B) and the total number
(rate) of hospitalizations (4/30 [0.13] in group A and 3/33 [0.09] in group B).
There were no significant differences between treatments with respect to their
effect on the symptoms of exacerbations. A decrease in the need for antibiotics
was also observed in group B.
CONCLUSION: Our data suggest that COPD patients benefit from the addition of
Ismigen on top of the routine maintenance treatment with SFC.

DOI: 10.1177/1753465809104677 
PMID: 19443519  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Prescrire Int. 2008 Dec;17(98):229.

Fluticasone/salmeterol: labeling change.

[No authors listed]

The fixed-dose combination of fluticasone and salmeterol has no place in the
treatment of asthma or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).


PMID: 19418648  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. Am J Manag Care. 2009 Apr;15(4):226-32.

Cost-effectiveness of salmeterol, fluticasone, and combination therapy for COPD.

Oba Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonary, Critical Care and Environmental Medicine, University 
of Missouri-Columbia, One Hospital Dr, Health Science Center MA419A, Columbia, MO
65212, USA. obay@health.missouri.edu

OBJECTIVE: To assess the incremental cost-effectiveness of inhaled medication use
in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
STUDY DESIGN: A Markov model was constructed to estimate the incremental
quality-adjusted life-years (QALYs) gained of the alternative treatment arms used
in the Towards a Revolution in COPD Health (TORCH) study (ie,
salmeterol-fluticasone propionate combination [SFC], salmeterol, fluticasone, and
placebo).
METHODS: The cycle length for the model was set to 3 months, and the maximum time
horizon was set to 3 years. The cost-effective analysis was conducted from a
third-party payer's perspective in the US healthcare system. Future costs and
effects were discounted at 3%. Multiple 1-way sensitivity analyses and a
probabilistic sensitivity analysis using Monte Carlo simulation were performed to
handle uncertainty.
RESULTS: The most cost-effective strategies are placebo (as-needed short-acting
bronchodilator use with no maintenance therapy) when willingness to pay (WTP) is 
less than $52,800/QALY gained and SFC when WTP exceeds that threshold. When no
maintenance therapy is not an acceptable option, the most cost-effective
strategies are treatment with salmeterol when WTP is less than $49,500/QALY
gained and treatment with SFC when WTP exceeds that threshold. The base-case
analysis showed that incremental cost-effectiveness ratios of salmeterol,
fluticasone, and SFC relative to placebo were $56,519, $62,833, and $52,046/QALY 
gained, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: The most cost-effective strategy in moderate-to-severe COPD depends 
on how much society is willing to pay to achieve health improvements. When
treatment with as-needed short-acting bronchodilator use does not provide
adequate control, salmeterol or SFC would be the drug of choice depending on WTP.


PMID: 19355795  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. COPD. 2008 Dec;5(6):369-75. doi: 10.1080/15412550802522924.

Reflections on TORCH: potential mechanisms for the survival benefit of
salmeterol/fluticasone propionate in COPD patients.

Johnson M(1), Agusti AG, Barnes NC.

Author information: 
(1)GlaxoSmithKline Research and Development, Uxbridge, Middlesex, UK.
Malcolm.W.Johnson@gsk.com

COPD is a disease with a multi-component pathophysiology in which inflammation
plays a key role. An anti-inflammatory effect of salmeterol (S)/fluticasone
propionate (FP) combination (SFC), as demonstrated in a number of biopsy studies,
may be the mechanism by which it provides a potential survival benefit in COPD
patients in the TORCH study. It is possible that the molecular synergy between S 
and FP shown in COPD results in enhanced anti-inflammatory in the airways. This
may also contribute to the reduction in exacerbations and the increase in lung
function seen in the TORCH study. Alternatively, SFC may prolong survival by
impacting on systemic inflammation and disease co-morbidities in COPD.

DOI: 10.1080/15412550802522924 
PMID: 19353351  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. Curr Med Res Opin. 2009 May;25(5):1235-45. doi: 10.1185/03007990902868971 .

Progression of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: impact of inflammation,
comorbidities and therapeutic intervention.

Stockley RA(1).

Author information: 
(1)University Hospital Birmingham NHS Foundation Trust, Birmingham, UK.
r.a.stockley@bham.ac.uk

BACKGROUND AND AIM: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a major cause
of morbidity and mortality, and through under-diagnosis, is often inappropriately
treated. This multicomponent disease involves both airway and systemic
inflammation at all stages and may influence the progression of disease and the
pathophysiology of comorbidities. This review examines evidence linking
inflammation, disease progression and comorbidities in COPD, and the potential
role of anti-inflammatory therapies.
METHODS: Systematic searches of Medline and Cochrane Reviews databases from 1976 
to March 2008 using the terms: chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, disease
progression, inflammation, inflammatory, comorbid condition, comorbidity,
treatment, therapy, bronchodilator, inhaled corticosteroid.
FINDINGS: Increased levels of interleukin-8, tumour necrosis factor-alpha and
systemic C-reactive protein correlate with worse disease severity, exacerbation
rates and lung function decline. Increased systemic C-reactive protein is also
associated with poorer health status and comorbidities (e.g. cardiovascular
disease, cancer and skeletal muscle dysfunction). The pivotal role of
inflammation in the pathogenesis of COPD and its comorbidities suggests
anti-inflammatory therapies will be important in the overall management of COPD. 
Long-term studies indicate that combination therapies consisting of a long-acting
beta-agonist plus an inhaled corticosteroid in one inhaler have the potential to 
modify disease progression through positive effects on lung function,
exacerbations, symptoms and health status. The TOwards a Revolution in COPD
Health (TORCH) study is the first to demonstrate that a COPD pharmacotherapy
(combination salmeterol plus fluticasone propionate) significantly decreased the 
rate of lung function decline versus placebo.
CONCLUSION: Better understanding of the specific inflammatory mechanisms
underlying COPD disease progression and associated comorbidities will likely lead
to more effective management of the disease.

DOI: 10.1185/03007990902868971   
PMID: 19335322  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. Clin Exp Allergy. 2009 May;39(5):688-99. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2222.2009.03220.x.
Epub 2009 Mar 20.

Opposite effect of fluticasone and salmeterol on fibronectin and tenascin-C
expression in primary human lung fibroblasts.

Degen M(1), Goulet S, Ferralli J, Roth M, Tamm M, Chiquet-Ehrismann R.

Author information: 
(1)Friedrich Miescher Institute for Biomedical Research, Novartis Research
Foundation, Basel, Switzerland.

BACKGROUND: Airway remodelling is a key feature of asthma and chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD). The remodelling process involves the deposition of
extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins within the airways. Current therapies for
asthma and COPD consist of inhaled corticosteroids and long-acting
beta(2)-agonists (LABA). However, their effect on airway remodelling is not well 
understood so far.
OBJECTIVE: In this study we investigated the effect of fluticasone and
salmeterol, either alone or in combination, on fibronectin and tenascin-C
protein, isoform, and mRNA levels in primary human lung fibroblasts.
METHODS: In our model, fibroblasts cultured in serum-free medium represented a
non-inflammatory condition and stimulation with 5% fetal calf serum and/or
TGF-beta(1) mimicked a pro-fibrotic environment with activation of tissue repair.
Using these two different conditions, the effects of fluticasone and salmeterol
on fibronectin and tenascin-C protein and mRNA levels were analysed by
immunoblotting and semi-quantitative RT-PCR.
RESULTS: In both conditions, fluticasone increased fibronectin transcript and
protein levels, whereas it decreased those of tenascin-C. Salmeterol neither
affected fibronectin and tenascin-C synthesis significantly nor did it influence 
the effect of fluticasone when applied in combination. Furthermore, we found that
treatment with fluticasone had an opposite effect on extra domain A and B
containing fibronectin isoforms generated by alternative splicing compared with
total fibronectin transcript levels, whereas tenascin-C isoforms were not
differently modulated by fluticasone.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results indicate that standard therapies for inflammatory lung
disorders influence ECM protein composition and relative expression levels. In
contrast to corticosteroids, LABA did not significantly alter the expression of
tenascin-C and fibronectin in cultures of primary human lung fibroblasts.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2222.2009.03220.x 
PMID: 19309351  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. Clin Med Res. 2009 Jun;7(1-2):14-20. doi: 10.3121/cmr.2009.824. Epub 2009 Feb 26.

The effect of an inhaled corticosteroid on glucose control in type 2 diabetes.

Faul JL(1), Wilson SR, Chu JW, Canfield J, Kuschner WG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Connolly Hospital, Dublin, Ireland.

OBJECTIVE: To determine the effect of inhaled corticosteroid (ICS) therapy on
glucose control in adults with type 2 diabetes mellitus and coexisting asthma or 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
DESIGN: A prospective randomized, double-blind, double-dummy placebo-controlled, 
crossover investigation of inhaled steroids and oral leukotriene blockers.
SETTING: A United States Department of Veterans Affairs Health Care System
outpatient setting.
PARTICIPANTS: Adults with type 2 diabetes and asthma or COPD.
METHODS: Subjects (n=12) were randomized to receive either inhaled fluticasone
propionate (440 microg twice daily) and oral placebo, or inhaled placebo and oral
montelukast (10 mg/day). After 6 weeks, subjects were switched to the opposite
therapy for 6 weeks. The primary outcome measure was the change in the percentage
of glycosylated hemoglobin (%HbA1c) at 6 weeks relative to the baseline value.
RESULTS: Ten patients completed the study. The difference between the mean
within-subject changes in %HbA1c associated with 6-week periods of fluticasone
and the mean changes associated with montelukast therapy was small but
statistically significant (mean difference=0.25; P<0.025). Neither fluticasone
nor oral montelukast therapy for 6 weeks led to a significantly different mean % 
HbA1c compared with the relevant baseline (mean differences=0.11 and -0.14,
respectively).
CONCLUSION: The absence of a clinically significant within-subject difference in 
the changes in %HbA1c associated with fluticasone versus oral montelukast
therapy, or between either therapy or baseline does not warrant recommending
changes in therapy for asthma or diabetes in patients with these co-morbid
conditions. However, we suggest that clinicians carefully monitor blood glucose
control when diabetic patients initiate ICS, especially with higher dosages.

DOI: 10.3121/cmr.2009.824 
PMCID: PMC2705276
PMID: 19251584  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2009 Mar 1;179(5):426; author reply 426-7.

Effect of pharmacotherapy on rate of decline of FEV(1) in the TORCH study.

Marchand E.

Comment on
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2008 Aug 15;178(4):332-8.

DOI: 10.1164/ajrccm.179.5.426a 
PMID: 19234322  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. COPD. 2009 Feb;6(1):1-3. doi: 10.1080/15412550902723984.

TORCH and UPLIFT: what has been learned from the COPD "mega-trials"?

Niewoehner DE.

TORCH and UPLIFT are amongst the largest and most ambitious COPD trials ever
undertaken. In terms of the primary outcomes, both trials were negative. Compared
with placebo, combined salmeterol and fluticasone therapy did not significantly
reduce all cause mortality over 3 years in TORCH, and tiotropium did not slow the
decline in lung function over 4 years in UPLIFT. Secondary outcomes from these
studies strongly confirmed findings from previous trials. Monotherapy with all
three drugs provided small improvements in respiratory health status and
reductions in exacerbation rates with some additive effect from the
salmeterol/fluticasone combination. Both salmeterol/fluticasone and tiotropium
also reduced COPD hospitalization rates. The trials provide very strong evidence 
that the long-acting bronchodilators, salmeterol and tiotropium, are not
associated with increased risk of death or major cardiovascular adverse events.

DOI: 10.1080/15412550902723984 
PMID: 19229702  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. Respirology. 2009 Mar;14(2):260-3. doi: 10.1111/j.1440-1843.2008.01425.x. Epub
2008 Dec 11.

Association between CRHR1 polymorphism and improved lung function in response to 
inhaled corticosteroid in patients with COPD.

Kim WJ(1), Sheen SS, Kim TH, Huh JW, Lee JH, Kim EK, Lee JH, Lee SM, Lee S, Lim
SY, Shin TR, Yoon HI, Oh YM, Lee SD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, College of Medicine, Kangwon National
University, Chuncheon, Korea.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Inhaled corticosteroids are used to treat COPD and
asthma. An association between sequence variants in the corticotrophin-releasing 
hormone receptor 1 (CRHR1) gene and improved lung function in asthmatics treated 
with inhaled corticosteroids was reported recently. This study investigated the
association between the change in lung function in response to inhaled
corticosteroids and single-nucleotide CRHR1 polymorphisms in patients with COPD.
METHODS: COPD patients (n = 87) with a positive smoking history were recruited
from the pulmonary clinics of 11 hospitals in Korea. Patients were treated with
fluticasone propionate and salmeterol for 12 weeks and lung function was measured
at baseline and after the 12-week treatment. Eighty-four of the 87 subjects were 
successfully genotyped.
RESULTS: Seventy-one patients with the wild-type GG genotype and 13 patients with
the heterozygous GT genotype in rs242 941 were evaluated. After 12-week
treatment, the change in FEV(1) was significantly higher in patients with
wild-type GG genotype (6.0 +/- 0.8% of predicted FEV(1)) than in GT heterozygotes
(-0.8 +/- 1.8, P = 0.003).
CONCLUSIONS: Improved FEV(1) following inhaled corticosteroid and a long-acting
beta2-agonist was associated with CRHR1 genetic polymorphism in patients with
COPD.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1440-1843.2008.01425.x 
PMID: 19210659  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. Respirology. 2009 Mar;14(2):239-44. doi: 10.1111/j.1440-1843.2008.01452.x. Epub
2008 Dec 11.

Changes in lung function and health status in patients with COPD treated with
tiotropium or salmeterol plus fluticasone.

Kurashima K(1), Hara K, Yoneda K, Kanauchi T, Kagiyama N, Tokunaga D, Takayanagi 
N, Ubukata M, Sugita Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Saitama Cardiovascular and Respiritory
Center, Kumagaya city, Saitama, Japan. a1091749@pref.saitama.jp

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: The effects of tiotropium, a long-acting
anticholinergic drug, were compared with those of the combination of salmeterol, 
a long-acting beta(2)-agonist, and fluticasone, an inhaled corticosteroid, in
patients with COPD.
METHODS: A 4-month, randomized, open cross-over study of tiotropium, 18 microg
once daily, versus salmeterol, 50 microg, plus fluticasone, 200 microg, twice
daily, was conducted in patients with COPD. Efficacy was assessed by spirometry
and responses to the St George's Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ). After 4
months, patients were asked to select their subsequent therapy and indicate the
reasons for their selection.
RESULTS: A total of 78 patients completed the study. There were no significant
differences in the improvements in FEV(1) or SGRQ scores between the therapies.
Similar numbers of patients selected tiotropium (42.3%) and salmeterol plus
fluticasone (57.7%). However, those who preferred one of the therapies
demonstrated greater improvements in SGRQ scores with that therapy. One subgroup 
of patients (30.8%) showed greater improvements in dyspnoea and FEV(1) in
response to tiotropium, and the other subgroup of patients (35.9%) showed greater
improvements in dyspnoea and FEV(1) in response to salmeterol plus fluticasone.
Some patients (14.1%) selected salmeterol plus fluticasone because of positive
effects on sputum expectoration.
CONCLUSIONS: The study was unblinded and the results need to be interpreted with 
caution. However, tiotropium and salmeterol plus fluticasone had similar overall 
effects on pulmonary function and SGRQ scores in patients with COPD. Responses to
the two therapies were heterogeneous, and the patients who showed greater
improvements in FEV(1) or SGRQ scores with one of the therapies preferred it for 
their subsequent treatment.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1440-1843.2008.01452.x 
PMID: 19210650  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Respir Med. 2009 Apr;103(4):542-51. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2008.11.003. Epub 2009
Jan 9.

Fluticasone and N-acetylcysteine in primary care patients with COPD or chronic
bronchitis.

Schermer T(1), Chavannes N, Dekhuijzen R, Wouters E, Muris J, Akkermans R, van
Schayck O, van Weel C.

Author information: 
(1)Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Department of General Practice,
Nijmegen, The Netherlands. t.schermer@hag.umcn.nl

BACKGROUND: Increased oxidative stress and bronchial inflammation are important
mechanisms in the pathophysiology of COPD.
AIM: To investigate whether treatment with the inhaled corticosteroid fluticasone
propionate (FP) or the anti-oxidative agent N-acetylcysteine (NAC) are effective 
in primary care patients.
METHODS: The study was a 3-year placebo-controlled randomised controlled trial
preceded by a 3-month washout and 2-week prednisolone pre-treatment. Patients
were (ex-)smokers with chronic bronchitis or COPD. Interventions were inhaled FP 
500microg b.i.d., oral NAC 600mg o.d., or placebo. Exacerbation rate and quality 
of life measured with the Chronic Respiratory Questionnaire (CRQ) were the
primary outcomes, FEV(1) decline and respiratory symptoms secondary outcomes.
RESULTS: 286 patients recruited from 44 general practices were randomised.
Exacerbation rate was 1.35 times higher for NAC (p=0.054) and 1.30 times higher
for FP (p=0.095) compared with placebo. CRQ total scores did not differ between
NAC (p=0.306) or FP (p=0.581) treatment compared to placebo. Annual
postbronchodilator FEV(1) decline was 64mL [SD 5.4] for NAC [p=0.569 versus
placebo], 59mL [SD 5.7] for FP [p=0.935], and 60mL [SD 5.4] for placebo.
CONCLUSION: No beneficial treatment effects for either high-dosed inhaled
fluticasone propionate or oral N-acetylcysteine were observed in our study
population of patients with COPD or chronic bronchitis.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2008.11.003 
PMID: 19138505  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. Eur Respir J. 2009 Apr;33(4):778-84. doi: 10.1183/09031936.00115308. Epub 2009
Jan 7.

Anti-inflammatory effects of salmeterol/fluticasone, tiotropium/fluticasone or
tiotropium in COPD.

Perng DW(1), Tao CW, Su KC, Tsai CC, Liu LY, Lee YC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chest Medicine, Taipei Veterans General Hospital, Taipei,
Taiwan. dwperng@vghtpe.gov.tw

The anti-inflammatory effects of salmeterol/fluticasone (SFP),
tiotropium/fluticasone (Tio+FP) and tiotropium (Tio) alone were investigated on
the inflammatory cells and mediators in sputum induced from chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease patients. Subjects were either newly diagnosed or had not taken
any medication for 3 months prior to the study. Subjects (n = 99) were randomised
(not double blinded) and received either SFP (100/1,000 microg daily), Tio+FP
(18/1,000 microg daily) or Tio (18 microg daily) for 12 weeks. Induced sputum and
serum C-reactive protein (CRP) were analysed prior to and at the end of
treatment. The results showed that treatment with SFP caused a significant
reduction in interleukin (IL)-8 and matrix metalloprotease (MMP)-9 in induced
sputum, compared with treatment with Tio alone. There were no treatment
differences between the SFP and Tio+FP groups in decreasing IL-8 and MMP-9
levels. The reduction in IL-8 showed significant association with the reduction
in MMP-9. All treatment groups failed to significantly reduce the numbers of
total cells, neutrophils, macrophages and eosinophils in induced sputum; in
addition, there were no treatment differences in terms of improvement of forced
expiratory volume in one second, forced vital capacity, CRP or quality of life
between the three groups. The anti-inflammatory effects of salmeterol/fluticasone
probably contribute to the clinical benefits seen in chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease patients.

DOI: 10.1183/09031936.00115308 
PMID: 19129278  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. Ther Adv Respir Dis. 2008 Apr;2(2):55-64. doi: 10.1177/1753465808088902.

Exhaled nitric oxide, systemic inflammation, and the spirometric response to
inhaled fluticasone propionate in severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: a
prospective study.

Kunisaki KM(1), Rice KL, Janoff EN, Rector TS, Niewoehner DE.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary, Allergy, Critical Care and Sleep, University of
Minnesota, USA. kunis001@umn.edu

BACKGROUND: A subset of patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD) may respond more favorably to inhaled corticosteroids (ICS), but no simple
method is currently utilized to predict the presence or absence of ICS responses 
in patients with COPD.We evaluated the ability of exhaled nitric oxide (FENO) and
serum inflammatory markers (C-reactive protein [CRP], interleukin-6 [IL-6], and
interleukin-8 [IL-8]) to independently predict spirometric responses to ICS in
patients with COPD.
METHODS: Among 60 ex-smokers with severe COPD (mean FEV1 1.07 L, 36% of
predicted), we conducted a single-arm, open-label study. Participants spent four 
weeks free of any ICS, followed by four weeks of ICS use (fluticasone propionate 
500 mcg twice daily). FENO, CRP, IL-6, IL-8, and pre-bronchodilator spirometry
were measured immediately before and after the four weeks of ICS use.
RESULTS: Baseline FENO, CRP, IL-6, and IL-8 showed no correlations to FEV1
responses to ICS. ICS responders (increase in FEV1 > or = 200 mL after four weeks
of ICS) did have significantly higher baseline FENO levels compared with
non-responders (46.5 parts per billion [ppb] vs. 25 ppb, p = 0.028). The receiver
operating characteristic curve for FENO to discriminate responders from
non-responders had an area under curve of 0.72. Baseline serum inflammatory
markers did not differ between responders and non-responders.
CONCLUSION: In ex-smokers with severe COPD, a measure of local pulmonary
inflammation, FENO, may be more closely associated with FEV1 responses to four
weeks of ICS than are standard markers of systemic inflammation, serum CRP, IL-6,
and IL-8.

DOI: 10.1177/1753465808088902 
PMID: 19124359  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. Nanoscale Res Lett. 2009 Jan 6;4(3):254-261.

Evaluation of Aerosol Delivery of Nanosuspension for Pre-clinical Pulmonary Drug 
Delivery.

Chiang PC(1), Alsup JW, Lai Y, Hu Y, Heyde BR, Tung D.

Author information: 
(1)Global Research and Development, Pharmaceutical Research and Development, St. 
Louis Laboratories, Pfizer Inc, 700 Chesterfield parkway N. T2F, Chesterfield, MO
USA.

Asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) are pulmonary diseases
that are characterized by inflammatory cell infiltration, cytokine production,
and airway hyper-reactivity. Most of the effector cells responsible for these
pathologies reside in the lungs. One of the most direct ways to deliver drugs to 
the target cells is via the trachea. In a pre-clinical setting, this can be
achieved via intratracheal (IT), intranasal (IN), or aerosol delivery in the
desired animal model. In this study, we pioneered the aerosol delivery of a
nanosuspension formulation in a rodent model. The efficiency of different dosing 
techniques and formulations to target the lungs were compared, and fluticasone
was used as the model compound. For the aerosol particle size determination, a
ten-stage cascade impactor was used. The mass median aerodynamic diameter (MMAD) 
was calculated based on the percent cumulative accumulation at each stage.
Formulations with different particle size of fluticasone were made for
evaluation. The compatibility of regular fluticasone suspension and
nanosuspension for aerosol delivery was also investigated. The in vivo studies
were conducted on mice with optimized setting. It was found that the aerosol
delivery of fluticasone with nanosuspension was as efficient as intranasal (IN)
dosing, and was able to achieve dose dependent lung deposition.

DOI: 10.1007/s11671-008-9234-1 
PMCID: PMC2894320
PMID: 20596335  [PubMed]


383. Respir Med. 2009 Apr;103(4):582-8. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2008.10.017. Epub 2008 Dec
21.

Primary care of the patient with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease in Italy.

Cazzola M(1), Bettoncelli G, Sessa E, Cricelli C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Unit of Respiratory Diseases, University of
Rome Tor Vergata, Rome, Italy. mario.cazzola@uniroma2.it

Using a general practice research database with general practitioner (GP)
clinical records, it has been observed that among the 617,280 subjects registered
with 400 Italian GPs, 15,229 (2.47%) patients were suffering from chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Of these, 67.7% had a chest radiograph at
least once in a period of 10 years (1997-2006), while in the same period only
31.9% had a spirometry, 29.9% had a visit to a specialist, and 0.94% had a visit 
to an allergologist. From 1997 to 2006, 7.5% of patients with COPD, especially
the oldest ones, were hospitalized at least once for the disease, although 44.0% 
of all patients with COPD were hospitalized for other pathologies. With regard to
treatment, in 2006, 10,936 (71.1%) of COPD patients received at least one drug
for their disease (drugs classified within the R03 therapeutic pharmacological
subgroup of the Anatomical Therapeutic Chemical Classification). In particular,
salmeterol/fluticasone was prescribed 6441 times, tiotropium 4962, theophylline
3142, beclomethasone 2853, salbutamol 2256, formoterol 2191,
salbutamol/beclomethasone 2129, oxitropium 1802 and formoterol/budesonide 1741
times. Based on these findings, the level of COPD management in Italy seems to
fall short of recommended international COPD guidelines. In particular, it
appears that GPs usually prescribe treatment without the use of spirometry,
and/or without taking into account the severity of airway obstruction. It must
also be noted that, in general, patients with COPD are undertreated.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2008.10.017 
PMID: 19103479  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2009 Jan 1;179(1):80; author reply 80-1.

The INSPIRE trial results: are they truly breathtaking?

Chui D, Tejani AM.

Comment on
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2008 Jan 1;177(1):19-26.

DOI: 10.1164/ajrccm.179.1.80 
PMID: 19098157  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. Zhonghua Jie He He Hu Xi Za Zhi. 2008 Nov;31(11):811-4.

[Combination of inhaled salmeterol/fluticasone and tiotropium in the treatment of
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: a randomised controlled trial].

[Article in Chinese]

Fang LZ(1), Liang X, Zhang JQ, Liu L, Fu WP, Zhao ZH, Dai LM.

Author information: 
(1)Department 2 of Respiratory Medicine, the First Affiliated Hospital of Kunming
Medical College, Kunming 650032, China.

OBJECTIVE: To observe the efficacy of combination therapy with inhaled
salmeterol/fluticasone and tiotropium in reducing the frequency of acute episodes
of symptom exacerbation and improving lung function and health status in chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
METHODS: One hundred and twenty-six patients (M/F: 92/34) with COPD were treated 
in a randomised, parallel-group, controlled study with salmeterol/fluticasone
(50/250 microg) twice daily and tiotropium 18 microg once daily (n = 33, M/F:
23/10); salmeterol/fluticasone (50/250 microg) twice daily (n = 32, M/F: 24/8);
or tiotropium 18 microg once daily (n = 32, M/F: 23/9) for 12 months. Patients in
the blank control group (n = 29, M/F: 22/7) did not receive any inhaled
anticholinergic drugs, long-acting beta(2) agonists or glucocorticoid therapy.
Intention-to-treat analysis (n = 161) and per-protocol analysis (n = 126, age 45 
- 71 years) were performed.
RESULTS: Three active treatments significantly improved symptoms and health
status. The use of rescue medication in the combination group [1 (0 - 7) time,
95% CI] was significantly decreased compared with those in the blank group [2 (0 
- 29) times], salmeterol/fluticasone alone [2 (0 - 13) times], tiotropium alone
[1 (0 - 11) time], F = 4.914, P < 0.01. The frequency of exacerbations in the
combination group was (0.7 +/- 0.5) time, significantly lower than that in the
blank group [(1.5 +/- 0.9) times], salmeterol/fluticasone alone [(1.2 +/- 0.6)
times], and tiotropium alone [(1.1 +/- 0.5) times], F = 8.513, P < 0.01. The
FEV(1) in the combination group after the trial was (1.19 +/- 0.03) L,
significantly improved compared to that before treatment (1.09 +/- 0.04) L, a
9.5% increase, which was greater than the blank (0.9%), tiotropium alone (8.2%)
and salmeterol/fluticasone alone (6.3%), t = -5.024 to -15.58, P < 0.01.
CONCLUSION: Combination therapy with salmeterol/fluticasone and tiotropium leads 
to better control of symptoms and improved lung function, with no greater risk of
side-effects, as compared to salmeterol/fluticasone or tiotropium alone in the
treatment of COPD.


PMID: 19080533  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. Expert Opin Pharmacother. 2008 Dec;9(18):3271-3. doi: 10.1517/14656560802591406 .

Inhaled corticosteroids in COPD: systemic effects of a local therapy?

Antoniu SA(1).

Author information: 
(1)University of Medicine and Pharmacy 'Gr. T. Popa' Iasi, Division of Pulmonary 
Disease, Pulmonary Disease University Hospital, 30 Dr I Cihac Street, 700115
Iasi, Romania. sabina.antonela.antoniu@pneum.umfiasi.ro

Comment on
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2008 Jun 1;177(11):1207-14.

BACKGROUND: There are few data on the effects of inhaled corticosteroids on
systemic inflammation in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
OBJECTIVE: Evaluation of the systemic anti-inflammatory effects of inhaled
corticosteroids alone or in combination with long acting beta2-agonists.
METHODS: Analysis of the results of a randomized study assessing the short-term
effects of inhaled fluticasone propionate, inhaled fluticasone + salmeterol and
placebo on three inflammation biomarkers represented by C-reactive protein, IL-6 
and surfactant protein-D.
RESULTS/CONCLUSIONS: Inhaled corticosteroids alone or in combination exhibited
partial systemic anti-inflammatory effects, reducing significantly only SP-D
serum levels. Further evaluation of effects of inhaled corticosteroids on various
biomarkers of systemic inflammation is required in more severe stable COPD.

DOI: 10.1517/14656560802591406   
PMID: 19040347  [PubMed]


387. Respir Med. 2009 Jan;103(1):12-21. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2008.10.005. Epub 2008 Nov
17.

Cost-effectiveness of fluticasone propionate/salmeterol (500/50 microg) in the
treatment of COPD.

Earnshaw SR(1), Wilson MR, Dalal AA, Chambers MG, Jhingran P, Stanford R, Mapel
DW.

Author information: 
(1)RTI Health Solutions, Research Triangle Park, NC, USA. searnshaw@rti.org

OBJECTIVE: We examine the lifetime cost-effectiveness of treatment with
fluticasone propionate/salmeterol (500/50 microg) compared with no maintenance
treatment in COPD in the US.
METHODS: A decision-analytic model was developed to estimate lifetime costs and
outcomes associated with fluticasone propionate/salmeterol 500/50 microg
treatment, salmeterol 50 microg, and fluticasone propionate 500 microg compared
to no maintenance treatment in treating COPD from a third-party US payer
perspective. The patient population was similar to that of the TORCH clinical
trial. Model structure and inputs were obtained from published literature and
clinical trial data. All costs are presented in 2006 US dollars. Outcomes
included cost per life year (LY) saved and cost per quality-adjusted life year
(QALY) gained. Costs and outcomes were discounted at 3% annually. Univariate and 
multivariate sensitivity analyses were conducted to assess model robustness.
RESULTS: Compared to no maintenance treatment, treatment with fluticasone
propionate/salmeterol 500/50mug results in a lifetime incremental
cost-effectiveness ratio (ICER) of $33,865/QALY. Treatment with salmeterol 50
microg was found to have an ICER of $20,797/QALY. These results are robust to
changes in input parameters. Fluticasone propionate 500 microg was dominated by
no treatment, though the results were not robust to changes in parameters.
CONCLUSIONS: Treatment of COPD with fluticasone propionate/salmeterol 500/50
microg appears to be cost-effective (<or=$50,000/QALY) compared to no maintenance
treatment. Similarly, salmeterol 50 microg may be cost-effective compared to no
maintenance treatment. Compared with no maintenance treatment, fluticasone
propionate 500 microg was effective in reducing number of exacerbations, but
failure to differentiate from no maintenance treatment in mortality resulted in
it being dominated in the base case.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2008.10.005 
PMID: 19010652  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. Laryngoscope. 2008 Nov;118(11):1957-9. doi: 10.1097/MLG.0b013e3181802122.

Laryngeal candidiasis mimicking malignancy.

Nunes FP(1), Bishop T, Prasad ML, Madison JM, Kim DY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Massachusetts, Worcester, Massachusetts 
01655, USA.

Isolated laryngeal candidiasis in immunocompetent individuals is a rare entity
with fewer than 40 cases reported in the literature. Laryngeal candidiasis
secondary to inhaled steroid therapy is usually mild and has been reported in 10%
to 15% of patients complaining of dysphonia during treatment. We present a case
of laryngeal candidiasis mimicking laryngeal carcinoma in an immunocompetent
patient being treated with inhaled fluticasone for chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease. Biopsy of the lesion failed to show any signs of malignancy, and patient
responded well to oral fluconazole therapy.

DOI: 10.1097/MLG.0b013e3181802122 
PMID: 18978482  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. J Insur Med. 2008;40(1):55-63.

Assessing mortality risk in COPD.

Richie RC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Texas Life Insurance Company (Waco Lung Associates), 7125 New Sanger Road,
Suite B, Waco, TX 76712, USA. rcrichie@earthlink.net


PMID: 18924368  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. Drug Saf. 2008;31(11):965-88.

Safety of inhaled budesonide: clinical manifestations of systemic
corticosteroid-related adverse effects.

Christensson C(1), Thorén A, Lindberg B.

Author information: 
(1)Patient Safety, Clinical Development, AstraZeneca R&D Lund, Lund, Sweden.

Inhaled corticosteroid (ICS) therapy is central to the long-term management of
asthma and is extensively used in the management of chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD). While administration via inhalation limits systemic exposure
compared with oral or injected corticosteroids and, therefore, the risk of
systemic corticosteroid-related adverse effects, concerns over the long-term
safety of ICS persist. The assessment of the long-term effects of ICS therapy
requires considerable research effort over years or even decades. Surrogate
markers/predictors for clinical endpoints such as adrenal crisis, reduced final
height and fractures have been identified for use in relatively short-term
studies. However, the predictive value of such markers remains
questionable.Inhaled budesonide has been available since the early 1980s and
there is a considerable evidence base investigating the safety of this agent. To 
assess the long-term safety of inhaled budesonide therapy in terms of the actual 
incidence of the clinical endpoints adrenal crisis/insufficiency, reduced final
height, fractures and pregnancy complications, we undertook a review of the
scientific literature. The external databases BIOSIS, Cochrane Central Register
of Controlled Trials, Current Contents, EMBASE, International Pharmaceutical
Abstracts and MEDLINE were searched, in addition to AstraZeneca's internal
product literature database Planet, up to 29 February 2008. Only original
articles of epidemiological studies, national surveys, clinical trials and case
reports concerning inhaled budesonide were included.Eight surveys of adrenal
crisis were found. The only survey with specified criteria for diagnosis involved
2912 paediatricians and endocrinologists and revealed 33 patients with adrenal
crisis associated with ICS therapy; only one patient used budesonide (in
co-treatment with fluticasone propionate). In addition, 14 case reports of
adrenal crisis in budesonide-treated patients were found. In only two of these,
budesonide was used at recommended doses and in the absence of interacting
medication.Three retrospective studies and one prospective study assessing final 
height were found. None of them showed any reduced final height in patients
receiving inhaled budesonide during childhood or adolescence.Seventeen
epidemiological studies investigating the risk of fractures were found. When
adjusting for confounding factors, they did not provide any unequivocal data for 
an increased fracture risk with budesonide. Four prospective placebo-controlled
clinical trials of 2-6 years duration with inhaled budesonide in patients with
asthma or COPD were found. None of the studies identified any association between
inhaled budesonide and increased risk for fractures.Four studies using data from 
the Swedish birth and health registries showed there was no increased risk for
congenital malformations, cardiovascular defects, decreased gestational age,
birth weight or birth length among infants born to women using inhaled budesonide
during pregnancy compared with the general population. This was confirmed by five
observational studies in Australia, Canada, Hungary, Japan and the US. Similarly,
one randomized clinical trial comparing pregnancy outcomes among asthma patients 
receiving inhaled budesonide or placebo did not demonstrate any difference in
outcome of pregnancy.In summary, based on 25 years of experience with different
doses and in different populations, inhaled budesonide therapy only in very rare 
cases appears to be associated with an increased risk of adrenal crisis,
reduction in final height, increases in the number of fractures or complications 
during pregnancy.


PMID: 18840017  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. Presse Med. 2008 Nov;37(11):1604-8. doi: 10.1016/j.lpm.2008.08.003. Epub 2008 Sep
30.

[Prevention of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease exacerbations].

[Article in French]

Dusser D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Faculté Cochin Port-Royal, Service de Pneumologie, Groupe Hospitalier Cochin
Saint-Vincent-de-Paul, APHP, Université Paris Descartes, Paris Cedex 14, France. 
daniel.dusser@cch.aphp.fr

Exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) aggravate disease
course, induce increased morbidity and mortality, impair quality of life, and
raise the direct costs of COPD. Their prevention is essential and is an integral 
part of the COPD program defined by French health authorities for the 2005-2010
period. Both pharmacologic and nonpharmacologic approaches have been shown to be 
effective in preventing exacerbations, but these treatments are still underused
and misused. Important nonpharmacologic therapies that directly decrease the risk
of exacerbation or hospitalization include smoking cessation, oxygen therapy,
pulmonary rehabilitation, and education. Most of the drugs available for
long-term management of COPD have significant effects on the frequency of
exacerbations: tiotropium and salmeterol, each used alone, as well as fixed
combinations of salmeterol/fluticasone or formoterol/budesonide. Tiotropium
reduces the frequency of exacerbation in both moderate and severe COPD. Inhaled
glucocorticosteroid agents are not recommended alone. They must be prescribed
only with a long-acting bronchodilator and only to patients with severe disease
and repeated exacerbations. Influenza vaccination is recommended.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lpm.2008.08.003 
PMID: 18829252  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. Expert Rev Respir Med. 2008 Oct;2(5):551-64. doi: 10.1586/17476348.2.5.551.

Budesonide/formoterol in the treatment of asthma.

Lee C(1), Corren J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Allergy and Immunology, VA Greater Los
Angeles Healthcare System/University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, 
USA.

Budesonide/formoterol is a combination of an inhaled corticosteroid plus a
long-acting beta(2)-agonist available as a dry-powder inhaler for the indication 
of asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease in various countries outside 
of the USA and as a pressurized metered-dose inhaler in the USA for the
indication of asthma. Clinical studies have shown that budesonide/formoterol is
significantly more effective than an equivalent or higher dose of budesonide or
fluticasone propionate alone in patients with moderate-to-severe disease, and at 
least as effective as its two components administered via separate inhalers in
asthmatics with predominantly moderate to severe persistent disease.
Budesonide/formoterol is effective when administered both once or twice daily.
Adjustable maintenance dosing with budesonide/formoterol has been shown to
provide equivalent or better asthma control with a significantly lower amount of 
study drug use compared with fixed dosing. The rapid onset of action of
budesonide/formoterol, predominantly due to formoterol, as well as its favorable 
dose-response, has prompted budesonide/formoterol to be used as both a
maintenance and reliever medication, referred to as the Symbicort maintenance and
reliever therapy (SMART) dosing regimen in several countries. Use of this
approach has resulted in studies evaluating SMART, demonstrating significantly
lower rates of exacerbations and reliever medication use compared with
fixed-dosing regimens in asthma.

DOI: 10.1586/17476348.2.5.551 
PMID: 20477290  [PubMed]


393. Respirology. 2008 Nov;13(6):799-809. doi: 10.1111/j.1440-1843.2008.01380.x.

Bronchodilator reversibility, airway eosinophilia and anti-inflammatory effects
of inhaled fluticasone in COPD are not related.

Reid DW(1), Wen Y, Johns DP, Williams TJ, Ward C, Walters EH.

Author information: 
(1)Respiratory Research Group, Menzies Research Institute, University of
Tasmania, Hobart, Tasmania, Australia.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Bronchodilator reversibility (BDR) is common in
smoking-related COPD, but the airway pathology underlying this has not been
described. In particular, it is not known whether BDR is associated with
underlying airway eosinophilia and whether BDR is predictive of a better response
to inhaled corticosteroid (ICS) treatment.
METHODS: A double-blind, placebo-controlled, randomized 2:1 study of fluticasone 
propionate (FP), 500 microg twice daily versus placebo over 6 months was
performed in subjects with mild to moderate COPD. Subjects with a clinical
history of asthma were excluded, but not on BDR criteria alone. Induced sputum,
BAL and endobronchial biopsies (EBB) were performed in 36 subjects at baseline,
and 30 of these provided a second full set of samples (FP, n = 19; placebo, n =
11).
RESULTS: Baseline BDR was not related to airway eosinophilia and did not predict 
response to ICS. Post-bronchodilator FEV(1) increased in the FP group compared
with the placebo group (P = 0.05), and there were within-treatment group
reductions in total symptom scores with FP (P < 0.05). Compared with placebo, FP 
reduced macrophage numbers but increased neutrophil numbers in EBB (P = 0.01 and 
P = 0.003, respectively). BAL neutrophil and epithelial cell numbers were also
reduced with FP (P = 0.03 for both). There were within-treatment group reductions
in the numbers of EBB mast cells and CD8+ve lymphocytes with FP (P = 0.007).
CONCLUSIONS: BDR was not related to any particular inflammatory phenotype or any 
clinical or anti-inflammatory response to ICS in these subjects with mild to
moderate COPD.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1440-1843.2008.01380.x 
PMID: 18811878  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. Am J Geriatr Pharmacother. 2008 Aug;6(3):138-46. doi:
10.1016/j.amjopharm.2008.08.005.

Risk of hospitalizations/emergency department visits and treatment costs
associated with initial maintenance therapy using fluticasone propionate 500
microg/salmeterol 50 microg compared with ipratropium for chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease in older adults.

Blanchette CM(1), Akazawa M, Dalal A, Simoni-Wastila L.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Pharmacoeconomic and Outcomes Research, Lovelace Respiratory
Research Institute, Albuquerque, New Mexico 87108, USA. cblanchette@LRRI.org

BACKGROUND: Cost-effective treatments for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD) are needed to reduce the burden on the Medicare system.
OBJECTIVES: The objectives of this retrospective study were to compare the
effects of fluticasone propionate 500 microg/salmeterol 50 microg (FSC 500/50)
with those of ipratropium (IPR) in older adult patients with COPD on the
following factors: (1) the risk of all-cause and COPD-related hospitalization and
emergency department (ED) visits; and (2) all-cause and COPD-related treatment
costs.
METHODS: This retrospective, observational cohort study assessed commercially
insured patients aged > or =65 years (Medicare eligible) with COPD-related
medical costs (International Classification of Diseases, Ninth Revision, Clinical
Modification codes 490.xx, 491.xx, 492.xx, or 496.xx), 18 months of continuous
enrollment (12 months' pre-study and 6 months' poststudy), and > or =1
prescription claim (ie, the index event) for FSC 500/50 or IPR between January 2,
2001, and August 12, 2003. Exacerbation events (hospitalizations/ED visits) were 
assessed using Cox proportional hazards regression models controlling for
baseline factors and preindex events. Treatment costs were estimated using
multivariate generalized linear models to adjust for baseline characteristics and
preindex utilization and costs. A propensity-matched comparison was conducted as 
a sensitivity analysis.
RESULTS: A total of 1051 patients (540 women, 511 men) were identified: 952 in
the IPR group (mean age, 74.26 years) and 99 in the FSC 500/50 group (mean age,
72.38 years). Treatment with FSC 500/50 was not associated with a reduction in
the risk of all-cause hospitalization or ED visit compared with IPR (adjusted
hazards ratio [HR], 0.913 [95% CI, 0.673-1.238]); however, FSC 500/50 was
associated with a significantly lower risk (45%) of a COPD-related event
(adjusted HR, 0.547 [95% CI, 0.301-0.995]). Although treatment with FSC 500/50
was associated with significantly lower annual mean all-cause medical costs
compared with IPR ($18,642 vs $25,556, P < 0.05), the use of FSC 500/50 was also 
associated with significantly higher annual all-cause pharmacy costs ($2813 vs
$2244, P < 0.05). Compared with the IPR cohort, the FSC 500/50 cohort had lower
mean annual COPD-related medical costs (-$464 [P = NS]) and higher COPD-related
pharmacy costs ($260 [P < 0.01]). However, increased pharmacy costs may be
compensated for by decreased medical costs in both all-cause and COPD-related
services. Results from the sensitivity analysis with the propensity score-matched
sample of 194 patients were similar.
CONCLUSIONS: Compared with the IPR cohort, the FSC 500/50 cohort was 45% less
likely to have a COPD-related exacerbation event and had similar medical costs.
FSC 500/50 was a more effective initial maintenance therapy than IPR for this
Medicare population, and, despite the $260 increase in COPD-related pharmacy
costs, there was no significant difference in COPD-related medical costs.

DOI: 10.1016/j.amjopharm.2008.08.005 
PMID: 18775388  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. Lung. 2008 Nov-Dec;186(6):381-6. doi: 10.1007/s00408-008-9103-9. Epub 2008 Aug
29.

Lung function response to 12-week treatment with combined inhalation of
long-acting beta2 agonist and glucocorticoid according to ADRB2 polymorphism in
patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Kim WJ(1), Oh YM, Sung J, Kim TH, Huh JW, Jung H, Lee JH, Kim EK, Lee JH, Lee SM,
Lee S, Lim SY, Shin TR, Yoon HI, Kwon SY, Lee SD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, College of Medicine, Kangwon National
University, Chuncheon, South Korea.

Recent reports suggest that beta(2)-adrenergic receptor (ADRB2) genotypes are
associated with therapeutic responses to beta(2) agonists in asthmatics. However,
few studies have investigated therapeutic responses to beta(2) agonists in
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) patients. This study investigated
immediate bronchodilator response and lung function responses following a 12-week
treatment with a long-acting beta(2) agonist combined with a steroid inhaler in
patients with COPD with various ADRB2 genotypes. One hundred four patients with
chronic obstruction were genotyped for codon 16 and 27 polymorphisms of the ADRB2
gene. The immediate bronchodilator response to beta(2)-agonist treatment was
evaluated after inhalation of 400 microg salbutamol. In addition, long-term
response was evaluated using observed change in spirometric values before and
after the treatment with salmeterol (50 microg) combined with fluticasone
propionate (500 microg) inhalation twice daily for 12 weeks. In terms of codon 16
variants, the immediate bronchodilator response to salbutamol was 6.4 +/- 0.8% (%
predicted value) in Arg/Arg patients, 4.9 +/- 0.7% in Arg/Gly patients, and 5.8
+/- 1.2% in Gly/Gly patients (p = 0.418). The FEV(1) changes following the
12-week treatment were 7.0 +/- 1.2% in Arg/Arg patients, 3.0 +/- 1.5% in Arg/Gly 
patients, and 7.2 +/- 1.2% in Gly/Gly patients (p = 0.229). Similarly, there was 
no difference between codon 27 variants in terms of immediate bronchodilator
response or FEV1 changes after 12 weeks of treatment. We were unable to
demonstrate an association between ADRB2 genotype and the effect on lung function
of 12-week treatment with combined long-acting beta(2) agonist and glucocorticoid
inhalation or on the immediate bronchodilator response to a short-acting beta(2) 
agonist in patients with COPD.

DOI: 10.1007/s00408-008-9103-9 
PMID: 18758858  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2008 Sep 1;178(5):543-4; author reply 544.

The INSPIRE study: influence of prior use and discontinuation of inhaled
corticosteroids.

Lanes SF, Jara M.

Comment on
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2008 Jan 1;177(1):19-26.

DOI: 10.1164/ajrccm.178.5.543 
PMID: 18713851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. Eur Respir J. 2008 Nov;32(5):1283-8. doi: 10.1183/09031936.00020608. Epub 2008
Aug 6.

Fluticasone propionate reduces bacterial airway epithelial invasion.

Barbier M(1), Agustí A, Albertí S.

Author information: 
(1)University Institute of Health Sciences Research, University of the Balearic
Islands, Palma de Mallorca, Spain.

Fluticasone propionate reduces the frequency and severity of the episodes of
exacerbation of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Streptococcus
pneumoniae and Haemophilus influenzae are frequently isolated in these episodes. 
Both express phosphorylcholine, an epitope that mediates their interaction with
airway epithelial cells via the platelet-activating factor receptor (PAFR). The
present work studies the effects of fluticasone propionate on the expression of
PAFR on human airway epithelial cells, the invasion of these cells by S.
pneumoniae and H. influenzae, and the course of pneumococcal infection in vivo.
The following were used in the experiments: S. pneumoniae and H. influenzae
isolated from patients with COPD, cell cultures of type II pneumocytes and
bronchoepithelial cells, and a mouse model of lung infection. Fluticasone
propionate was found to reduce PAFR expression on the surface of the two cells
types studied. All S. pneumoniae and H. influenzae isolates expressed
phosphorylcholine. Treatment of both cells lines with fluticasone propionate
reduced invasion of both microorganisms and reduced the bacterial load of mice
infected with S. pneumoniae. Fluticasone propionate reduces the invasion of
airway epithelial cells by Streptococcus pneumoniae and Haemophilus influenzae
through its effect on platelet-activating factor receptor. These results may help
explain the beneficial effects of fluticasone propionate on chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease exacerbations.

DOI: 10.1183/09031936.00020608 
PMID: 18684852  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2008 Aug 15;178(4):322-3. doi:
10.1164/rccm.200805-721ED.

Medications to modify lung function decline in chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease: some hopeful signs.

Suissa S.

Comment on
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2008 Aug 15;178(4):332-8.

DOI: 10.1164/rccm.200805-721ED 
PMID: 18676961  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. COPD. 2008 Aug;5(4):221-7. doi: 10.1080/15412550802237408.

A double-blind crossover study comparing the safety and efficacy of three weeks
of Flu/Sal 250/50 bid plus albuterol 180 ug prn q4 hours to Flu/Sal 250/50 bid
plus albuterol/Ipratropium bromide 2 puffs prn q4 hours in patients with chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease.

Balkissoon R(1), Make B.

Author information: 
(1)National Jewish Medical and Research Center, Denver, Colorado 80206, USA.
balkissoonr@njc.org

Erratum in
    COPD. 2009 Apr;6(2):145. Dosage error in article text.

The Federal Drug Administration (FDA) approved the use of Fluticasone 250
microg/Salmeterol 50 microg 1 puff bid for maintenance therapy in patients with
COPD associated with chronic bronchitis. Short-acting beta agonists (SABA) have
been the recommended rescue medication; however, previous studies have shown that
combination short-acting Albuterol (alb) /Ipratropium bromide (IB) has superior
bronchodilator properties to albuterol alone in patients with COPD. The safety
and efficacy of Albuterol compared to Albuterol/Ipratropium bromide as rescue
medications for COPD patients on maintenance combination therapy of ICS/LABA has 
not been evaluated. Double-blind randomized crossover trial with COPD subjects
receiving Fluticasone/ Salmeterol 500 microg/50 microg (Flu/Sal) 1 puff twice
daily and 2 puffs of Albuterol Sulfate (90 microg micrograms per inhalation) or 2
puffs of Albuterol (90 microg/puff and Ipratropium Bromide 18 microg/puff. Either
Albuterol Sulfate (90 micrograms/puff) or Alb (90 micrograms/puff)/IB used prn
for 3 weeks before crossing over to the other rescue formulation. This is a
non-inferiority study where safety and efficacy outcomes were serially assessed, 
including adverse events, Baseline (BDI)/Transition Dyspnea Index (TDI), St.
George Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ), SF36, diary cards, 24-hour cardiac
monitoring, potassium and glucose levels and other adverse events. Twenty
subjects completed the study. The mean age was 62.5 (+/- 14.5); 12 were males.
The mean baseline FEV(1) (range) was 1.12 L (0.56-1.67) or 40.6 (21-65)%
predicted. There were no statistically significant differences between either
rescue inhaler formulation with regard to measures neither of lung function or
dyspnea nor in terms of safety parameters of cardiac monitoring, glucose and
potassium levels and other adverse events. SABA and combination SABA/Ipratropium 
bromide are equally safe and efficacious as rescue inhalers for patients on
combination Fluticasone 500 microg/Salmeterol 50 microg.

DOI: 10.1080/15412550802237408 
PMID: 18671147  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. Thorax. 2008 Nov;63(11):962-7. doi: 10.1136/thx.2007.089557. Epub 2008 Jul 11.

Cost effectiveness of therapy with combinations of long acting bronchodilators
and inhaled steroids for treatment of COPD.

Najafzadeh M(1), Marra CA, Sadatsafavi M, Aaron SD, Sullivan SD, Vandemheen KL,
Jones PW, Fitzgerald JM.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of British Columbia, Vancouver,
British Columbia, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Little is known about the combination of different medications in
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). This study determined the cost
effectiveness of adding salmeterol (S) or fluticasone/salmeterol (FS) to
tiotropium (T) for COPD.
METHODS: This concurrent, prospective, economic analysis was based on costs and
health outcomes from a 52 week randomised study comparing: (1) T 18 microg once
daily + placebo twice daily (TP group); (2) T 18 microg once daily + S 25
microg/puff, 2 puffs twice daily (TS group); and (3) T 18 microg once daily + FS 
250/25 microg/puff, 2 puffs twice daily (TFS group). The incremental cost
effectiveness ratios (ICERs) were defined as incremental cost per exacerbation
avoided, and per additional quality adjusted life year (QALY) between treatments.
A combination of imputation and bootstrapping was used to quantify uncertainty,
and extensive sensitivity analyses were performed.
RESULTS: The average patient in the TP group generated CAN$2678 in direct medical
costs compared with $2801 (TS group) and $4042 (TFS group). The TS strategy was
dominated by TP and TFS. Compared with TP, the TFS strategy resulted in ICERs of 
$6510 per exacerbation avoided, and $243,180 per QALY gained. In those with
severe COPD, TS resulted in equal exacerbation rates and slightly lower costs
compared with TP.
CONCLUSIONS: TFS had significantly better quality of life and fewer
hospitalisations than patients treated with TP but these improvements in health
outcomes were associated with increased costs. Neither TFS nor TS are
economically attractive alternatives compared with monotherapy with T.

DOI: 10.1136/thx.2007.089557 
PMID: 18621985  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. Respir Med. 2008 Oct;102(10):1468-72. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2008.04.001. Epub 2008 
Jul 14.

Long-term mortality follow-up of the ISOLDE participants: causes of death during 
13 years after trial completion.

Bale G(1), Martínez-Camblor P, Burge PS, Soriano JB.

Author information: 
(1)Respiratory Medicine, Birmingham Heartlands Hospital, Birmingham, UK.
geraldine.bale@heartofengland.nhs.uk

The Inhaled Steroids in Obstructive Lung Disease (ISOLDE) study was a trial that 
randomised 752 patients with moderate to severe COPD to fluticasone propionate
1000 mcg/day or placebo for three years. We aimed to examine the causes of death 
of the ISOLDE participants after the original three up to 13 years
post-randomisation. Death certificates were obtained either from the NHS
Strategic Tracing Service or from the Office of National statistics. Deaths were 
classified according to the trial protocol. In the subsample of 375 participants 
from the seven ISOLDE original centers where complete extended follow-up was
conducted, the factors associated with observed higher mortality (p<0.05) were
male gender, older age and more severe COPD. Causes of death were; 107 (52%)
respiratory, 38 (18%) cardiac, 29 (14%) lung cancer, 16 (8%) other cancer and 16 
(8%) other causes. The percentage of respiratory-related deaths increased during 
the follow-up period; from 46% within the three-year trial, to 48% after 3-6
years, 57% after 6-9 years, and 60% after 9-13 years of follow-up (p for
trend<0.05). We conclude that participants' survival is poor (only 44% in the 13 
years after the ISOLDE trial), and that respiratory-related illnesses were the
most frequent causes of death in patients with moderate to severe COPD.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2008.04.001 
PMID: 18620853  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. Respir Med. 2008 Aug;102(8):1099-108. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2008.04.019. Epub 2008 
Jul 9.

Effect of fluticasone propionate/salmeterol (250/50 microg) or salmeterol (50
microg) on COPD exacerbations.

Ferguson GT(1), Anzueto A, Fei R, Emmett A, Knobil K, Kalberg C.

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary Research Institute of Southeast Michigan, 28807 Eight Mile Road,
Suite 103, Livonia, MI 48152, USA. garytferguson@msn.com

OBJECTIVES: COPD exacerbations are associated with significant morbidity and
mortality. This randomized, double-blind, parallel-group, multicenter study
evaluated the effect of fluticasone propionate/salmeterol 250/50 and salmeterol
50 microg twice daily on moderate to severe exacerbations.
METHODS: Patients received standardized treatment with fluticasone
propionate/salmeterol 250/50 during a 1-month run-in, followed by randomization
to fluticasone propionate/salmeterol 250/50 or salmeterol for 12 months. Moderate
to severe exacerbations were defined as worsening symptoms of COPD requiring
treatment with oral corticosteroids, antibiotics, or hospitalization.
RESULTS: In 782 patients with COPD (mean FEV(1)=0.94+/-0.36 L, 33% predicted
normal), treatment with fluticasone propionate/salmeterol 250/50 significantly
reduced (1) the annual rate of moderate to severe exacerbations by 30.5% compared
with salmeterol (1.06 and 1.53 per subject per year, respectively, p<0.001), (2) 
the risk of time to first exacerbation by 25% (hazard ratio=0.750, p=0.003) and
(3) the annual rate of exacerbations requiring oral corticosteroids by 40%
(p<0.001). Clinical improvements observed during run-in treatment with
fluticasone propionate/salmeterol 250/50 were better maintained over 12 months
with fluticasone propionate/salmeterol 250/50 than salmeterol. Adverse events
were reported for a similar percentage of subjects across groups. A higher
reporting of pneumonia was observed with fluticasone propionate/salmeterol 250/50
than salmeterol (7% vs. 4%).
CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that fluticasone propionate/salmeterol 250/50 is more
effective than salmeterol at reducing the rate of moderate to severe
exacerbations over 1 year. The benefits of this reduction relative to the risk of
a higher incidence of reported pneumonia should be considered. This study
supports the use of fluticasone propionate/salmeterol 250/50 for the reduction of
COPD exacerbations in patients with COPD.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2008.04.019 
PMID: 18614347  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Am J Manag Care. 2008 Jul;14(7):438-48.

Economic assessment of initial maintenance therapy for chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease.

Akazawa M(1), Hayflinger DC, Stanford RH, Blanchette CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health Policy and Administration, University of North Carolina
at Chapel Hill, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To compare the effects of initial maintenance therapy with fluticasone
250 microgram plus salmeterol 50 microgram in a single inhaler versus other
inhaled medications on exacerbation risks and treatment costs among chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) patients.
STUDY DESIGN: A retrospective observational analysis was conducted by using
medical/pharmacy claims from a large managed care database between January 2000
and February 2004. Patients age 40 years or older with a primary diagnosis of
COPD (International Classification of Diseases, Ninth Revision, Clinical
Modification code 490, 491, 492, or 496), at least 18 months of continuous
eligibility, and an index prescription for fluticasone/salmeterol combination,
salmeterol alone, inhaled corticosteroid alone, ipratropium/albuterol
combination, or ipratropium alone (reference) were identified.
METHODS: Time to first COPD-related hospitalization or emergency department (ED) 
visit was estimated by using Cox proportional hazard models. All-cause and
COPD-related treatment costs were estimated by using generalized linear models
with a gamma distribution and log link. Multivariable regressions were used,
controlling for age, sex, comorbidities, COPD subtype, preindex medications, and 
hospitalizations and ED visits.
RESULTS: Initial maintenance therapy with fluticasone/salmeterol combination was 
associated with a 31% to 56% lower risk of hospitalization or ED visit compared
with ipratropium alone, adjusting for baseline characteristics and preindex
resource utilization. Fluticasone/salmeterol combination therapy was related to
lower medical costs, higher pharmacy costs, and almost similar total costs in all
populations studied.
CONCLUSION: Fluticasone/salmeterol combination therapy was considered to be
cost-effective compared with ipratropium alone because it achieved better
clinical outcomes with similar or lower treatment costs.


PMID: 18611095  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. J Mol Med (Berl). 2008 Sep;86(9):1045-56. doi: 10.1007/s00109-008-0360-0. Epub
2008 Jul 4.

Salmeterol with fluticasone enhances the suppression of IL-8 release and
increases the translocation of glucocorticoid receptor by human neutrophils
stimulated with cigarette smoke.

Mortaz E(1), Rad MV, Johnson M, Raats D, Nijkamp FP, Folkerts G.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pharmacology and Pathophysiology, Utrecht Institute for
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Faculty of Sciences, Utrecht University, P.O. Box 80082,
3508 TB Utrecht, The Netherlands. e.mortaz@uu.nl

The combination of inhaled corticosteroids and long-acting beta2-adrenoceptor
agonists is increasingly used in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
Recently, we have demonstrated that combination of salmeterol and fluticasone
propionate (FP) additionally suppress the production of IL-8 by human monocyte.
In this study, the molecular mechanism behind the effectiveness of this
combination therapy is investigated in human neutrophils. Human neutrophils were 
preincubated with salmeterol or FP or the combination. The amount of
interleukin-8 (IL-8), elastase and matrix metalloproteinases (MMP)-2 and -9
releases, and reactive oxygen species (ROS) generation and expression of MAP
kinase phosphatase (MKP-1) and glucocorticoid receptor (GR) were determined.
Cigarette smoke medium (CSM) induces an increased expression of CXC receptors and
the production of ROS that may explain the strong production of IL-8 by
neutrophils. The expression of CXC receptors, the production of ROS, and the
release of elastase and MMP-2 and -9 were not influenced by salmeterol, FP, or
the combination. Interestingly, the combination therapy had an additive
suppressive effect on the CSM-induced production of IL-8. The latter could be
explained by an increased mRNA expression of MKP-1, the GR and an increased
translocation of the GR to the nucleus. This leads eventually to suppression of
both the NF-kappaB and MAPK pathways and, hence, to less IL-8 production by the
neutrophil. These data are in support for the use of a combination therapy in
COPD patients.

DOI: 10.1007/s00109-008-0360-0 
PMCID: PMC2517086
PMID: 18600309  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. J Prosthodont. 2008 Aug;17(6):462-7. doi: 10.1111/j.1532-849X.2008.00334.x. Epub 
2008 Jun 28.

Mineral status of COPD patients under long-term inhaled corticosteroid therapy.

Buyukkaplan US(1), Akkaya A, Yildiz M, Bircan A, Aksoy Dogan A, Ozturk O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Prosthetic Dentistry, Faculty of Dentistry, Suleyman Demirel
University, Isparta, Turkey.

PURPOSE: The aim of this study was to determine the mineral status of mandibles, 
femurs, and spines in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) patients under
long-term inhaled corticosteroid therapy.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Pulmonary function tests were conducted on patients (n =
30) with COPD under inhaled corticosteroid therapy for at least 1 year. The
results were compared to sex- and age-matched controls (n = 30). Analyses of
blood gases were also carried out relative to COPD, and bone mineral densities
(BMD) of the mandible, lumbar spine, femoral neck, trochanter, and Ward's
triangle were also measured by dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry (DEXA). Levels of
serum osteocalcin, alkaline phosphatase, calcium, phosphorus, and cortisol were
also assessed.
RESULTS: In accordance with the Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung
Disease criteria, 8 of the COPD patients had moderate, 11 patients had severe,
and 11 patients had very severe forms of the disease. All BMD measurements were
lower in the COPD patients than in the control group. The serum osteocalcin
levels in COPD patients were significantly lower than those in the control group 
(p < 0.0001). Serum calcium (p < 0.004) and cortisol levels (p < 0.026) in the
COPD patients were also significantly lower than those in the control subjects.
Although serum alkaline phosphatase level was higher and the phosphorus level was
lower in the treatment group than in the control group, the differences were not 
statistically significant.
CONCLUSION: Regular evaluation of the biochemical markers of bone metabolism and 
BMD would be helpful for detecting any detrimental changes of bone in COPD
patients under long-term inhaled corticosteroid therapy. In this study,
mandibular BMD was observed to be lower in COPD patients under long-term inhaled 
corticosteroid therapy than in healthy subjects. Thus, dental implant treatment
may require preventive measures in COPD patients under long-term inhaled
corticosteroid therapy.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1532-849X.2008.00334.x 
PMID: 18573148  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. COPD. 2008 Jun;5(3):187-200. doi: 10.1080/15412550802093041.

Mortality in COPD: inevitable or preventable? Insights from the cardiovascular
arena.

Halpin D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Royal Devon & Exeter Hospital Barrack Road Exeter EX2 5DW, UK.
David.Halpin@rdeft.nhs.uk

Mortality due to chronic obstructive pulmonary disease continues to rise, whereas
mortality rates related to cardiovascular disease appear to be slowing, or even
declining. This is due at least in part to more widespread use of preventative
therapies that have been shown to reduce cardiovascular mortality, raising the
question of whether appropriate use of therapies for chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease which potentially reduce mortality could have a similar impact.
This article discusses approaches used successfully in managing heart disease and
considers whether these can be applied to chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
and whether a better understanding of the strongest predictors of mortality in
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease is needed. It reviews the role of inhaled
corticosteroids, both alone and in combination with long-acting beta(2)-agonists,
in individuals with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, including the role of 
combination therapy with inhaled corticosteroids/long-acting beta(2)-agonists
(budesonide/formoterol or salmeterol/fluticasone propionate) in decreasing
exacerbations and improving health status, potentially providing survival
benefits in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. This review also discusses the
potential impact of treatments indicated for cardiovascular disease on chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease and possible links between the two diseases.

DOI: 10.1080/15412550802093041 
PMCID: PMC2442901
PMID: 18568843  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. COPD. 2008 Jun;5(3):163-9. doi: 10.1080/15412550802092969.

Beta2-agonists potentiate corticosteroid-induced neutrophil survival.

Perttunen H(1), Moilanen E, Zhang X, Barnes PJ, Kankaanranta H.

Author information: 
(1)The Immunopharmacology Research Group, Medical School, University of Tampere
and Research Unit, Tampere University Hospital, Tampere, Finland.
heli.perttunen@uta.fi

Comment in
    COPD. 2008 Jun;5(3):143-5.

Neutrophils are considered to play a role in the pathogenesis of chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and severe asthma. Recent guidelines
recommend the use of a combination of inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) and
long-acting beta2-agonists (LABA) in the treatment of COPD with exacerbations and
asthma not adequately controlled by ICS alone. LABA have been proposed to have a 
synergistic effect with corticosteroids by activating glucocorticoid receptors.
The aim of this study was to investigate the effect of beta2-agonists on the
inhibitory effects of corticosteroids on human neutrophil apoptosis. In addition,
the effects of beta2-agonists on spontaneous neutrophil apoptosis and on GM-CSF- 
and LTB4-afforded survival were also evaluated. Neutrophils were isolated from
human blood under sterile conditions and cultured for 16 hours. Apoptosis was
assessed by relative DNA fragmentation assay. Morphological analysis was used as 
a control method to confirm the occurrence of apoptosis. Salbutamol, formoterol
and salmeterol prolonged the lifespan of budesonide- and fluticasone
propionate-treated neutrophils by inhibiting apoptosis. Formoterol and salbutamol
partly reversed the inhibitory effect of GM-CSF on neutrophil apoptosis. In
contrast, the effects of beta(2)-agonists on spontaneous neutrophil apoptosis and
on LTB(4)-afforded survival were negligible. beta2-agonists potentiate
corticosteroid-induced neutrophil survival at clinically relevant drug
concentrations. Whether these effects translate into clinically relevant changes 
in lung neutrophil numbers remains to be demonstrated.

DOI: 10.1080/15412550802092969 
PMID: 18568840  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2008 Jul 1;178(1):106; author reply 106-7.

Management of patients with COPD: a comparison of the INSPIRE and TORCH studies.

Middleton PG.

Comment on
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2008 Jan 1;177(1):19-26.

DOI: 10.1164/ajrccm.178.1.106a 
PMID: 18565964  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2008 Jul 1;178(1):105; author reply 106-7.

Is salmeterol/fluticasone propionate equivalent to tiotropium bromide in the
treatment of COPD?

Gillissen A.

Comment on
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2008 Jan 1;177(1):19-26.

DOI: 10.1164/ajrccm.178.1.105 
PMID: 18565963  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2008 Jul 1;178(1):105-6; author reply 106-7.

Treatment step down should be avoided at entry in COPD therapeutic trials.

Marchand E.

Comment on
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2008 Jan 1;177(1):19-26.

DOI: 10.1164/ajrccm.178.1.105a 
PMID: 18565962  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. Pulm Pharmacol Ther. 2008 Aug;21(4):682-8. doi: 10.1016/j.pupt.2008.04.003. Epub 
2008 May 1.

Lung function and symptom improvement with fluticasone propionate/salmeterol and 
ipratropium bromide/albuterol in COPD: response by beta-agonist reversibility.

Bleecker ER(1), Emmett A, Crater G, Knobil K, Kalberg C.

Author information: 
(1)Wake Forest University Health Sciences, Winston-Salem, NC, USA.

This retrospective analysis of data from two multi-center, randomized,
double-blind, parallel group studies compared the efficacy of fluticasone
propionate/salmeterol (FSC) 250/50 mcg twice daily with ipratropium
bromide/albuterol (IB/ALB) 36/206 mcg four times daily in albuterol-reversible
(n=320 [44%]) and non-reversible (n=399 [56%]) patients with COPD. In reversible 
and non-reversible patients, both treatments significantly increased
FEV(1)AUC(0-6h) from baseline and the magnitude of improvement was larger in
reversible patients. FSC increased FEV(1)AUC(0-6h) by 1.46+/-0.08 and 1.98+/-0.13
l-h at Day 1 and Week 8, respectively, in reversible patients, compared with
0.71+/-0.06 and 0.94+/-0.10 l-h in non-reversible patients (p<0.001). With
IB/ALB, increases were 1.46+/-0.08 and 1.19+/-0.11 l-h at Day 1 in reversible
patients and Week 8, respectively, and 0.89+/-0.06 and 0.74+/-0.09 l-h (p < or = 
0.041) in non-reversible patients. After 8 weeks, in both the reversible and
non-reversible populations, the FEV(1) AUC(0-6h) significantly increased with FSC
treatment (p < or = 0.002) and significantly decreased with IB/ALB (p < or =
0.010). In both reversibility groups, improvement in Transition Dyspnea Index
(TDI) scores, overall daytime diary symptom scores and nocturnal symptom measures
were significantly greater with FSC treatment compared with IB/ALB (p < or =
0.044). Reversibility status was not predictive of the magnitude of reduction in 
symptom scores. We conclude that both reversible and non-reversible patients
receive greater clinical benefit with FSC compared with IB/ALB and acute
bronchodilator reversibility is not useful for differentiating patients based on 
symptomatic responses to FSC compared with IB/ALB.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pupt.2008.04.003 
PMID: 18541448  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2008 Aug 15;178(4):332-8. doi:
10.1164/rccm.200712-1869OC. Epub 2008 May 29.

Effect of pharmacotherapy on rate of decline of lung function in chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease: results from the TORCH study.

Celli BR(1), Thomas NE, Anderson JA, Ferguson GT, Jenkins CR, Jones PW, Vestbo J,
Knobil K, Yates JC, Calverley PM.

Author information: 
(1)Tufts University School of Medicine, Pulmonary and Critical Care Division,
Caritas-St Elizabeth's Medical Center, Boston, MA 02135-2997, USA.
bcelli@copdnet.org

Comment in
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2008 Aug 15;178(4):322-3.
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2009 Mar 1;179(5):426; author reply 426-7.
    Hosp Pract (1995). 2010 Apr;38(2):92-3.
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2009 Jan 15;179(2):171; author reply 171-2.

RATIONALE: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is characterized by an
accelerated decline in lung function. No drug has been shown conclusively to
reduce this decline.
OBJECTIVES: In a post hoc analysis of the Toward a Revolution in COPD Health
(TORCH) study, we investigated the effects of combined salmeterol 50 microg plus 
fluticasone propionate 500 microg, either component alone or placebo, on the rate
of post-bronchodilator FEV(1) decline in patients with moderate or severe COPD.
METHODS: A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study was conducted from 
September 2000 to November 2005 in 42 countries. Of 6,112 patients from the
efficacy population, 5,343 were included in this analysis.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: Spirometry was measured every 24 weeks for 3
years. There were 26,539 on-treatment observations. The adjusted rate of decline 
in FEV(1) was 55 ml/year for placebo, 42 ml/year for salmeterol, 42 ml/year for
fluticasone propionate, and 39 ml/year for salmeterol plus fluticasone
propionate. Salmeterol plus fluticasone propionate reduced the rate of FEV(1)
decline by 16 ml/year compared with placebo (95% confidence interval [CI], 7-25; 
P < 0.001). The difference was smaller for fluticasone propionate and salmeterol 
compared with placebo (13 ml/year; 95% CI, 5-22; P = 0.003). Rates of decline
were similar among the active treatment arms. FEV(1) declined faster in current
smokers and patients with a lower body mass index, and varied between world
regions. Patients who exacerbated more frequently had a faster FEV(1) decline.
CONCLUSIONS: Pharmacotherapy with salmeterol plus fluticasone propionate, or the 
components, reduces the rate of decline of FEV(1) in patients with
moderate-to-severe COPD, thus slowing disease progression. Clinical trial (GSK
Study Code SCO30003) registered with www.clinicaltrials.gov (NCT00268216).

DOI: 10.1164/rccm.200712-1869OC 
PMID: 18511702  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. Curr Infect Dis Rep. 2008 May;10(3):223-8.

Pneumonia in elderly patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Ernst P(1), Suissa S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical Epidemiology, Royal Victoria Hospital, Ross 4.29, 687
Pine Avenue West, Montreal, Quebec, Canada, H3A 1A1. pierre.ernst@mcgill.ca

This article reviews the association between pneumonia and chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD) and the possible role of inhaled corticosteroids in
increasing the risk of pneumonia in patients with COPD. An increased risk of
pneumonia with inhaled corticosteroids was first reported from the Toward
Revolution in COPD Health (TORCH) study, a large randomized clinical trial
comparing fluticasone, salmeterol, or a combination of the two medications with
placebo. We carried out a large observational study using a health care
administrative database of information on hospitalizations and medication use
among patients older than 65 years of age in Quebec. We found an excess of
pneumonia requiring hospitalization and an excess of pneumonia hospitalizations
leading to death in relation to current use of inhaled corticosteroids,
especially at high doses. Here, we explore the potential mechanisms of this
association and try to weigh the benefits and risks of therapy with inhaled
corticosteroids in patients with COPD.


PMID: 18510885  [PubMed]


414. Gac Sanit. 2008 Mar-Apr;22(2):105-14.

[Impact of new therapeutic products for the treatment of chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease and asthma in primary care in Madrid between 1996 and 2005].

[Article in Spanish]

Rodríguez Escolar C(1), Fidalgo García ML.

Author information: 
(1)Area 5, Servicio Madrileño de Salud, Madrid, Spain.
crodrigueze.gapm05@salud.madrid.org

OBJECTIVES: To analyze the trend of use of new drugs for the treatment of chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease in primary care of Madrid (Spain) between 1996 and 
2005, and to evaluate its impact in terms of supply, use and costs.
METHODS: Drug utilization study of new products of the R03 group (Anatomical
Therapeutic Chemical Classificaction System: drugs for obstructive airway
diseases) prescribed by doctors of primary care of Madrid, during 1996 and 2005. 
Information on drug utilization and cost was obtained from the prescription
database. Date was expressed in daily doses defined by 1,000 inhabitants and day.
RESULTS: The supply experiences few quantitative variations although of great
qualitative interest, when disappearing drugs without therapeutic utility and
commercializing 6 therapeutic new products. In 2005, the use of the 6 new
products generates 28.03% of the total of the consumption and 79% of the costs.
The new drugs of greater impact are salmeterol/fluticasone and tiotropio.
CONCLUSIONS: The supply of medicines qualitatively improves when disappearing
drugs without therapeutic utility. The consumption of therapeutic new products
has a great impact on the total consumption of the R03 group and, mainly, in the 
costs by its elevated price, in spite of contributing only limited therapeutic
advantages. The new drugs have been gotten up at great speed to the prescription.


PMID: 18420007  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. Chest. 2008 Aug;134(2):255-62. doi: 10.1378/chest.07-2138. Epub 2008 Apr 10.

Comparison of a combination of tiotropium plus formoterol to salmeterol plus
fluticasone in moderate COPD.

Rabe KF(1), Timmer W, Sagkriotis A, Viel K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonology C3-P, Leiden University Medical Center,
Albinus-dreef 2 Postbus, NL-2300 Leiden, the Netherlands. k.f.rabe@lumc.nl

BACKGROUND: A 6-week, multicenter, randomized, double-blind, parallel-group study
was conducted in patients with COPD to compare lung function improvements of
tiotropium, 18 microg qd, plus formoterol, 12 microg bid, to salmeterol, 50
microg bid, plus fluticasone, 500 microg bid.
METHODS: Following a screening visit, subjects entered a run-in period in which
they received regular ipratropium. At randomization, patients were assigned to
either tiotropium plus formoterol or salmeterol plus fluticasone. After 6 weeks
of treatment, a 12-h lung function profile was obtained. The coprimary end points
were FEV(1) area under the curve for the time period 0 to 12 h (AUC(0-12)) and
peak FEV(1).
RESULTS: A total of 729 patients were screened, and 605 patients were randomized 
and treated. A total of 592 patients (baseline FEV(1), 1.32 +/- 0.43 L/min
[+/-SD]) were included in the analysis. After 6 weeks, the 12-h lung function
profiles in the group receiving tiotropium plus formoterol were superior to those
in the group receiving salmeterol plus fluticasone (mean difference in FEV(1)
AUC(0-12), 78 mL [p = 0.0006]; mean difference in FVC AUC(0-12), 173 mL, p <
0.0001). Also, peak responses were in favor of tiotropium plus formoterol
(difference in peak FEV(1), 103 mL [p < 0.0001]; difference in peak FVC, 214 mL
[p < 0.0001]), as were FEV(1) and FVC at each individual time point after dose (p
< 0.05). Predose FVC was significantly higher with the bronchodilator
combination, while predose FEV(1) and rescue medication use did not differ
significantly between groups. Both treatments were well tolerated.
CONCLUSIONS: Tiotropium plus formoterol was superior in lung function over the
day compared to salmeterol plus fluticasone in patients with moderate COPD.
Long-term studies in patients with severe COPD are warranted to assess the
relative efficacy of different treatment combinations.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: Clinicaltrials.gov Identifier: NCT00239421.

DOI: 10.1378/chest.07-2138 
PMID: 18403672  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. Respir Med. 2008 Jun;102(6):815-8. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2008.01.020. Epub 2008 Mar
17.

Tiotropium and salmeterol/fluticasone combination do not cause oxygen
desaturation in COPD.

Andò F(1), Ruggeri P, Girbino G, Cazzola M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine and Pharmacology, University 
of Messina, Messina, Italy.

It has been documented that tiotropium is less likely to induce oxygen
desaturation in stable COPD patients compared to long-acting beta2-agonists
(LABAs) and combined administration of a LABA and an inhaled corticosteroid (ICS)
reduces the potential for acute effects of LABA on blood-gas tensions. In this
study, we have compared the acute effects of tiotropium 18 microg and
salmeterol/fluticasone combination (SFC) 50/250 microg on arterial blood gases in
20 patients with stable COPD. Each subject was studied on 2 days, separated from 
one another by at least 4 days. Blood specimens were taken just before the
inhalation and at 15, 30, 60, 180 and 360 min after inhalation of each treatment,
and spirometry was performed at the same time points. As expected, both
treatments significantly improved FEV1 (greatest changes were 0.20 L, 95% CI:
0.13-0.27 at 360 min after tiotropium; and 0.13 L, 95% CI: 0.06-0.19 at 180 min
after SFC). The greatest mean changes from baseline in PaO2 were -1.7 (95% CI:
-4.0 to 0.6)mmHg, p=0.134, after tiotropium; -0.8 (95% CI: -2.2 to 0.6)mmHg,
after SFC. Both changes were observed after 15 min. Both drugs caused a small
decrease in PaCO2 (greater changes: -1.9 (95% CI -3.2 to -0.6)mmHg, p=0.005 at 60
min after tiotropium; and -2.4 (95% CI: -3.5 to -1.3) mmHg, p=0.0002 at 180 min
after SFC). These results indicate that both tiotropium and SFC are able to
induce a significant long-last bronchodilation without affecting arterial blood
gases. Moreover, they confirm that the impact of tiotropium on PaO2 is small and 
without clinical significance and the addition of a LABA to an ICS can reduce the
potentially dangerous acute effect of the LABA on blood gases.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2008.01.020 
PMID: 18343646  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. Acta Biomed. 2007 Dec;78(3):233-45.

Inhalatory therapy training: a priority challenge for the physician.

Melani AS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Respiratory Physiopathology and Rehabilitation, Cardiothoracic Department,
Polyclinic Le Scotte, Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria Senese, Siena, Italy.
a.melani@ao-siena.toscana.it

Patients with asthma and COPD commonly use inhaled drugs. The 3 types of
currently available devices for inhaled therapy (Metered-dose inhaler, dry powder
inhaler, and nebulizer) are clinically equivalent. However, since many different 
inhalers are available for inhaled therapy, the choice of the delivery device is 
important for optimizing the results of aerosol therapy. Traditional
press-and-breathe Metered Dose Inhalers (pMDIs) have recently improved their
ecological appeal, can be used in every clinical and environmental situation,
their dosing is convenient and highly reproducible, but their efficient delivery 
remains highly technique dependent. Poor inhalation technique can be minimised by
the use of add-on valved holding chambers, which are seldom used in the clinical 
practice possibly because they are cumbersome. Breath Actuated devices (BAIs),
such as Dry Powder Inhalers (DPIs), which are environmental-friendly, safe,
effective, reliable, portable and self-contained, overcome problems of handbreath
co-ordination associated with pMDIs usage, but their use is also undermined by
common errors of inhalation technique in real life. Nebulizers are cumbersome and
time-comsuming for use and maintenance, but their use needs less cooperation than
inhalers. Although nebulizer practice is not always evidence-based, some
patients, mainly elderly prefer nebulizers for regular long-term usage. Despite
the introduction of newer devices, clear advantages of a particular delivery
system over other inhalers in terms of compliance, preference, and
cost-effectiveness are not currently available. The objective of an ideal and
easy-to use inhaler is far from reality. Patient education is the critical factor
in the use and misuse of delivery devices and effectiveness of aerosol therapy.
The choice of the device has to be tailored according to the patient's needs,
situation, and preference. Whatever the chosen inhaler, education from health
caregivers has a key-role for improving inhaler technique and compliance.
Differences among delivery devices represent another challenge to patient use and
caregiver instruction.


PMID: 18330086  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2008 Jun 1;177(11):1207-14. doi:
10.1164/rccm.200709-1356OC. Epub 2008 Feb 28.

The effects of fluticasone with or without salmeterol on systemic biomarkers of
inflammation in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Sin DD(1), Man SF, Marciniuk DD, Ford G, FitzGerald M, Wong E, York E, Mainra RR,
Ramesh W, Melenka LS, Wilde E, Cowie RL, Williams D, Gan WQ, Rousseau R; ABC
(Advair, Biomarkers in COPD) Investigators.

Collaborators: Baron J, Lopez G, Mainra A, Hui L, Sigurdson M, Duce K, Edwards J,
Depner A, Barchard J, Cheung H, Rossitter T, Thawer A, Conley D, Wolters G, Gray 
C, Watson T, Waddell J, Hagan G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Respiratory Division, University of British Columbia, 
Vancouver, Canada.

Comment in
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2008 Jun 1;177(11):1177-8.
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2009 Jan 15;179(2):170; author reply 170-1.
    Expert Opin Pharmacother. 2008 Dec;9(18):3271-3.

RATIONALE: Small studies have suggested that inhaled corticosteroids can suppress
systemic inflammation in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
OBJECTIVES: To determine the effect of inhaled corticosteroids with or without
long-acting beta(2)-adrenergic agonist on systemic biomarkers of inflammation.
METHODS: We conducted a double-blind randomized placebo-controlled trial across
11 centers (n = 289 patients with FEV(1) of 47.8 +/- 16.2% of predicted) to
compare the effects of inhaled fluticasone alone or in combination with
salmeterol against placebo on circulating biomarkers of systemic inflammation
over 4 weeks. The primary endpoint was C-reactive protein (CRP) level. Secondary 
molecules of interest were IL-6 and surfactant protein D (SP-D).
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: Neither fluticasone nor the combination of
fluticasone/salmeterol had a significant effect on CRP or IL-6 levels. There was,
however, a significant reduction in SP-D levels with fluticasone and
fluticasone/salmeterol compared with placebo (P = 0.002). Health status also
improved significantly in both the fluticasone and fluticasone/salmeterol groups 
compared with placebo, driven mostly by improvements in the symptom scores.
Changes in the circulating SP-D levels were related to changes in health status
scores. FEV(1) improved significantly only in the fluticasone/salmeterol group
compared with placebo.
CONCLUSIONS: ICS in conjunction with long-acting beta(2)-adrenergic agonist do
not reduce CRP or IL-6 levels in serum of patients with COPD over 4 weeks. They
do, however, significantly reduce serum SP-D levels. These data suggest that
these drugs reduce lung-specific but not generalized biomarkers of systemic
inflammation in COPD.

DOI: 10.1164/rccm.200709-1356OC 
PMID: 18310480  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. Pulm Pharmacol Ther. 2008;21(3):540-50. doi: 10.1016/j.pupt.2007.12.004. Epub
2008 Jan 6.

The impact of inhaled corticosteroid and long-acting beta-agonist combination
therapy on outcomes in COPD.

Hanania NA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Section of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Asthma Clinical Research
Center, Baylor College of Medicine, 1504 Taub Loop, Houston, TX 77030, USA.
hanania@bcm.tmc.edu <hanania@bcm.tmc.edu>

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is an under-recognized cause of
morbidity and mortality worldwide that imposes an ever increasing burden on the
patient and society alike. The disease encompasses multiple structural and
functional components of which inflammation is at the core of the disease,
affecting the lungs and other organs. Consequently, current treatment strategies 
are aimed at treating both the symptoms and the pulmonary inflammation underlying
the complex pathophysiology of COPD. Smoking cessation is the only intervention
currently shown to slow disease progression in COPD and decrease all-cause
mortality, aside from lung transplant, lung-volume reduction surgery and oxygen
therapy in selective patients. However, this intervention is difficult to achieve
and sustain because of the addictive and chronic relapsing nature of cigarette
smoking. Pharmacotherapy with bronchodilating agents, including the beta
2-agonists, anticholinergics and methylxanthines, is central to the symptomatic
management of all stages of COPD. While inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) are
employed to reduce inflammation in more severe patients, their role as stand
alone medication in COPD is not well defined. However, increasing evidence
suggests that long-acting beta 2-agonists (LABAs) and ICS have complementary and 
synergistic effects, when delivered as combination therapy from a single inhaler.
In this respect, two preparations comprising combinations of
salmeterol+fluticasone propionate (SFC) and formoterol+budesonide (FBC) are
currently available and employed for treatment of more severe disease. Several
large-scale studies in patients with moderate-to-severe COPD have demonstrated
that treatment with SFC and FBC leads to significantly greater improvements in
lung function, exacerbations, health status and breathlessness, compared with
placebo or monotherapy with the component drugs. In the recently published
landmark study, Towards a Revolution in COPD Health (TORCH), regular treatment
with SFC narrowly missed demonstrating a statistically significant benefit on the
reduction in all-cause mortality over 3 years (17.5% reduction in risk, P=0.052),
further emphasizing the clinical usefulness of LABA+ICS therapy in COPD. In view 
of this increasing evidence for the additional effectiveness of LABA+ICS
combinations compared with the individual components, and the potential benefits 
of LABA+ICS on lung function, disease progression and potentially on all-cause
mortality, initiation of LABA+ICS combination treatment early in the COPD disease
process may be warranted.SEARCH STRATEGY: The studies discussed in this review
were identified from systematic searches of Medline and the Cochrane Database, up
to October 2007, for articles in English or with English abstracts describing
randomized, double-blind, parallel-group/crossover trials of at least 24 weeks'
duration. All searches were performed using the terms: chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease, COPD, chronic obstructive airway disease, or COAD AND either
salmeterol, formoterol, long-acting beta 2-adrenoceptor agonist, fluticasone
propionate, budesonide, inhaled corticosteroids, or inhaled glucocorticosteroids.
Additional relevant references were identified from the reference lists of
selected papers. Only studies that compared a combined LABA+ICS therapy with its 
monotherapy components were selected for inclusion in this manuscript.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pupt.2007.12.004 
PMID: 18280761  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2007;2(4):599-607.

Physicochemical compatibility of fluticasone-17- propionate nebulizer suspension 
with ipratropium and albuterol nebulizer solutions.

Kamin W(1), Schwabe A, Krämer I.

Author information: 
(1)Childrens Hospital, Johannes Gutenberg-Universität, Mainz, Germany.
kamin@kinder.klinik.uni-mainz.de

The objective of this in-vitro study was to determine whether mixtures of three
nebulizable drugs are physicochemically compatible. Drug combinations were
prepared by mixing the content of one respule Flutide forte "ready to use"
(fluticasone propionate) with 2 milliliter Atrovent LS (ipratropium bromide) and 
0.5 milliliter Sultanol inhalation solution (albuterol sulfate). Test suspensions
were stored at room temperature and exposed to normal laboratory light for 5
hours. Concentrations of fluticasone- 17-propionate, ipratropium bromide, and
albuterol sulfate were determined by using stability-indicating high-performance 
liquid chromatography assays with ultraviolet detection. Physical compatibility
was determined by measuring pH and osmolality. Main outcome measures were the
drug concentrations of the active components of the mixtures. All drug
concentrations retained nearly 100% of the initial drug concentrations after
mixing and storage in glass containers at room temperature. Osmolality and pH of 
the mixtures exhibited no significant changes and no visible changes of the
mixtures were detectable over the inspection period. Mixtures of fluticasone
propionate, ipratropium bromide, and albuterol sulfate inhalation drug products
were shown to be physicochemically compatible over a period of 5 hrs. In order to
avoid contamination and microbiological instability, mixing should only take
place immediately before administration. Further investigations are needed to
determine whether or not drug delivery is affected by mixing the nebulizer
suspensions and to ensure that simultaneous nebulization is recommendable.


PMCID: PMC2699966
PMID: 18268934  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2007;2(4):551-7.

Fixed combination therapies in COPD--effect on quality of life.

Groneberg-Kloft B(1), Fischer A, Welte T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Hannover Medical School, Hannover,
Germany.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) represents a major global cause of
disability and death. COPD is currently the fourth most common global cause of
death and also exerts an enormous toll on patients quality of life. The present
database analysis aimed to identify clinical trials using fixed combination
therapies that have assessed the impact on the patients quality of life. Within
the different studies, questionnaires including the George's Respiratory
Questionnaire (SGRQ) the Chronic Respiratory Disease Questionnaire (CRDQ) and the
Clinical COPD Questionnaire (CCQ) were used and differing results in quality of
life were obtained when combination therapies such as fluticasone/salmeterol or
fluticasone/salmeterol were compared with monotherapies. While there were some
differences in favor of combination therapies reported when the combination
therapy was compared to inhaled steroid monotherapy there were no consistent
differences when combination therapies were compared to bronchodilator
monotherapies. Future trials will lead to a proof-of-principle stage concerning
the use of combination therapies.


PMCID: PMC2699960
PMID: 18268928  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. Thorax. 2008 Jul;63(7):592-8. doi: 10.1136/thx.2007.087213. Epub 2008 Feb 1.

Superiority of "triple" therapy with salmeterol/fluticasone propionate and
tiotropium bromide versus individual components in moderate to severe COPD.

Singh D(1), Brooks J, Hagan G, Cahn A, O'Connor BJ.

Author information: 
(1)Medicines Evaluation Unit, University Hospital of South Manchester, University
of Manchester, Manchester M33 3TR, UK. dsingh@meu.org.uk

BACKGROUND: The combination of salmeterol and fluticasone propionate (SFC) and
tiotropium bromide (TIO) are commonly used treatments in chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD) but there are few data on their effectiveness when used 
together. We compared the effects of SFC 50/500 microg twice daily in addition to
TIO 18 microg once daily with the individual treatments alone.
METHODS: 41 patients with COPD participated in a randomised, double blind, double
dummy, three way crossover study with 2 week washout periods between treatments. 
Lung function assessment included plethysmography and spirometry. The primary end
point was post-dose specific airways conductance (sGaw) area under the curve
(AUC(0-4 h)) on day 14.
RESULTS: AUC(0-4 h) sGaw was significantly higher on day 14 after SFC+TIO
compared with TIO (22%) or SFC alone (27%) (both p<0.001). SFC+TIO significantly 
improved trough forced expiratory volume in 1 s compared with TIO alone (212 ml, 
p<0.001) and SFC alone (110 ml, p = 0.017) on day 14. Inspiratory capacity
measurements also showed significant benefits for triple therapy over individual 
components on day 14. Subjects receiving SFC+TIO had clinically relevant
improvements in Transition Dyspnoea Index (TDI) total score of 2.2 compared with 
TIO alone (p<0.001) (but not SFC alone, 0.7; NS) and used significantly less
rescue medication (1.0 occasion less daily than TIO (p<0.001) and 0.6 less than
SFC (p = 0.01)).
CONCLUSION: SFC+TIO triple therapy led to greater improvements in bronchodilation
compared with TIO and SFC alone. The advantages of triple therapy are observed
across a range of physiologically important parameters, including airway
conductance and lung volumes. Triple therapy also led to patient related benefits
by improving TDI and use of rescue medication.

DOI: 10.1136/thx.2007.087213 
PMID: 18245142  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. Eur Respir J. 2008 May;31(5):927-33. doi: 10.1183/09031936.00098307. Epub 2008
Jan 23.

Methodological issues in therapeutic trials of COPD.

Suissa S(1), Ernst P, Vandemheen KL, Aaron SD.

Author information: 
(1)McGill Pharmacoepidemiology Research Unit, McGill University Health Centre,
Montreal, Québec, Canada. samy.suissa@clinepi.mcgill.ca

Comment in
    Eur Respir J. 2009 Feb;33(2):443-4.
    Eur Respir J. 2008 Aug;32(2):523-4.

The recent Towards a Revolution in COPD Health (TORCH) randomised trial
replicated the findings of previous trials in chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD) on the apparent effectiveness of inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) in 
reducing exacerbation rates, but not so for mortality. In the present article,
the authors review methodological issues in the TORCH and previous trials, such
as patients already receiving ICS before randomisation and the absence of
follow-up after study drug discontinuation, using data from two trials. First,
among previous ICS users in the Canadian Optimal Therapy of COPD Trial, the
hazard ratio of the first exacerbation with ICS relative to bronchodilators was
0.71 (95% confidence interval (CI) 0.53-0.96), while among those not using ICS
prior to randomisation, it was 1.11 (95% CI 0.69-1.79). Secondly, the rate ratio 
of exacerbations with ICS was 0.78 (95% CI 0.61-0.99) prior to drug
discontinuation during follow-up and 1.23 (95% CI 0.78-1.95) thereafter. Finally,
a 2x2 factorial analysis of the TORCH data found a rate ratio of mortality for
the salmeterol component to be 0.83 (95% CI 0.74-0.95), while for the fluticasone
component it was 1.00 (95% CI 0.89-1.13). In conclusion, after proper
consideration of the various methodological shortcomings in the design and
analysis of randomised trials, the effectiveness of inhaled corticosteroids in
treating chronic obstructive pulmonary disease remains doubtful, while the
benefit observed with combination therapy may be due exclusively to the
beneficial effects of the long-acting bronchodilator alone.

DOI: 10.1183/09031936.00098307 
PMID: 18216056  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. J Med Econ. 2008;11(3):555-70. doi: 10.3111/13696990802320908.

Seretide: a pharmacoeconomic analysis.

Fritscher L(1), Chapman KR.

Author information: 
(1)Asthma & Airway Centre, University Health Network, Toronto Western Hospital,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

BACKGROUND: The costs of asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD),
the two most common chronic respiratory illnesses, are substantial and rising.
The fixed-dose combination of fluticasone and salmeterol has been a safe and
effective therapy for these diseases.
OBJECTIVES: To review the pharmacoeconomic impact of the fixed-dose combination
of inhaled fluticasone and salmeterol in asthma and COPD.
METHODS: A systematic review of the literature was carried out to identify
pharmacoeconomic studies with fixed-dose salmeterol and fluticasone (Seretide,
Advair, Viani). In addition, abstracts from recent respiratory meetings were
sought, and any unpublished data were requested from the manufacturer.
RESULTS: For asthma, when compared to treatment with inhaled corticosteroid
monotherapy and antileukotrienes, alone or combined, salmeterol/fluticasone
inhalation produced a higher proportion of successfully treated weeks,
improvement in lung function and quality of life, and fewer treatment failures.
The costs per quality-adjusted life year (QALY) for fluticasone/salmeterol have
been favourable not only in patients with moderate to severe disease but also in 
patients with mild disease or patients not previously treated with a maintenance 
therapy. The excess cost per QALY varied from US$2,670 to US$26,445. For COPD, a 
clear reduction in exacerbation rates and improvement in quality of life has been
demonstrated with salmeterol/fluticasone along with a likely improvement in
survival rates. The incremental cost per QALY ratio for fluticasone/salmeterol
against placebo ranged from US$9,512 to US$64,038.
CONCLUSIONS: The data currently available suggest that the cost effectiveness of 
combination therapy with fluticasone and salmeterol is favourable for asthma and 
COPD in a variety of clinical settings.

DOI: 10.3111/13696990802320908 
PMID: 19450105  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. J Med Econ. 2008;11(2):345-62. doi: 10.3111/13696990802210984.

Symbicort: a pharmacoeconomic review.

Halpin DM(1).

Author information: 
(1)David.Halpin@rdeft.nhs.uk

OBJECTIVE: This systematic review examines the published evidence on the
pharmacoecomonics of Symbicort. Symbicort is a combination inhaler used in asthma
and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) that contains budesonide and
formoterol. In asthma, Symbicort can be used as fixed or adjustable dose
maintenance therapy as well as for both maintenance and reliever therapy (SMART).
METHOD: A literature search of PubMed was carried out to find all publications on
the pharmacoeconomics of Symbicort. Additional studies were searched for in the
reference lists of the papers retrieved and by searching tables of contents of
relevant journals. A total of 13 studies on Symbicort in asthma and 2 studies on 
Symbicort in COPD were found.
RESULTS: Total costs were lower with Symbicort than with separate inhalers
containing budesonide and formoterol. Adjustable dosing maintained control of
asthma using less medication and was associated with lower treatment costs than
fixed dosing with Symbicort or the combination of fluticasone/salmeterol. SMART
improves asthma control, reduces exacerbations and reduces direct and indirect
costs compared to fixed maintenance therapy with either Symbicort or
fluticasone/salmeterol. In COPD, Symbicort offers clinical advantages over
therapy with the monocomponents and these are achieved at little or no extra
cost.

DOI: 10.3111/13696990802210984 
PMID: 19450091  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. Respir Res. 2007 Dec 27;8:93.

Withdrawal of inhaled corticosteroids in people with COPD in primary care: a
randomised controlled trial.

Choudhury AB(1), Dawson CM, Kilvington HE, Eldridge S, James WY, Wedzicha JA,
Feder GS, Griffiths CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Health Sciences, Queen Mary's School of Medicine and Dentistry,
Barts and The London, 2 Newark Street, London, E1 2AT, UK.
aklak.choudhury@btinternet.com

BACKGROUND: Guidelines recommend inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) for patients with 
severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Most COPD patients are
managed in primary care and receive ICS long-term and irrespective of severity.
The effect of withdrawing ICS from COPD patients in primary care is unknown.
METHODS: In a pragmatic randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial in 31 
practices, 260 COPD patients stopped their usual ICS (median duration of use 8
years) and were allocated to 500 mcg fluticasone propionate twice daily (n =
128), or placebo (n = 132). Follow-up assessments took place at three monthly
intervals for a year at the patients' practice. Our primary outcome was COPD
exacerbation frequency. Secondary outcomes were time to first COPD exacerbation, 
reported symptoms, peak expiratory flow rate and reliever inhaler use, and lung
function and health related quality of life.
RESULTS: In patients randomised to placebo, COPD exacerbation risk over one year 
was RR: 1.11 (CI: 0.91-1.36). Patients taking placebo were more likely to return 
to their usual ICS following exacerbation, placebo: 61/128 (48%); fluticasone:
34/132 (26%), OR: 2.35 (CI: 1.38-4.05). Exacerbation risk whilst taking
randomised treatment was significantly raised in the placebo group 1.48 (CI:
1.17-1.86). Patients taking placebo exacerbated earlier (median time to first
exacerbation: placebo (days): 44 (CI: 29-59); fluticasone: 63 (CI: 53-74), log
rank 3.81, P = 0.05) and reported increased wheeze. In a post-hoc analysis,
patients with mild COPD taking placebo had increased exacerbation risk RR: 1.94
(CI: 1.20-3.14).
CONCLUSION: Withdrawal of long-term ICS in COPD patients in primary care
increases risk of exacerbation shortens time to exacerbation and causes symptom
deterioration. Patients with mild COPD may be at increased risk of exacerbation
after withdrawal.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov NCT00440687.

DOI: 10.1186/1465-9921-8-93 
PMCID: PMC2245934
PMID: 18162137  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. Prescrire Int. 2007 Dec;16(92):257-8.

COPD: don't use fluticasone + salmeterol. Patients treated with inhaled
fluticasone for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) are more prone to
pneumonia.

[No authors listed]


PMID: 18092426  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. Ann Intern Med. 2007 Dec 18;147(12):882; author reply 882-3.

Tiotropium in combination with placebo, salmeterol, or fluticasone salmeterol for
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: possible confounding effect of treatment
withdrawal?

Brown SM.

Comment on
    Ann Intern Med. 2007 Apr 17;146(8):545-55.


PMID: 18087061  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. Med Monatsschr Pharm. 2007 Nov;30(11):428-9.

[Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. No increased survival with combination
therapy].

[Article in German]

Ecker-Schlipf B.


PMID: 18062342  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2006;1(3):235-42.

Salmeterol/fluticasone combination in the treatment of COPD.

Chung KF(1).

Author information: 
(1)National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College and Royal Brompton
Hospital, London, UK. f.chung@imperial.ac.uk

Clinical trials of a combination therapy of an inhaled corticosteroid,
fluticasone propionate (FP), with a long-acting beta2-agonist, salmeterol (Sal), 
have demonstrated a greater improvement in lung function and in quality of life
measures after the combination compared with either component of alone. In a
subanalysis of the data of the TRISTAN study, Sal/FP reduced exacerbation rates
in COPD patients with a baseline FEV1 < 50% of predicted. A combination therapy
of budesonide and formoterol improved quality of life and FEV1, and reduced
exacerbations better than either component alone. In studies of FP or of Sal/FP
in COPD, there was a reduction in all-cause mortality by 25% relative to placebo.
Sal/FP has anti-inflammatory effects in COPD airways. FP inhibits markers of
systemic inflammation, and it is not known whether Sal/FP has an advantage over
FP alone. While long-acting beta2-agonists such as Sal can be recommended for
treatment of moderate COPD, addition of inhaled steroid therapy such as FP should
be considered in more severe disease.


PMCID: PMC2707153
PMID: 18046860  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2006;1(3):209-18.

The severity of airways obstruction as a determinant of treatment response in
COPD.

Calverley P(1), Pauwels RA, Jones PW, Anderson JA, Vestbos J.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Research Centre, University Hospital Aintree, Liverpool, UK.
pmacal@liverpool.ac.uk

Guidelines recommend that patients with COPD are stratified arbitrarily by
baseline severity (FEV1) to decide when to initiate combination treatment with a 
long-acting beta2-agonist and an inhaled corticosteroid. Assessment of baseline
FEV1 as a continuous variable may provide a more reliable prediction of treatment
effects. Patients from a 1-year, parallel-group, randomized controlled trial
comparing 50 microg salmeterol (Sal), 500 microg fluticasone propionate (FP), the
combination (Sal/FP) and placebo, (bid), were categorized post hoc into FEV1 <
50% and FEV1 > or = 50% predicted subgroups (n = 949/513 respectively). Treatment
effects on clinical outcomes-- lung function, exacerbations, health status, diary
card symptoms, and adverse events--were investigated. Treatment responses based
on a pre-specified analysis explored treatment differences by severity as a
continuous variable. Lung function improved with active treatment irrespective of
FEV1; Sal/FP had greatest effect. This improvement appeared additive in milder
disease; synergistic in severe disease. Active therapy significantly reduced
exacerbation rate in patients with FEV1 < 50% predicted, not in milder disease.
Health status and breathlessness improved with Sal/FP irrespective of baseline
FEV1; adverse events were similar across subgroups. The spirometric response to
Sal/FP varied with baseline FEV1, and clinical benefits were not restricted to
patients with severe disease. These data have implications for COPD management
decisions, suggesting that arbitrary stratifications of baseline severity are not
necessarily indicative of treatment efficacy and that the benefits of assessing
baseline severity as a continuous variable should be assessed in future trials.


PMCID: PMC2707163
PMID: 18046858  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2007;2(2):169-76.

Cost-effectiveness and healthcare budget impact in Italy of inhaled
corticosteroids and bronchodilators for severe and very severe COPD patients.

Dal NR(1), Eandi M, Pradelli L, Iannazzo S.

Author information: 
(1)Lung Dept., Orlandi General Hospital, Bussolengo,Verona, Italy.
rdalnegro@ulss22.ven.it

Current practice guidelines for the treatment of COPD recommend the use of
combined inhaled corticosteroids and long-acting bronchodilators in severe and
very severe patients (GOLD stages III and IV). The aim of this study was to
evaluate, through a simulation model, the economic consequences of this
recommendation in Italy. We developed a cost-effectiveness analysis (CEA) on five
alternative therapeutic strategies (salmeterol/fluticasone, SF; formoterol!
budesonide, FB; salmeterol alone, S; fluticasone alone, F; control, C). Published
data on the Italian COPD population and efficacy data from international
reference trials were fitted in a disease progression model based on a Markov
chain representing severity stages and death. The yearly total direct costs of
treating COPD patients in Italy was estimated at approximately Euro 7 billion,
with a mean cost per patient per year of around Euro 2450. Mean survival of the
cohort is 11.5 years. The C and F strategies were dominated (ie, are associated
with worse outcomes and higher costs) by all alternatives. SF and FB were the
most effective strategies, with a slight clinical superiority of SF, but they
were also marginally more expensive than S. Incremental cost-effectiveness of SF 
vs S was Euro 679.5 per avoided exacerbation and Euro 3.3 per symptom-free day.
Compared with current practice, the recommended use of combined inhaled
corticosteroids and long-acting bronchodilators for severe and very severe COPD
patients has the potential for improving clinical outcomes without increasing
healthcare costs.


PMCID: PMC2695615
PMID: 18044689  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2007;2(2):107-16.

Comparison and optimal use of fixed combinations in the management of COPD.

Mensing M(1), Aalbers R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonolgy, Martini Hospital, Groningen, The Netherlands.
m.mensing@mzh.nl

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a leading cause of morbidity and 
mortality worldwide. Indications for the use of long-acting beta-agonists (LABAs)
and inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) in patients with COPD are described in the
various international guidelines, but no special recommendations are made
concerning the use of combination inhalers containing a LABA as well as an ICS.
To determine the place of combination inhalers in the treatment of COPD we
reviewed recent literature concerning this subject. On molecular level ICS/LABA
combination therapy has anti-inflammatory properties which cannot be attributed
to ICS alone. All clinical studies indicate that the two available combinations
(salmeterol/fluticasone and formoterol/budesonide) significantly reduce
exacerbation rate of moderate/severe exacerbations when compared with placebo.
Some studies also showed a significant reduction in exacerbation rate compared
with LABA monotherapy, but not compared with ICS monotherapy. From the patient's 
perspective, ICS/LABA combination inhalers are the first choice when both need to
be prescribed, possibly improving patient compliance for ICS. Currently little
evidence is available to predict if flexible treatment with LABA/ICS combination 
inhalers will improve disease control in COPD. Further studies are needed to
elucidate the clinical benefit of combination inhalers versus the individual
components in different inhalers, and to investigate the clinical benefit of
flexible dosing of combination inhalers in patients with COPD.


PMCID: PMC2695609
PMID: 18044682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2006;1(4):345-54.

The role of combination therapy with corticosteroids and long-acting
beta2-agonists in the prevention of exacerbations in COPD.

Cazzola M(1), Hanania NA.

Author information: 
(1)Antonio Cardarelli Hospital, Department of Respiratory Medicine, Unit of
Pneumology and Allergology, Naples, Italy. mcazzola@qubisoft.it

Acute exacerbations of COPD can complicate the course of the disease in patients 
with severe airway obstruction. Reduction of exacerbations is an important
clinical outcome in evaluating new therapies in COPD. Combination therapies with 
long-acting beta-agonists and inhaled corticosteroids have now been approved for 
use. Three 1-year randomized clinical trials, which studied the effect of
combining a long-acting beta2-agonist with an inhaled corticosteroid in COPD,
documented that exacerbation frequency was lower with therapy than placebo.
Combination therapy had a similar effect to its monocomponents in the trial
evaluating salmeterol/fluticasone combination. However, when patients with more
severe COPD were studied using a combination of budesonide and formoterol, a
clear improvement was seen in the overall exacerbation rates compared with the
use of a long-acting beta2-agonist alone.


PMCID: PMC2707808
PMID: 18044091  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. Respir Res. 2007 Nov 22;8:84.

Epithelial expression of TLR4 is modulated in COPD and by steroids, salmeterol
and cigarette smoke.

MacRedmond RE(1), Greene CM, Dorscheid DR, McElvaney NG, O'Neill SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland, Dublin, Ireland.
rmacredmond@mrl.ubc.ca

The toll-like receptors (TLRs) are a key component of host defense in the
respiratory epithelium. Cigarette smoking is associated with increased
susceptibility to infection, while COPD is characterised by bacterial
colonisation and infective exacerbations. We found reduced TLR4 gene expression
in the nasal epithelium of smokers compared with non-smoking controls, while TLR2
expression was unchanged. Severe COPD was associated with reduced TLR4 expression
compared to less severe disease, with good correlation between nasal and tracheal
expression. We went on to examine the effect of potential modulators of TLR4
expression in respiratory epithelium pertinent to airways disease. Using an
airway epithelial cell line, we found a dose-dependent downregulation in TLR4
mRNA and protein expression by stimulation with cigarette smoke extracts.
Treatment with the corticosteroids fluticasone and dexamethasone resulted in a
dose-dependent reduction in TLR4 mRNA and protein. The functional significance of
this effect was demonstrated by impaired IL-8 and HBD2 induction in response to
LPS. Stimulation with salmeterol (10-6 M) caused upregulation of TLR4 membrane
protein presentation with no upregulation of mRNA, suggesting a
post-translational effect. The effect of dexamethasone and salmeterol in
combination was additive, with downregulation of TLR4 gene expression, and no
change in membrane receptor expression. Modulation of TLR4 in respiratory
epithelium may have important implications for airway inflammation and infection 
in response to inhaled pathogens.

DOI: 10.1186/1465-9921-8-84 
PMCID: PMC2194695
PMID: 18034897  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. Pneumologia. 2007 Jul-Sep;56(3):143-6.

[Inhaled therapy via nebulization: practical issues].

[Article in Romanian]

Antoniu S(1), Bararu T, Zizilaş G, Mihăescu T.

Author information: 
(1)Universitatea de Medicină şi Farmacie Gr. T. Popa Iaşi.
saantoniu@pneumo.umfiasi.ro

Inhaled therapy represents a mainstay component in treatment of many chronic
respiratory conditions. It offers the advantage of local delivery of the active
substance at lower doses, with consequent reduction of systemic side effects.
Inhaled medication can be delivered with various types of devices including
nebulizers. Nebulization have advantages and disadvantages compared with the
other devices and requires a specific technique and patient education in advance.
In Romania there are several pharmaceutical forms which can be given via
nebulisation, however, this method is not widely used. Better knowledge of
practical issues related with nebulization, which is the aim of this paper, could
contribute to a more effective use of.


PMID: 18019975  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2007 Nov;39(11):1891-5.

A patient with vanishing lung syndrome and remarkable tolerance to high altitude.

Luks AM(1), Goss CH, Schoene RB, Swenson ER.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, University of Washington,
Seattle, WA 98195-6522, USA. aluks@u.washington.edu

Very little information is known about patients with chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease who travel to high altitude for work or pleasure. Even less is 
known about the outcomes at high altitude for patients with severe bullous lung
disease. We present the case of a 54-yr-old man with vanishing lung syndrome, an 
idiopathic form of severe bullous emphysema, who has made repeated trips to
altitudes as high as 3400 m, where he has engaged in physical activity, such as
downhill skiing. We consider the issues of adequacy of oxygenation and the risks 
of barotrauma in patients with obstructive lung disease traveling to high
altitude, and we also consider factors, such as improved air-flow limitation,
maintenance of adequate ventilation-perfusion matching, and underlying physical
fitness, which may affect our patient's ability to tolerate physical activity in 
this environment. The case demonstrates that the presence of severe lung disease 
does not necessarily preclude travel to and moderate activity at high altitude.
Such travel may, in fact, be safe as long as the patient has undergone
appropriate pretravel evaluation, and we provide recommendations regarding such
evaluation in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

DOI: 10.1249/mss.0b013e318145b62d 
PMID: 17986894  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. Drugs. 2007;67(16):2383-405.

Salmeterol/fluticasone propionate: a review of its use in the treatment of
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Keating GM(1), McCormack PL.

Author information: 
(1)Wolters Kluwer Health | Adis, Auckland, New Zealand. demail@adis.co.nz

Salmeterol/fluticasone propionate (Seretide, Advair, Viani) administered using a 
multidose dry powder inhaler (Diskus, Accuhaler) is approved for use in the
treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) in numerous
countries.Salmeterol/fluticasone propionate administered twice daily via dry
powder inhaler is effective and generally well tolerated in patients with COPD.
Although not associated with a statistically significant reduction in mortality
versus placebo in the TORCH study (p = 0.052), salmeterol/fluticasone propionate 
reduced the rate of decline in lung function over the 3 years of the trial and
was associated with lower exacerbation rates than the component monotherapies or 
placebo; other trials revealed clinically significant improvements in health
status and dyspnoea scores with salmeterol/fluticasone propionate. Results of the
INSPIRE trial suggest that salmeterol/fluticasone propionate is associated with a
significantly lower mortality rate than tiotropium bromide monotherapy in
patients with COPD; the two treatments had similar effects in terms of
exacerbation rates and lung function. Thus, salmeterol/fluticasone propionate is 
an important option in the treatment of patients with COPD who are appropriate
candidates for combination therapy with a long-acting bronchodilator and an
inhaled corticosteroid.


PMID: 17983257  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. Ned Tijdschr Geneeskd. 2007 Oct 6;151(40):2195-7.

[Inhaled corticosteroids in patients with COPD: maintain current guidelines].

[Article in Dutch]

Heijdra YF(1).

Author information: 
(1)Universitair Medisch Centrum St Radboud, afd. Longziekten (454), Nijmegen.
y.heijdra@long.umcn.nl

The use of inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) is one of the most controversial issues 
in COPD treatment. There is evidence that ICS with or without long-acting
beta-2-adrenergics (LABA) reduce exacerbation rates and improve the health status
of severe COPD patients. The effects on FEV1 are limited and their effect on
survival is unknown. Recently, a worldwide double-blind placebo-controlled study 
'Towards a revolution in COPD health' (TORCH) was published in which salmeterol
50 microg and fluticasone 500 microg twice daily was compared with placebo,
salmeterol alone or fluticasone alone. Of the 6112 included patients 875 died
within 3 years after the start of treatment. Death rate, defined as the primary
outcome parameter, was not significantly reduced (p = 0.052) while exacerbation
frequency and health status improved in the combination therapy group. The TORCH 
trial therefore does not change current guidelines regarding trial treatment with
ICS in severe COPD patients.


PMID: 17969568  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. Internist (Berl). 2007 Dec;48(12):1450-2.

[Impact of COPD therapy on patient survival: the TORCH Study (TOwards a
Revolution in COPD Health)].

[Article in German]

Nitschmann S(1), Schultze-Werninghaus G.

Author information: 
(1)Stuttgart, Germany.

DOI: 10.1007/s00108-007-1964-0 
PMID: 17965844  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. Chest. 2007 Dec;132(6):1756-63. Epub 2007 Oct 20.

The efficacy and safety of combination salmeterol (50 microg)/fluticasone
propionate (500 microg) inhalation twice daily via accuhaler in Chinese patients 
with COPD.

Zheng JP(1), Yang L, Wu YM, Chen P, Wen ZG, Huang WJ, Shi Y, Wang CZ, Huang SG,
Sun TY, Wang GF, Xiong SD, Zhong NS.

Author information: 
(1)Guangzhou Institute of Respiratory Disease, First Affiliated Hospital of
Guangzhou Medical College, Guangzhou 510120, People's Republic of China.

BACKGROUND: Few studies of the efficacy and safety of therapy with combinations
of salmeterol/fluticasone propionate (SFCs) have been conducted in Chinese
patients with COPD, and the benefits of combination therapy in nonsmoking
patients with COPD are, to our knowledge, not known.
STUDY OBJECTIVES: The aims were to establish the efficacy and tolerability of the
therapy with SFC (salmeterol, 50 microg/fluticasone, 500 microg, twice daily) in 
the management of Chinese COPD patients and to investigate the effectiveness of
SFC in nonsmokers with COPD.
METHODS AND PATIENTS: This was a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled,
parallel-group, multicenter study. Changes in prebronchodilator and
postbronchodilator FEV(1), quality of life determined by the St. George
Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ) scores, relief bronchodilator use, nighttime
awakenings, and frequency of exacerbations of COPD were measured in patients
randomized to receive SFC (n = 297) or placebo (n = 148). Never-smokers, former
smokers, and current smokers accounted for 11.7%, 66.7%, and 21.6%, respectively,
of the study population.
RESULTS: After 24 weeks, the mean changes in prebronchodilator and
postbronchodilator FEV(1) were 180 mL (95% confidence interval [CI],
approximately 91 to 268; p < 0.001) and 65 mL (95% CI, approximately 14 to 115; p
= 0.012), respectively, greater for the SFC group than that for the placebo
group. The differences in response to treatment were significant (all p < 0.0001)
in former or current smokers but not in never-smokers (p > 0.05). The mean
improvement in the total SGRQ score for the SFC group was 5.74 (p < 0.01) greater
than that for the placebo group. SFC significantly reduced the frequency of
nighttime awakenings and the use of relief bronchodilator. The adjusted ratio of 
exacerbations of COPD for the SFC group relative to the placebo group was 0.61
(95% CI, approximately 0.45 to 0.84; p < 0.01). There were no significant
differences between the SFC and placebo groups in safety measures.
CONCLUSIONS: SFC therapy achieved sustained improvement in lung function, quality
of life, and control of symptoms, and was well tolerated in Chinese patients.
Greater improvements in lung function were found only for COPD patients with a
history of smoking.
TRIAL REGISTRATION:
http://ctr.gsk.co.uk/Summary/fluticasone_salmeterol/studylist.asp Identifier: No.
SCO100540.

DOI: 10.1378/chest.06-3009 
PMID: 17951625  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. J Fam Pract. 2007 Oct;56(10 Suppl Value):S1-24.

The value of early diagnosis for effective management of chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease.

Doherty DE(1), Chapman KR, Martinez FJ, Belfer MH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care, and Sleep Medicine, Department of
Medicine, University of Kentucky, Veterans Administration Medical Center,
Lexington, KY, USA.


PMID: 17949606  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2007 Oct 17;(4):CD006829.

Combined corticosteroid and long-acting beta-agonist in one inhaler versus
long-acting beta-agonists for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Nannini LJ(1), Cates CJ, Lasserson TJ, Poole P.

Author information: 
(1)Hospital G. Baigorria, Pulmonary Section, Ruta 11 Y Jm Estrada, G. Baigorria, 
Santa Fe - Rosario, Argentina, 2152. nanninilj@cimero.org.ar

Comment in
    Evid Based Med. 2008 Apr;13(2):56-7.
    ACP J Club. 2008 Mar-Apr;148(2):48-9.

Update in
    Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2012;9:CD006829.

BACKGROUND: The co-administration of inhaled corticosteroids and long-acting
beta-agonists in a combined inhaler is intended to facilitate adherence to
medication regimens, and to improve efficacy in COPD. In this review they are
compared with mono component long-acting beta-agonists.
OBJECTIVES: To assess the efficacy of combined inhaled corticosteroids and
long-acting beta-agonists preparations with mono component long-acting
beta-agonists in adults with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
SEARCH STRATEGY: We searched the Cochrane Airways Group Specialised Register of
trials. The date of the most recent search is April 2007.
SELECTION CRITERIA: Studies were included if they were randomised and
double-blind. Studies could compare a combined inhaled corticosteroids and
long-acting beta-agonist preparation with component long-acting beta-agonist
preparation.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Two reviewers independently assessed trial quality 
and extracted data. The primary outcomes were exacerbations, mortality and
pneumonia, with health-related quality of life (measured by validated scales),
lung function and side-effects as secondary outcomes. Dichotomous data were
analysed as fixed effect odds ratios (OR), and continuous data as mean
differences and 95% confidence intervals (CI). Sensitivity analysis was performed
by combining data with a random effects model.
MAIN RESULTS: Ten studies of good methodological quality met the inclusion
criteria, randomising 7598 participants with severe chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease. Eight studies assessed fluticasone/salmeterol, and two studies
budesonide/formoterol. The exacerbation rates with combined inhalers were reduced
in comparison to long-acting beta-agonists alone (Rate Ratio 0.82, 95% CI 0.78 to
0.88). There was no significant difference in mortality between combined inhalers
and long-acting beta-agonists alone. Pneumonia occurred more commonly with
combined inhalers (OR 1.62; 95% CI 1.35 to 1.94). There was no significant
difference in terms of hospitalisations, although the two studies contributing
data to this outcome may have been drawn from differing populations. Combination 
was more effective than LABA in improving quality of life measured by the St
George Respiratory Questionnaire, and the Chronic Respiratory Questionnaire, and 
predose and post dose FEV1.
AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: Combination therapy was more effective than long-acting
beta-agonists in reducing exacerbation rates, although the evidence for the
effects on hospitalisations was mixed, and requires further exploration. No
significant impact on mortality was found even with additional information from
the TORCH trial. The superiority of combination inhalers should be viewed against
the increased risk of side-effects, particularly pneumonia. Additional studies on
BDF are required and more information would be useful of the relative benefits
and adverse event rates with different doses of inhaled corticosteroids.

DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD006829 
PMID: 17943918  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2007 Oct 17;(4):CD006826.

Combined corticosteroid and long-acting beta-agonist in one inhaler versus
inhaled steroids for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Nannini LJ(1), Cates CJ, Lasserson TJ, Poole P.

Author information: 
(1)Hospital G. Baigorria, Pulmonary Section, Ruta 11 Y Jm Estrada, G. Baigorria, 
Santa Fe - Rosario, Argentina, 2152. nanninilj@cimero.org.ar

Comment in
    Evid Based Med. 2008 Jun;13(3):74.

Update in
    Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2013;8:CD006826.

BACKGROUND: Long-acting beta-agonists and inhaled corticosteroids have both been 
recommended in guidelines for the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease. Their co-administration in a combined inhaler is intended to facilitate 
adherence to medication regimens, and to improve efficacy. Two preparations are
currently available, fluticasone/salmeterol (FPS) and budesonide/formoterol
(BDF).
OBJECTIVES: To assess the efficacy of combined inhaled corticosteroid and
long-acting beta-agonist preparations, compared to inhaled corticosteroids, in
the treatment of adults with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
SEARCH STRATEGY: We searched the Cochrane Airways Group Specialised Register of
trials. The date of the most recent search is April 2007.
SELECTION CRITERIA: Studies were included if they were randomised and
double-blind. Studies compared combined inhaled corticosteroids and long-acting
beta-agonist preparations with the inhaled corticosteroid component.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Two reviewers independently assessed trial quality 
and extracted data. The primary outcome were exacerbations, mortality and
pneumonia. Health-related quality of life (measured by validated scales), lung
function and side-effects were secondary outcomes. Dichotomous data were analysed
as fixed effect odds ratios (OR), and continuous data as mean differences and 95%
confidence intervals (CI).
MAIN RESULTS: Seven studies of good methodological quality met the inclusion
criteria randomising 5708 participants with predominantly poorly reversible,
severe COPD. Exacerbation rates were significantly reduced with combination
therapies (Rate ratio 0.91; 95% confidence interval 0.85 to 0.97, P = 0.0008).
Data from two FPS studies indicated that exacerbations requiring oral steroids
were reduced with combination therapy. Data from one large study suggest that
there is no significant difference in the rate of hospitalisations. Mortality was
also lower with combined treatment (odds ratio 0.77; 95% confidence interval 0.63
to 0.94). Quality of life, lung function and withdrawals due to lack of efficacy 
favoured combination treatment. Adverse event profiles were similar between the
two treatments. No significant differences were found between FPS and BDP in the 
primary outcomes, but the confidence intervals for the BDP results were wide as
smaller numbers of patients have been studied.
AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: Combination ICS and LABA significantly reduces morbidity
and mortality in COPD when compared with mono component steroid. Adverse events
were not significantly different between treatments, although evidence from other
sources indicates that inhaled corticosteroids are associated with increased risk
of pneumonia. Assessment of BDF in larger, long-term trials is required. Dose
response data would provide valuable evidence on whether efficacy and safety
outcomes are affected by different steroid loads.

DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD006826 
PMCID: PMC4069257
PMID: 17943917  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2007 Oct 17;(4):CD003794.

Combined corticosteroid and long-acting beta-agonist in one inhaler versus
placebo for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Nannini L(1), Cates CJ, Lasserson TJ, Poole P.

Author information: 
(1)Hospital G. Baigorria, Pulmonary Section, Ruta 11 Y Jm Estrada, G. Baigorria, 
Santa Fe - Rosario, Argentina, 2152. nanninilj@cimero.org.ar

Update in
    Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2013;11:CD003794.

Update of
    Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2004;(3):CD003794.

BACKGROUND: Long-acting beta-agonists and inhaled corticosteroids have both been 
recommended in guidelines for the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease. Their co-administration in a combined inhaler may facilitate adherence
to medication regimens, and improve efficacy.
OBJECTIVES: To assess the efficacy of combined inhaled corticosteroid and
long-acting beta-agonist preparations, compared to placebo, in the treatment of
adults with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
SEARCH STRATEGY: We searched the Cochrane Airways Group Specialised Register of
trials. The date of the most recent search is April 2007.
SELECTION CRITERIA: Studies were included if they were randomised and
double-blind. Studies could compare any combined inhaled corticosteroids and
long-acting beta-agonist preparation with placebo.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Two authors independently assessed trial quality
and extracted data. One author entered the data.
MAIN RESULTS: Eleven studies met the inclusion criteria (6427 participants
randomised). Two different combination preparations (fluticasone/salmeterol and
budesonide/formoterol) were used. Study quality was good. Fluticasone/salmeterol 
and budesonide/formoterol both reduced the rate of exacerbations. Pooled analysis
of both combination therapies indicated that exacerbations were less frequent
when compared with placebo, Rate Ratio: 0.74 (95% CI 0.7 to 0.8). The clinical
impact of this effect depends on the frequency of exacerbations experienced by
patients. The patients included in these trials had on average 1-2 exacerbations 
per year which means that treatment with combination therapy would lead to a
reduction of one exacerbation every two to four years in these individuals. There
is an overall reduction in mortality, but this outcome is dominated by the
results of TORCH and further studies on budesonide/formoterol are required. The
three year number needed to treat to prevent one extra death is 36 (95% CI 21 to 
258), using a baseline risk of 15.2% from the placebo arm of TORCH. Both
treatments led to statistically significant improvement in health status
measurements, although the clinical importance of the differences observed is
open to interpretation. Symptoms and lung function assessments favoured
combination treatments. There was an increase in the risk of pneumonia with
combined inhalers. The three year number needed to treat for one extra case of
pneumonia is 13 (95% CI 9 to 20), using a baseline risk of 12.3% from the placebo
arm of TORCH. Fewer participants withdrew from studies assessing combined
inhalers due to adverse events and lack of efficacy.
AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: Compared with placebo, combination therapy led to a
significant reduction of a quarter in exacerbation rates. There was a significant
reduction in all-cause mortality with the addition of data from the TORCH trial. 
The increased risk of pneumonia is a concern, and better reporting of this
outcome in future studies would be helpful. In order to draw firmer conclusions
about the effects of combination therapy in a single inhaler more data are
necessary, particularly in relation to the profile of adverse events and benefits
in relation to different doses of inhaled corticosteroids.

DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD003794.pub3 
PMCID: PMC4164185
PMID: 17943798  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. Curr Med Res Opin. 2007 Nov;23(11):2887-95.

The effect of fixed combination of fluticasone and salmeterol on asthma drug
utilization, asthma drug cost, and episodes of asthma exacerbations.

Brixner DI(1), Lenhart G, Young DC, Samuelson WM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacotherapy, College of Pharmacy, University of Utah, Salt
Lake City, UT 84108, USA. Diana.Brixner@pharm.utah.edu

OBJECTIVE: This study evaluated the use and drug costs of inhaled corticosteroids
(ICSs), long-acting beta2-agonists (LABAs), and fluticasone propionate and
salmeterol in a fixed-dose combination (FSC) and their relationship to asthma
exacerbations before and after the market introduction of FSC in April 2001.
METHODS: This is a retrospective analysis of employer-sponsored health insurance 
claims filed between January 1, 1998, and December 31, 2003 to detect impact of
introduction of FSC (approved by the US Food and Drug Administration in August
2000) on utilization and cost of FSC, any ICS (excluding FSC), and any LABA
(excluding FSC) along with utilization of medical services related to asthma
exacerbations. Asthma medications were identified using National Drug Codes and
Redbook, whereas asthma exacerbations were identified using ICD-9-CM primary
diagnosis code 493.x. These medical and pharmacy claims were converted to rates
per 100 asthma office visits.
RESULTS: For all ICSs, the average pharmacy claims per 100 office visits
increased from 383 in the year before FSC was introduced to 407 (120 [29.5%] were
for FSC and 287 [70.5%] were for single-entity ICSs) in 2003. LABA prescribing
increased from 72 in the year before FSC to 147 (120 from FSC, 27 single-entity
LABA) in 2003 (p < 0.001). An additional $13,511 per 100 asthma office visits was
spent on the FSC product (p < 0.001). After the introduction of FSC, there was no
significant difference in asthma admissions (p = 0.17), whereas emergency
department (ED) visits increased by 0.92 visits per 100 office visits (p = 0.03).
The diagnosis and severity of asthma was inferred from the pharmacy claims and
patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease could not be excluded. In
addition, the study was not designed to assess the impact of other asthma
medications on the disease and/or associated costs, and patient adherence to
claimed medication could not be monitored.
CONCLUSIONS: The introduction of FSC was associated with increased LABAs/FSC
patient exposure and expenditure with no change in asthma hospitalizations and an
increase in ED visits.

DOI: 10.1185/030079907X242548    
PMID: 17922979  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2008 Jan 1;177(1):19-26. Epub 2007 Oct 4.

The prevention of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease exacerbations by
salmeterol/fluticasone propionate or tiotropium bromide.

Wedzicha JA(1), Calverley PM, Seemungal TA, Hagan G, Ansari Z, Stockley RA;
INSPIRE Investigators.

Author information: 
(1)Academic Unit of Respiratory Medicine, Royal Free & University College Medical
School, University College London, London, UK. j.a.wedzicha@medsch.ucl.ac.uk

Comment in
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2009 Jan 1;179(1):80; author reply 80-1.
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2008 Nov 15;178(10):1090-1; author reply 1091-2.
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2008 Sep 1;178(5):543-4; author reply 544.
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2008 Jul 1;178(1):105; author reply 106-7.
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2008 Jul 1;178(1):105-6; author reply 106-7.
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2008 Jul 1;178(1):106; author reply 106-7.

RATIONALE: Exacerbations are key drivers of morbidity and mortality in chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
OBJECTIVES: We compared the relative efficacy of the long-acting inhaled
bronchodilator/antiinflammatory combination (salmeterol/fluticasone propionate)
50/500 microg twice daily and the long-acting bronchodilator (tiotropium) 18
microg once daily in preventing exacerbations and related outcomes in severe and 
very severe COPD.
METHODS: A total of 1,323 patients (mean age, 64 yr, post-bronchodilator FEV1,
39% predicted) were randomized in this 2-year, double-blind, double-dummy
parallel study.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: Primary endpoint was health care utilization
exacerbation rate. Other endpoints included health status measured by St.
George's Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ), mortality, adverse events, and study
withdrawal. Probability of withdrawing from the study was 29% greater with
tiotropium than salmeterol/fluticasone propionate (P = 0.005). The modeled annual
exacerbation rate was 1.28 in the salmeterol/fluticasone propionate group and
1.32 in the tiotropium group (rate ratio, 0.967; 95% confidence interval [CI],
0.836-1.119]; P = 0.656). The SGRQ total score was statistically significantly
lower at 2 years on salmeterol/fluticasone propionate versus tiotropium
(difference 2.1 units; 95% CI, 0.1-4.0; P = 0.038). Mortality was significantly
lower in the salmeterol/fluticasone propionate group; 21 (3%) of patients in this
group died compared with 38 (6%) in the tiotropium group (P = 0.032). More
pneumonias were reported in the salmeterol/fluticasone propionate group relative 
to tiotropium (P = 0.008).
CONCLUSIONS: We found no difference in exacerbation rate between
salmeterol/fluticasone propionate and tiotropium. More patients failed to
complete the study while receiving tiotropium. A small statistically significant 
beneficial effect was found on health status, with an unexpected finding of lower
deaths in salmeterol/fluticasone propionate-treated patients. Clinical trial
registered with www.clinicaltrials.gov (NCT 00361959).

DOI: 10.1164/rccm.200707-973OC 
PMID: 17916806  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. Evid Based Med. 2007 Aug;12(4):114.

Salmeterol and fluticasone propionate did not reduce mortality in chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease.

Schünemann H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Italian National Cancer Institute Regina Elena, Rome, Italy.

Comment on
    N Engl J Med. 2007 Feb 22;356(8):775-89.

DOI: 10.1136/ebm.12.4.114 
PMID: 17885162  [PubMed]


449. Respirology. 2007 Sep;12(5):732-9.

Fast onset of effect of budesonide/formoterol versus salmeterol/fluticasone and
salbutamol in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and reversible 
airway obstruction.

Lindberg A(1), Szalai Z, Pullerits T, Radeczky E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Sunderby Central Hospital of Norrbotten,
Luleå, Sweden. anne.lindberg@nll.se

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Data on the onset of action of COPD medications are
lacking. This study compared the onset of bronchodilation following different
inhaled therapies in patients with moderate-to-severe COPD and reversible airway 
obstruction.
METHODS: In this double-blind, double-dummy, crossover study, 90 patients (aged
>or=40 years; FEV(1) 30-70% predicted) were randomized to a single dose (two
inhalations) of budesonide/formoterol 160/4.5 microg, salmeterol/fluticasone
25/250 microg, salbutamol 100 microg or placebo (via pressurized metered-dose
inhalers) on four visits. The primary end-point was change in FEV(1) 5 min after 
drug inhalation; secondary end-points included inspiratory capacity (IC) and
perception of onset of effect.
RESULTS: Budesonide/formoterol significantly improved FEV(1) at 5 min compared
with placebo (P < 0.0001) and salmeterol/fluticasone (P = 0.0001). Significant
differences were first observed at 3 min. Onset of effect was similar with
budesonide/formoterol and salbutamol. Improvements in FEV(1) following active
treatments were superior to placebo after 180 min (all P < 0.0001); both
combinations were better than salbutamol at maintaining FEV(1) improvements (P
<or= 0.0001) at 180 min. Active treatments improved IC at 15 and 185 min compared
with placebo (P < 0.0001). Maximal IC was greater with budesonide/formoterol than
salmeterol/fluticasone (P = 0.0184) at 65 min. Patients reported a positive
response to the perceptions of the onset of effect question shortly after
receiving active treatments (median time to onset 5 min for active treatments vs 
20 min for placebo), with no significant difference between active treatments.
CONCLUSION: Budesonide/formoterol has an onset of bronchodilatory effect in
patients with COPD and reversible airway obstruction that is faster than
salmeterol/fluticasone and similar to salbutamol.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1440-1843.2007.01132.x 
PMID: 17875063  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2007 Sep 15;176(6):527-8.

COPD guidelines: the important thing is not to stop questioning.

Fabbri LM, Boschetto P, Mapp CE; Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung
Disease; Global Initiative for Asthma Management and Prevention.

Comment in
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2008 Jun 1;177(11):1291; author reply 1291-2.
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2008 Aug 15;178(4):431-2.

Comment on
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2007 Sep 15;176(6):532-55.

DOI: 10.1164/rccm.200706-854ED 
PMID: 17823358  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. COPD. 2007 Sep;4(3):177-83.

Investigating new standards for prophylaxis in reduction of exacerbations--the
INSPIRE study methodology.

Seemungal T(1), Stockley R, Calverley P, Hagan G, Wedzicha JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Medical Sciences, The University of the West Indies,
Mt. Hope, Trinidad and Tobago. TSeemungal@aol.com

Bronchodilators, including long-acting beta(2)-adrenoceptor agonists and
anticholinergic bronchodilators, are effective in the treatment of chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease. Evidence suggests that the addition of a
long-acting beta(2)-agonist to an inhaled corticosteroid is associated with a
reduced rate of exacerbations compared with either treatment alone or placebo.
However, it is not known whether a long-acting beta(2)-agonist/inhaled
corticosteroid combination is more effective than an anticholinergic
bronchodilator alone in reducing exacerbations. The Investigating New Standards
for Prophylaxis In Reduction of Exacerbations (INSPIRE) trial will study
salmeterol (a long-acting beta(2)-agonist) in combination with fluticasone
propionate (an inhaled corticosteroid) compared with tiotropium bromide (an
anticholinergic bronchodilator) in patients with moderate-to-severe chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease. The INSPIRE study is a multicentre, randomised,
double-blind, double dummy, parallel group study conducted over 104 weeks. This
is the first study to use two parallel definitions of an exacerbation; an
event-based exacerbation is defined as one that requires use of healthcare
resources, including additional treatment and hospitalization, whereas a
symptom-based exacerbation is defined as one that satisfies the 1987 Anthonisen
criteria. It is also the first study to compare the long-term effects of
salmeterol/fluticasone propionate with tiotropium bromide on the rate of
event-based exacerbations. Endpoints include rate of exacerbations (primary
endpoint), time to first exacerbation, and duration of exacerbations. Health
outcomes will be assessed via the St George's Respiratory Questionnaire. If the
innovative methodology of utilizing 2 definitions of exacerbation proves
successful, it will set the benchmark for future studies in chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease.

DOI: 10.1080/15412550701407862 
PMID: 17729060  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. Drug Saf. 2007;30(8):681-95.

A modified prescription-event monitoring study to assess the introduction of
Seretide Evohaler in England: an example of studying risk monitoring in
pharmacovigilance.

Perrio MJ(1), Wilton LV, Shakir SA.

Author information: 
(1)Drug Safety Research Unit, Southampton, UK. michael.perrio@dsru.org

INTRODUCTION: Monitoring was required for the introduction of
non-chlorofluorocarbon (CFC) propellants in metered dose inhalers (MDIs) to
ensure that there were no unexpected adverse events due to the new products. A
postmarketing surveillance study has been conducted to evaluate the introduction 
of the MDI Seretide Evohaler (hydrofluoroalkane-134a inhaler containing
salmeterol and fluticasone propionate).
OBJECTIVES: To summarise the modified prescription-event monitoring (PEM) study
conducted to evaluate the introduction of Seretide Evohaler and discuss the
relevance of this type of study towards pharmacovigilance risk-management
planning.
METHODS: Modified PEM methodology was used to examine the introduction of
Seretide Evohaler into general practice in England. Patients were identified from
the first National Health Service prescriptions dispensed in England for Seretide
Evohaler. One postal questionnaire was sent to the prescribing doctor, requesting
demographic information, severity of the indication, concomitant medication for
this condition, smoking history, event data 3 months prior to and 3 months after 
the first prescription for Seretide Evohaler and also reason for stopping if it
had been stopped. Pregnancies, deaths and selected events were followed up.
Incidence density ratios were calculated to compare event rates 3 months prior to
and 3 months after the introduction of Seretide Evohaler. A matched cohort
analysis examined oral corticosteroid use and hospital admissions between the
pre- and post-exposure periods.
RESULTS: The cohort comprised 13,464 patients prescribed Seretide Evohaler, with 
a response rate of 62%. There was no significant difference in the length of
courses of oral corticosteroid use when the pre- and post-exposure periods were
compared. A matched cohort analysis showed there was no increase in the use of
oral corticosteroids (relative risk [RR] 0.95; 95% CI 0.90, 0.99) or hospital
admissions in the post-exposure period (RR 0.87; 95% CI 0.73, 1.04). When the
number of patients with events were compared for the periods 3 months before and 
3 months after exposure, fewer events were reported in the post-exposure period. 
There were 64 patients who experienced adverse events within an hour of using
Seretide Evohaler, including one report of paradoxical bronchospasm and one of
myocardial infarction with fatal outcome that were both assessed as possibly
related to treatment.
DISCUSSION: The results of the study suggest that the introduction of Seretide
Evohaler was generally well tolerated. The modified methodology has allowed a
comparison of the event rates before and after the introduction of this CFC-free 
inhaler into general practice.


PMID: 17696581  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. Clin Ther. 2007 Jun;29(6):1203-13.

Comparison of hospitalizations, emergency department visits, and costs in a
historical cohort of Texas Medicaid patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease, by initial medication regimen.

Rascati KL(1), Akazawa M, Johnsrud M, Stanford RH, Blanchette CM.

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmacy and the Center for Pharmacoeconomic Studies, University of
Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas 78712-0127, USA. krascati@mail.utexas.edu

BACKGROUND: Limited information is available on the relative outcomes and
treatment costs of various pharmacotherapies for chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD) in a Medicaid population.
OBJECTIVE: This study compared the effects of initial medication regimens for
COPD on COPD-related and all-cause events (hospitalizations and/or emergency
department [ED] visits) and COPD-related and all-cause costs.
METHODS: The study population was a historical cohort of Texas Medicaid
beneficiaries aged 40 to 64 years with COPD-related medical costs (International 
Classification of Diseases, Ninth Revision, Clinical Modification codes 491.xx,
492.xx, 496.xx), 24 months of continuous Medicaid enrollment (12 months before
and after the index prescription), and at least 1 prescription claim (index) for 
a combination product containing fluticasone propionate + salmeterol, an inhaled 
corticosteroid, salmeterol, or ipratropium between April 1, 2001, and March 31,
2003. The analyses of events employed Cox proportional hazards regression,
controlling for baseline factors and preindex events. The analyses of costs used 
a 2-part model with logistic regression and generalized linear model to adjust
for baseline characteristics and preindex utilization and costs.
RESULTS: The study population included 6793 patients (1211 combination therapy,
968 inhaled corticosteroid, 401 salmeterol, and 4213 ipratropium). Only
combination therapy was associated with a significantly lower risk for any
COPD-related event (hazard ratio [HR] = 0.733; 95% CI, 0.650-0.826) and any
all-cause event (HR = 0.906; 95% CI, 0.844-0.972) compared with ipratropium.
COPD-related prescription costs were higher in all cohorts compared with the
ipratropium cohort, but COPD-related medical costs were lower, offsetting the
increase in prescription costs. For all-cause costs, prescription costs were
higher in the combination-therapy cohort (+$415; P < 0.05) and the salmeterol
cohort (+$247; P < 0.05) compared with the ipratropium cohort, but significant
reductions in all-cause medical costs in the combination-therapy cohort (-$1735; 
P < 0.05) and salmeterol cohort (-$1547; P < 0.05) more than offset the increase 
in prescription costs.
CONCLUSIONS: In this historical population of Texas Medicaid beneficiaries, the
combination-therapy cohort was 27% less likely to have a COPD-related event than 
the ipratropium cohort, 10% less likely to have any all-cause event, had similar 
COPD-related costs, and had reduced all-cause costs. Thus, compared with the
ipratropium cohort, the combination-therapy cohort had an improvement in outcomes
(based on the decreased time to a hospitalization or ED visit), with similar or
decreased direct medical costs. Future research is needed in other patient
groups.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clinthera.2007.06.006 
PMID: 17692734  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. Pulm Pharmacol Ther. 2008;21(2):292-7. Epub 2007 Jul 10.

Fluticasone, but not salmeterol, reduces cigarette smoke-induced production of
interleukin-8 in human airway smooth muscle.

Oltmanns U(1), Walters M, Sukkar M, Xie S, Issa R, Mitchell J, Johnson M, Chung
KF.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Studies, National Heart & Lung Institute, Imperial College,
Dovehouse Street, London SW3 6LY, UK.

Cigarette smoke is the leading risk factor for the development of chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease. We have recently shown that cigarette smoke
extract synergises with tumour necrosis factor alpha (TNFalpha) in the induction 
of interleukin-8 (IL-8) from human airway smooth muscle cells. We have
investigated the effect of fluticasone propionate, a corticosteroid, and
salmeterol, a beta 2-adrenergic receptor agonist, on cigarette smoke
extract-induced IL-8 production by human airway smooth muscle cells. Human airway
smooth muscle cells in primary culture were exposed to cigarette smoke extract
and/or TNFalpha (1 ng ml(-1)) with and without pretreatment with fluticasone
(10(-13)-10(-8)M) and/or salmeterol (10(-11)-10(-6)M). IL-8 was analysed by
ELISA. Fluticasone dose-dependently inhibited IL-8 release induced by cigarette
smoke extract, TNFalpha or combined cigarette smoke extract and TNFalpha.
However, while IL-8 release in the presence of cigarette smoke extract alone was 
completely inhibited by fluticasone, IL-8 production induced by cigarette smoke
extract and TNFalpha was only partially reduced. Salmeterol alone had no effect
on cigarette smoke extract and/or TNFalpha-induced IL-8 production from human
airway smooth muscle cells. Combined fluticasone and salmeterol did not cause
further inhibitory effects compared to fluticasone alone. Fluticasone but not
salmeterol is effective in reducing cigarette smoke extract-induced IL-8
production in human airway smooth muscle cells. The reduced inhibition of
cigarette smoke extract- and TNFalpha-induced IL-8 release by fluticasone may
explain why corticosteroids are less effective in chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease where increased amounts of TNFalpha are present.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pupt.2007.07.001 
PMID: 17692547  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. Expert Rev Respir Med. 2007 Aug;1(1):25-33. doi: 10.1586/17476348.1.1.25.

Salmeterol/fluticasone propionate combination in the treatment of COPD.

Singh SD(1).

Author information: 
(1)University of Manchester, North West Lung Research Centre, South Manchester,
University Hospital Trust, Manchester, M33 3TR, UK. dsingh@meu.org.uk

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is characterized by poorly
reversible airway obstruction and progressive airway inflammation. The
long-acting beta2-agonist salmeterol and the corticosteroid fluticasone
propionate can be administered in a combination inhaler. Four double-blind,
placebo-controlled, randomized clinical trials have demonstrated that
salmeterol/fluticasone propionate improves pulmonary function and health status, 
and also decreases exacerbation rates in COPD patients. The TORCH (Towards a
Revolution in COPD Health) study confirmed that the effects of combined therapy
with salmeterol/fluticasone propionate are greater than the monocomponents. The
TORCH data are also indicative of a beneficial effect of salmeterol/fluticasone
propionate on mortality, although there is much debate about this issue. This
review critically appraises the pharmacology of salmeterol/fluticasone
propionate, the evidence for efficacy in COPD and its potential use in
combination with other drugs.

DOI: 10.1586/17476348.1.1.25 
PMID: 20477262  [PubMed]


456. Eur J Pharmacol. 2007 Sep 24;571(1):55-61. Epub 2007 Jun 5.

Combination of fluticasone propionate and salmeterol potentiates the suppression 
of cigarette smoke-induced IL-8 production by macrophages.

Sarir H(1), Mortaz E, Karimi K, Johnson M, Nijkamp FP, Folkerts G.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pharmacology and Pathophysiology, Utrecht Institute for
Pharmaceutical Sciences, The Netherlands.

Cigarette smoke is the major risk factor for the development of chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Macrophages are suggested to orchestrate
the chronic inflammatory response and tissue destruction associated with COPD by 
secreting interleukin (IL)-8, a major neutrophil chemoattractant. The combination
of inhaled corticosteroids and long-acting beta(2)-adrenoceptor agonists are
increasingly used as maintenance therapy in patients with COPD. The aim of this
study was to determine whether combined fluticasone propionate, a corticosteroid,
and salmeterol, a long-acting beta(2)-adrenoceptor agonist, can suppress IL-8
production by human macrophages. To mimic resident macrophages in the lung, human
monocytes were cultured for 5 days in medium containing Granulocyte Macrophage
Colony Stimulating Factor (GM-CSF) and Macrophage Colony Stimulating Factor
(M-CSF). In human Monocyte-Derived Macrophages, we found that cigarette smoke
medium strongly enhanced IL-8 release in a time- and concentration-dependent
manner. IL-8 release by cigarette smoke was significantly suppressed in a
concentration-dependent manner by fluticasone and salmeterol. Coincubation of the
drugs potentiated the inhibitory effect on cigarette smoke medium-induced IL-8
production and longer preincubation times resulted in more IL-8 inhibition.
Interestingly, preincubation of cells with suboptimal concentration of salmeterol
for 4 h before fluticasone administration for 30 min potentiates the inhibitory
effect of fluticasone on IL-8 release. In conclusion, combination therapy may
provide benefits over monotherapy for the treatment of COPD patients.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2007.05.034 
PMID: 17631879  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. Nat Clin Pract Rheumatol. 2007 Jul;3(7):414-9.

Pulmonary Mycobacterium szulgai infection and treatment in a patient receiving
anti-tumor necrosis factor therapy.

van Ingen J(1), Boeree M, Janssen M, Ullmann E, de Lange W, de Haas P, Dekhuijzen
R, van Soolingen D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonary Diseases, Radboud University, Nijmegen Medical Centre,
and the Rijnstate Hospital in Arnhem, The Netherlands. j.vaningen@ulc.umcn.nl

Comment in
    Nat Clin Pract Rheumatol. 2007 Oct;3(10):E1.

BACKGROUND: A 54-year-old man with a 22-year history of rheumatoid arthritis and 
an 8-year history of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease presented with dyspnea
on exertion, nonproductive cough and fatigue of 1 month's duration. His
medication at presentation consisted of etanercept, azathioprine, naproxen and
inhaled fluticasone and salbutamol.
INVESTIGATIONS: At presentation, the patient underwent physical examination,
chest X-ray and high-resolution CT, blood tests, and bronchoalveolar lavage fluid
analysis including auramine stains and gene sequence analysis of cultured
Mycobacterium szulgai. The patient underwent minithoracotomy after 6 months, and 
bronchoalveolar lavage fluid analysis, culture and chest X-ray after 18 months.
Further chest imaging and culture of sputum samples were performed another year
later.
DIAGNOSIS: Pulmonary M. szulgai infection.
MANAGEMENT: Triple drug therapy with rifampicin, ethambutol hydrochloride and
clarithromycin. Anti-tumor necrosis factor treatment was continued.

DOI: 10.1038/ncprheum0538 
PMID: 17599076  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. J Int Med Res. 2007 May-Jun;35(3):361-73.

Efficacy of beclomethasone dipropionate HFA 200 microg once daily in chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease and bronchial asthma.

Tatsis G(1), Kotsifas K, Filaditaki V, Makrantoni G, Boulia S.

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonology Clinic, Evangelismos General Hospital, Athens, Greece.
pneumclinevah@yahoo.gr

The efficacy and safety of once-daily beclomethasone dipropionate (BDP; 200
microg), in combination with the propellant hydrofluoroalkane-134a (HFA) was
compared with that of budesonide turbuhaler (BUD-TH) 400 microg twice daily and
fluticasone propionate inhaler (FP-IH) 250 microg twice daily in 40 patients with
bronchial asthma or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. All patients had used 
inhaled corticosteroids for at least 1 month. On randomization, 20 patients were 
switched to HFA-BDP and 20 patients remained on their existing BUD-TH or FP-IH
treatment. After 8 weeks, HFA-BDP demonstrated a greater improvement in
spirometric values, respiratory symptoms and beta2-agonist use. No significant
local adverse effects were observed. Blood cortisol levels remained in the normal
range in both groups. We conclude that HFA-BDP (200 microg once-daily) offered
more benefit in terms of clinical and spirometry indices than BUD-TH (400 microg 
twice daily) or FP-IH (250 microg twice daily) in patients with moderate asthma
and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.


PMID: 17593865  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. J Immunol. 2007 Jul 1;179(1):578-89.

Glucocorticoids enhance or spare innate immunity: effects in airway epithelium
are mediated by CCAAT/enhancer binding proteins.

Zhang N(1), Truong-Tran QA, Tancowny B, Harris KE, Schleimer RP.

Author information: 
(1)Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, 240 East Huron Street,
Chicago, IL 60611, USA.

Although it is widely accepted that glucocorticoids (GC) are a mainstay of the
treatment of diseases characterized by airway inflammation, little is known about
the effects of GC on local innate immunity. In this article, we report that
respiratory epithelial cells manifested a local "acute phase response" after
stimulation with TLR activation and TNF-alpha and that GC spared or enhanced the 
epithelial expression of molecules that are involved in host defense, including
complement, collectins, and other antimicrobial proteins. As expected, GC
inhibited the expression of molecules responsible for inflammation such as
cytokines (IFNbeta and GM-CSF) and chemokines (RANTES and IL-8). Studies using
Western blotting, EMSA, and functional analysis indicated that the selective
effects of GC are mediated through activation of the transcription factor C/EBP. 
Knockdown of C/EBPbeta by small interfering RNA blocked the enhancement by GC of 
host defense molecule expression but had no effect on inflammatory gene
expression. These results suggest that GC spare or enhance local innate host
defense responses in addition to exerting anti-inflammatory actions. It is
possible that the known ability of GC to reduce the exacerbation of diseases in
which infectious organisms serve as triggering factors (e.g., asthma, allergic
bronchopulmonary aspergillosis, and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease) may
result in part from enhanced innate immune responses in airway mucosa.


PMCID: PMC2121188
PMID: 17579079  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. Rev Med Liege. 2007 Apr;62(4):230-4.

[Clinical study of the month: the TORCH study (TOwards a Revolution in COPD
Health)].

[Article in French]

Corhay JL(1), Louis R.

Author information: 
(1)Service de Pneumologie, CHU Sart-Tilman, Liège, Belgique.
jlcorhay@chu.ulg.ac.be

The TORCH study (Towards a Revolution in COPD Health) was a double-blind,
randomised, placebo-controlled clinical trial, investigating the combination of
salmeterol/fluticasone propionate for 3 years in COPD. The primary end point was 
on all-cause mortality. Secondary end points included COPD exacerbation rate,
lung function and health status. More than 6000 patients were randomised. In this
article, we briefly report the most significant results of the study. The
efficacy on mortality (reduction of the risk of death of 17.5%) was near the
predetermined level of statistical significance (p = 0.052); the combination had 
a significant effect on the three pillars of COPD management, that is:
improvement of quality of life and respiratory function, and reduction of the
rate of exacerbations. In addition to being effective, the combination
salmeterol/fluticasone (50/500 microg 2x/day) is well tolerated in COPD and had a
favourable benefit/risk ratio.


PMID: 17566394  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. Thorax. 2007 Nov;62(11):938-43. Epub 2007 Jun 8.

Effect of salmeterol/fluticasone propionate on airway inflammation in COPD: a
randomised controlled trial.

Bourbeau J(1), Christodoulopoulos P, Maltais F, Yamauchi Y, Olivenstein R, Hamid 
Q.

Author information: 
(1)Respiratory Epidemiology and Clinical Research Unit, Montreal Chest Institute,
McGill University Health Centre, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

Comment in
    Thorax. 2007 Nov;62(11):927-8.

BACKGROUND: Airway inflammation in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)
is characterised by infiltration of CD8+ T cells and CD68+ macrophages and an
increased number of neutrophils, whereas few studies have described the presence 
of eosinophils. Although the anti-inflammatory effects of corticosteroids in
stable COPD are unclear, recent studies suggest that combination therapy could be
beneficial. A study was therefore undertaken to evaluate combined
salmeterol/fluticasone propionate (SFC) and fluticasone propionate (FP) alone on 
inflammatory cells in the airways of patients with COPD.
METHODS: Patients were treated in a randomised, double blind, parallel group,
placebo-controlled trial with either a combination of 50 microg salmeterol and
500 microg FP twice daily (SFC, n = 19, 19 men, mean age 62 years), 500 microg FP
twice daily (n = 20, 15 men, mean age 64 years) or placebo (n = 21, 17 men, mean 
age 66 years) for 3 months. At the start and end of treatment bronchoscopy with
bronchial biopsies was performed and the numbers of CD8+ T lymphocytes, CD68+
macrophages, neutrophils and eosinophils were measured.
RESULTS: CD8+ cells were significantly reduced by SFC compared with placebo
(difference -98.05 cells/mm(2); 95% CI -143.14 to -52.9; p<0.001). Such a marked 
effect was not seen with FP alone (-44.67 cells/mm(2); 95% CI -90.92 to 1.57; p =
0.06). CD68+ macrophages were also reduced by SFC compared with placebo
(difference -31.68 cells/mm(2); 95% CI -61.07 to -2.29; p = 0.03) but not by FP. 
SFC did not significantly change neutrophils and eosinophils compared with
placebo.
CONCLUSIONS: SFC has airway anti-inflammatory effects not seen with inhaled
corticosteroids alone.

DOI: 10.1136/thx.2006.071068 
PMCID: PMC2117108
PMID: 17557771  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2007 Jun 15;175(12):1347; author reply 1347-8.

Avoiding mistakes in calculating the number needed to treat in severe COPD.

Aaron SD.

Comment on
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2007 Jan 15;175(2):144-9.

DOI: 10.1164/ajrccm.175.12.1347a 
PMID: 17545461  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2007 Jun 15;175(12):1222-32.

Update in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 2006.

Rabe KF(1), Beghé B, Luppi F, Fabbri LM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The
Netherlands.

DOI: 10.1164/rccm.200704-586UP 
PMID: 17545457  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. Eur J Gen Pract. 2007;13(2):89-91.

Early intervention with inhaled corticosteroids in subjects with rapid decline in
lung function and signs of bronchial hyperresponsiveness: results from the DIMCA 
programme.

den Otter JJ(1), van Schayck CP, Folgering HT, van den Boom G, Akkermans RP, van 
Weel C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Practice, Dekkerswald UMC St Radboud Nijmegen, Nijmegen,
The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Asthma is generally accepted as an inflammatory disease that needs
steroid treatment. However, when to start with inhaled steroids remains unclear. 
A study was undertaken to determine when inhaled corticosteroids should be
introduced as the first treatment step.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate the effectiveness of early introduction of inhaled
steroids on decline in lung function in steroid-naïve subjects with a rapid
decline in lung function in general practice.
SUBJECTS: Patients with signs/symptoms suspect of asthma (i.e., persistent and/or
recurrent respiratory symptoms) and a decline in forced expiratory volume in 1 s 
(FEV(1)) during 1-year monitoring of 0.080 l or more and reversible obstruction
(> or =10% predicted) or bronchial hyperresponsiveness (PC(20)< or =8 mg/ml) were
studied. They had been identified in a population screening aiming to detect
subjects at risk for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) or asthma.
DESIGN: A placebo-controlled, randomized, double-blind study.
METHODS: 75 subjects out of a random population of 1155 were found eligible, and 
45 were willingly to participate. Subjects were randomly treated with placebo or 
fluticasone propionate 250 microg b.i.d., and FEV(1) and PC(20) were monitored
over a 2-year period.
OUTCOME VARIABLES: The primary outcome measure was decline in FEV(1); the
secondary outcome measure was bronchial hyperresponsiveness (PC(20)).
RESULTS: 22 subjects were randomly allocated to the active group with inhaled
corticosteroids and 23 to placebo. Change of FEV(1) in the active treated group
was +43 ml in post-bronchodilator FEV(1) (p =0.341) and +62 ml/year (p =0.237) in
pre-bronchodilator FEV(1) after 1 year, and -22 ml (p =0.304) for
post-bronchodilator FEV(1) and -9.4 ml (p =0.691) for pre-bronchodilator FEV(1)
after 2 years, compared to placebo. The effect on PC(20) was almost one dose-step
(p =0.627) after 1 year and one dose-step (p =0.989) after 2 years.
CONCLUSION: In this study, the early introduction of inhaled corticosteroids in
newly diagnosed asthmatic subjects with rapid decline in lung function did not
prove to be either clinically relevant or statistically significant in reversing 
the decline in FEV(1). For PC(20), no significant changes were detected.

DOI: 10.1080/13814780701377455 
PMID: 17534745  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. COPD. 2007 Jun;4(2):127-34.

Survival among COPD patients using fluticasone/salmeterol in combination versus
other inhaled steroids and bronchodilators alone.

Mapel DW(1), Nelson LS, Lydick E, Soriano J, Yood MU, Davis KJ.

Author information: 
(1)Lovelace Clinic Foundation, Albuquerque, NM 87106, USA. Doug@LCFResearch.org

Recent retrospective studies have suggested that use of inhaled corticosteroids
(ICS) may improve survival in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD),
particularly when combined with a long-acting beta-agonist (LABA). However, the
study methodologies have been questioned, and no study has examined the survival 
effect of the newer combination ICS/LABA inhalers. The goal of this project was
to further examine the relationship between ICS treatment, with or without LABA, 
and survival in COPD. COPD patients were identified from the administrative
databases of four different integrated health care delivery systems. All patients
who were diagnosed with COPD between September 1, 2000 and August 31, 2001 and
who had at least 3 months treatment with either a combined fluticasone/salmeterol
inhaler (FSI, N=866), any ICS used with a LABA (ICS/LABA, N=525), ICS alone
(N=742), LABA alone (N=531), or a short-acting bronchodilator alone (SABD,
N=1832), were included. Analyses were conducted using three different analysis
approaches that adjust for various biases that may affect the results. In the
basic Cox proportional hazards models, use of FSI, ICS/LABA, ICS alone, and LABA 
alone had significant survival benefits as compared to SABD, after adjustment for
differences in age, gender, comorbidities, asthma status, and disease severity
(HRs 0.61 [0.45-0.83], 0.59 [0.46-0.77], 0.76 [0.61-0.95], 0.75 [0.57-0.98],
respectively). Propensity score matching to reduce the clinical differences
between the treatment groups versus the SABD reference group found very similar
results. Nested case-control analyses, which are based on survival status instead
of treatment, continued to show a significant survival benefit for FSI, ICS/LABA,
and ICS alone. Treatment with FSI or another ICS with or without LABA is
associated with improved survival in COPD. The treatment benefit is reproducible 
and is robust to application of a number of different analysis techniques
designed to adjust for differences in confounding variables and for bias by
indication.

DOI: 10.1080/15412550701341111 
PMID: 17530506  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. N Engl J Med. 2007 May 24;356(21):2211-2; author reply 2213-4.

Prevention of death in COPD.

La Vecchia C, Fabbri LM.

Comment on
    N Engl J Med. 2007 Feb 22;356(8):851-4.
    N Engl J Med. 2007 Feb 22;356(8):775-89.


PMID: 17526088  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. N Engl J Med. 2007 May 24;356(21):2212; author reply 2213-4.

Prevention of death in COPD.

Duerden M.

Comment on
    N Engl J Med. 2007 Feb 22;356(8):775-89.


PMID: 17526087  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. N Engl J Med. 2007 May 24;356(21):2212-3; author reply 2213-4.

Prevention of death in COPD.

Kupfer Y, Tessler S.

Comment on
    N Engl J Med. 2007 Feb 22;356(8):775-89.


PMID: 17526086  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. N Engl J Med. 2007 May 24;356(21):2211; author reply 2213-4.

Prevention of death in COPD.

Barnes PJ.

Comment on
    N Engl J Med. 2007 Feb 22;356(8):775-89.

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMc070783 
PMID: 17522406  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2007 Jun 1;175(11):1207; author reply 1207-8.

Hospitalizations with severe COPD.

Oba Y.

Comment on
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2007 Jan 15;175(2):144-9.

DOI: 10.1164/ajrccm.175.11.1207 
PMID: 17519347  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. Expert Rev Clin Immunol. 2007 May;3(3):365-81. doi: 10.1586/1744666X.3.3.365.

Protease inhibitors in respiratory disease: focus on asthma and chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease.

Venkatasamy R(1), Spina D.

Author information: 
(1)King's College London, Sackler Institute of Pulmonary Pharmacology, School of 
Biomedical and Health Science, Pharmaceutical Science Research Division, Guy's
Campus, London SE1 1UL, UK. radhakrishnan.venkatasamy@kcl.ac.uk

Respiratory diseases, such as asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD), are a major health burden on society and current treatment modalities for
these diseases have not significantly changed over the past 40 years. The only
major pharmacological advancement for the treatment of these diseases has been to
increase the duration of action of bronchodilators (asthma: salmeterol; COPD:
tiotropium bromide) and glucocorticosteroids (asthma: fluticasone propionate)
and, increasingly, to formulate these agents in the same delivery device. Despite
our increasing understanding of the cell and molecular biology of these diseases,
the development of novel treatments remains beyond the reach of the scientific
community. Proteases are a family of proteins with diverse biological activity,
which are found in abundance within the airways of asthma and COPD, and have been
implicated in the pathogenesis of these diseases. The targeting of proteases,
including mast cell tryptase, neutrophil elastase and matrix metalloprotease with
low-molecular-weight inhibitors, has highlighted the potential role of these
enzymes in mediating certain aspects of the disease process in preclinical
studies. Several challenges remain regarding the development of protease
inhibitors, including the synthesis of highly potent and specific inhibitors, and
target validation in man.

DOI: 10.1586/1744666X.3.3.365 
PMID: 20477680  [PubMed]


472. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2007 Jul 15;176(2):162-6. Epub 2007 Mar 30.

Inhaled corticosteroid use in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and the risk 
of hospitalization for pneumonia.

Ernst P(1), Gonzalez AV, Brassard P, Suissa S.

Author information: 
(1)Pharmacoepidemiology Research Unit, Department of Medicine, McGill University 
Health Centre, and Division of Clinical Epidemiology, Ross 4.29, Royal Victoria
Hospital, 687 Pine Avenue West, Montreal, PQ, Quebec, H3A 1A1 Canada.
pierre.ernst@mcgill.ca

Comment in
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2008 Mar 1;177(5):555-6; author reply 556.
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2007 Jul 15;176(2):111-2.

RATIONALE: Inhaled corticosteroids are commonly prescribed to patients with
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
OBJECTIVES: To examine whether these medications might be associated with an
excess risk of pneumonia.
METHODS: We conducted a nested case-control study within a cohort of patients
with COPD from Quebec, Canada, over the period 1988-2003, identified on the basis
of administrative databases linking hospitalization and drug-dispensing
information. Each subject hospitalized for pneumonia during follow-up (case
subjects) was age and time matched to four control subjects. The effect of the
use of inhaled corticosteroids was assessed by conditional logistic regression,
after adjusting for comorbidity and COPD severity.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: The cohort included 175,906 patients with COPD of 
whom 23,942 were hospitalized for pneumonia during follow-up, for a rate of 1.9
per 100 per year, and matched to 95,768 control subjects. The adjusted rate ratio
of hospitalization for pneumonia associated with current use of inhaled
corticosteroids was 1.70 (95% confidence interval [CI], 1.63-1.77) and 1.53 (95% 
CI, 1.30-1.80) for pneumonia hospitalization followed by death within 30 days.
The rate ratio of hospitalization for pneumonia was greatest with the highest
doses of inhaled corticosteroids, equivalent to fluticasone at 1,000 microg/day
or more (rate ratio, 2.25; 95% CI, 2.07-2.44). All-cause mortality was similar
for patients hospitalized for pneumonia, whether or not they had received inhaled
corticosteroids in the recent past (7.4 and 8.2%, respectively).
CONCLUSIONS: The use of inhaled corticosteroids is associated with an excess risk
of pneumonia hospitalization and of pneumonia hospitalization followed by death
within 30 days, among elderly patients with COPD.

DOI: 10.1164/rccm.200611-1630OC 
PMID: 17400730  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. J Biol Chem. 2007 May 25;282(21):15366-75. Epub 2007 Mar 29.

Corticosteroids and beta2 agonists differentially regulate rhinovirus-induced
interleukin-6 via distinct Cis-acting elements.

Edwards MR(1), Haas J, Panettieri RA Jr, Johnson M, Johnston SL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, National Heart and Lung Institute and
Wright Fleming Institute of Infection and Immunity, Imperial College London,
London W2 1PG, United Kingdom. michael.edwards@ic.ac.uk

Interleukin-6 (IL-6) is a proinflammatory cytokine up-regulated by rhinovirus
infection during acute exacerbations of asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease. The role of IL-6 during exacerbations is unclear; however, it is
believed IL-6 could contribute to airway and systemic inflammation. In this study
we investigate the effects of common asthma treatments fluticasone propionate and
beta(2) agonists salmeterol and salbutamol on IL-6 production in BEAS-2B and
primary bronchial epithelial cells. Salmeterol and salbutamol enhanced
rhinovirus- and IL-1beta-induced IL-6 production; however, fluticasone treatment 
caused a reduction of IL-6 protein and mRNA. Combined activity of salmeterol and 
fluticasone at equimolar concentrations had no effect on rhinovirus or IL-1beta
induction of IL-6. The induction of IL-6 by salmeterol was dependent upon the
beta(2) receptor and could also be induced by cAMP or cAMP-elevating agents
forskolin and rolipram. Using transfection of IL-6 promoter reporter constructs, 
dominant negative mutants, and electromobility shift assays, it was found that
NF-kappaB was the only transcription factor required for rhinovirus induction of 
IL-6 gene expression. Salmeterol caused an augmentation of rhinovirus-induced
promoter activation via a mechanism dependent upon the c/EBP and/or CRE (cyclic
AMP response element) cis-acting sites. The suppressive effect of FP was
dependent upon distinct glucocorticoid response element sequences proximal to the
transcriptional start site within the IL-6 promoter. The data demonstrate that
beta(2) agonists can augment IL-6 expression by other stimuli in an additive
manner via cyclic AMP and that the negative effect of steroids is mediated by
glucocorticoid response elements within the IL-6 promoter.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M701325200 
PMID: 17395587  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


474. COPD. 2006 Dec;3(4):233-42.

Is airway inflammation in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) a risk
factor for cardiovascular events?

Calverley PM(1), Scott S.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Science Centre, University Hospital Aintree, Liverpool, UK.
pmacal@liverpool.ac.uk

Cardiovascular disease (CVD) is a very common cause of death in patients with
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Smoking is a well-described risk
factor for both COPD and CVD, but CVD in patients with COPD is likely to be due
to other factors in addition to smoking. Inflammation may be an important common 
etiological link between COPD and CVD, being well described in both diseases. It 
is hypothesized that in COPD a "spill-over" of local airway inflammation into the
systemic circulation could contribute to increased CVD in these patients. Inhaled
corticosteroids (ICS) have well-documented anti-inflammatory effects and are
commonly used for the treatment of COPD, but their effects on cardiovascular
endpoints and all-cause mortality have only just started to be examined. A recent
meta-analysis has suggested that ICS may reduce all-cause mortality in COPD by
around 25%. A case-controlled study specifically examined the effects of ICS on
myocardial infarction and suggested that ICS may decrease the incidence of MI by 
as much as 32%. A large multicenter prospective randomized trial (Towards a
Revolution in COPD Health [TORCH]) is now ongoing and will examine the effect of 
fluticasone propionate in combination with salmeterol on all-cause mortality.


PMID: 17361504  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. Can Respir J. 2007 Jan-Feb;14(1):25-9.

Treatment persistence and compliance with medications for chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease.

Cramer JA(1), Bradley-Kennedy C, Scalera A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven,
Connecticut 06516-2770, USA. joyce.cramer@yale.edu

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Inhaled beta-agonist, anticholinergic and
glucocorticoid medications are used to treat asthma and chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD). The present study assessed the patterns of persistence 
with the above mentioned inhaled medications.
METHODS: Prescription claims data from the Ontario Drug Benefit Program were
analyzed to assess persistence (time to discontinuation) and compliance
(percentage of days with doses available divided by days to last refill) of
patients prescribed inhaled medications. Patients were grouped as naive (no
inhaled medication in the previous year) or experienced (previous or current
treatment), and by age (18 to 65 years of age and older than 65 years of age).
Medications included ipratropium, ipratropium plus salbutamol, formoterol,
formoterol plus budesonide, salmeterol, salmeterol plus fluticasone, and
tiotropium.
RESULTS: The database included 31,368 patients (4888 naive and 26,480
experienced) who were prescribed at least one of these medications. Fifteen per
cent to 63% of patients continued on the index drug for more than six months,
which decreased to 7% to 53% at 12 months, and 5% to 47% at 18 months. At 12
months, patients taking tiotropium had significantly longer persistence compared 
with other therapies (53% versus 7% to 30%; all P<0.0001), and fewer switches to 
alternative medications. Most naive patients had significantly shorter treatment 
persistence than experienced patients for all drugs (all P<0.0001), including
tiotropium (27% versus 55%, P<0.0001). Compliance rates were similar for all
drugs (ie, 76% to 94%) but were highest for tiotropium.
CONCLUSIONS: These data demonstrated that persistence with inhaled treatment was 
low overall, but patients treated with tiotropium remained on therapy
significantly longer than when treated with other medications, and patients naive
to inhaled treatment had shorter treatment persistence than experienced patients.


PMCID: PMC2690446
PMID: 17315055  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. N Engl J Med. 2007 Feb 22;356(8):775-89.

Salmeterol and fluticasone propionate and survival in chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease.

Calverley PM(1), Anderson JA, Celli B, Ferguson GT, Jenkins C, Jones PW, Yates
JC, Vestbo J; TORCH investigators.

Author information: 
(1)University Hospital Aintree, Liverpool, United Kingdom. pmacal@liverpool.ac.uk

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2007 Feb 22;356(8):867.
    Evid Based Med. 2007 Aug;12(4):114.
    Can Fam Physician. 2008 May;54(5):740-1.
    N Engl J Med. 2007 Feb 22;356(8):851-4.
    N Engl J Med. 2007 May 24;356(21):2212-3; author reply 2213-4.
    N Engl J Med. 2007 May 24;356(21):2211; author reply 2213-4.
    N Engl J Med. 2007 May 24;356(21):2211-2; author reply 2213-4.
    N Engl J Med. 2007 May 24;356(21):2212; author reply 2213-4.

Republished in
    Ugeskr Laeger. 2007 Sep 17;169(38):3198-201.

BACKGROUND: Long-acting beta-agonists and inhaled corticosteroids are used to
treat chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), but their effect on survival 
is unknown.
METHODS: We conducted a randomized, double-blind trial comparing salmeterol at a 
dose of 50 microg plus fluticasone propionate at a dose of 500 microg twice daily
(combination regimen), administered with a single inhaler, with placebo,
salmeterol alone, or fluticasone propionate alone for a period of 3 years. The
primary outcome was death from any cause for the comparison between the
combination regimen and placebo; the frequency of exacerbations, health status,
and spirometric values were also assessed.
RESULTS: Of 6112 patients in the efficacy population, 875 died within 3 years
after the start of the study treatment. All-cause mortality rates were 12.6% in
the combination-therapy group, 15.2% in the placebo group, 13.5% in the
salmeterol group, and 16.0% in the fluticasone group. The hazard ratio for death 
in the combination-therapy group, as compared with the placebo group, was 0.825
(95% confidence interval [CI], 0.681 to 1.002; P=0.052, adjusted for the interim 
analyses), corresponding to a difference of 2.6 percentage points or a reduction 
in the risk of death of 17.5%. The mortality rate for salmeterol alone or
fluticasone propionate alone did not differ significantly from that for placebo. 
As compared with placebo, the combination regimen reduced the annual rate of
exacerbations from 1.13 to 0.85 and improved health status and spirometric values
(P<0.001 for all comparisons with placebo). There was no difference in the
incidence of ocular or bone side effects. The probability of having pneumonia
reported as an adverse event was higher among patients receiving medications
containing fluticasone propionate (19.6% in the combination-therapy group and
18.3% in the fluticasone group) than in the placebo group (12.3%, P<0.001 for
comparisons between these treatments and placebo).
CONCLUSIONS: The reduction in death from all causes among patients with COPD in
the combination-therapy group did not reach the predetermined level of
statistical significance. There were significant benefits in all other outcomes
among these patients. (ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT00268216
[ClinicalTrials.gov].).

Copyright 2007 Massachusetts Medical Society.

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa063070 
PMID: 17314337  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. Thorax. 2007 May;62(5):411-5. Epub 2007 Feb 20.

Ascertainment of cause-specific mortality in COPD: operations of the TORCH
Clinical Endpoint Committee.

McGarvey LP(1), John M, Anderson JA, Zvarich M, Wise RA; TORCH Clinical Endpoint 
Committee.

Author information: 
(1)The Queen's University of Belfast, Grosvenor Road, Belfast BT12 6BJ, UK.
l.mcgarvey@qub.ac.uk

Comment in
    Thorax. 2007 May;62(5):378-9.

BACKGROUND: TORCH (Towards a Revolution in COPD Health) is an international
multicentre, randomised, placebo-controlled clinical trial of inhaled fluticasone
propionate/salmeterol combination treatment and its monotherapy components for
maintenance treatment of moderately to severely impaired patients with chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). The primary outcome is all-cause mortality.
Cause-specific mortality and deaths related to COPD are additional outcome
measures, but systematic methods for ascertainment of these outcomes have not
previously been described.
METHODS: A Clinical Endpoint Committee (CEC) was tasked with categorising the
cause of death and the relationship of deaths to COPD in a systematic, unbiased
and independent manner. The key elements of the operation of the committee were
the use of predefined principles of operation and definitions of cause of death
and COPD-relatedness; the independent review of cases by all members with
development of a consensus opinion; and a substantial infrastructure to collect
medical information.
RESULTS: 911 deaths were reviewed and consensus was reached in all.
Cause-specific mortality was: cardiovascular 27%, respiratory 35%, cancer 21%,
other 10% and unknown 8%. 40% of deaths were definitely or probably related to
COPD. Adjudications were identical in 83% of blindly re-adjudicated cases (kappa 
= 0.80). COPD-relatedness was reproduced 84% of the time (kappa = 0.73). The CEC 
adjudication was equivalent to the primary cause of death recorded by the site
investigator in 52% of cases.
CONCLUSION: A CEC can provide standardised, reliable and informative adjudication
of COPD mortality that provides information which frequently differs from data
collected from assessment by site investigators.

DOI: 10.1136/thx.2006.072348 
PMCID: PMC2117197
PMID: 17311843  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. Ann Intern Med. 2007 Apr 17;146(8):545-55. Epub 2007 Feb 19.

Tiotropium in combination with placebo, salmeterol, or fluticasone-salmeterol for
treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: a randomized trial.

Aaron SD(1), Vandemheen KL, Fergusson D, Maltais F, Bourbeau J, Goldstein R,
Balter M, O'Donnell D, McIvor A, Sharma S, Bishop G, Anthony J, Cowie R, Field S,
Hirsch A, Hernandez P, Rivington R, Road J, Hoffstein V, Hodder R, Marciniuk D,
McCormack D, Fox G, Cox G, Prins HB, Ford G, Bleskie D, Doucette S, Mayers I,
Chapman K, Zamel N, FitzGerald M; Canadian Thoracic Society/Canadian Respiratory 
Clinical Research Consortium.

Author information: 
(1)The Ottawa Health Research Institute and University of Ottawa, Ottawa,
Ontario, Canada.

Comment in
    Ann Intern Med. 2007 Dec 18;147(12):882; author reply 882-3.
    Ann Intern Med. 2007 Apr 17;146(8):606-8.

Summary for patients in
    Ann Intern Med. 2007 Apr 17;146(8):I12.

BACKGROUND: Treatment of moderate or severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD) with combinations of inhaled corticosteroids, long-acting beta-agonists,
and long-acting anticholinergic bronchodilators is common but unstudied.
OBJECTIVE: To determine whether combining tiotropium with salmeterol or
fluticasone-salmeterol improves clinical outcomes in adults with moderate to
severe COPD compared with tiotropium alone.
DESIGN: Randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial conducted from October
2003 to January 2006.
SETTING: 27 academic and community medical centers in Canada.
PATIENTS: 449 patients with moderate or severe COPD.
INTERVENTION: 1 year of treatment with tiotropium plus placebo, tiotropium plus
salmeterol, or tiotropium plus fluticasone-salmeterol.
MEASUREMENTS: The primary end point was the proportion of patients who
experienced an exacerbation of COPD that required treatment with systemic
steroids or antibiotics.
RESULTS: The proportion of patients in the tiotropium plus placebo group who
experienced an exacerbation (62.8%) did not differ from that in the tiotropium
plus salmeterol group (64.8%; difference, -2.0 percentage points [95% CI, -12.8
to 8.8 percentage points]) or in the tiotropium plus fluticasone-salmeterol group
(60.0%; difference, 2.8 percentage points [CI, -8.2 to 13.8 percentage points]). 
In sensitivity analyses, the point estimates and 95% confidence bounds shifted in
the direction favoring tiotropium plus salmeterol and tiotropium plus
fluticasone-salmeterol. Tiotropium plus fluticasone-salmeterol improved lung
function (P = 0.049) and disease-specific quality of life (P = 0.01) and reduced 
the number of hospitalizations for COPD exacerbation (incidence rate ratio, 0.53 
[CI, 0.33 to 0.86]) and all-cause hospitalizations (incidence rate ratio, 0.67
[CI, 0.45 to 0.99]) compared with tiotropium plus placebo. In contrast,
tiotropium plus salmeterol did not statistically improve lung function or
hospitalization rates compared with tiotropium plus placebo.
LIMITATIONS: More than 40% of patients who received tiotropium plus placebo and
tiotropium plus salmeterol discontinued therapy prematurely, and many crossed
over to treatment with open-label inhaled steroids or long-acting beta-agonists.
CONCLUSIONS: Addition of fluticasone-salmeterol to tiotropium therapy did not
statistically influence rates of COPD exacerbation but did improve lung function,
quality of life, and hospitalization rates in patients with moderate to severe
COPD. International Standard Randomised Controlled Trial registration number:
ISRCTN29870041.


PMID: 17310045  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. Ann Intern Med. 2007 Apr 17;146(8):I12. Epub 2007 Feb 19.

Summaries for patients. Combination inhaler therapy for chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease.

[No authors listed]

Original report in
    Ann Intern Med. 2007 Apr 17;146(8):545-55.


PMID: 17310044  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. Curr Opin Pulm Med. 2007 Mar;13(2):90-7.

Do chronic inhaled steroids alone or in combination with a bronchodilator prolong
life in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease patients?

Sin DD(1), Man SF.

Author information: 
(1)The University of British Columbia (Respiratory Division), Vancouver, British 
Columbia, Canada. dsin@mrl.ubc.ca

Comment in
    Curr Opin Pulm Med. 2007 Mar;13(2):89.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Inhaled corticosteroids with or without long-acting beta2
adrenergic agonists are commonly used to treat patients with chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease to attenuate symptoms and to prevent exacerbations. Whether
these medications prolong survival is uncertain.
RECENT FINDINGS: Inhaled corticosteroids attenuate airway and systemic
inflammation, reduce airway hyperreactivity, improve patient symptoms and prevent
exacerbations in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease patients. The data on
mortality are mixed. A pooled analysis of published randomized controlled trials 
indicated that inhaled corticosteroids reduced mortality by around 25%; however
other studies have failed to show a beneficial effect on mortality. The addition 
of long-acting beta2 adrenergic agonists to inhaled corticosteroids enhances the 
clinical effectiveness of these medications and confers incremental mortality
benefits to patients. Interestingly, these medications appear to be especially
beneficial in reducing cardiovascular morbidity and mortality, though large
randomized controlled trials powered specifically on these endpoints are needed
to confirm these early findings.
SUMMARY: Inhaled corticosteroids, especially with long-acting beta2 adrenergic
agonists, reduce airway inflammation and appear to prolong survival in chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease patients. They may be particularly effective in
reducing cardiovascular morbidity and mortality of patients, pending confirmation
by additional clinical studies powered specifically on these endpoints.

DOI: 10.1097/MCP.0b013e3280142021 
PMID: 17255798  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. Fam Pract. 2007 Apr;24(2):181-8. Epub 2007 Jan 23.

Lower inhaled steroid requirement with a fluticasone/salmeterol combination in
family practice patients with asthma or COPD.

Schermer TR(1), Albers JM, Verblackt HW, Costongs RJ, Westers P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Family Medicine, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre,
Nijmegen, The Netherlands. T.Schermer@hag.umcn.nl

BACKGROUND: Previous studies on inhaled steroid and long-acting beta2-agonist
combination products may not be representative for the asthma and chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) patients in family practice.
OBJECTIVES: To compare in a group of doctor-diagnosed patients with asthma or
COPD, the effects of a lower dose of fluticasone in a combination product with
salmeterol with conventional treatment (i.e. a higher dose of fluticasone), both 
supplemented with as-needed use of a short-acting bronchodilator.
METHODS: The study was a 12-week multicentre, randomized controlled, double-blind
trial. In all, 41 family practices recruited 137 patients diagnosed with asthma
and 40 patients diagnosed with COPD. Primary outcome was the forced expiratory
volume in 1 second (FEV1) as percentage of predicted. Morning peak expiratory
flow (PEF), symptom-free days, health status [Asthma Quality of Life
Questionnaire (AQLQ) and St. George's Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ)],
exacerbations, use of short-acting bronchodilators and adverse events were
secondary outcomes.
RESULTS: FEV1% predicted increased 2.6% (SD 8.3) in fluticasone/salmeterol- and
0.01% (SD 6.6) in fluticasone-treated patients (overall: P=0.036, asthma: P=0.025
and COPD: P=0.700). PEF increased in favour of fluticasone/salmeterol in asthma
patients only (P=0.016). Fluticasone/salmeterol-treated asthma patients had 1.1
more symptom-free days per week (P=0.044); no such effect was observed for COPD
(P=0.769). There were no differences in total AQLQ and SGRQ scores,
exacerbations, use of reliever puffs or adverse effects.
CONCLUSIONS: In family practice patients diagnosed with asthma, several treatment
goals were better achieved with a lower dose of fluticasone and salmeterol in a
combination product than with a higher dose of fluticasone. We found no
differences between the two approaches for patients with COPD.

DOI: 10.1093/fampra/cml076 
PMID: 17251178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. Pharm Stat. 2007 Apr-Jun;6(2):89-97.

Analysis of exacerbation rates in asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease: example from the TRISTAN study.

Keene ON(1), Jones MR, Lane PW, Anderson J.

Author information: 
(1)GlaxoSmithKline Research and Development, Greenford, Middlesex, UK.
oliver.n.keene@gsk.com

Recurrent events in clinical trials have typically been analysed using either a
multiple time-to-event method or a direct approach based on the distribution of
the number of events. An area of application for these methods is exacerbation
data from respiratory clinical trials. The different approaches to the analysis
and the issues involved are illustrated for a large trial (n = 1465) in chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). For exacerbation rates, clinical interest
centres on a direct comparison of rates for each treatment which favours the
distribution-based analysis, rather than a time-to-event approach. Poisson
regression has often been employed and has recently been recommended as the
appropriate method of analysis for COPD exacerbations but the key assumptions
often appear unreasonable for this analysis. By contrast use of a negative
binomial model which corresponds to assuming a separate Poisson parameter for
each subject offers a more appealing approach. Non-parametric methods avoid some 
of the assumptions required by these models, but do not provide appropriate
estimates of treatment effects because of the discrete and bounded nature of the 
data.

Copyright (c) 2007 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/pst.250 
PMID: 17230434  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. Pulm Pharmacol Ther. 2008;21(1):20-5. Epub 2006 Oct 13.

Comparable spirometric efficacy of tiotropium compared with salmeterol plus
fluticasone in patients with COPD: a pilot study.

Bateman ED(1), van Dyk M, Sagriotis A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonology, Department of Medicine, Faculty of Health Sciences,
University of Cape Town, PO Box 34560, Groote Schuur 7937, Cape Town, South
Africa. ebateman@uctgsh1.uct.ac.za <ebateman@uctgsh1.uct.ac.za>

BACKGROUND: International guidelines recommend the long-acting anticholinergic,
tiotropium, or long-acting beta 2-agonists as maintenance therapy in patients
with moderate-to-very severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). The
efficacy of long-acting beta(2)-agonists combined with inhaled corticosteroids
(ICS) in the treatment of COPD has also been confirmed for severe and very severe
COPD, but data comparing tiotropium with the combination of a long-acting beta
2-agonist and an ICS are lacking.
METHODS: This 6-week multicentre, randomised, double-blind, triple-dummy pilot
study compared the bronchodilator effects of tiotropium 18 microg once daily
(n=56) vs. the combination of salmeterol 50 microg plus fluticasone 250 microg
twice daily (n=51) in patients with moderate-to-very severe COPD. Serial
spirometry was performed over 12h after 6 weeks of treatment. The primary
endpoint was forced expiratory volume in 1s (FEV1) area under the curve from 0 to
12h (AUC0-12h) on Day 43.
RESULTS: Randomization failed to provide treatment groups with comparable
baseline characteristics for smoking history, current smokers, duration of COPD, 
FEV1, forced vital capacity (FVC) and reversibility. Mean+/-SD FEV1 was
1.31+/-0.47 l in the tiotropium group vs. 1.46+/-0.53 l in the salmeterol plus
fluticasone group. Fewer patients in the tiotropium showed a 12% and 200 ml acute
increase to short-acting bronchodilators at baseline. However, treatment with
tiotropium alone resulted in comparable bronchodilation compared with salmeterol 
plus fluticasone, as measured by all the spirometric parameters at the end of the
6-week study period. FEV1 AUC0-12h was 1.55+/-0.03 l in the tiotropium group vs. 
1.57+/-0.04 l in the salmeterol plus fluticasone groups (p=0.63). Trough
(predose) FEV1 was 1.54+/-0.03 l in the tiotropium group vs. 1.46+/-0.03 l in the
combination group (p=0.07), and peak FEV(1) was 1.68+/-0.04 l vs. 1.66+/-0.04 l, 
respectively, (p=0.77). FVC AUC0-12h, trough and peak were also comparable
between groups at study end (p>0.05, for all). Further, rescue salbutamol use was
similar in the tiotropium and combination groups and both treatment regimens were
well tolerated.
CONCLUSIONS: Six weeks of treatment with tiotropium resulted in comparable
bronchodilation compared with salmeterol plus fluticasone in patients with
moderate-to-very severe COPD, despite tiotropium patients having lower lung
function and fewer patients considered reversible at baseline. The results of
this pilot study will aid planning for further large-scale comparative studies.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pupt.2006.10.001 
PMID: 17118684  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


484. J Physiol Pharmacol. 2006 Sep;57 Suppl 4:273-82.

Differences in responses upon corticosteroid therapy between smoking and
non-smoking patients with COPD.

Van Overveld FJ(1), Demkow U, Górecka D, De Backer WA, Zieliński J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, University of Antwerp, Belgium.
Fransvan.Overveld@pmintl.com

Inhaled corticosteroids have a high level of topical anti-inflammatory activity. 
However, in patients with COPD these drugs have been reported to exert limited
effects. A reduction in histone deacetylase (HDAC) activity is suggested to
prevent the anti-inflammatory action of corticosteroids. Cigarette smoke is known
to reduce HDAC expression. The aim of this study is to compare the outcome of
corticosteroid therapy in both smoking and non-smoking COPD patients.
Twenty-three smoking patients and 18 ex-smoking patients with COPD were treated
with inhaled corticosteroids for a period of 2 months. Blood and induced sputum
samples were collected before and after treatment. Values of FEV(1) %-predicted
did not change upon the therapy, but there was a trend to improve in the
ex-smokers (63.1 -> 64.8%-pred.), compared with a decrease in the smokers (63.3
-> 61.6%-pred.). The levels of the pro-inflammatory cytokine IL-8 increased in
the group of smokers from 379 +/-78 to 526 +/-118 ng/ml. Although not
significant, a slight decrease from 382 +/-70 to 342 +/-62 ng/ml was observed in 
the group of ex-smokers. The neutrophil related elastase activity showed similar 
effects after steroid treatment, it went up from 36.4 +/-12.0 to 113.5 +/-9.7
nmol/l in smokers, and decreased from 346.2 +/-72.1 to 131.1 +/-6.5 nmol/l in
ex-smokers with COPD. These results support the evidence that inhaled
corticosteroids have no anti-inflammatory effects in COPD patients, but only when
these patients are still smoking. Smoking cessation seems the best therapy for
COPD patients.


PMID: 17072055  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2007 Jan 15;175(2):144-9. Epub 2006 Oct 19.

Impact of salmeterol/fluticasone propionate versus salmeterol on exacerbations in
severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Kardos P(1), Wencker M, Glaab T, Vogelmeier C.

Author information: 
(1)Group Practice and Center for Respiratory and Sleep Medicine, Allergy, Maingau
Hospital, Scheffelstrasse 2, 60318 Frankfurt am Main, Germany. pkardos@aol.com

Comment in
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2007 Jun 1;175(11):1207; author reply 1207-8.
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2007 Jun 15;175(12):1347; author reply 1347-8.
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2007 Sep 1;176(5):522; author reply 522-3.
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2007 Jan 15;175(2):103-4.

RATIONALE: Exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) greatly 
contribute to declining health status and the progression of the disease, thereby
incurring significant direct and indirect health care costs. The prevention of
exacerbations, therefore, is an important treatment goal.
OBJECTIVES: To assess the impact of combination therapy with
salmeterol/fluticasone propionate compared with salmeterol alone on moderate and 
severe exacerbations in patients with severe COPD and a history of repeated
exacerbations.
METHODS: Randomized, double-blind, parallel-group study. After a 4-wk run-in
period, 994 clinically stable patients were randomized to one of two treatment
groups: 507 patients received the salmeterol/fluticasone combination 50/500 micro
g twice daily and 487 received salmeterol 50 micro g twice daily for 44 wk.
MAIN RESULTS: The total number of exacerbations was 334 in the combination
therapy and 464 in the salmeterol group (p < 0.0001). The annualized rate of
moderate and severe exacerbations per patient was 0.92 in the combination therapy
and 1.4 in the salmeterol group, corresponding to a 35% decrease. In addition,
the mean time to first exacerbation in the combination therapy group was
significantly longer compared with that of the salmeterol group (128 vs. 93 d, p 
< 0.0001). Other endpoints, including health-related quality of life, peak
expiratory flow, and use of rescue medication, were significantly improved in the
combination therapy group. Both treatments were well tolerated.
CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrates that combination therapy with
salmeterol/fluticasone compared with salmeterol monotherapy significantly reduces
the frequency of moderate/severe exacerbations in patients with severe COPD.

DOI: 10.1164/rccm.200602-244OC 
PMID: 17053207  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2006 Oct;118(4):899-904. Epub 2006 Sep 8.

Adherence and persistence with fluticasone propionate/salmeterol combination
therapy.

Bender BG(1), Pedan A, Varasteh LT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, National Jewish Medical and Research Center, Denver,
CO 80206, USA. benderb@njc.org

BACKGROUND: Pharmacy database medication refill studies provide a panoramic view 
of medication-taking behavior in patients nationally.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate fluticasone propionate/salmeterol combination (FSC)
adherence, including the factors associated with refill adherence in a large
national pharmacy database.
METHODS: Adherence and persistence were documented for 12 months from date of
initial FSC prescription in 5504 patients who filled their medication at a
nationwide pharmacy chain.
RESULTS: On average, patients filled enough medication to cover 22.2% of days.
More than half the patients filled a 30-day prescription only once over the
1-year interval. Higher adherence levels were associated with being male, being
older than 35 years, having a comorbid disorder, a having a copay of 1.01 dollar 
to 10 dollars, previous beta2-agonist use, and a prescription for higher-dose
FSC.
CONCLUSION: This pharmacy database study portrays medication adherence levels to 
be considerably lower than those reported in most clinical trials, suggests that 
most adults taking FSC obtain a single fill before abandoning their controller
medication, and indicates a need for a reappraisal of current treatment
guidelines and educational strategies for both providers and patients.
CLINICAL IMPLICATIONS: For many patients, filling of a controller medication is
markedly discrepant with practice guidelines. Reappraisal of both the guidelines 
and strategies to implement them is in order.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaci.2006.07.002 
PMID: 17030244  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. Curr Pharm Des. 2006;12(25):3261-79.

Advances in asthma and COPD treatment: combination therapy with inhaled
corticosteroids and long-acting beta 2-agonists.

Miller-Larsson A(1), Selroos O.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Science, AstraZeneca R &D, 221 87 Lund, Sweden.
Anna.Miller-Larsson@Astrazeneca.com

Asthma treatment guidelines advocate the use of long-acting beta2-agonists (LABA)
in addition to inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) in patients whose asthma is
uncontrolled by ICS alone, thereby addressing two processes fundamental to
asthma: bronchoconstriction and inflammation. Superior control--including a
reduction in severe exacerbations--of asthma and COPD by ICS/LABA combination
therapy has been demonstrated. Results from clinical studies suggest additive and
potentially synergistic effects when the two agents are used in combination. No
new safety-related issues have been identified with ICS/LABA compared with the
monocomponents. The exact mechanisms for the enhanced efficacy of ICS/LABA
combinations are under investigation but likely include drug interactions at the 
receptor level and interwoven signalling pathways, which may result in improved
function of 2- adrenoceptors and steroid receptors. Data from preclinical studies
provide evidence of additive, compensatory, complementary and synergistic effects
of ICS and LABA in the control of inflammation and airway and lung remodelling.
These effects may contribute to the improved efficacy seen when treating asthma
and COPD with ICS/LABA combinations in clinical studies. Two ICS/LABA combination
products are available: budesonide/formoterol (Symbicort) and
salmeterol/fluticasone propionate (SeretideTM). An ICS/LABA combination in a
single inhaler represent safe, effective and convenient treatment options for the
management of patients with asthma and COPD. Clinical results also suggest that
adjustable dosing with budesonide/formoterol provides better asthma control than 
fixed dosing. Further elucidation of the underlying mechanisms responsible for
this superior disease control is needed.


PMID: 17020533  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. Lung. 2006 Jul-Aug;184(4):217-22.

Inhaled fluticasone and salmeterol suppress eosinophilic airway inflammation in
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: relations with lung function and
bronchodilator reversibility.

Perng DW(1), Wu CC, Su KC, Lee YC, Perng RP, Tao CW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chest Medicine, Taipei Veterans General Hospital, Taipei,
Taiwan. dwperng@vghtpe.gov.tw

The aim of this study was to determine whether combined inhaled corticosteroids
and long-acting beta(2) agonists can suppress eosinophilic inflammation in
chronic dostructive plumonary disease (COPD) and to investigate the association
between the level of eosinophilia and the degree of bronchodilator reversibility.
Sixty-two patients with stable COPD (forced expiratory volume in 1 [FEV(1)] of
30%-70% predicted before bronchodilation) were enrolled from our outpatient
clinic. Patients received inhaled fluticasone (100 microg)/salmeterol (50 microg)
twice daily for two months. Lung function measurements, bronchodilator tests, and
sputum induction were performed. The number of inflammatory cells and mediators, 
including interleukin-8 (IL-8), tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha), and
eosinophilic cationic protein (ECP), were measured. Treatment with inhaled
fluticasone and salmeterol significantly suppressed eosinophilic inflammation in 
COPD patients with sputum eosinophilia (mean 8.9% +/- 2.0% vs. 1.6% +/- 0.5%, p =
0.003), but insignificant differences in FEV(1) and FVC between patients with and
without eosinophilia suggested that suppression of eosinophilic inflammation had 
no effect on FEV(1) or FVC. Reduction in the percentage of eosinophils was
significantly correlated with decreased levels of ECP (r = 0.48, p < 0.001).
Levels of neutrophils, IL-8, and TNF-alpha were not affected. Sputum eosinophilia
was not related to the degree of bronchodilator reversibility. The degree of
bronchodilator reversibility did not predict the increase in FEV(1) and FVC after
treatment with inhaled corticosteroids/long-acting beta(2) agonists. Suppression 
of eosinophilic inflammation and bronchodilator responsiveness indices were not
correlated with clinical outcomes in COPD patients treated with inhaled
corticosteroids/long-acting beta(2) agonists.

DOI: 10.1007/s00408-005-2586-8 
PMID: 17006748  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. Am J Med. 2006 Oct;119(10 Suppl 1):63-72.

The role of patient-centered outcomes in the course of chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease: how long-term studies contribute to our understanding.

Tashkin DP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Medicine,
David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, University of California-Los Angeles,
Los Angeles, California 90095-1690, USA. dtashkin@mednet.ucla.edu

In chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), the rate of decline in forced
expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1) and progression to disability and death are 
accelerated. COPD management goals include preventing or slowing the progressive 
loss of lung function, relieving symptoms, improving exercise tolerance and the
patient's health status, preventing and treating exacerbations and complications,
minimizing side effects of treatment, and reducing mortality. Although lung
function is important for diagnosis of COPD and classification of its severity,
clinicians and patients are also very interested in symptoms, ability to
function, and general well-being (health status). Consequently, increasing
attention is being given to these patient-centered outcomes. It is possible to
modify patient-centered outcomes; however, it remains to be seen whether doing so
can also alter the natural course of the disease and reduce mortality. Two
long-term clinical trials--Towards a Revolution in COPD Health (TORCH) and
Understanding the Potential Long-Term Impacts on Function with Tiotropium
(UPLIFT)--will help to answer the question of whether pharmacologic interventions
are effective in changing the clinical course of COPD. The TORCH study examines
the long-term effects of combination therapy with an inhaled long-acting
beta-agonist (salmeterol) and a corticosteroid (fluticasone) on reduction of
all-cause mortality over 3 years. The 4-year UPLIFT study examines the effects of
maintenance treatment with the once-daily anticholinergic bronchodilator
tiotropium on the yearly rate of decline in trough FEV1 and the yearly rate of
decline in FEV1 90 minutes after maximal or near-maximal bronchodilator
administration. This article examines the rationale for each of these studies and
provides an overview of study methodology as well as preliminary demographic
data.

DOI: 10.1016/j.amjmed.2006.08.009 
PMID: 16996901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. Int J Clin Pract. 2006 Oct;60(10):1218-24.

Fluticasone propionate/salmeterol hydrofluoroalkane via metered-dose inhaler with
integrated dose counter: Performance and patient satisfaction.

Sheth K(1), Wasserman RL, Lincourt WR, Locantore NW, Carranza-Rosenzweig J, Crim 
C.

Author information: 
(1)Lafayette Allergy and Asthma Clinic, Lafayette, IN 47905, USA.
ksheth@unityhc.com

Currently, patients have to keep track of doses to determine when to replace
their metered-dose inhalers (MDIs). This study evaluated the performance and
patient satisfaction of a novel MDI with an integrated dose counter. In an
open-label study at 38 outpatient centres, patients > or =12 years old with
asthma or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) received two actuations of
fluticasone propionate/salmeterol 125/25 microg (115/21 microg ex-actuator)
hydrofluoroalkane (ADVAIR) HFA) via MDI with counter twice a day until all 120
actuations were completed. Concordance between counter and diary recordings in
patients who reported use of > or =90% of labelled actuations (completer
population, n = 228) was high (discrepancy rate of 0.94%) and the incidence of
device firing without changes in counter readings was low (0.13%). Mean expected 
actuations based on canister weights (114) were slightly lower than mean counter 
(121) and diary reported actuations (120). Upon study completion, 95% of patients
were satisfied with the dose counter and 92% agreed it would help prevent them
from running out of medication. Safety assessments (intent-to-treat population, n
= 237) indicated that the drug was well tolerated. This integrated MDI counter
may help patients maintain better disease control by enabling them to accurately 
track their medication supply.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1742-1241.2006.01138.x 
PMID: 16981966  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. Chest. 2006 Sep;130(3):647-56.

Effect of fluticasone propionate/salmeterol on lung hyperinflation and exercise
endurance in COPD.

O'Donnell DE(1), Sciurba F, Celli B, Mahler DA, Webb KA, Kalberg CJ, Knobil K.

Author information: 
(1)Queen's University, Kingston, ON, Canada. odonnell@post.queensu.ca

STUDY OBJECTIVE: To examine the effect of fluticasone propionate, 250
microg/salmeterol, 50 microg combination (FSC 250/50) twice daily on lung
hyperinflation and associated measures of exercise performance in patients with
COPD.
DESIGN: This was a randomized, double-blind, parallel-group study.
PATIENTS: Eligible patients were > or = 40 years old with a diagnosis of COPD,
prealbuterol FEV(1) < 70% of predicted, FEV1/FVC ratio > or = 0.70, and
functional residual capacity (FRC) > or = 120% of predicted normal.
INTERVENTIONS: Patients were randomized to FSC 250/50; salmeterol, 50 microg; or 
placebo twice daily for 8 weeks. Predose and postdose spirometry,
plethysmography, and constant-load cycle cardiopulmonary exercise test
evaluations were compared. The primary comparison was FSC 250/50 with placebo.
The salmeterol group was included for exploratory comparisons with FSC 250/50.
RESULTS: A total of 185 patients (mean baseline FEV1 of 41% predicted) were
enrolled. At rest, FSC 250/50 significantly reduced postdose FRC and increased
inspiratory capacity (IC) compared with placebo (differences of - 0.35 +/- 0.12 L
and 0.33 +/- 0.06 L [mean +/- SE], respectively, at week 8; p > or = 0.003) and
increased exercise endurance time (difference, 132 +/- 45 s; p = 0.004). At a
standardized time during exercise (isotime), FSC 250/50 increased postdose IC by 
0.20 +/- 0.05 L over placebo with associated improvements in tidal volume and
minute ventilation (p < 0.05 vs placebo at week 8). Improvement in exercise time 
was significantly correlated with the increase in IC (r = 0.45, p < 0.001) but
not FEV1 (r = 0.23, p = 0.08). Predose comparisons of FSC 250/50 with salmeterol 
and placebo favored FSC 250/50.
CONCLUSION: We conclude that FSC 250/50 decreases lung hyperinflation at rest and
during exercise with an associated increase in exercise endurance time when
compared with placebo.

DOI: 10.1378/chest.130.3.647 
PMID: 16963658  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. Proc Am Thorac Soc. 2006 Sep;3(7):624-9.

Pharmacotherapy for mortality reduction in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Sin DD(1), Man SF.

Author information: 
(1)The James Hogg iCAPTURE Center for Cardiovascular and Pulmonary Research, St. 
Paul's Hospital, Room 368A, 1081 Burrard Street, Vancouver, BC, V6Z 1Y6 Canada.
dsin@mrl.ubc.ca

Despite rapid advances in our understanding of its pathophysiology, chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) remains incurable. Although bronchodilators 
and theophyllines are commonly used to treat symptoms of dyspnea and cough and to
acutely improve lung function, they do not modify the long-term decline in
FEV(1). The principal goals of current COPD pharmacotherapy are to reduce
exacerbations, improve health status, and prolong survival. There is strong
evidence, including data from randomized clinical trials, that indicates inhaled 
corticosteroids alone, or in combination with a long-acting beta(2)-adrenoceptor 
agonist, improve patient symptoms, reduce morbidity, and perhaps even prolong
survival in COPD. A recent individual patient-based meta-analysis of randomized, 
placebo-controlled trials of inhaled corticosteroids in COPD indicated that
mortality over 3-4 yr was 27% lower in the group that received inhaled
corticosteroids compared with the group that received placebo. Several short-term
follow-up trials have also suggested a reduction in mortality with a combination 
of long-acting beta(2)-agonist and inhaled corticosteroids, and a large,
long-term study that is currently ongoing (the Toward a Revolution in COPD Health
[TORCH] study) will provide data on the effects of fluticasone propionate and
salmeterol in combination on all-cause mortality. This article reviews some of
the relevant epidemiologic and pathophysiologic processes that affect mortality
in COPD and critically examines the effect of current COPD therapies on
mortality.

DOI: 10.1513/pats.200603-096SS 
PMID: 16963545  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


493. Thorax. 2006 Sep;61(9):761-6.

Inhibition of reactive nitrogen species production in COPD airways: comparison of
inhaled corticosteroid and oral theophylline.

Hirano T(1), Yamagata T, Gohda M, Yamagata Y, Ichikawa T, Yanagisawa S, Ueshima
K, Akamatsu K, Nakanishi M, Matsunaga K, Minakata Y, Ichinose M.

Author information: 
(1)Third Department of Internal Medicine, Wakayama Medical University School of
Medicine, Wakayama, Japan.

Erratum in
    Thorax. 2008 Nov;63(11):1029.

Comment in
    Thorax. 2006 Sep;61(9):742-4.

BACKGROUND: Reactive nitrogen species (RNS) are thought to be one of the
important factors in the pathogenesis of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD). A study was undertaken to examine the effects of theophylline and
fluticasone propionate (FP) on RNS production in subjects with COPD.
METHODS: Sixteen COPD subjects participated in the study. Theophylline (400
mg/day orally) or FP (400 mug/day inhalation) were administered for 4 weeks in a 
randomised crossover manner with a washout period of 4 weeks. Induced sputum was 
collected at the beginning and end of each treatment period. 3-nitrotyrosine
(3-NT), which is a footprint of RNS, was quantified by high performance liquid
chromatography with an electrochemical detection method as well as by
immunohistochemical staining.
RESULTS: Theophylline significantly reduced the level of 3-NT in the sputum
supernatant as well as the number of 3-NT positive cells (both p<0.01). FP also
reduced 3-NT formation, but the effect was smaller than that of theophylline.
Theophylline also significantly reduced the neutrophil cell counts in the sputum 
(p<0.01), while FP treatment had no effect on the number of inflammatory cells in
the sputum, except eosinophils.
CONCLUSIONS: Theophylline reduces nitrative stress and neutrophil infiltration in
COPD airways to a larger extent than inhaled corticosteroid.

DOI: 10.1136/thx.200X.058156 
PMCID: PMC2117093
PMID: 16936236  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. MedGenMed. 2006 Mar 29;8(1):86.

Management of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease associated with chronic
bronchitis with inhaled fluticasone propionate/salmeterol (ADVAIR DISKUS) 250/50:
results of a patient experience trial.

Stoloff S(1), Samuels S, Kerney D, Brown CP.

Author information: 
(1)The University of Nevada School of Medicine, Reno, Nevada, USA.

CONTEXT: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is recognized as a major
healthcare problem in the United States and around the world.
OBJECTIVE: This survey regarding initial experience in patients with COPD
collected feedback about newly initiated therapy with fluticasone
propionate/salmeterol (FSC; ADVAIR DISKUS).
DESIGN: Three telephone surveys were conducted; Survey 1 prior to initiating
therapy with FSC 250/50, and Surveys 2 and 3 at 2 weeks and 30 days after
initiating therapy with FSC 250/50, respectively.
SETTING: One thousand primary care physicians recruited outpatients into the
trial.
PATIENTS: Patients were either newly diagnosed with COPD associated with chronic 
bronchitis or were still experiencing breathing difficulties on an
anticholinergic medication.
INTERVENTIONS: Patients initiated FSC 250/50 and received a 1-month supply of FSC
250/50 with an albuterol inhaler for rescue use.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Outcome measures were patient perceptions of satisfaction,
compliance, and convenience and changes in breathing on 1 (negative) to 9
(positive) point scales.
RESULTS: Five hundred sixteen patients completed all 3 surveys. The mean age was 
61 years, 63% were female, and 62% had been diagnosed with COPD associated with
chronic bronchitis for 3 years or less (Table 1).
CONCLUSION: Patients reported high satisfaction, compliance, and convenience with
FSC 250/50 within 2 weeks of initiating therapy, all maintained over the trial
period. Additionally, patients had positive changes in breathing, including
improvements in the ability to breathe upon awakening in the morning.


PMCID: PMC1681960
PMID: 16915216  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


495. Pulm Pharmacol Ther. 2007;20(5):556-61. Epub 2006 Jul 7.

A pilot study to assess the effects of combining fluticasone
propionate/salmeterol and tiotropium on the airflow obstruction of patients with 
severe-to-very severe COPD.

Cazzola M(1), Andò F, Santus P, Ruggeri P, Di Marco F, Sanduzzi A, D'Amato M.

Author information: 
(1)University of Rome Tor Vergata, Department of Internal Medicine, Unit of
Respiratory Diseases, Rome, Italy. mcazzola@qubisoft.it

The aim of this pilot study was to explore the relative efficacy in terms of
improvement in symptoms and lung function of combining fluticasone
propionate/salmeterol combination (FSC) and tiotropium in patients with
severe-to-very severe stable COPD. Ninety patients were randomized to receive 3
months of treatment in one of three treatment groups: (1) FSC 500/50 microg
Diskus, 1 inhalation twice daily+placebo Handihaler 1 inhalation once-daily
daily; (2) tiotropium 18 microg Handihaler, 1 inhalation once daily+placebo
Diskus, 1 inhalation twice daily; (3) FSC 500/50 microg Diskus, 1 inhalation
twice daily+tiotropium 18 microg Handihaler, 1 inhalation once-daily daily.
Patients attended the clinic before and after 1 month, 2 months, and 3 months of 
treatment for evaluations of pulmonary function, and dyspnea, which was assessed 
using a visual analog scale (VAS). Also the supplemental salbutamol use was
measured. Eighty-one patients completed the 3-month treatment period: 26 patients
receiving FSC, 26 patients receiving tiotropium, and 29 patients receiving
FSC+tiotropium. Patients were withdrawn for COPD exacerbation. Improvements in
trough FEV(1) with all treatments medications were observed by the first month
when trough FEV(1) had improved significantly above baseline by 74 mL (p<0.05) in
the tiotropium group, by 117 mL (p<0.05) in the FSC group and by 115 mL (p<0.05) 
in FSC+tiotropium group. At the end of the study, trough FEV(1) had improved
significantly above baseline by 141 mL (p<0.05) in the tiotropium group, by 140
mL (p<0.05) in the FSC group and by 186 mL (p<0.05) in FSC+tiotropium group. The 
difference between FSC and tiotropium appeared to decrease, that between FSC and 
FSC+tiotropium appeared to increase and that between tiotropium and
FSC+tiotropium remained almost similar with study duration. Our results suggest
that adding FSC and tiotropium may provide benefits in symptomatic patients with 
severe-to-very severe stable COPD.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pupt.2006.06.001 
PMID: 16914336  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


496. Value Health. 2006 Jul-Aug;9(4):227-35.

Estimating the cost-effectiveness of fluticasone propionate for treating chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease in the presence of missing data.

Briggs AH(1), Lozano-Ortega G, Spencer S, Bale G, Spencer MD, Burge PS.

Author information: 
(1)Public Health & health Policy, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, UK.
a.briggs@clinmed.gla.ac.uk

OBJECTIVES: To explore the cost-effectiveness of fluticasone propionate (FP) for 
the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), we estimated costs
and quality-adjusted life-years (QALYs) over 3 years, based on an economic
appraisal of a previously reported clinical trial (Inhaled Steroids in
Obstructive Lung Disease in Europe [ISOLDE]).
METHODS: Seven hundred forty-two patients enrolled in the ISOLDE trial who
received either FP or placebo had data available on health-care costs and quality
of life over the period of the study. The SF-36-based utility scores for quality 
of life were used to calculate QALYs. A combined imputation and bootstrapping
procedure was employed to handle missing data and to estimate statistical
uncertainty in the estimated cumulative costs and QALYs over the study period.
The imputation approach was based on propensity scoring and nesting this approach
within the bootstrap ensured that multiple imputations were performed such that
statistical estimates included imputation uncertainty.
RESULTS: Complete data were available on mortality within the follow-up period of
the study and a nonsignificant trend toward improved survival of 0.06 (95%
confidence interval [CI]-0.01 to 0.15) life-years was observed. In an analysis
based on a propensity scoring approach to missing data we estimated the
incremental costs of FP versus placebo to be 1021 sterling pound(95% CI 619-1338 
sterling pound) with an additional effect of 0.11 QALYs (CI 0.04-0.20).
Cost-effectiveness estimates for the within-trial period of 17,700 sterling pound
per life-year gained (6900 sterling pound to infinity) and 9500 sterling pound
per QALY gained (CI 4300-26,500 sterling pound) were generated that include
uncertainty due to the imputation process. An alternative imputation approach did
not materially affect these estimates.
CONCLUSIONS: Previous analyses of the ISOLDE study showed significant improvement
on disease-specific health status measures and a trend toward a survival
advantage for treatment with FP. This analysis shows that joint considerations of
quality of life and survival result in a substantial increase in QALYs favoring
treatment with FP. Based on these data, the inhaled corticosteroid FP appears
cost-effective for the treatment of COPD. Confirmation or refutation of this
result may be achieved once the Towards a Revolution in COPD Health (TORCH) study
reports, a large randomized controlled trial powered to detect mortality changes 
associated with the use of FP alone, or in combination with salmeterol, which is 
also collecting resource use and utility data suitable for estimating
cost-effectiveness.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1524-4733.2006.00106.x 
PMID: 16903992  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


497. Thorax. 2006 Aug;61(8):735.

Inhaled corticosteroids and mortality in COPD: are we there yet?

Stirling R.

Comment in
    Thorax. 2006 Oct;61(10):918.

Comment on
    Thorax. 2005 Dec;60(12):992-7.


PMCID: PMC2104685
PMID: 16877693  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


498. Pulm Pharmacol Ther. 2006;19(6):419-24. Epub 2006 May 10.

Additional clinical benefit of enoxaparin in COPD patients receiving salmeterol
and fluticasone propionate in combination.

Brown RA(1), Allegra L, Matera MG, Page CP, Cazzola M.

Author information: 
(1)Sackler Institute of Pulmonary Pharmacology, King's College London, Guy's
Campus, London, UK.

It is now well recognised that heparin possesses numerous anti-inflammatory
properties in addition to its anticoagulant properties. Thus, the aim of this
study was to investigate the effects of the low molecular weight heparin,
enoxaparin (ENX), as an add-on therapy for a period of 12 weeks, to inhaled
salmeterol/fluticasone propionate (SLM/FP) combination in patients with stable
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Forty-six patients were randomised 
to receive 12 weeks of treatment in one of two treatment groups: (1) fixed
combination of SLM 50 microg and FP 500 microg Diskus, one inhalation twice
daily; or (2) as group 1 plus 20 mg ENX administered subcutaneously once daily
for 12 weeks. Patients attended the clinic before and after 4, 8 and 12 weeks of 
treatment for evaluations of lung function, blood gas tensions, dyspnoea and
supplemental salbutamol use. Thirty-six patients completed the 12-week treatment 
period, 20 from group 1 and 16 from group 2. A significant increase in forced
expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1) over baseline was observed after 12 weeks of
treatment in group 1 (0.145 L, 95% CI: 0.994-1.406, p<0.01), whilst significant
increases in FEV1 over baseline were observed in group 2 after 4, 8 and 12 weeks 
of treatment with a maximum increase at 12 weeks of 0.244 L (95% CI: 1.175-1.596,
p<0.01). Both treatment groups experienced similar improvements in blood gas
tensions, dyspnoea and supplemental salbutamol use. Our results suggest that
addition of ENX to conventional therapy of COPD may provide additional clinical
benefit and must be further investigated as a treatment for COPD.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pupt.2006.04.004 
PMID: 16807023  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. Prim Care Respir J. 2004 Dec;13(4):185-97.

Patient-centred outcomes in primary care management of COPD - what do recent
clinical trial data tell us?

Haughney J(1), Gruffydd-Jones K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Practice and Primary Care, University of Aberdeen,
Foresterhill Health Centre, Westburn Road, Aberdeen AB25 2AY, UK.
j.haughney@abdn.ac.uk

Comment in
    Prim Care Respir J. 2004 Dec;13(4):177-8.

Traditionally, the severity of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and
effectiveness of interventions have been determined using measures of lung
function. However, a relatively small reduction or change in lung function - such
as those observed in mild to moderate COPD - may not always reflect the impact of
the disease or intervention on patients' physical and psychological well-being.
This paper examines the utility of various outcome measures that can be used in
primary care to monitor and manage COPD. In particular, it demonstrates the
importance of measuring patient-centred outcomes, such as health-related quality 
of life and exacerbations, which may reflect more accurately the effects of the
disease and treatment on patients' everyday lives. Recent large-scale clinical
trials of budesonide/formoterol and fluticasone/salmeterol combination therapies 
and tiotropium have utilised these outcome measures to show the significant
benefits these treatments bestow to patients in the presence of relatively modest
gains in lung function.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pcrj.2004.06.006 
PMID: 16701668  [PubMed]


500. Chest. 2006 Apr;129(4):893-8.

Airway blood flow reactivity in healthy smokers and in ex-smokers with or without
COPD.

Mendes ES(1), Campos MA, Wanner A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, University of Miami School
of Medicine, 1600 NW 10th Ave, 7064-A, Miami, FL 33136. emendes@med.miami.edu.

Erratum in
    Chest. 2006 Jul;130(1):308.

STUDY OBJECTIVES: Cigarette smoking has been associated with impaired
endothelium-dependent relaxation responses in the brachial and coronary arteries 
(endothelial dysfunction). The aim of the present study was to determine whether 
the airway circulation is also affected and whether pharmacologic treatment has
an effect on endothelial function in patients with COPD.
METHODS AND PATIENTS: Airway blood flow (Qaw) responses to therapy with inhaled
albuterol, which causes endothelium-dependent vasodilation, were measured with a 
noninvasive soluble-gas-uptake technique in age-matched healthy current smokers
(n = 10), healthy ex-smokers (n = 10), ex-smokers with COPD (n = 10), and healthy
lifetime nonsmokers. In the ex-smokers with COPD, the albuterol responsiveness
measurement was repeated after 4 weeks of treatment with fluticasone/salmeterol
and after a drug washout period of 4 or 8 weeks.
RESULTS: The mean (+/- SE) baseline Qaw values ranged between 40.7 +/- 3.9 and
50.9 +/- 2.8 microL/min/mL anatomic dead space in the four groups (differences
were not significant). The mean FEV(1) was 53.4 +/- 2.3% predicted in the
ex-smokers with COPD. Albuterol inhalation increased mean Qaw significantly in
lifetime nonsmokers (50.1 +/- 8.3% predicted; p < 0.05) and healthy ex-smokers
(37.2 +/- 3.4% predicted; p < 0.05), but not in healthy current smokers (13.9 +/-
3.2% predicted; difference was not significant) and ex-smokers with COPD (9.7 +/-
4.5% predicted; difference was not significant). While fluticasone/salmeterol did
not change Qaw significantly, it restored albuterol responsiveness (67.6 +/-
11.1% predicted; p < 0.05) in the ex-smokers with COPD; this effect was no longer
seen after the drug washout period.
CONCLUSIONS: Cigarette smoking is associated with a blunted vasodilator response 
to inhaled albuterol in the airway as an expression of endothelial dysfunction,
with a partial recovery of albuterol responsiveness after smoking cessation in
healthy ex-smokers but not in ex-smokers with COPD. In the latter group, combined
glucocorticoid/long-acting beta(2)-adrenergic agonist treatment restores
albuterol responsiveness. The role of endothelial dysfunction in the
physiopathology of COPD remains to be examined.

DOI: 10.1378/chest.129.4.893 
PMID: 16608935  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


501. Rev Port Pneumol. 2005 Nov-Dec;11(6):587-9.

[Withdrawal of fluticasone propionate from combined salmeterol/fluticasone
treatment in patients with COPD causes immediate and sustained disease
deterioration: a randomised controlled trial].

[Article in Portuguese]

Wouters EF, Postma DS, Fokkens B, Hop WC, Prins J, Kuipers AF, Pasma HR, Hensing 
CA, Creutzberg EC; Cosmic COPD and Serentide: A Multi-Center Intervention and
Characterization Study Group.


PMID: 16514718  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


502. Respiration. 2007;74(2):154-8. Epub 2006 Feb 6.

Effect of inhaled steroids on increased collagen synthesis in asthma.

Kai S(1), Nomura A, Morishima Y, Ishii Y, Sakamoto T, Kiwamoto T, Iizuka T,
Sekizawa K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Institute of Clinical Medicine, University
of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan.

BACKGROUND: We previously reported that sputum levels of procollagen type I
C-terminal peptide (PICP), a marker of ongoing collagen type I deposition, are
increased in proportion to airway inflammation in asthma patients.
OBJECTIVES: In this study, we examined the effect of inhaled corticosteroids on
increased collagen synthesis in step 2-4 asthmatics.
METHODS: We compared the sputum PICP concentrations of 25 steroid-naive
asthmatics, 25 normal volunteers, and 10 subjects with chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease. Asthma subjects were also instructed to start fluticasone
propionate treatment, and the percentage of forced expiratory volume in 1 s,
sputum eosinophil counts, sputum PICP concentrations, and sputum transforming
growth factor-beta-positive cell counts before treatment were compared with those
1 month after treatment.
RESULTS: Sputum PICP concentrations were detected in the following order: asthma 
group >or= chronic obstructive pulmonary disease group > control group. Asthma
patients showing high sputum PICP belonged to step 4, although there was no
correlation between sputum PICP and asthma severity. Treatment with fluticasone
propionate not only significantly improved the mean percentage of forced
expiratory volume in 1 s (from 66.7 to 87.2%), but also decreased the mean sputum
eosinophil counts (from 13.4 to 5.8%), the mean sputum PICP concentrations (from 
30.8 to 10.2 ng/ml), and the mean sputum tumor growth factor-beta-positive cells 
(from 11.3 to 2.8%). Nevertheless, a significant difference in sputum PICP
concentrations was still observed between the control group and the
steroid-treated asthma group.
CONCLUSIONS: The present results suggest that inhaled corticosteroid treatment
might reduce sputum indexes of collagen metabolism and eosinophilic inflammation 
in asthma patients.

DOI: 10.1159/000091390 
PMID: 16465044  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


503. BMC Pulm Med. 2006 Feb 6;6:3.

Can inhaled fluticasone alone or in combination with salmeterol reduce systemic
inflammation in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease? Study protocol for a
randomized controlled trial [NCT00120978].

Sin DD(1), Man SF, Marciniuk DD, Ford G, FitzGerald M, Wong E, York E, Mainra RR,
Ramesh W, Melenka LS, Wilde E, Cowie RL, Williams D, Rousseau R; ABC (Advair,
Biomarkers in COPD) Investigators.

Author information: 
(1)Respiratory Division, Department of Medicine, University of British Columbia, 
Vancouver, Canada. dsin@mrl.ubc.ca

BACKGROUND: Systemic inflammation is associated with various complications in
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease including weight loss, cachexia,
osteoporosis, cancer and cardiovascular diseases. Inhaled corticosteroids
attenuate airway inflammation, reduce exacerbations, and improve mortality in
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Whether inhaled corticosteroids by
themselves or in combination with a long-acting beta2-adrenoceptor agonist
repress systemic inflammation in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease is
unknown. The Advair Biomarkers in COPD (ABC) study will determine whether the
effects of inhaled corticosteroids alone or in combination with a long-acting
beta2-adrenoceptor agonist reduce systemic inflammation and improve health status
in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
METHODS/DESIGN: After a 4-week run-in phase during which patients with stable
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease will receive inhaled fluticasone (500
micrograms twice daily), followed by a 4-week withdrawal phase during which all
inhaled corticosteroids and long acting beta2-adrenoceptor agonists will be
discontinued, patients will be randomized to receive fluticasone (500 micrograms 
twice daily), fluticasone/salmeterol combination (500/50 micrograms twice daily),
or placebo for four weeks. The study will recruit 250 patients across 11 centers 
in western Canada. Patients must be 40 years of age or older with at least 10
pack-year smoking history and have chronic obstructive pulmonary disease defined 
as forced expiratory volume in one second to vital capacity ratio of 0.70 or less
and forced expiratory volume in one second that is 80% of predicted or less.
Patients will be excluded if they have any known chronic systemic infections,
inflammatory conditions, history of previous solid organ transplantation,
myocardial infarction, or cerebrovascular accident within the past 3 months prior
to study enrollment. The primary end-point is serum C-reactive protein level.
Secondary end-points include circulating inflammatory cytokines such as
interleukin-6 and interleukin-8 as well as health-related quality of life and
lung function.
DISCUSSION: If inhaled corticosteroids by themselves or in combination with a
long-acting beta2-adrenoceptor agonist could repress systemic inflammation, they 
might greatly improve clinical prognosis by reducing various complications in
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2466-6-3 
PMCID: PMC1373664
PMID: 16460562  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


504. Eur J Pharmacol. 2006 Mar 8;533(1-3):28-35. Epub 2006 Feb 7.

Corticosteroids and adrenoceptor agonists: the compliments for combination
therapy in chronic airways diseases.

Sin DD(1), Man SF.

Author information: 
(1)James Hogg iCAPTURE Center for Cardiovascular and Pulmonary Research, St.
Paul's Hospital, Room 368A, 1081 Burrard Street, and Department of Medicine
(Pulmonary Division), University of British Columbia, Vancouver, B.C., Canada V6Z
1Y6. dsin@mrl.ubc.ca

The combination of inhaled corticosteroids and long-acting beta2-adrenoceptor
agonists is increasingly used as maintenance therapy in patients with moderate to
severe asthma or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). The main effect of
inhaled corticosteroids is thought to be mediated through suppression of airway
inflammation, while long-acting beta2-adrenoceptor agonists are thought to work
by inducing bronchodilation. However, there is emerging data to indicate that
these two classes of drugs interact positively with each other, leading to added 
or perhaps synergistic benefits for patients. Corticosteroids enhance the
expression of beta2-adrenoceptor, thus providing protection against
desensitization and development of tolerance to beta2-adrenoceptor agonists,
which may occur with prolonged use of these medications. Long-acting
beta2-adrenoceptor agonists, on the other hand, may amplify the anti-inflammatory
effects of corticosteroids by accelerating nuclear translocation of the
glucocorticoid receptor complex, and enhancing transcription and expression of
steroid-inducible genes in pro-inflammatory cells. In clinical trials,
corticosteroids in combination with long-acting beta2-adrenoceptor agonists
reduce exacerbation rates, and improve lung function and health status of
patients with moderate to severe asthma or COPD beyond that achieved by
individual component therapy. Their effects on mortality are unknown. There is a 
large clinical trial currently underway, which will provide mortality data by the
year 2006. On balance, clinical evidence supports the use of combination therapy 
in moderate to severe asthma and COPD.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2005.12.049 
PMID: 16457807  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


505. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2006 Apr 1;173(7):736-43. Epub 2006 Jan 19.

Antiinflammatory effects of salmeterol/fluticasone propionate in chronic
obstructive lung disease.

Barnes NC(1), Qiu YS, Pavord ID, Parker D, Davis PA, Zhu J, Johnson M, Thomson
NC, Jeffery PK; SCO30005 Study Group.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, London Chest Hospital, London, UK.

RATIONALE: No currently available treatment is reported to reduce the exaggerated
airway wall inflammation of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
OBJECTIVES: We tested the hypothesis that inhaled combined long-acting
beta2-agonist (salmeterol) and corticosteroid (fluticasone propionate) will
reduce inflammation.
METHODS: Bronchial biopsies and induced sputum were taken from 140 current and
former smokers (mean age, 64 yr) with moderate to severe disease, randomized in a
13-wk double-blind study to placebo (n = 73) or salmeterol/fluticasone propionate
50/500 microg (n = 67) twice daily. Biopsies were repeated at 12 wk and sputa at 
8 and 13 wk. After adjustment for multiplicity, comparisons between active and
placebo were made for median change from baseline in the numbers of biopsy CD8+
and CD68+ cells/mm2 and sputum neutrophils.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: Combination therapy was associated with a
reduction in biopsy CD8+ cells of -118 cells/mm2 (95% confidence interval [CI],
-209 to -42; p = 0.02), a reduction of 36% over placebo (p = 0.001). CD68+ cells 
were unaffected by combination treatment. Sputum differential (but not total)
neutrophils reduced progressively and, at Week 13, significantly with combination
treatment (median treatment difference, 8.5%; 95% CI, 1.75%-15.25%; p = 0.04).
The combination also significantly reduced biopsy CD45+ and CD4+ cells and cells 
expressing genes for tumor necrosis factor-alpha and IFN-gamma and sputum total
eosinophils (all p < or = 0.03). These antiinflammatory effects were accompanied 
by a 173-ml (95% CI, 104-242; p < 0.001) improvement in prebronchodilator FEV1.
CONCLUSIONS: The combination of salmeterol and fluticasone propionate has a broad
spectrum of antiinflammatory effects in both current and former smokers with
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, which may contribute to clinical efficacy.

DOI: 10.1164/rccm.200508-1321OC 
PMID: 16424444  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


506. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2006 May;34(5):616-24. Epub 2006 Jan 19.

Combination therapy: Synergistic suppression of virus-induced chemokines in
airway epithelial cells.

Edwards MR(1), Johnson MW, Johnston SL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, National Heart Lung Institute, Imperial
College London, Norfolk Place, W2 1PG, London, UK. michael.edwards@ic.ac.uk

Viruses are associated with the majority of exacerbations of asthma and chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease. Virus induction of neutrophil and lymphocyte
chemokines in bronchial epithelium is important in exacerbation pathogenesis.
Combined corticosteroid/beta2 agonists synergistically suppress airway smooth
muscle chemokine production. Because bronchial epithelium expresses
glucocorticoid and beta2 receptors, we investigated whether combination therapy
can synergistically suppress rhinovirus-induced bronchial epithelial cell
neutrophil (CXCL5, CXCL8) and lymphocyte (CCL5, CXCL10) chemokine production. We 
investigated modulation of rhinovirus- and IL-1beta-induced bronchial epithelial 
cell chemokine production by salmeterol and fluticasone propionate, used at
therapeutic concentrations, alone and in combination. After 1 h pretreatment,
combined treatment significantly inhibited rhinovirus 16, 1B, and
IL-1beta-induced CCL5 and CXCL8 protein and mRNA production in BEAS-2B cells
compared with fluticasone alone. When used 4 h after treatment, the combination
significantly reduced virus-induced CCL5 but not CXCL8. Salmeterol alone had no
effect; therefore, this inhibition was synergistic. Kinetic analysis demonstrated
that combination therapy reduced by 5-fold the concentration of corticosteroid
required to inhibit CXCL8 mRNA expression. In primary cells, salmeterol alone
reduced rhinovirus-induced CCL5 and CXCL10 and increased CXCL5 production in a
dose-dependent manner but had no effect on CXCL8. Fluticasone alone reduced CCL5,
CXCL8, and CXCL10 but had no effect on CXCL5. Combination therapy augmented
inhibition of CXCL8, CCL5, and CXCL10 but had no effect on CXCL5. Corticosteroids
and beta2 agonists suppress rhinovirus-induced chemokines in bronchial epithelial
cells through synergistic and additive mechanisms. This effect was greater for
lymphocyte- than for neutrophil-related chemokines.

DOI: 10.1165/rcmb.2005-0385OC 
PMID: 16424382  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


507. Pulm Pharmacol Ther. 2007;20(2):126-9. Epub 2006 Jan 18.

Airway blood flow reactivity in smokers.

Wanner A(1), Campos MA, Mendes E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine,
University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, P.O. Box 016960 (R-47), Miami, FL 
33101, USA. awanner@miami.edu

Cigarette smoking has been associated with impaired endothelium-dependent
relaxation responses in the brachial and coronary arteries (endothelial
dysfunction). The aim of the present study was to determine if the airway
circulation is also affected and if airway treatment has an effect on endothelial
function. Airway blood flow (Q(aw)) responses to inhaled albuterol as an index of
endothelial function were measured in age-matched healthy current smokers,
healthy ex-smokers, ex-smokers with COPD and healthy lifetime non-smokers; in the
ex-smokers with COPD, the albuterol responsiveness was repeated after a 4-week
treatment with an inhaled glucocorticoid/beta(2)-adrenergic agonist combination
drug. Mean baseline Q(aw) was similar in the four groups. Albuterol inhalation
increased mean Q(aw) in lifetime non-smokers (50.1+/-8.3%; p<0.05) and in healthy
ex-smokers (37.2+/-3.4%; p<0.05) but not in healthy current smokers (13.9+/-3.2%;
p=NS) and ex-smokers with COPD (9.7+/-4.5%; p=NS). While drug treatment per se
did not change Q(aw) significantly, it restored albuterol responsiveness
(+67.6+/-11.1%; p<0.05) in the ex-smokers with COPD. Thus, cigarette smoking is
associated with endothelial dysfunction in the airway, with a partial recovery of
endothelial function after smoking cessation in healthy ex-smokers but not in
ex-smokers with COPD. In the latter, combined glucocorticoid/beta(2)-adrenergic
agonist treatment restores albuterol responsiveness.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pupt.2005.12.004 
PMID: 16414297  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


508. Chest. 2005 Dec;128(6):4036-40.

Heat decreases formoterol delivery.

Robbins RA(1), Thomas AR, Proctor LM, Hoyt JC, Hayden JM.

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Carl T. Hayden VA Medical Center, 650
East Indian School Rd, Phoenix, AZ 85012, USA. Richard.Robbins2@med.va.gov

STUDY OBJECTIVES: Based on anecdotal reports of formoterol aggregating in
mailboxes in the summer in Arizona, we examined the effect of heat on formoterol 
as well as on drug delivery.
DESIGN: Formoterol capsules in original blister packaging were heated to 40 to 70
degrees C (104 to 158 degrees F) for 3 h and at 70 degrees C (158 degrees F) for 
15 to 180 min. Capsules were removed from packaging, and a vacuum setup was used 
to dispense the formoterol into a filter using the device provided by the
manufacturer. The weights of the capsule predispensation and postdispensation
were measured to calculate drug delivery. Measurements were compared to those of 
capsules not exposed to heat. For comparison, tiotropium and a combination of
fluticasone propionate and salmeterol (Advair; GlaxoSmithKline; Research Triangle
Park, NC) were similarly tested.
RESULTS: Visual inspection of the heated capsules revealed gross distortion as
well as visible clumping of formoterol at the higher temperatures. The mean (+/- 
SEM) change in the weights of capsules that underwent heating were significantly 
less than those obtained from capsules that had not been heated (mean change
after heating for 3 h at 70 degrees C, 2.3 +/- 0.7 vs 24.7 +/- 0.6 mg,
respectively; p < 0.001), indicating decreased formoterol delivery. Heat produced
a dose-responsive and time-responsive decrease in formoterol delivery. One of six
capsules that were subjected to temperatures as low as 40 degrees C (104 degrees 
F) for 3 h had decreased delivery, and three of six capsules subjected to a
temperature of 70 degrees C (158 degrees F) for times as short as 30 min
decreased delivery. In contrast, neither tiotropium nor fluticasone
propionate/salmeterol delivery was decreased by heating for up to 3 h at 70
degrees C (158 degrees F). Thermometers placed in mailboxes or in car windows in 
mid-summer in Arizona (approximate outside temperature, 110 degrees F [43 degrees
C]) exceeded 70 degrees C (158 degrees F).
CONCLUSIONS: These data demonstrate that the exposure of formoterol to heat
decreases drug delivery and that caution should be used when mailing,
transporting or storing formoterol.

DOI: 10.1378/chest.128.6.4036 
PMID: 16354878  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


509. Int J Clin Pract. 2005 Dec;59(12):1488-95.

Idealhalers or realhalers? A comparison of Diskus and Turbuhaler.

Borgström L(1), Asking L, Thorsson L.

Author information: 
(1)AstraZeneca R&D, Lund, Sweden. lars.borgstrom@astrazeneca.com

Medication for the treatment of asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
should be given locally by inhalation. There is, however, no such thing as an
ideal inhaler, or 'Idealhaler', which has all desired properties with no
drawbacks. In this short review, we have compared the relative merits of the two 
most commonly used dry powder inhalers -- Turbuhaler and Diskus. Clinical effect 
is related to the amount of inhaled drug that reaches the lungs, and this in turn
depends on the amount of fine particles generated at inhalation. Turbuhaler is
more than twice as effective as Diskus at generating fine particles, and the
higher lung deposition with Turbuhaler is accompanied by a lower variability in
lung deposition. Compared with Diskus, the lung deposition with Turbuhaler is
affected less by factors such as humidity.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1368-5031.2005.00747.x 
PMID: 16351685  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


510. Pharmacotherapy. 2005 Dec;25(12):1752-60.

Asthma-related health care resource use among patients starting fluticasone or
montelukast therapy.

Allen-Ramey FC(1), Anstatt DT, Sajjan SG, Markson LE.

Author information: 
(1)Outcomes Research and Management, Merck & Co., Inc., West Point, Pennsylvania 
19486-0004, USA. felicia_ramey@merck.com

STUDY OBJECTIVES: To compare patterns of asthma-related health care resource use 
among patients prescribed fluticasone or montelukast as singlecontroller therapy 
for asthma, and to confirm patterns previously observed in retrospective analyses
examining outcomes among patients receiving fluticasone or montelukast for
asthma.
DESIGN: Retrospective cohort study.
DATA SOURCE: Administrative claims data drawn from United States health insurers 
in 35 states, covering 17 million privately insured patients. PATIENTS; A total
of 4758 patients aged 2-55 years with asthma who were prescribed either
fluticasone or montelukast from July 1, 1998-June 30, 1999, were continuously
enrolled for at least 24 months, had no evidence of controller therapy for 6
months before the start of drug therapy, and had no evidence of chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease or other respiratory illness.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: Patients were identified using an algorithm based 
on medical and pharmacy insurance claims. Patients were matched between groups
based on a propensity score of clinical characteristics and age; this resulted in
1512 patients/treatment group. Asthma-related health care claims incurred for 12 
months before and after the start of controller therapy were analyzed. After
adjustment, the fluticasone-treated group had greater risk than the
montelukast-treated group of requiring therapy with a short-acting beta-agonist
in the follow-up period (relative risk 1.12, 95% confidence interval [CI]
1.03-1.20). Odds were similar across treatment groups for needing an emergency
department visit and/or hospitalization (odds ratio 1.08, 95% CI 0.74-1.58) and
for needing therapy with an oral corticosteroid (odds ratio 1.02, 95% CI
0.84-1.26).
CONCLUSION: The start of therapy with either fluticasone or montelukast as a
single-controller for asthma was associated with similar asthma-related health
care resource use in this matched population.

DOI: 10.1592/phco.2005.25.12.1752 
PMID: 16305295  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


511. Am J Vet Res. 2005 Oct;66(10):1665-74.

Randomized, controlled study of inhaled fluticasone propionate, oral
administration of prednisone, and environmental management of horses with
recurrent airway obstruction.

Couëtil LL(1), Chilcoat CD, DeNicola DB, Clark SP, Glickman NW, Glickman LT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences, School of Veterinary Medicine,
Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47907, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To determine whether administration of glucocorticoids provides
additional benefits to environmental management of horses with recurrent airway
obstruction (RAO).
ANIMALS: 28 horses with RAO.
PROCEDURE: Horses were classified as having mild, moderate, or severe RAO. Within
each category, horses were randomly assigned to receive inhaled fluticasone
propionate, inhaled control substance, or oral administration of prednisone.
During the 4-week study, horses were maintained outdoors and fed a pelleted feed.
Clinical scores, pulmonary function, results of cytologic examination of
bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF), and adrenal gland function were determined
before and 2 and 4 weeks after initiation of treatment.
RESULTS: Clinical score and pulmonary function of all RAO-affected horses
improved during the treatment period. After 4 weeks, clinical scores and
pulmonary function of horses treated with a glucocorticoid were not different
from those for the control treatment. In horses with severe RAO, treatment with
fluticasone for 2 weeks resulted in significantly greater improvement in
pulmonary function, compared with pulmonary function after treatment with
prednisone or the control substance. Treatment with a glucocorticoid for 4 weeks 
and a low-dust environment did not have any effect on cellular content of BALF
Treatment with prednisone for 2 weeks resulted in a significant decrease in serum
cortisol concentration, compared with concentrations after administration of
fluticasone or the control substance.
CONCLUSIONS AND CLINICAL RELEVANCE: Environmental management is the most
important factor in the treatment of horses with RAO. Early treatment with
inhaled fluticasone can help accelerate recovery of horses with severe RAO.


PMID: 16273895  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


512. Proc Am Thorac Soc. 2005;2(4):272-81; discussion 290-1.

Combination therapy for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: clinical aspects.

Donohue JF(1).

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary & Critical Care Medicine, University of North Carolina School of
Medicine, 4125 Bioinformatics Building, CB#7020, Chapel Hill, NC 27599-7020, USA.
jdonohue@med.unc.edu

Anticholinergics and beta-agonists reduce bronchoconstriction through different
mechanisms, and there is a long history of combination therapy with short-acting 
agents in these classes for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Such
combinations may allow lower doses and thereby improve safety. Oral theophylline 
has also been combined with short-acting bronchodilators for many years. Most
studies, however, show only mild improvements in bronchodilation at the expense
of increased adverse effects. Professional society guidelines recommend that as
the symptoms of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease progress, the patient
should receive regular treatment with one or more long-acting bronchodilators,
and an inhaled corticosteroid if the patient has repeated exacerbations. The
combination of a short-acting anticholinergic with a long-acting beta-agonist, or
the combination of a long-acting anticholinergic with a short- or long-acting
beta-agonist, has been shown in most studies to improve lung function versus
monotherapy with the individual components. Systematic reviews have concluded
that fluticasone and salmeterol, and budesonide and formoterol, are superior to
placebo and lead to clinically meaningful improvements in lung function,
exacerbation rate, and quality of life. Effects on survival are less clear. Some 
of the other issues to be resolved are the safety of combination therapy, its
pharmacoeconomic impact, and the role of newer agents.

DOI: 10.1513/pats.200505-047SR 
PMID: 16267348  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


513. Thorax. 2006 Jan;61(1):29-33. Epub 2005 Oct 21.

Cost effectiveness of inhaled steroid withdrawal in outpatients with chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease.

van der Palen J(1), Monninkhof E, van der Valk P, Sullivan SD, Veenstra DL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Medisch Spectrum Twente, Enschede, The
Netherlands. vdpalen@euronet.nl

BACKGROUND: The evidence for the effectiveness and safety of inhaled
corticosteroids (ICS) in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is
inconclusive. This study determined the cost effectiveness of withdrawing
fluticasone propionate (FP) in outpatients with COPD.
METHODS: The cost effectiveness analysis was based on a randomised, placebo
controlled FP withdrawal study. After a 4 month run in period on FP, patients
were randomly assigned to continue FP 500 microg twice daily or to receive
placebo for 6 months. A decision analytical model evaluated the 6 month
incremental cost effectiveness of the ICS versus ICS withdrawal strategy. One way
sensitivity analyses and a Monte Carlo simulation were performed to evaluate the 
robustness of the findings.
RESULTS: The average patient with COPD in the FP group generated 511 in direct
medical costs, including 238 for FP. The cost of the placebo strategy was 456.
The higher direct drug cost of 212 per patient for the FP strategy during the 6
month follow up period compared with the placebo group was partially offset by a 
lower exacerbation and hospital admission cost of 157. The 6 month incremental
cost effectiveness of the FP strategy compared with placebo was 110 per
exacerbation prevented and 1286 per hospital admission prevented.
CONCLUSIONS: Over a 6 month period, withdrawing FP in a pre-selected trial
population of COPD patients led to absolute cost savings but with a higher rate
of exacerbations and hospital admissions.

DOI: 10.1136/thx.2005.044578 
PMCID: PMC2080701
PMID: 16244087  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


514. J Feline Med Surg. 2006 Feb;8(1):45-54. Epub 2005 Oct 6.

Inhaled fluticasone reduces bronchial responsiveness and airway inflammation in
cats with mild chronic bronchitis.

Kirschvink N(1), Leemans J, Delvaux F, Snaps F, Jaspart S, Evrard B, Delattre L, 
Cambier C, Clercx C, Gustin P.

Author information: 
(1)Department for Functional Sciences B41, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine,
University of Liège, 4000 Liège, Belgium. kirschvink@fundp.ac.be

This study investigated the effect of inhaled fluticasone on lower airway
inflammation and bronchial responsiveness (BR) to inhaled carbachol in cats with 
very mild, chronic bronchitis (n = 5) that were compared with healthy cats
serving as controls (n = 6). Chest radiographs, BR tests performed non-invasively
by barometric whole body plethysmography (BWBP) and bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) 
were performed before and after treatment. BR was quantified by calculating the
concentration of carbachol inducing bronchoconstriction (C-Penh300%), defined as 
a 300% increase of baseline Penh, an index of bronchoconstriction obtained by
BWBP. BAL fluid was analyzed cytologically and the oxidant marker 8-iso-PGF2alpha
was determined. At test 1, healthy cats and cats with bronchitis were untreated, 
whereas for test 2 inhalant fluticasone (250 microg once daily) was administrated
for 2 consecutive weeks to cats with bronchitis. Control cats remained untreated.
Inhaled fluticasone induced a significant increase in C-Penh300% and a
significant decrease of BAL fluid total cells, macrophages, neutrophils and
8-iso-PGF2alpha in cats with bronchitis, whilst untreated control cats did not
show significant changes over time. This study shows that a 2-week fluticasone
treatment significantly reduced lower airway inflammation in very mild
bronchitis. BR could be successfully monitored in cats using BWPB and decreased
significantly in response to inhaled fluticasone. 8-Iso-PGF2alpha in BAL fluid
was responsive to treatment and appeared as a sensitive biomarker of lower airway
inflammation in cats.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jfms.2005.07.001 
PMID: 16213765  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


515. J Physiol Pharmacol. 2005 Sep;56 Suppl 4:135-42.

New developments in the treatment of COPD: comparing the effects of inhaled
corticosteroids and N-acetylcysteine.

van Overveld FJ(1), Demkow U, Górecka D, de Backer WA, Zielinski J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Antwerp University, Antwerp, Belgium.
frans.vanoverveld@pmintl.com

Inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) are widely used for the treatment of COPD despite
of controversial statements concerning their efficacy. The use of
N-acetylcysteine (NAC), a mucolytic drug with antioxidant properties, is less
clear, but it may counteract the oxidant-antioxidant imbalance in COPD. The aim
of this study was to evaluate whether treatment of COPD patients with ICS or NAC 
is able to improve inflammatory indices and to enhance lung function. ICS
treatment enhanced protective markers for oxidative stress such as glutathione
peroxidase (GPx) (51.2 +/-5.8 vs. 62.2 +/-8.6 U/g Hb, P<0.02) and
trolox-equivalent antioxidant capacity (TEAC) (1.44 +/-0.05 vs. 1.52 +/-0.06 mM, 
P<0.05). NAC decreased sputum eosinophil cationic protein (318 +/-73 vs. 163
+/-30 ng/ml, P<0.01) and sputum IL-8 (429 +/-80 vs. 347 +/-70 ng/ml, P<0.05). The
increased antioxidant capacity prevented an up-regulation of adhesion molecules, 
since the levels of intracellular adhesion molecule 1 (ICAM-1) correlated
negatively with GPx (P<0.0001) and TEAC (P<0.0001). On the other hand, expression
of adhesion molecules was promoted by inflammation, reflected by a positive
correlation between the levels of IL-8 and ICAM-1 (P<0.0001). The effects of
treatment on lung function were only reflected in the FEV(1) values. The absolute
value of FEV(1), both before and after salbutamol inhalation, increased from 1690
+/-98 to 1764 +/-110 ml, and 1818 +/-106 to 1906 +/-116 ml, respectively, after
ICS (P<0.05) . Ten weeks after treatment, FEV(1) values dropped to 1716 +/-120 ml
post-salbutamol (P<0.05). When followed by treatment with NAC, these values
decreased even further to 1666 +/-84 ml. These results suggest that ICS improved 
lung function in COPD patients with moderate airflow obstruction, beside a minor 
improvement in the oxidant-antioxidant imbalance leading to a lesser expression
of ICAM-1. Treatment with NAC decreased some inflammatory parameters and had
indirectly an inhibitory effect on the expression of adhesion molecules.


PMID: 16204787  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


516. Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci. 2005 Jul-Aug;9(4):209-15.

Combination therapy in COPD: different response of COPD stages and predictivity
of functional parameters.

Terzano C(1), Petroianni A, Ricci A, Allegra L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular & Respiratory Sciences, Respiratory Diseases
Unit, Fondazione E. Lorillard Spencer Cenci, La Sapienza University--Rome, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Inhaled corticosteroids reduce exacerbations in patients with chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) but they do not affect disease progression. 
FEV1, as single parameter, showed limits in describing the heterogeneity of COPD 
population. Combination therapy, with long-acting Beta2-agonist and
corticosteroid, showed a more beneficial effect on lung function, exacerbations, 
and health status than single inhaled drug. The aim of this study was to assess, 
in stable COPD, which stage (mild, moderate, severe) shows the best response
after 12 weeks inhaled treatment, and which starting functional parameters show a
correlation with the response.
METHODS: 170 stable COPD patients (38 mild, 66 moderate, 66 severe) were
enrolled. Patients received salmeterol/fluticasone 50/500 microg Metered Dose
Inhaler (MDI) bid for 12 weeks. Pulmonary function tests and clinical data were
performed. Results were subdivided, on functional and clinical data, in
"responders (R)" and "no-responders (NR)".
RESULTS: A FEV1 improvement (+ 12% and 200 ml) was achieved in 21 mild, 28
moderate and 17 severe COPD patients, respectively 55.3%, 45.9%, and 30.9% of
each group. Statistical analysis of starting functional parameters showed a
correlation with the therapeutic response for FEV1/FVC, MEF50 and DLCO/VA% (p <
0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Salmeterol/fluticasone improves FEV1% in mild and moderate more than
in severe COPD patients. The study confirmed the difference in response between
early and advanced stage. Starting FEV1/FVC and MEF50 were significant predictors
in mild and moderate stages, and starting DLCO/VA% resulted a significant
predictor in moderate and severe stages.


PMID: 16128040  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


517. Oral Dis. 2005 Sep;11(5):303-8.

Oral health in patients on inhaled corticosteroid treatment.

Komerik N(1), Akkaya A, Yildiz M, Buyukkaplan US, Kuru L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Surgery, Faculty of Dentistry, Suleyman Demirel University,
Isparta, Turkey. nkomerik@med.sdu.edu.tr

OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to investigate the effects of long-term
inhaled corticosteroids on bone mineral density (BMD) of the mandible in relation
with the tooth loss.
DESIGN: Cross sectional analytic study.
SUBJECTS AND METHODS: Patients (n = 30) with chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease under inhaled corticosteroid therapy for at least 1 year were compared
with sex- and age-matched healthy controls (n = 30). BMD of the mandible was
measured by dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry. The clinical examination included
recording the number of teeth present together with periodontal condition. Levels
of serum osteocalcin, alkaline phosphatase, calcium, phosphorus and cortisol were
also assessed.
RESULTS: BMD of the mandible in patients on corticosteroid treatment was
significantly lower than that in the control group (P = 0.001). Patients under
treatment had more missing teeth than the control group but the difference did
not reach statistical significance. The two groups exhibited similar clinical
parameters of periodontal condition. Significantly lower levels of osteocalcin (P
< 0.0001), calcium (P = 0.004) and cortisol (P = 0.03) were observed in the
patients on corticosteroid treatment.
CONCLUSION: Long-term use of inhaled corticosteroids may impair bone metabolism
and lead to a marked decrease in the mandibular BMD.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1601-0825.2005.01122.x 
PMID: 16120117  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


518. Proc Am Thorac Soc. 2005;2(1):78-82.

Effects of corticosteroids on systemic inflammation in chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease.

Man SF(1), Sin DD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of British Columbia, Canada.
pman@providencehealth.bc.ca

Patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) are predisposed to
atherosclerosis and coronary artery disease, but the underlying mechanisms are
unclear. Although there is wide acceptance that atherosclerosis is related to
systemic inflammation, the cause(s) and mechanism(s) of pulmonary inflammation in
stable COPD remain unknown. Infectious (bacterial and viral) as well as
noninfectious agents can cause acute exacerbations in COPD, and they intensify
local and systemic inflammation. Although it is not known how systemic
inflammation develops in stable COPD, there is good evidence to suggest that it
occurs and that the intensity of systemic inflammation is linked to the severity 
of airflow obstruction. We postulate that systemic inflammation provides the
linkage between COPD and atherosclerosis. Inhaled corticosteroids have been shown
to improve health outcomes in COPD, but the mechanism by which this occurs is a
pivotal and challenging question that has yet to be answered. To prove the
concept that inhaled corticosteroids could suppress systemic inflammation (as
exemplified by serum C-reactive protein [CRP] levels), a double-blind,
placebo-controlled clinical trial was conducted in a group of patients with mild 
to moderate COPD. We found that withdrawal of inhaled corticosteroids increased
serum CRP levels, and that reintroduction of inhaled fluticasone could suppress
CRP levels.

DOI: 10.1513/pats.200406-034MS 
PMID: 16113473  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


519. Proc Am Thorac Soc. 2004;1(3):167-70.

Clinical effects of inhaled corticosteroids in chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease.

Jones PW(1).

Author information: 
(1)Respiratory Medicine, St. George's Hospital Medical School, London SW 17 0RE, 
UK. pjones@sghms.ac.uk

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) has multiple pathophysiologic
effects that are not confined to the lungs. Similarly, treatment for COPD may
have a number of different beneficial effects, and although each of these may be 
small, their cumulative effect may add up to a worthwhile overall outcome. Many
of the effects of COPD are only weakly related to FEV(1), and there is good
evidence that health status questionnaires are the best overall measures of
disease severity. Recently it has been shown, using such instruments, that health
status in patients with COPD deteriorates progressively and at a measurable rate.
Fluticasone reduces that decline, an effect that may take months to be detectable
but continues to develop over 3 years. The effect of fluticasone on health
appears to be due to a reduction in exacerbations coupled with its small effect
on FEV(1).

DOI: 10.1513/pats.200402-012MS 
PMID: 16113430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


520. Proc Am Thorac Soc. 2004;1(3):152-60.

Effects of corticosteroids on lung function in asthma and chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease.

Donohue JF(1), Ohar JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, University of North
Carolina at Chapel Hill, 4125 Bioinformatics Bldg., CB 7020, Chapel Hill, NC
27599-7020, USA. jdonohue@med.unc.edu

Both oral and inhaled corticosteroids have clinically significant effects on
symptoms, exacerbations, health status, and lung function in asthma, and to a
lesser extent in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Change in FEV(1)
does not correlate well with functional tests in COPD and may not be the best
measure of response to treatment. Inhaled corticosteroids may be beneficial when 
added to a beta-agonist for treatment of acute asthma, and the efficacy of oral
corticosteroids in this setting is well established. Oral corticosteroids
inconsistently improve lung function in stable outpatients with COPD. Individual 
inhaled corticosteroids do not have a marked effect, but the combination of
fluticasone propionate and salmeterol and the combination of budesonide plus
formoterol seem to improve FEV(1) over treatment with the individual components. 
In addition, there is convincing evidence for the use of systemic corticosteroids
during acute exacerbations of COPD. Some evidence suggests that patients with
COPD who respond to corticosteroids have eosinophilic inflammation and other
attributes of an asthma phenotype.

DOI: 10.1513/pats.200402-003MS 
PMID: 16113428  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


521. Proc Am Thorac Soc. 2004;1(2):121-4.

Reducing the frequency and severity of exacerbations of chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease.

Calverley PM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University Hospital Aintree, Clinical Sciences Centre,
Longmoor Lane, Liverpool L9 7AL, UK. pmacal@liverpool.ac.uk

Exacerbations contribute significantly to impaired health status in chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), but current therapy can prevent these
episodes. Immunization against, for example, influenza offers specific
prophylaxis for a minority of episodes. Pulmonary rehabilitation reduces hospital
attendance, but its effect wanes. Inhaled bronchodilators such as tiotropium
produce similar reductions in exacerbation frequency. Database studies show an
association between prescription of inhaled corticosteroids and reduced
hospitalization in the older population, a finding confirmed by randomized trials
in patients with an FEV(1) of less than 50% predicted. Three 1-year randomized
clinical trials studied the effect of combining a long-acting beta-agonist with
an inhaled corticosteroids. In these studies, exacerbation frequency was lower
with therapy than placebo. Combination therapy had a similar effect to its
monocomponents in the trial of inhaled steroids and long-acting beta agonists
study using salmeterol and fluticasone. However, when patients with more severe
COPD (an FEV(1) of less than 36% predicted) were studied using a combination of
budesonide and formoterol, a clear improvement was seen in the overall
exacerbation rate compared with the beta-agonist alone. In addition, the time to 
first exacerbation was increased compared with either drug alone. Health status
changes mirrored these effects. In summary, combination therapy can effectively
prevent exacerbations in patients with more advanced COPD.

DOI: 10.1513/pats.2306031 
PMID: 16113424  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


522. Semin Respir Crit Care Med. 2005 Apr;26(2):235-45.

The role of corticosteroids in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Calverley PM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Clinical Sciences Centre, University Hospital Aintree,
Liverpool L9 7AL, United Kingdom. pmacal@liverpool.ac.uk

Oral corticosteroids are powerful relatively nonspecific antiinflammatory agents 
with a range of well-characterized side effects. There is good evidence to show
that they accelerate the rate of resolution of exacerbations of COPD and relapse 
is less likely if patients receive these drugs. Maintenance therapy with oral
preparations is associated with worse mortality and skeletal muscle myopathy is a
particular problem. Corticosteroids have little effect on biopsy proven
inflammation or its surrogates in COPD and did not change the rate of decline of 
FEV (1) over a range of spirometric disease severity in a number of trials each
lasting 3 years. However, meta-analysis of the data suggests that a small effect 
(up to 10 ml /year) might be present. There is more consistent evidence for an
effect on postbronchodilator FEV (1) with both fluticasone propionate and
budesonide. In patients with a postbronchodilator FEV (1) < 50% predicted where
self-reported exacerbations become more common, inhaled corticosteroids can
reduce the number of attacks. This effect is the major factor accounting for the 
reduction in deterioration in health status seen in patients who receive inhaled 
corticosteroids. Inhaled corticosteroids are much safer than oral therapy,
although they do have a predictably higher incidence of candidiasis and
hoarseness of the voice. Skin bruising is seen in patients with better lung
function who use these drugs. Triamcinolone use is associated with reduction in
bone density but this was not seen with budesonide. Combining an inhaled
corticosteroid and a long-acting beta-agonist in the same inhaler increases the
efficacy of the latte drug in COPD patients, with a significantly larger
improvement in FEV (1), a larger reduction in reported breathlessness, and a
reduction in exacerbation numbers in those with severe disease where
beta-agonists appear to be less effective. Inhaled corticosteroids are not
suitable for monotherapy in COPD but can be helpfully combined with an inhaled
bronchodilator in patients with symptomatic disease.

DOI: 10.1055/s-2005-869542 
PMID: 16088440  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


523. Clin Pharmacokinet. 2005;44(8):815-36.

Pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic properties of inhaled beclometasone
dipropionate delivered via hydrofluoroalkane-containing devices.

Derom E(1), Pauwels RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Diseases, Ghent University Hospital, De pintelaan
185, B-9000 Gent, Belgium. eric.derom@Ugent.be

Inhaled corticosteroids have a key role in the treatment of asthma and chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease. In recent times, beclometasone dipropionate has
been reformulated in pressurised metered dose inhalers (pMDIs), using
hydrofluoroalkanes (HFAs) as a propellant. Extensive toxicological testing has
shown that HFA-propellants are well tolerated. Among the reformulated
beclometasone dipropionate-containing pMDIs, only the characteristics of the two 
Qvar formulations have been thoroughly explored. Compared to the reference
beclometasone dipropionate formulation, the mass median aerodynamic diameter of
the Qvar formulations are substantially smaller (1.1 vs 4.0 microm), whereas that
of Modulite averages 2.6 microm. Scintigraphic and pharmacokinetic studies
indicate a higher lung deposition for both the Qvar and the Beclazone
formulations, compared with reference beclometasone dipropionate formulation.
Since the 2- to 3-fold increase in pulmonary deposition results in a 2.6- to
3-fold difference in relative efficacy for Qvar, half the dose of the reference
beclometasone dipropionate formulation has been currently recommended in adult
patients with asthma, a recommendation that is supported by a large number of
clinical trials. Conversely, the design of the studies conducted to compare the
efficacy of Qvar with fluticasone propionate and budesonide does not allow
establishing their equivalence on a milligram per milligram basis. Good studies
on the bioequivalence between the reference beclometasone dipropionate
formulation and the Modulite or Beclazone formulations are not available.

DOI: 10.2165/00003088-200544080-00004 
PMID: 16029067  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


524. Ugeskr Laeger. 2005 Jun 6;167(23):2504-6.

[Combined inhaled corticosteroid and long-acting beta-2-agonist in one inhaler in
the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease].

[Article in Danish]

Pedersen ST(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laegemiddelstyrelsen, Laegemiddelgodkendelse, København. thirstrup@dadlnet.dk


PMID: 16008004  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


525. J Manag Care Pharm. 2005 Jul;11(6 Suppl A):S12-9; quiz S20-2.

New treatment options in COPD.

Hilleman DE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Creighton University School of Pharmacy, 2500 California St., Omaha, NE 68178,
USA. hilleman@creighton.edu

OBJECTIVE: To review the role of long-acting bronchodilators in the treatment of 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), including the importance of
treatment adherence.
SUMMARY: Overall, clinical trials show that compared with placebo and
ipratropium, tiotropium significantly improves spirometric measures, increases
quality-of-life scores, and is associated with fewer exacerbations. In addition, 
compared with salmeterol, tiotropium is associated with greater improvements in
spirometric measures and clinically meaningful increases in quality-of-life
measures. In comparison with either fluticasone or salmeterol alone, the
fluticasone/salmeterol combination is associated with statistically greater
improvement in spirometric and dyspnea measures; however, the combination is not 
associated with fewer exacerbations than either fluticasone or salmeterol used by
itself.
CONCLUSIONS: The 2003 update to the Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive
Lung Disease (GOLD) guidelines recommends regular treatment with long-acting
bronchodilators for maintenance COPD therapy because of superior effectiveness
and convenience compared with short-acting bronchodilators. The results from
trials presented in this article demonstrate that inhaled tiotropium is effective
in treating COPD and might be considered as a first-line agent for maintenance
therapy in view of its outcomes data. The convenience of once-daily
administration would probably contribute to patient adherence and thus to the
overall efficacy of this agent.


PMID: 15998172  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


526. Clin Ther. 2005 May;27(5):531-42.

The efficacy and safety of inhaled fluticasone propionate/salmeterol and
ipratropium/albuterol for the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease:
an eight-week, multicenter, randomized, double-blind, double-dummy,
parallel-group study.

Make B(1), Hanania NA, ZuWallack R, Kalberg C, Emmett A, Brown CP, Knobil K.

Author information: 
(1)National Jewish Medical and Research Center, Denver, Colorado 80206, USA.
makeb@njc.org

BACKGROUND: The pathology of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)
includes both obstructive and inflammatory components.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to confirm the findings of a previous study 
that compared the efficacy of a combination of 2 short-acting bronchodilators
with the use of an inhaled corticosteroid and a long-acting beta-agonist in the
treatment of COPD.
METHODS: We conducted an 8-week, multicenter, randomized, double-blind,
double-dummy, parallel-group study of subjects with moderate to severe COPD to
compare fluticasone propionate/salmeterol 250/50 microg BID (FSC) with
ipratropium/albuterol 36/206 microg QID (IB/ALB). The primary efficacy measure
was morning preadministration forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV(1)).
Secondary measures were morning peak expiratory flow (PEF), 6-hour FEV(1) AUC,
percentage of symptom-free nights, Transition Dyspnea Index (TDI) score, and
overall daytime symptom score. Additional measures included sleep symptoms,
supplemental albuterol use, and nighttime awakenings due to respiratory symptoms.
Safety evaluations were based on clinical adverse events and COPD exacerbations.
RESULTS: Baseline characteristics were similar between the FSC (n = 180) and
IB/ALB (n = 181) groups, including mean age (63.7 and 65.4 years, respectively), 
mean body weight (81 and 79 kg, respectively), screening pulmonary function (mean
[SD], 43.7% [14.2%] and 41.6% [13.4%] of predicted FEV(1)), race (82% and 91%
white), and sex (64% and 62% male). FSC resulted in greater improvements in
morning preadministration FEV(1), morning PEF, and 6-hour FEV(1) AUC (all, P <
0.001), TDI score (P = 0.026), overall daytime symptom score (P = 0.024),
percentage of symptom-free nights (P = 0.010), nighttime awakenings due to
respiratory symptoms (P = 0.002), sleep symptom score (P = 0.003), and percentage
of days and nights without rescue albuterol use compared with IB/ALB (P = 0.021
and P < 0.001, respectively). Compared with day 1, the FEV(1) AUC at week 8
increased by 0.38 L-h with FSC and decreased by 0.18 L-h with IB/ALB (P < 0.001
between groups). The type and incidence of adverse events were similar between
the 2 groups. One or more adverse event was reported for 81 (45%) and 85 (47%)
subjects in the FSC and IB/ALB groups, respectively.
CONCLUSION: In this 8-week study, subjects with moderate to severe COPD
experienced greater improvements in lung function and symptom measures with FSC
than with IB/ALB.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clinthera.2005.05.009 
PMID: 15978302  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


527. Med Clin (Barc). 2005 Jun 11;125(2):65-74.

[New treatments for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease].

[Article in Spanish]

Miravitlles M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Neumología, Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i
Sunyer, Red Respira RTIC 03/11 ISCIII, Hospital Clínic, Barcelona, Spain.
marcm@clinic.ub.es

Treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) has underwent a very
important advance in the last five years. It has been developed a new
long-lasting anticholynergic drug, tiotrope bromure, which has been found to
improve lung function and exercise capacity and to decrease relapses. Also the
combined treatment of long lasting beta 2 adrenergics with inhaled steroids
(salmeterol/fluticasone and formoterol/budesonide) has proven similar results.
However, the response to these new drugs is not the same in all patients.
Individual characteristics such as gravity, degree of bronchial
hyperresponsiveness, frequency of relapses, comorbidity, etc will determine the
response to several agents. Thus, it is necessary to perform a detailed
diagnostic study in COPD patients in order to select the best treatment in an
individualized form. In the future, new specific antiinflammatories such as
phosphodiesterase 4 inhibitors or agents with a potential action in tissue
regeneration could lead to new perspectives, as well as to new questions, in COPD
treatment.


PMID: 15970187  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


528. Pharmacoeconomics. 2005;23(6):619-37.

Development of an economic model to assess the cost effectiveness of treatment
interventions for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Spencer M(1), Briggs AH, Grossman RF, Rance L.

Author information: 
(1)Global Health Outcomes, GlaxoSmithKline Research & Development, Greenford,
Middlesex, UK. michael.d.spencer@gsk.com

OBJECTIVE: To develop a Markov model that allows the cost effectiveness of
interventions in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) to be
estimated, and to apply the model to investigate the cost effectiveness of an
inhaled corticosteroid/long-acting beta(2)-adrenoceptor agonist (beta(2)-agonist)
combination (salmeterol/fluticasone propionate) versus usual care.
METHODS: A Markov model consisting of four mutually exclusive disease states was 
constructed (mild, moderate and severe disease, and death). The transition
probabilities of disease progression (for smokers and ex-smokers) and death were 
derived from the published medical literature. The model outputs were costs,
exacerbations, survival, QALYs and cost effectiveness. The model was made fully
probabilistic to reflect the joint uncertainty in the model parameters. Efficacy 
data for the combination of inhaled salmeterol/fluticasone propionate
50/500microg twice daily in poorly reversible COPD patients with a history of
exacerbations were obtained from the 1-year TRISTAN (TRial of Inhaled STeroids
ANd long-acting beta-agonists) study and applied to the model, based on patient
profiles representative of COPD clinical trials.
RESULTS: According to the model, the mean life expectancy with usual care alone
(placebo group) was 8.95 years, which decreased to 4.08 QALYs once adjusted for
quality and discounted, at a lifetime discounted cost of Can 16,415 dollars per
patient (year 2002 values). Assuming that salmeterol/fluticasone propionate
reduced exacerbation frequency only (base case analysis), the estimated mean
survival time remained unchanged but there was an increase in the number of QALYs
(4.21) for an estimated lifetime cost of Can 25,780 dollars, resulting in a
cost-effectiveness ratio of Can 74,887 dollars per QALY (95% CI 21,985, 128,671) 
versus usual care. If a survival benefit was assumed for salmeterol/fluticasone
propionate, the incremental cost per QALY was Can11,125 dollars (95% CI 8710,
dominated) versus usual care. If the combination achieved around a 10%
improvement in forced expiratory volume in 1 second, leading to delayed
progression to more severe disease states, the benefits translated into an
incremental cost per QALY of Can 49,928 dollars (95% CI 37 269, 66,006) versus
usual care.
CONCLUSIONS: This Markov model allows, for the first time, a means of estimating 
the long-term cost effectiveness and cost utility of interventions for COPD.
Initial evidence suggests that for patients with poorly reversible COPD and a
documented history of frequent COPD exacerbations, the addition of salmeterol (a 
long-acting beta(2)-agonist) to fluticasone propionate (an inhaled
corticosteroid) is potentially cost effective from the Canadian healthcare
payer's perspective. However, the precision of this estimate will be improved
when additional data are available from clinical trials such as the ongoing TORCH
(TOwards a Revolution in COPD Health) study.


PMID: 15960557  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


529. Thorax. 2005 Jun;60(6):480-7.

Withdrawal of fluticasone propionate from combined salmeterol/fluticasone
treatment in patients with COPD causes immediate and sustained disease
deterioration: a randomised controlled trial.

Wouters EF(1), Postma DS, Fokkens B, Hop WC, Prins J, Kuipers AF, Pasma HR,
Hensing CA, Creutzberg EC; COSMIC (COPD and Seretide: a Multi-Center Intervention
and Characterization) Study Group.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, University Hospital Maastricht, The
Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Guidelines recommend inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) as maintenance
treatment for patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) with a
post-bronchodilator forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1) <50% predicted
and frequent exacerbations, although they have only a small preventive effect on 
the accelerated decline in lung function. Combined treatment with ICS and long
acting beta2 agonists (LABA) may provide benefit to the stability of COPD, but it
is unknown if withdrawal of ICS will result in disease deterioration.
METHODS: The effects of 1 year withdrawal of the ICS fluticasone propionate (FP) 
after a 3 month run-in treatment period with FP combined with the LABA salmeterol
(S) (500 microg FP + 50 microg S twice daily; SFC) were investigated in patients 
with COPD in a randomised, double blind study. 497 patients were enrolled from 39
centres throughout the Netherlands; 373 were randomised and 293 completed the
study.
RESULTS: The drop out rate after randomisation was similar in the two groups.
Withdrawal of FP resulted in a sustained decrease in FEV1: mean (SE) change from 
baseline -4.4 (0.9)% (S) v -0.1 (0.9)% (SFC); adjusted difference 4.1 (95% CI 1.6
to 6.6) percentage points (p<0.001). Corresponding figures for the FEV1/FVC ratio
were -3.7 (0.8)% (S) v 0.0 (0.8)% (SFC) (p = 0.002). The annual moderate to
severe exacerbation rate was 1.6 and 1.3 in the S and SFC groups, respectively
(adjusted rate ratio 1.2; 95% CI 0.9 to 1.5; p = 0.15). The mean annual incidence
rate of mild exacerbations was 1.3 (S) v 0.6 (SFC), p = 0.020. An immediate and
sustained increase in dyspnoea score (scale 0-4; mean difference between groups
0.17 (0.04), p<0.001) and in the percentage of disturbed nights (6 (2) percentage
points, p<0.001) occurred after withdrawal of fluticasone.
CONCLUSIONS: Withdrawal of FP in COPD patients using SFC resulted in acute and
persistent deterioration in lung function and dyspnoea and in an increase in mild
exacerbations and percentage of disturbed nights. This study clearly indicates a 
key role for ICS in the management of COPD as their discontinuation leads to
disease deterioration, even under treatment with a LABA.

DOI: 10.1136/thx.2004.034280 
PMCID: PMC1747438
PMID: 15923248  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


530. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2005 May 15;171(10):1191; author reply 1191-2.

Systemic bioavailability of fluticasone in COPD.

Lipworth BJ, Menzies D.

Comment on
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2004 Oct 1;170(7):721-2.

DOI: 10.1164/ajrccm.171.10.950 
PMID: 15879430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


531. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2005 May 15;171(10):1191; author reply 1191-2.

Fluticasone reduces CRP in COPD.

Virchow JC.

Comment on
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2004 Oct 1;170(7):721-2.
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2004 Oct 1;170(7):760-5.

DOI: 10.1164/ajrccm.171.10.951 
PMID: 15879429  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


532. Thorax. 2005 Apr;60(4):301-4.

Early onset of effect of salmeterol and fluticasone propionate in chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease.

Vestbo J(1), Pauwels R, Anderson JA, Jones P, Calverley P; TRISTSAN study group.

Author information: 
(1)North West Lung Centre, Wythenshawe Hospital, Manchester M23 9LT, UK.
jorgen.vestbo@manchester.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: Combined treatment with inhaled corticosteroids and long acting beta2
agonists is approved for the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD), but little is known about the onset of effect of the combination.
METHODS: Data were used from 1465 patients with COPD entered into a large 1 year 
double blind trial with daily measurements of peak expiratory flow (PEF) and
symptom scores.
RESULTS: PEF was significantly higher after 1 day in patients treated with
salmeterol 50 microg twice daily or the salmeterol/fluticasone propionate
combination 50/500 microg twice daily than placebo. In patients treated with
fluticasone propionate 500 microg twice daily alone, PEF differed from placebo
after 2 days. The differences after 2 weeks compared with placebo were 16 l/min
(95% confidence interval (CI) 11 to 21), 11 l/min (95% CI 6 to 16), and 27 l/min 
(95% CI 22 to 33) for salmeterol, fluticasone propionate, and the
salmeterol/fluticasone propionate combination, respectively. For all treatments
the effect on PEF after 2 weeks was comparable to that seen at the end of the
study. The difference between the salmeterol/fluticasone propionate combination
and placebo after 2 weeks as a percentage of baseline was similar for PEF and
clinic forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1). Differences in breathlessness
scores were statistically significant after 1 day for the group treated with
salmeterol alone and after 2 days for the combination group. The 2 week change in
FEV1 was only partly indicative of a long term response in individual patients.
CONCLUSIONS: The effects of salmeterol and fluticasone propionate, alone or in
combination, on PEF and breathlessness are seen within days and most of the
obtainable effect on these parameters is reached within 2 weeks.

DOI: 10.1136/thx.2004.025411 
PMCID: PMC1747357
PMID: 15790985  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


533. Arch Bronconeumol. 2005 Mar;41(3):130-4.

[Bronchodilator efficacy of combined salmeterol and tiotropium in patients with
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease].

[Article in Spanish]

Baloira Villar A(1), Vilariño Pombo C.

Author information: 
(1)Sección de Neumología, Complexo Hospitalario de Pontevedra, Mourente,
Pontevedra, España. adolfobalo@eresmas.com

OBJECTIVE: Bronchodilators are still the most effective drugs for controlling the
symptoms of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Tiotropium bromide, a
long-acting anticholinergic drug, has recently been added to the therapeutic
arsenal for the disease. To date, there have been no studies combining 2
long-acting bronchodilators. The aim of the present trial was to determine
whether the combination of salmeterol and tiotropium improved lung function in
COPD patients more than either of them alone.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Twenty-two patients (20 men) diagnosed with COPD, with a
mean age of 64 years, were enrolled in this cross-over trial. Active smokers were
excluded. Mean (SD) forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1) was 43% (14%) of 
predicted. All patients were experienced in the use of inhalers. The following 3 
therapeutic combinations were randomly assigned to be administered for a 1-week
period: a) fluticasone (500 microg/12 h), salmeterol (50 microg/12 h) and
placebo; b) fluticasone, tiotropium (18 microg/24 h), and placebo; and c)
fluticasone, salmeterol, and tiotropium. At the end of each period, forced
spirometry was performed before inhalation of the therapeutic combination
(between 8:30 am and 9:30 am) and 2 hours after inhalation. Throughout the week, 
morning peak flow rates measured immediately before inhalation were recorded, and
there was a 48-hour wash-out period between each therapeutic combination.
RESULTS: All the patients completed the protocol. There were no significant
differences in preinhalation or postinhalation FEV1 with salmeterol compared to
tiotropium (preinhalation FEV1, 1.17 [0.55] L compared to 1.19 [0.49] L;
postinhalation FEV1, 1.32 [0.65] L compared to 1.29 [0.61] L). In all cases
postinhalation FEV1 was significantly higher than preinhalation FEV1. The
combination of fluticasone, salmeterol, and tiotropium proved superior to the
other 2 combinations with respect to both preinhalation FEV1 and postinhalation
FEV1 (preinhalation FEV1, 1.32 [0.56] L, [P<.03 in both comparisons];
postinhalation FEV1, 1.49 [0.68] L [P<.001 in both comparisons]). Peak flow rate 
was also significantly higher with the combination of the 2 bronchodilators (345 
L/min compared to 291 L/min and 311 mL, respectively [P <.04 in both cases]).
There were no notable side effects.
CONCLUSIONS: In terms of improvement in lung function, the combination of
salmeterol and tiotropium together with fluticasone is more effective in patients
with moderate-to-severe COPD than either of the 2 bronchodilators administered
alone.


PMID: 15766465  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


534. Drugs. 2005;65(5):579-91.

Inhaled corticosteroids in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: is there a
clinical benefit?

Man SF(1), Sin DD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Pulmonary Division, St Paul's Hospital, Vancouver,
British Columbia.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a serious illness that affects
over 5% of the adult population. It is one of the few conditions for which the
mortality and morbidity are still increasing. Experts expect COPD to become the
third leading cause of death and the fifth leading cause of disability worldwide 
by the year 2020. Thus far, the only treatments that have been shown to make a
difference to survival are smoking cessation and the use of oxygen supplements
for those who are hypoxaemic at rest. The use of inhaled corticosteroids as
monotherapy or in combination with a long-acting beta2-adrenoceptor agonist for
COPD is controversial. Experimental data indicate that the inflammatory process
in COPD may be resistant to the anti-inflammatory effects of corticosteroids.
However, several large clinical studies have shown that inhaled corticosteroids
in relatively high doses (e.g. budesonide 800 microg/day or fluticasone
propionate 1 mg/day) reduce exacerbations by 20-30% and improve the health status
of COPD patients by a similar amount compared with placebo. Withdrawal of inhaled
corticosteroids may increase clinical exacerbation rates by 50% in COPD patients 
and by 2-fold in those with severe disease. Combined therapy with inhaled
corticosteroids and long-acting beta2-adrenoceptor agonists may be superior to
individual component therapy in reducing exacerbations. However, these
medications must be used cautiously, as they have been associated with certain
adverse effects. Inhaled corticosteroids, for instance, increase the risk for
dysphonia and oral thrush by 2- to 3-fold. Skin bruising is also more common in
users than in non-users of inhaled corticosteroids. On balance, for those with
moderate-to-severe COPD and those who experience frequent exacerbations,
judicious use of inhaled corticosteroids alone or in combination with long-acting
beta2-adrenoceptor agonists appears reasonable.


PMID: 15748094  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


535. Respir Med. 2005 Feb;99(2):241-9.

The interrelationship between markers of inflammation and oxidative stress in
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: modulation by inhaled steroids and
antioxidant.

Sadowska AM(1), van Overveld FJ, Górecka D, Zdral A, Filewska M, Demkow UA,
Luyten C, Saenen E, Zielinski J, De Backer WA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, University of Antwerp, Antwerpen, Belgium.
anna.sadowska@ua.ac.be

BACKGROUND: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is accompanied by both
airway and systemic inflammation and by oxidative stress. This study aimed to
characterise the relationship between oxidative stress and inflammatory
components in induced sputum and blood.
MATERIAL & METHODS: We studied blood and sputum samples from stable COPD patients
(mean FEV1 60.5+/-7.5% predicted) at baseline (no treatment) and after 10 weeks
treatment with either inhaled steroid, fluticasone propionate (FP) (1000
microg/d) or 10 weeks treatment with N-acetylcysteine (600mg/d) (NAC). We
assessed the inflammatory markers (IL-8, ECP, sICAM-1, NE) in sputum and serum
and we compared them with blood markers of oxidative stress (SOD, GPx, TEAC,
albumin, vitamin E and A).
RESULTS: At baseline blood sICAM-1 correlated with IL-8 levels (P<0.01, r = 0.62)
and negatively with GPx (P<0.01, r = -0.63) and with TEAC (P<0.05, r = -0.53).
TEAC correlated positively with GPx (P<0.01, r = 0.70). Correlation between sICAM
and IL-8 disappeared after NAC treatment. The correlation between sICAM and GPx
disappeared after FP treatment. The correlation between TEAC and GPx was
maintained after both NAC and FP.
CONCLUSIONS: The relationship between markers of inflammation, adhesion and
antioxidant capacity is significantly modulated by treatment with
N-acetylcysteine or inhaled corticosteroids.


PMID: 15715193  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


536. Chest. 2005 Jan;127(1):89-97.

The risk of nonvertebral fracture related to inhaled corticosteroid exposure
among adults with chronic respiratory disease.

Johannes CB(1), Schneider GA, Dube TJ, Alfredson TD, Davis KJ, Walker AM.

Author information: 
(1)Ingenix Epidemiology, Auburndale, MA 02466, USA. kjohannes@epidemiology.com

Comment in
    Chest. 2005 Jan;127(1):5-7.
    ACP J Club. 2005 Jul-Aug;143(1):23.

OBJECTIVE: To examine nonvertebral fracture risk in relation to inhaled
corticosteroid (ICS) exposure among adults with respiratory disease.
DESIGN AND PATIENTS: Nested case-control study within a cohort of 89,877
UnitedHealthcare members aged > or = 40 years with physician insurance claims for
COPD or asthma, enrolled for > or = 1 year from January 1, 1997 to June 30, 2001.
METHODS: Cases (n = 1,722) represented patients with a first treated nonvertebral
fracture (the index date is the first fracture claim). Control subjects (n =
17,220) were randomly selected from the person-time and assigned a random index
date. ICS exposure was ascertained 1 month, 3 months, 6 months, and 12 months
before the index date, with estimated cumulative dose through 0 to 6 months, 7 to
12 months, and 0 to 12 months. Covariates included demographics, oral
corticosteroid and other medication exposure, comorbidities, and indicators of
respiratory disease severity. Odds ratios (ORs) adjusted for all covariates were 
estimated by logistic regression.
RESULTS: No increased fracture risk with ICS exposure as a class or with
fluticasone propionate alone was detected. ORs for exposure in the preceding 30
days were 1.05 (95% confidence interval [CI], 0.89 to 1.24), 1.13 (95% CI, 0.90
to 1.40), and 0.97 (95% CI, 0.78 to 1.21) for all ICS, fluticasone propionate,
and other ICS, respectively. No dose-response effect was present. Among patients 
with COPD only (n = 6,932), no increased risk was found for recent ICS exposure
(OR, 0.86; 95% CI, 0.59 to 1.25).
CONCLUSIONS: Concern about nonvertebral fracture risk should not strongly
influence the decision to use recommended doses of ICS for adult patients with
asthma or COPD in managed-care settings in the United States. This study could
not evaluate very-high ICS dose, long-term ICS exposure, or vertebral fracture
risk.

DOI: 10.1378/chest.127.1.89 
PMID: 15653967  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


537. Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Saf. 2005 Mar;14(3):203-9.

Changes in prescribing of inhaled corticosteroids (1999-2002) in Scotland.

Boyter AC(1), Steinke DT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Strathclyde, John
Arbuthnott Building, Glasgow, Scotland, UK. anne.boyter@strath.ac.uk

PURPOSE: To investigate the trend in prescribing of inhaled corticosteroids and
general practitioner (GP) consultations for respiratory diseases.
METHODS: A longitudinal observation study of all prescriptions, from primary
care, for inhaled corticosteroids dispensed in Scotland from January 1999 to May 
2002 was undertaken. The main outcome measures were the trends in prescribing of 
inhaled corticosteroids and GP consultations for respiratory diseases.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS: The prescribing of all inhaled corticosteroids has risen
over the study period. The rise in prescribing of the combination product
containing fluticasone and salmeterol appears not to have been at the expense of 
the prescribing of fluticasone alone while the prescribing of the
budesonide/eformoterol combination may be at the expense of budesonide (BUD)
alone. GP consultations for both asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD) have declined over a similar period. The increased prescribing of inhaled 
corticosteroids over this period is associated with the increased use of the
fluticasone/salmeterol combination rather than an increase in the use of all
inhaled corticosteroids. The accompanying fall in number of consultations with
GPs may be due to this increased prescribing or a move to nurse led clinics.

Copyright 2004 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/pds.1054 
PMID: 15624197  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


538. Can Respir J. 2004 Nov-Dec;11(8):581-5.

The Canadian Optimal Therapy of COPD Trial: design, organization and patient
recruitment.

Aaron SD(1), Vandemheen K, Fergusson D, Fitzgerald M, Maltais F, Bourbeau J,
Goldstein R, McIvor A, Balter M, O'donnell D.

Author information: 
(1)The Ottawa Health Research Institute, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Canada.
saaron@ottawahospital.on.ca

BACKGROUND: There are no published studies that have assessed whether adding
long-acting beta 2-agonist bronchodilators and/or inhaled steroids to chronic
therapy with tiotropium would provide additional clinical benefit to patients
with moderate to severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
METHODS: The Canadian Optimal Therapy of COPD Trial is a randomized, prospective,
double-blind, placebo-controlled, multicentre trial funded by the Canadian
Institutes of Health Research that has been designed to determine which
combination of inhaled medications will most effectively prevent exacerbations
and optimize disease-specific quality of life in patients with COPD. The trial is
the first to evolve from the Canadian Thoracic Society Clinical Trials Group. The
study will randomize 432 patients with moderate to severe COPD to one of three
parallel treatment arms for 52 weeks: tiotropium and fluticasone/salmeterol;
tiotropium and salmeterol; or tiotropium and placebo inhaler. The participants
will be allowed to use salbutamol as required throughout the trial period.
OUTCOMES: The primary outcome measure is the proportion of patients in the three 
treatment groups who experienced a respiratory exacerbation within 52 weeks of
randomization. Other outcomes that will be assessed over the 52-week trial period
will include: changes in disease-specific quality of life and changes in dyspnea,
health care use and changes in lung function. A pharmacoeconomic analysis will
also be performed to evaluate the cost of these therapies.
RESULTS: The study commenced recruitment in October 2003. It is currently
operating at 22 centres across Canada and has randomized 137 patients during the 
first four months of recruitment. Recruitment is scheduled to continue until
April 2005 or until 432 patients have been randomized.
CONCLUSION: The present randomized, placebo-controlled trial offers a unique
opportunity to answer the question, what is the best combination of inhaled
medications to use for COPD patients? It is hoped that optimal use of inhaled
medications will improve patient health and quality of life, reduce patient
respiratory exacerbations, and ultimately, reduce health care resource use.


PMID: 15611808  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


539. Pulm Pharmacol Ther. 2005;18(1):19-22.

The bronchodilator response to salmeterol is maintained with regular, long-term
use in patients with COPD.

Hanania NA(1), Kalberg C, Yates J, Emmett A, Horstman D, Knobil K.

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Baylor College of Medicine, 1504 Taub
Loop, Houston, TX 77030, USA. hanania@bcm.tmc.edu

Long-acting beta(2)-agonists (LABAs) are recommended in the management of
patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Previous studies have
demonstrated that the LABA, salmeterol, improves lung function, symptoms and
quality of life in patients with COPD. In this study, we have performed
additional analyses of the combined data from two previous double-blind,
placebo-controlled, parallel studies of salmeterol (50 microg, b.i.d) in patients
with COPD. The new analyses reveal that the significant improvements seen in
pre-dose and 2-h post-dose forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV(1)) compared to
placebo, occur early in the treatment period, and are sustained for at least 24
weeks. Moreover, improvements in peak expiratory flow rate occur as early as Day 
1, and are sustained throughout the 24-week period. Additional analyses of 12-h
FEV(1) data also show that salmeterol is associated with an increase in the area 
under the curve at Week 12 compared with Day 1, adding further support to
evidence that it results in a sustained bronchodilator response, with no evidence
of tolerance.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pupt.2004.07.005 
PMID: 15607123  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


540. Chest. 2004 Dec;126(6):1815-24.

Efficacy of inhaled steroids in undiagnosed subjects at high risk for COPD:
results of the detection, intervention, and monitoring of COPD and asthma
program.

Albers M(1), Schermer T, van den Boom G, Akkermans R, van Schayck C, van
Herwaarden C, van Weel C.

Author information: 
(1)University Medical Center, Department of Family Medicine [229-HAG], PO Box
9101, 6500 HB Nijmegen, the Netherlands. M.Albers@hag.umcn.nl

BACKGROUND AND AIM: COPD leads to a progressive decline of pulmonary function.
Family physicians treat a substantial number of patients with COPD and are
encouraged to start treatment at as early a stage as is possible. This study
analyzed the effectiveness of early inhaled corticosteroid treatment on the
decline of pulmonary function in COPD patients.
PATIENTS AND SETTING: Subjects with a rapid decline in lung function (ie, FEV(1) 
decline, > 80 mL/yr) who had never before received a diagnosis of asthma or COPD.
METHODS: Two-year, randomized, controlled, double-blind clinical trial of
fluticasone propionate (250 microg bid; 24 patients) or placebo (25 patients),
followed by a 7-month open-label study in which all subjects received fluticasone
propionate. The primary outcome was the post-bronchodilator therapy FEV(1,) and
secondary outcomes were respiratory symptoms, exacerbations, health state,
quality of life, and health-care utilization.
RESULTS: After 31 months, there were no statistical differences in
post-bronchodilator therapy FEV(1) between the intervention group and the control
group. No statistical differences were observed for symptoms, exacerbations, or
quality of life, although tendencies were consistently in favor of treatment.
There was no significant impact on the direct or indirect costs.
CONCLUSIONS: There are no indications that early treatment with inhaled
corticosteroids modifies a rapid decline in lung function or respiratory symptoms
and quality of life.

DOI: 10.1378/chest.126.6.1815 
PMID: 15596679  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


541. Respir Med. 2004 Nov;98(11):1045-50.

Gender does not influence the response to the combination of salmeterol and
fluticasone propionate in COPD.

Vestbo J(1), Soriano JB, Anderson JA, Calverley P, Pauwels R, Jones P; TRISTAN
Study Group.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Hvidovre University Hospital, Kettegaard
Alle 30, Hvidovre DK 2650, Copenhagen, Denmark. jvestbo@man.ac.uk

The prevalence of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) in women is
increasing worldwide. Women may have greater susceptibility to COPD progression
than men, and differences in efficacy and safety of respiratory medications by
gender are largely unexplored. We aimed to determine whether the response to
treatment in women with COPD differed from men in a large, 1-year double-blind
trial ('TRISTAN'). In a sensitivity analysis, we compared 539 male and 180 female
COPD patients, who were randomized to the saLmeterol/fluticasone combination
50/500mcg bid or placebo for 12 months. Combination therapy improved
pre-treatment FEV1 significantly more than placebo in women by 152 ml (95%
confidence interval 95-208) and in men by 127 ml (94-159). Similarly, a reduction
in COPD exacerbation rates of 31% in women (9-48%) and of 23% in men (8-35%) was 
observed. Combination therapy reduced COPD exacerbations requiring treatment with
oral corticosteroids by 36% in women and by 41% in men. Finally, combination
treatment produced a better improvement in health status than placebo with a
decrease in the SGRQ scores in women by -2.3 (-4.6 - 0.1) and in men by -2.1
(-3.5 to -0.8). No gender interaction was found for any outcome. Treatments were 
well tolerated with no difference in the frequency of adverse events in women and
men. In this trial, therapy with the salmeterol/fluticasone combination produced 
significant improvements compared to placebo on all main endpoints and the
magnitude of these improvements was similar for both men and women.


PMID: 15526804  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


542. J Biopharm Stat. 2004 Aug;14(3):803-16.

Evaluating assumptions for least squares analysis using the general linear model:
a guide for the pharmaceutical industry statistician.

Darken PF(1).

Author information: 
(1)ALTANA Pharma US, Florham Park, New Jersey 07932, USA.
patrick.darken@altanapharma.us.com

A review of graphical and test based methods for evaluating assumptions
underlying the use of least squares analysis with the general linear model is
presented along with some discussion of robustness. Alternative analyses are
described for situations where there is evidence that the assumptions are not
reasonable. Evaluation of the assumptions is illustrated through the use of an
example from a clinical trial used for US registration purposes. It is
recommended that: (1) most assumptions required for the least squares analysis of
data using the general linear model can be judged using residuals graphically
without the need for formal testing, (2) it is more important to normalize data
or to use nonparametric methods when there is heterogeneous variance between
treatment groups, and (3) nonparametric analyses can be used to demonstrate
robustness of results and that it is best to specify these analyses prior to
unblinding.

DOI: 10.1081/BIP-200025699 
PMID: 15468766  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


543. Eur Respir J. 2004 Aug;24(2):206-10.

The TORCH (towards a revolution in COPD health) survival study protocol.

Vestbo J(1); TORCH Study Group.

Author information: 
(1)North West Lung Research Centre, Wythenshawe Hospital, Manchester, UK.
jvestbo@man.ac.uk

Only long-term home oxygen therapy has been shown in randomised controlled trials
to increase survival in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). There have 
been no trials assessing the effect of inhaled corticosteroids and long-acting
bronchodilators, alone or in combination, on mortality in patients with COPD,
despite their known benefit in reducing symptoms and exacerbations. The "TOwards 
a Revolution in COPD Health" (TORCH) survival study is aiming to determine the
impact of salmeterol/fluticasone propionate (SFC) combination and the individual 
components on the survival of COPD patients. TORCH is a multicentre, randomised, 
double-blind, parallel-group, placebo-controlled study. Approximately 6,200
patients with moderate-to-severe COPD were randomly assigned to b.i.d. treatment 
with either SFC (50/500 microg), fluticasone propionate (500 microg), salmeterol 
(50 microg) or placebo for 3 yrs. The primary end-point is all-cause mortality;
secondary end-points are COPD morbidity relating to rate of exacerbations and
health status, using the St George's Respiratory Questionnaire. Other end-points 
include other mortality and exacerbation end-points, requirement for long-term
oxygen therapy, and clinic lung function. Safety end-points include adverse
events, with additional information on bone fractures. The first patient was
recruited in September 2000 and results should be available in 2006. This paper
describes the "TOwards a Revolution in COPD Health" study and explains the
rationale behind it.


PMID: 15332386  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


544. Drugs. 2004;64(17):1975-96.

Inhaled salmeterol/fluticasone propionate: a review of its use in chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease.

Fenton C(1), Keating GM.

Author information: 
(1)Adis International Limited, Auckland, New Zealand. demail@adis.co.nz

The salmeterol/fluticasone propionate dry powder inhaler (DPI) [Advair Diskus,
Seretide Accuhaler] contains the long-acting beta2-adrenoceptor agonist
salmeterol and the inhaled corticosteroid fluticasone propionate. In the US,
twice-daily salmeterol/fluticasone propionate 50/250 microg is approved for use
in adults with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) associated with
chronic bronchitis, and in the EU, the twice-daily 50/500 microg dosage is
approved for use in patients with severe COPD, repeat exacerbations and
significant symptoms despite bronchodilator therapy. In patients with
moderate-to-severe COPD, twice-daily inhaled salmeterol/fluticasone propionate
50/250 or 50/500 microg for 24-52 weeks improves predose forced expiratory volume
in 1 second (FEV1) significantly more than salmeterol monotherapy, improves
postdose or postbronchodilator FEV1 significantly more than fluticasone
propionate monotherapy and results in clinically significant improvements in
health-related quality of life. Salmeterol/fluticasone propionate 50/500 microg
significantly reduced annual COPD exacerbations, especially in severe COPD. Some 
corticosteroid-related adverse events were increased in recipients of fluticasone
propionate with or without salmeterol versus salmeterol monotherapy or placebo;
withdrawal from fluticasone propionate, including combination therapy, needs
careful management to minimise COPD exacerbations. The DPI combining a
corticosteroid and long-acting beta2-agonist provides benefits over monotherapy
and may encourage patient compliance in COPD.


PMID: 15329047  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


545. Chest. 2004 Aug;126(2):653-4; author reply 654-5.

Differentiating asthma and COPD patients.

El-Kassimi FA.

Comment on
    Chest. 2003 Sep;124(3):834-43.

DOI: 10.1378/chest.126.2.653 
PMID: 15302761  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


546. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2004;(3):CD003794.

Combined corticosteroid and long acting beta-agonist in one inhaler for chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease.

Nannini L(1), Cates CJ, Lasserson TJ, Poole P.

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary Section, Hospital G. Baigorria, Ruta 11 Y Jm Estrada, G. Baigorria, 
Santa Fe - Rosario, Argentina, 2152. nanninilj@cimero.org.ar

Update in
    Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2007;(4):CD003794.

Update of
    Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2003;(4):CD003794.

BACKGROUND: Long-acting beta-agonists and inhaled corticosteroids have both been 
recommended in guidelines for the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease. Their co-administration in a combined inhaler is intended to facilitate 
adherence to medication regimens, and to improve efficacy.
OBJECTIVES: To assess the efficacy of combined inhaled corticosteroid and
long-acting beta-agonist preparations, compared to placebo or the individual
components, in the treatment of adults with chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease.
SEARCH STRATEGY: We searched the Cochrane Airways Group chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD) trials register. Date of last search April 2004.
SELECTION CRITERIA: Studies were included if they were randomised and
double-blind. Studies could compare a combined inhaled corticosteroids and
long-acting beta-agonist preparation with either component preparation or
placebo.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Two reviewers independently assessed trial quality 
and extracted data. The primary outcome was exacerbations.
MAIN RESULTS: Six randomised trials with 4118 participants were included. Two
different combination preparations (fluticasone/salmeterol and
budesonide/formoterol) were used. Combination treatment was more effective than
placebo for mean exacerbation rates, quality of life and lung function. No trials
were found comparing the combination of drugs in a single inhaler with the same
drugs both given in separate inhalers. Exacerbations: Fluticasone/salmeterol did 
not significantly reduce exacerbations compared with either of its component
treatments in one large study. There was no significant difference when
budesonide/formoterol was compared with budesonide. Budesonide/formoterol was
more effective than formoterol in reducing exacerbations (Rate ratio: 0.78 [0.68 
to 0.90], two studies). A pooled analysis of both combination therapies indicated
that exacerbations were less frequent when compared with either placebo or
long-acting beta-agonist (versus placebo Rate ratio: 0.76 [0.68, 0.84], three
studies, versus beta-agonist, Rate ratio: 0.85 [0.77, 0.95], three studies), but 
not when compared with steroid. The clinical impact of this effect depends on the
frequency of exacerbations experienced by patients. One full exacerbation was
prevented for every two to four years of treatment in the type of patients
included in the trials. Quality of Life: There were conflicting findings in
quality of life and symptoms when fluticasone/salmeterol was compared with
inhaled steroids alone (three studies). There was no significant difference
between fluticasone/salmeterol and long-acting beta-agonist in quality of life
scores (three studies). Budesonide/formoterol improved symptoms when compared
with budesonide but not with formoterol. There were conflicting findings in
quality of life scores when budesonide/formoterol was compared with component
inhaled corticosteroid or beta-agonist. These may be accounted for by different
study design. Lung Function: Treatment with either combination led to small,
significant differences in lung function compared with component steroid
medication. Fluticasone/salmeterol led to small improvements in FEV1 compared
with salmeterol, but budesonide/formoterol treatment did not increase FEV1
significantly when compared with formoterol.
REVIEWERS' CONCLUSIONS: Compared with placebo, combination therapy led to
clinically meaningful differences in quality of life, symptoms and exacerbations.
However, there were conflicting results when the different combination therapies 
were compared with the mono-components alone. In order to draw firmer conclusions
about the effects of combination therapy in a single inhaler more data are
necessary, including the assessment of the comparative effects with separate
administration of the two drugs in double-dummy trials.

DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD003794.pub2 
PMID: 15266502  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


547. Expert Opin Pharmacother. 2004 Aug;5(8):1815-26.

Fluticasone propionate/salmeterol for the treatment of chronic-obstructive
pulmonary disease.

Dransfield MT(1), Bailey WC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary, Allergy and Critical Care Medicine, University of
Alabama at Birmingham, 215 THT, 1900 University Blvd, Birmingham, AL 35294, USA. 
mdransfield99@msn.com

Chronic-obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a global public health problem
and its impact is increasing. Although only smoking cessation has been shown to
alter the natural history of the disease, current treatment guidelines recommend 
the use of inhaled bronchodilators to decrease symptoms, improve lung function
and quality of life and to prevent exacerbations. For a subset of patients with
more severe disease, inhaled corticosteroids may also have a role in achieving
these goals. Fluticasone propionate/salmeterol (Advair) or Seretide),
GlaxoSmithKline) is a combination inhaled steroid and long-acting bronchodilator 
that is delivered by a dry-powder inhaler and was recently approved for use in
COPD in the US. Fluticasone propionate/salmeterol is a potent bronchodilator and 
also appears to have important effects on the frequency of exacerbations and
overall quality of life for some patients with COPD. Issues of patient selection 
as well as the pharmacology, efficacy and safety of the drug are discussed.

DOI: 10.1517/14656566.5.8.1815   
PMID: 15264996  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


548. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2004 Oct 1;170(7):760-5. Epub 2004 Jun 30.

Effects of fluticasone on systemic markers of inflammation in chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease.

Sin DD(1), Lacy P, York E, Man SF.

Author information: 
(1)James Hogg iCAPTURE Center for Cardiovascular and Pulmonary Research, St.
Paul's Hospital, 1081 Burrard Street, Vancouver, BC V6Z 1Y6, Canada.

Comment in
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2004 Oct 1;170(7):721-2.
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2005 May 15;171(10):1191; author reply 1191-2.

Systemic inflammation is present in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD),
which has been linked to cardiovascular morbidity and mortality. We determined
the effects of oral and inhaled corticosteroids on serum markers of inflammation 
in patients with stable COPD. We recruited 41 patients with mild to moderate
COPD. After 4 weeks during which inhaled corticosteroids were discontinued,
patients were assigned to fluticasone (500 mcg twice a day), oral prednisone (30 
mg/day), or placebo over 2 weeks, followed by 8 weeks of fluticasone at 500 mcg
twice a day and another 8 weeks at 1,000 mcg twice a day. Withdrawal of inhaled
corticosteroids increased baseline C-reactive protein (CRP) levels by 71% (95%
confidence interval [CI], 16-152%). Two weeks with inhaled fluticasone reduced
CRP levels by 50% (95% CI, 9-73%); prednisone reduced it by 63% (95% CI, 29-81%).
No significant changes were observed with the placebo. An additional 8 weeks of
fluticasone were associated with CRP levels that were lower than those at
baseline (a 29% reduction; 95% CI, 7-46%). Inhaled and oral corticosteroids are
effective in reducing serum CRP levels in patients with COPD and suggest their
potential use for improving cardiovascular outcomes in COPD.

DOI: 10.1164/rccm.200404-543OC 
PMID: 15229100  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


549. Treat Respir Med. 2004;3(3):173-81.

A short-term comparison of fluticasone propionate/salmeterol with ipratropium
bromide/albuterol for the treatment of COPD.

Donohue JF(1), Kalberg C, Emmett A, Merchant K, Knobil K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary Medicine, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill,
27599-7020, USA. jdonohue@med.unc.edu

BACKGROUND: This is the first comparison of two combination therapies,
fluticasone propionate/salmeterol and ipratropium bromide/albuterol (salbutamol),
for the treatment of patients with COPD.
METHODS: A randomized, double-blind, double-dummy, parallel group, multicenter
evaluation of fluticasone propionate/salmeterol 250/50 microg twice daily via
DISKUS and ipratropium bromide/albuterol 36/206 microg four times daily via
metered-dose inhaler over 8 weeks was conducted at 41 research sites in the US.
Morning pre-dose FEV(1), 6-hour serial spirometry, PEF, dyspnea, night-time
awakenings, supplemental albuterol use, and patient diary evaluations of symptoms
were evaluated.
RESULTS: A total of 365 patients with symptomatic COPD were enrolled. The
treatment groups were similar in mean age (63.3 and 63.9 years), screening
pulmonary function (44.1% and 43.2% of predicted FEV(1)), race (96% and 95%
White), and sex distribution (59% and 60% male). Both fluticasone
propionate/salmeterol and ipratropium bromide/albuterol improved lung function,
symptoms, and supplemental albuterol use compared with baseline. Fluticasone
propionate/salmeterol was more effective than ipratropium bromide/albuterol for
improvement in morning pre-dose FEV(1), morning PEF, 6-hour FEV(1) area under the
curve (AUC(6)), Transition Dyspnea Index (TDI) focal score, daytime symptom
score, night-time awakenings, sleep symptoms, and albuterol-free nights (p < or =
0.013). Compared with day 1, at week 8 the FEV(1) AUC(6) significantly increased 
with fluticasone propionate/salmeterol and significantly decreased with
ipratropium bromide/albuterol (p < or = 0.003). The incidence of adverse events
was similar between treatment groups, except for a higher incidence of oral
candidiasis with fluticasone propionate/salmeterol.
CONCLUSIONS: Short-term treatment with the combined inhaled corticosteroid and
long-acting beta(2)-adrenoceptor agonist fluticasone propionate/salmeterol
resulted in greater control of lung function and symptoms than combined
ipratropium bromide/albuterol bronchodilator therapy, in patients with COPD.


PMID: 15219176  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


550. Chest. 2004 Jun;125(6):2368; author reply 2368.

Withdrawal of treatment in the ISOLDE study.

D'Urzo AD.

Comment on
    Chest. 2003 Oct;124(4):1350-6.


PMID: 15189970  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


551. Eur Respir J. 2004 May;23(5):698-702.

Impact of preventing exacerbations on deterioration of health status in COPD.

Spencer S(1), Calverley PM, Burge PS, Jones PW.

Author information: 
(1)Dept of Health and Social Care, Brunel University, Isleworth, UK.
Sally.Spencer@brunel.ac.uk

Exacerbations of chronic obstuctive pulmonary disease (COPD) are associated with 
worse health status. The Inhaled Steroids in Obstructive Lung Disease in Europe
(ISOLDE) study showed that treatment with fluticasone propionate (FP) reduced
exacerbation frequency and the rate of deterioration in health status as compared
with placebo. The present study analysed these data to test whether the effect of
FP on health status was attributable to its effect on exacerbations. Rates of
deterioration in St George's Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ) total score were
obtained for 613 patients with moderate to severe COPD followed for a maximum of 
3 yrs. Exacerbation rates were skewed and could not be normalised, therefore,
patients were stratified into three exacerbation groups: none, infrequent (<1.65 
exacerbations x yr(-1)) and frequent (>1.65 exacerbations x yr(-1)). There were
91 patients with no exacerbations, 285 with infrequent exacerbations and 235 with
frequent exacerbations. Frequent exacerbations were independently associated with
a worse baseline SGRQ score (p<0.0001) and a more rapid rate of deterioration in 
health status (p=0.0003). Exacerbation frequency and rate of decline in forced
expiratory volume in one second were independently related to the rate of
deterioration in SGRQ score. Statistical modelling showed the beneficial effect
of fluticasone propionate on deterioration in health status to be largely due to 
its effect on exacerbation frequency.


PMID: 15176682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


552. Internist (Berl). 2004 Jun;45(6):727-8.

[Inhalation combination therapy in chronic obstructive lung disease.
TRISTAN-study].

[Article in German]

Seeger W(1), Schulz R.

Author information: 
(1)Medizinische Klink II, Universitätsklinikum Giessen.
werner.seeger@innere.med.uni-giessen.de

DOI: 10.1007/s00108-004-1177-8 
PMID: 15138641  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


553. Am J Ther. 2004 May-Jun;11(3):236-7.

Metformin-associated respiratory alkalosis.

Bryant SM(1), Cumpston K, Lipsky MS, Patel N, Leikin JB.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Toxicology and Hyperbaric Medicine, Department of
Emergency Medicine, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio, USA.

We present an 84-year-old man with a history of chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease, type 2 diabetes, hypertension, glaucoma, and bladder cancer who
presented to the emergency department after the police found him disoriented and 
confused. Metformin therapy began 3 days before, and he denied any overdose or
suicidal ideation. Other daily medications included glipizide, fluticasone,
prednisone, aspirin, furosemide, insulin, and potassium supplements. In the
emergency department, his vital signs were significant for hypertension (168/90),
tachycardia (120 bpm), and Kussmaul respirations at 24 breaths per minute. Oxygen
saturation was 99% on room air, and a fingerstick glucose was 307 mg/dL. He was
disoriented to time and answered questions slowly. Metformin was discontinued,
and by day 3, the patient's vital signs and laboratory test results normalized.
He has been asymptomatic at subsequent follow-up visits. Metformin-associated
lactic acidosis is a well-known phenomenon. Respiratory alkalosis may be an early
adverse event induced by metformin prior to the development of lactic acidosis.


PMID: 15133541  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


554. Pulm Pharmacol Ther. 2004;17(3):141-5.

Salmeterol/fluticasone propionate in a Single Inhaler Device versus
theophylline+fluticasone propionate in patients with COPD.

Cazzola M(1), Noschese P, Centanni S, Santus P, Di Marco F, Spicuzza L, Di Maria 
GU.

Author information: 
(1)Respiratory Medicine and Allergology Unit, A. Cardarelli Hospital, Via del
Parco Margherita 24, 80121 Naples, Italy. mcazzola@qubisoft.it

STUDY OBJECTIVES: The aim of this study was to compare the relative efficacy in
terms of improvement in symptoms and lung function of salmeterol/fluticasone
propionate (SLM/FP) combination administered through the Diskus inhaler versus
theophylline (THEO) added to FP Diskus in patients with stable chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
METHODS AND MEASUREMENTS: Eighty patients were randomized to receive 4 months of 
treatment in one of two treatment groups: (1) fixed combination of SLM 50 microg 
and FP 500 microg Diskus, 1 inhalation twice daily; or (2) FP Diskus 500 microg, 
1 inhalation twice daily, plus oral titrated THEO twice daily. Patients attended 
the clinic before and after 4, 8, 12 and 16 weeks of treatment for evaluations of
pulmonary function, and dyspnea, which was assessed using an analogic visual
scale. Also the supplemental salbutamol use was measured.
RESULTS: . Sixty-six patients completed the 4-month treatment period: 37 patients
receiving SLM/FP and 29 patients receiving THEO+FP. Patients were withdrawn for
various reasons, the most common of which were poor compliance with the protocol,
exacerbation and GI events. A gradual increase in FEV(1) was observed with each
treatment. Maximum significant increases in FEV(1) over baseline values that were
observed after 4 months of treatment were as follows: SLM/FP 0.172 l (95% CI:
0.084-0.260) and THEO+FP 0.155 l (95% CI: 0.054-0.256). SLM/FP experienced
significantly (p<0.05) greater improvements in dyspnea, and required
significantly fewer supplemental salbutamol treatments than the THEO+FP group.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that SLM/FP combination may provide substantial 
benefits in both physiologic and clinical outcomes in symptomatic patients with
COPD. It also causes a more effective control than THEO+FP.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pupt.2004.01.004 
PMID: 15123223  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


555. Drug Ther Bull. 2004 Mar;42(3):18-21.

Are Seretide and Symbicort useful in COPD?

[No authors listed]

Seretide (fluticasone + salmeterol--Allen & Hanburys) and Symbicort (budesonide +
formoterol--AstraZeneca) inhalers have recently been licensed in the UK for the
symptomatic treatment of patients with severe chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD) and a history of repeated exacerbations. Advertising for Seretide 
depicts a man and states that the drug "has improved his ability to breathe and
reduced his risk of exacerbations", while promotional claims for Symbicort
include benefits in "reducing symptoms" and "improving quality of life". Here we 
assess the place of these fixed-dose combination inhalers containing a
corticosteroid and a long-acting beta 2 agonist in the management of patients
with COPD.


PMID: 15038079  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


556. Br J Clin Pharmacol. 2004 Apr;57(4):388-92.

The presence of emphysema does not affect the systemic bioactivity of inhaled
fluticasone in severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Lee DK(1), Lipworth BJ.

Author information: 
(1)Asthma & Allergy Research Group, Department of Clinical Pharmacology,
Ninewells Hospital & Medical School, University of Dundee, Dundee DD1 9SY,
Scotland, United Kingdom.

AIMS: To assess the systemic bioactivity of fluticasone proprionate (FP) 2000
micro g daily on sensitive adrenal and bone markers in severe chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD) patients with or without significant emphysema.
METHODS: Ten patients without emphysema (COPD group: age 55 years, FEV(1) 51%
predicted and DL(CO) 83% predicted) and 10 patients with emphysema (COPDE group: 
age 59 years, FEV(1) 43% predicted and DL(CO) 49% predicted) received FP 2000
micro g daily via a spacer for 2 weeks. There was a 1-week washout period prior
to FP treatment where patients were given salmeterol and oxitropium, after
stopping their usual inhaled corticosteroids for the duration of the study.
Measurements including overnight 10 h urinary cortisol excretion corrected for
creatinine (OUCC) and serum osteocalcin concentrations were performed at baseline
following washout and after 2 weeks of FP.
RESULTS: Values for OUCC and serum osteocalcin concentrations pre- and post-FP
were not significantly different between the COPD and COPDE groups. There was
significant suppression of OUCC (nmol mmol(-1)) by FP treatment within the COPD
group (P = 0.03): 7.86 vs 4.64 (95% CI on the difference 0.47, 5.98), and within 
the COPDE group (P = 0.006): 7.13 vs 4.27 (95% CI on the difference: 1.03, 4.69).
Likewise, there was significant suppression of osteocalcin concentration (nmol
l(-1)) by FP treatment within the COPD group (P = 0.04): 7.24 vs 6.34 (95% CI on 
the difference: 0.01, 1.78), and within the COPDE group (P = 0.03): 6.92 vs 5.72 
(95% CI on the difference: 0.12, 2.29).
CONCLUSIONS: Severe COPD patients who are receiving high dose FP are susceptible 
to the development of systemic adverse effects, irrespective of the presence of
emphysema.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2125.2003.02026.x 
PMCID: PMC1884482
PMID: 15025735  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


557. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol. 2004 Feb;92(2):201-7; quiz 207-8, 267.

Impact of long-term inhaled corticosteroid therapy on bone mineral density:
results of a meta-analysis.

Halpern MT(1), Schmier JK, Van Kerkhove MD, Watkins M, Kalberg CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Exponent, Alexandria, Virginia, USA. mhalpern@exponent.com

BACKGROUND: The impact of long-term inhaled corticosteroid (ICS) therapy on bone 
mineral density (BMD) is poorly understood.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the impact of long-term ICS use on BMD.
METHODS: Random-effects meta-analysis. Published and unpublished literature were 
identified by searches of MEDLINE and EMBASE databases and consultation with
experts. Studies reporting BMD among adult asthma and chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD) patients using ICS and non-ICS controls were identified.
Studies selected for review included at least 1 year of follow-up. Two
independent reviewers evaluated studies; data from those meeting specified
inclusion criteria were abstracted for inclusion in the meta-analysis.
RESULTS: Fourteen (5.3%) of 266 reviewed studies met specified inclusion
criteria. Sufficient data were available to perform meta-analysis on 3 measures
for ICS-using patients (lumbar, femoral neck, and major trochanter BMD) and 1
measure (lumbar BMD) for non-ICS-using controls. Using current National Asthma
Education and Prevention Program definitions, the majority of studies (12 of 14) 
included patients receiving moderate to high doses of ICSs. Among ICS users,
annual changes from baseline in lumbar, femoral neck, and major trochanter BMD
(-0.23%, -0.17%, and +1.46%, respectively) were not statistically significant.
Mean changes in lumbar BMD were also not significantly different from controls
(-0.02%). Further, annual changes in lumbar BMD were not statistically
significant for subgroups of patients with asthma or COPD.
CONCLUSIONS: Long-term use of ICSs in patients with asthma or COPD was not
associated with significant changes in BMD.

DOI: 10.1016/S1081-1206(10)61548-7 
PMID: 14989387  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


558. Ugeskr Laeger. 2004 Jan 19;166(4):271-4.

[Combined salmeterol and fluticasone in the treatment of chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease].

[Article in Danish]

Vestbo J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Wythenshawe Hospital, North West Lung Centre, Manchester, UK.
jvestbo@man.ac.uk


PMID: 14964108  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


559. Am J Respir Med. 2002;1(4):273-82; discussion 283-4.

Inhaled salmeterol/fluticasone propionate combination in chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease.

Lyseng-Williamson KA(1), Keating GM.

Author information: 
(1)Adis International Inc, Langhorne, Pennsylvania 19047, USA. demail@adis.com

Salmeterol/fluticasone propionate is a fixed-dose combination of the long-acting 
beta2-adrenoceptor agonist salmeterol and the corticosteroid fluticasone
propionate and is inhaled via the Diskus powder inhaler. In three randomized,
double-blind, 24-week or 52-week studies in >2850 patients with chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), administration of salmeterol/fluticasone
propionate 50/250 microg twice daily (in one study) and salmeterol/fluticasone
propionate 50/500 microg twice daily (in the other studies) provided greater
improvement in lung function than placebo or either component alone at the same
nominal dosage. Both strengths of the combination product administered twice
daily resulted in clinically meaningful increases in scores in health-related
quality-of-life questionnaires that were specific for respiratory disease.
Improvements in this and almost all other secondary measures of efficacy,
including symptomatic outcomes, were significantly greater with the combination
product than with placebo. Administration of salmeterol/fluticasone propionate as
a combination product did not result in any untoward interactions that affected
the pharmacodynamic, pharmacokinetic or tolerability profiles of the individual
components. Candidiasis, hoarseness/dysphonia, throat irritation and headache
occurred more frequently with salmeterol/fluticasone propionate than with placebo
in patients with COPD.


PMID: 14720047  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


560. MMW Fortschr Med. 2003 Nov 13;145(46):47.

[Salmeterol + fluticasone in COPD. Complementary treatment principles hold true
in the COPD management, too].

[Article in German]

[No authors listed]


PMID: 14699834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


561. Respir Med. 2003 Dec;97(12):1303-12.

Short- and long-term efficacy of fluticasone propionate in subjects with early
signs and symptoms of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Results of the DIMCA
study.

van Grunsven P(1), Schermer T, Akkermans R, Albers M, van den Boom G, van Schayck
O, van Herwaarden C, van Weel C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Practice, University Medical Center Nijmegen, PO Box
9101, 6500 HB Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Early treatment with inhaled corticosteroids may prevent progression 
of irreversible obstruction in COPD, especially in patients with bronchial
hyperresponsiveness. We investigated the clinical effects of early introduction
of inhaled steroids in subjects showing early signs and symptoms of COPD without 
a prior clinical diagnosis.
METHODS: Study subjects were detected in a general population screening and
monitoring program. Those with a moderately accelerated annual FEV1 decline and
persistent respiratory symptoms were invited to participate in a 2-year
randomized controlled trial comparing fluticasone propionate DPI 250 microg
b.i.d. with placebo. Pre- and post-bronchodilator (BD) FEV1, PC20 histamine,
functional status (COOP/WONCA charts) and occurrence of exacerbations were
periodically assessed. Subjects recorded respiratory symptoms. Post-BD FEV1
decline served as the main outcome. Multivariable repeated measurements analysis 
techniques were applied.
RESULTS: 48 subjects were randomized (24 fluticasone, 24 placebo). After 3
months, the post-BD FEV1 had increased with 125 ml (SE = 68, P = 0.075) and the
pre-BD FEV1 with 174 ml (SE 90, P = 0.059) in the fluticasone relative to the
placebo group. The subsequent post-BD and pre-BD FEV1 decline were not
beneficially modified by fluticasone treatment. There were no statistically
significant differences in respiratory symptoms, functional status, or
exacerbations favoring fluticasone. Subgroup analysis indicated that the presence
of bronchial hyperresponsiveness modified the initial FEV1 response on
fluticasone, but not the subsequent annual FEV1 decline.
CONCLUSION: Early initiation of inhaled steroid treatment does not seem to affect
the progressive deterioration of lung function or other respiratory health
outcomes in subjects with early signs and symptoms of COPD. In subjects at risk
for, or in an early stage of COPD, long-term inhaled steroid treatment should not
be based on a single spirometric evaluation after 3 months.


PMID: 14682412  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


562. Eur Respir J. 2003 Nov;22(5):815-20.

Effects of a comprehensive self-management programme in patients with chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease.

Monninkhof E(1), van der Valk P, van der Palen J, van Herwaarden C, Zielhuis G.

Author information: 
(1)Dept of Pulmonary Medicine, Medisch Spectrum Twente, Enschede, The
Netherlands. emonninkhof@introweb.nl

The aim of this study was to assess the effects of a comprehensive
self-management intervention on health-related quality of life (HRQoL), symptoms 
and walking distance in patients with stable moderately severe chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). This study was part of the overall COPD
study of the Dept of Pulmonary Medicine, Enschede, which consisted of an inhaled 
corticosteroid (ICS) trial and a self-management trial. After the ICS trial, all 
patients were randomised again to a self-management and a control group. The
self-management intervention consisted of a skill-oriented patient education
programme and a near-home fitness programme, on top of usual care. The control
group received usual care by the treating chest physician. HRQoL was measured by 
the St George's Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ) and walking distance by the
6-min walking test. Patients recorded their symptoms in diaries and graded their 
health status from 1-10 in a weekly report. Altogether, 248 COPD patients were
randomly allocated to either an intervention (127) or control (121) group. No
differences in the SGRQ scores within and between both groups were observed over 
1 yr. Similarly, no differences in symptom scores and 6-min walking distance were
found within and between groups. The intervention group reported more
exacerbations than the control group. The majority (69%) of the exacerbations in 
the intervention group were self-treated at home. This study failed to show
positive effects of a self-management programme among moderately severe chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease patients.


PMID: 14621090  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


563. Rev Med Brux. 2003 Sep;24(4):A354-7.

[Drug therapies of COPD].

[Article in French]

Noseda A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Clinique de Pneumologie, C.H.U. Brugmann, U.L.B.

In patients with COPD bronchodilators improve lung function to some extent and
relieve dyspnoea. Within short-acting bronchodilators, ipratropium
(anticholinergic agent) is as effective as salbutamol (sympathomimetic agent)
with fewer adverse effects. Presently, maintenance therapy is based on
long-acting inhaled bronchodilators. Tiotropium (anticholinergic agent) once a
day has a better efficacy to adverse effects ratio than salmeterol or formoterol 
(sympathomimetic agents) twice a day. Inhaled steroids (fluticasone, budesonide) 
are also able to improve lung function slightly and to relieve symptoms, but have
no beneficial effect on the accelerated rate of decline in lung function that
characterizes COPD. A short course (10 days) of systemic steroids is useful to
treat an exacerbation. On the other hand, potential toxicity of oral steroids is 
a definite contra-indication for maintenance therapy.


PMID: 14606301  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


564. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2003;(4):CD003794.

Combined corticosteroid and longacting beta-agonist in one inhaler for chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease.

Nannini L(1), Lasserson TJ, Poole P.

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary Section, Hospital G. Baigorria, Ruta 11 Y Jm Estrada, G. Baigorria, 
Santa Fe - Rosario, Argentina, 2152. nanninilj@cimero.org.ar

Update in
    Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2004;(3):CD003794.

BACKGROUND: Long-acting beta-agonists and inhaled corticosteroids have been
recommended in guidelines for the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease. However, they have only been available until recently via separate
administration. They have been developed in order to facilitate adherence to
medication regimens, and to improve efficacy.
OBJECTIVES: To assess the efficacy of combined inhaled corticosteroid and
long-acting beta-agonist preparations in the treatment of adults with chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease.
SEARCH STRATEGY: We searched the Cochrane Airways Group chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD) trials register (March 2003), the Cochrane Central
Register of Controlled Trials (The Cochrane Library Issue 1, 2003), LILACS (all
years to March 2003) and reference lists of articles. We also contacted
manufacturers and researchers in the field.
SELECTION CRITERIA: Studies were included if they were randomised, with adequate 
blinding procedures in place. Studies could compare a combined inhaled
corticosteroids and long-acting beta-agonist preparation with either component
preparation or placebo. Studies comparing different members of each class of
combined therapies were included
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Two reviewers independently assessed trial quality 
and extracted data.
MAIN RESULTS: Four randomised trials with 2986 participants were included. Two
different combination preparations (fluticasone/salmeterol and
budesonide/formoterol) were studied in the trials. No meta-analysis on clinical
outcomes was possible due to different outcome assessment across studies. All
studies demonstrated a reduction in exacerbation rates versus placebo.
Budesonide/formoterol was more effective than formoterol in reducing
exacerbations in one study from 1.84 to 1.42 exacerbations per year.
Fluticasone/salmeterol did not significantly reduce exacerbations compared with
either of its component treatments. Fluticasone/salmeterol led to better quality 
of life compared with placebo (two studies), although there were conflicting
results when compared with inhaled corticosteroid alone (two studies). There was 
no significant difference between fluticasone/salmeterol and long-acting
beta-agonist (two studies). Budesonide/formoterol led to statistically
significant differences in quality of life compared with placebo, but not when
compared with component inhaled corticosteroid or beta-agonist (one study).
REVIEWER'S CONCLUSIONS: For the primary outcome of exacerbations,
budesonide/formoterol had a modest advantage over a component medication,
formoterol, in a single trial, but fluticasone/salmeterol did not result in a
significant reduction in exacerbations compared to either of its components. The 
combination of steroids and long-acting beta-agonist in one inhaler was effective
in improving symptoms compared with placebo and on certain clinical outcomes
compared with one of the individual components alone. In order to draw firmer
conclusions about the effects of combination therapy in a single inhaler more
data are necessary, including the assessment of the comparative effects with
separate administration of the two drugs in double-dummy trials.

DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD003794 
PMID: 14583994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


565. Am J Gastroenterol. 2003 Oct;98(10):2146-8.

Prevalence of esophageal candidiasis among patients treated with inhaled
fluticasone propionate.

Kanda N(1), Yasuba H, Takahashi T, Mizuhara Y, Yamazaki S, Imada Y, Izumi Y,
Kobayashi Y, Yamashita K, Kita H, Tamada T, Chiba T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Kyoto University Graduate
School of Medicine, Kyoto, Japan.

OBJECTIVES: Development of oropharyngeal candidiasis is a frequently reported
adverse effect of inhaled corticosteroid use, but the prevalence of esophageal
candidiasis is unknown. The aim of this study was to estimate the prevalence of
esophageal candidiasis among patients treated with an inhaled corticosteroid,
fluticasone propionate.
METHODS: Upper GI endoscopy was performed on 49 patients treated with inhaled
fluticasone propionate to examine the prevalence of esophageal candidiasis. Of
the patients, 36 had bronchial asthma and 13 had chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease. To compare the prevalence with control patients, upper GI endoscopy was 
performed on 700 consecutive patients without malignancy or immunosuppression.
RESULTS: The prevalence of esophageal candidiasis was 37% among patients treated 
with inhaled fluticasone propionate, whereas only 0.3% of the control patients
had the infection. The prevalence was especially high among patients with
diabetes mellitus or those who were treated with a high dose of inhaled
fluticasone propionate. Moreover, a reduction in the daily dose of inhaled
fluticasone propionate eliminated the infection in four of five patients.
CONCLUSIONS: Esophageal candidiasis is a common complication of inhaled
corticosteroid use.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1572-0241.2003.07626.x 
PMID: 14572559  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


566. Chest. 2003 Oct;124(4):1373-80.

Oxidative stress in expired breath condensate of patients with COPD.

Kostikas K(1), Papatheodorou G, Psathakis K, Panagou P, Loukides S.

Author information: 
(1)Pneumonology and Clinical Research Department, Athens Army General Hospital,
Athens, Greece.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the levels of hydrogen peroxide (H(2)O(2)) and
8-isoprostane in the expired breath condensate (EBC) of patients with COPD, and
to assess the relationship between the above markers of oxidative stress and
parameters expressing inflammatory process and disease severity.
SETTING: Inpatient respiratory unit and outpatient clinic in tertiary care
hospital.
DESIGN: Cross-sectional study.
PATIENTS: Thirty stable COPD patients (all smokers) with disease severity ranging
from mild to severe. Ten subjects who were smokers with stage 0 disease (ie, at
risk for COPD; mean [+/- SD] FEV(1), 88 +/- 5% predicted) were studied as a
control group.
METHODS: H(2)O(2) and 8-isoprostane levels were measured in EBC, and the values
were correlated with variables expressing COPD severity (ie, FEV(1) percent
predicted, dyspnea severity score (ie, Medical Research Council scale) and airway
inflammation (ie, differential cell counts from induced sputum).
RESULTS: The mean concentration of H(2)O(2) was significantly elevated in COPD
patients compared to control subjects (mean, 0.66 micromol/L [95% confidence
interval (CI), 0.54 to 0.68 micro mol/L) vs 0.31 micro mol/L [95% CI, 0.26 to
0.35 micromol/L], respectively; p < 0.0001). The difference was primarily due to 
the elevation of H(2)O(2) in patients with severe and moderate COPD, whose
expired breath H(2)O(2) levels were significantly higher than those of patients
with mild disease (mean, 0.96 micromol/L [95% CI, 0.79 to 1.13 micromol/L], 0.68 
micromol/L [95% CI, 0.55 to 0.81 micromol/L], and 0.33 micromol/L [95% CI, 0.24
to 0.43 micromol/L], respectively, p < 0.0001). The mean concentration of
8-isoprostane was significantly elevated in patients with COPD compared to that
of the control group (47 pg/mL [95% CI, 41 to 53 pg/mL] vs 29 pg/mL [95% CI, 25
to 33 pg/mL], respectively; p < 0.0001) but did not differ significantly among
the different stages of the disease (p = 0.43). Repeatability and stability data 
within measurements showed that H(2)O(2) has a better repeatability and stability
than 8-isoprostane. Furthermore, we observed significant correlations of H(2)O(2)
with FEV(1), neutrophil count, and dyspnea score. Those correlations existed only
in patients with moderate and severe disease. No correlations were found between 
levels of 8-isoprostane and the above parameters.
CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that levels of H(2)O(2) and 8-isoprostane are elevated
in the EBC of patients with COPD, but that H(2)O(2) seems to be a more repeatable
and a more sensitive index of the inflammatory process and the severity of the
disease.


PMID: 14555568  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


567. Chest. 2003 Oct;124(4):1350-6.

Withdrawal from treatment as an outcome in the ISOLDE study of COPD.

Calverley PM(1), Spencer S, Willits L, Burge PS, Jones PW; IOSLDE Study Group.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University Hospital Aintree, Liverpool, United
Kingdom. pmacal@liverpool.ac.uk

Comment in
    Chest. 2004 Jun;125(6):2368; author reply 2368.
    Chest. 2004 Aug;126(2):659.

OBJECTIVES: To investigate the determinants of patient withdrawal from our study,
and the effect of these withdrawals on the outcome of treatment with inhaled
corticosteroids in patients with COPD.
DESIGN: A double-blind, placebo-controlled, randomized trial.
SETTING: Eighteen outpatient centers in the United Kingdom.
PARTICIPANTS: Seven hundred fifty-one patients with stable COPD defined
clinically and as baseline postbronchodilator FEV(1) > or = 0.8 L and < 85%
predicted, FEV(1)/FVC ratio < 70%, and FEV(1) change after albuterol < 10% of
predicted.
INTERVENTION: Random assignment of either 500 microg bid of inhaled fluticasone
propionate (FP) using a spacer device or an identical placebo inhaler. Treatment 
was continued for 3 years or until patients withdrew from follow-up.
MEASUREMENTS AND RESULTS: Postbronchodilator FEV(1) was measured on three
occasions before randomization and every 3 months thereafter. Health status was
assessed by the disease-specific St. George Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ) and 
the modified short-form 36 questionnaire (SF-36) at baseline and every 6 months. 
Three hundred thirty-nine patients withdrew, of whom 156 patients received FP.
Prescription of frequent courses of oral prednisolone was the most common reason 
for withdrawing as specified in the protocol (69 patients in the FP group
withdrew due to respiratory symptoms, compared with 93 patients in the placebo
group). This explained the significantly greater dropout of placebo-treated
patients that was most evident when FEV(1) was < 50% predicted. Patients
withdrawing had a significantly more rapid decline in health status, measured by 
both the SGRQ and the SF-36 (p < 0.001). Those withdrawing from the placebo group
had a more rapid decline in FEV(1) and more exacerbations than the FP-treated
groups. Baseline FEV(1) was lower in dropouts than in patients completing the
study receiving placebo, but there was no difference between the respective
groups receiving FP.
CONCLUSIONS: Patients who withdrew from follow-up were those with the most
rapidly deteriorating health status and lung function. Losing these patients from
the final analysis can reduce the power of a study to achieve its primary end
point.


PMID: 14555565  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


568. Chest. 2003 Sep;124(3):834-43.

The efficacy and safety of fluticasone propionate (250 microg)/salmeterol (50
microg) combined in the Diskus inhaler for the treatment of COPD.

Hanania NA(1), Darken P, Horstman D, Reisner C, Lee B, Davis S, Shah T.

Author information: 
(1)Baylor College of Medicine, Pulmonary/Critical Care, Ben Taub General
Hospital, 1504 Taub Loop, Houston, TX 77030, USA. hanania@bcm.tmc.edu

Comment in
    Chest. 2004 Aug;126(2):653-4; author reply 654-5.

STUDY OBJECTIVES: To compare the efficacy and safety of the inhaled
corticosteroid fluticasone propionate (FP) and the inhaled long-acting
beta(2)-agonist salmeterol (SM), when administered together in a single device
(Diskus; GlaxoSmithKline, Inc; Research Triangle Park, NC), with that of placebo 
and the individual agents alone in patients with COPD.
DESIGN: Randomized, double-blind, multicenter, placebo-controlled study.
SETTING: Seventy-six investigative sites in the United States.
PATIENTS: Seven hundred twenty-three patients > or =40 years of age with COPD and
a mean baseline FEV(1) of 42% predicted.
INTERVENTIONS: FP (250 microg), SM (50 microg), FP plus SM combined in a single
inhaler (FSC), or placebo administered twice daily through the Diskus device for 
24 weeks.
MEASUREMENTS: Primary efficacy measures were morning predose (ie, trough FEV(1)) 
for FSC compared with SM and 2-h postdose FEV(1) for FSC compared with FP. Other 
efficacy measures were as follows: morning peak expiratory flow rate (PEF);
transition dyspnea index; chronic respiratory disease questionnaire; chronic
bronchitis symptom questionnaire; exacerbations; and other symptomatic measures.
RESULTS: At Endpoint (ie, the last on-treatment, post-baseline assessment),
treatment with FSC significantly (p < or = 0.012) increased the morning predose
FEV(1) (165 mL) compared with SM (91 mL) and placebo (1 mL), and significantly (p
< or = 0.001) increased the 2-h postdose FEV(1) (281 mL) compared with FP (147
mL) and placebo (58 mL). Improvements in lung function with FSC compared with FP 
and SM, and with FP and SM compared with placebo, as measured by the average
daily morning PEF, was observed within approximately 24 h after the initiation of
treatment, indicating an early onset of effect (p < or = 0.034). Compared with
placebo, FSC significantly improved dyspnea, quality of life, and symptoms of
chronic bronchitis. The incidence of adverse effects (except for an increase in
oral candidiasis with FSC and FP) were similar among the treatment groups.
CONCLUSIONS: Treatment with FSC (FP, 250 microg, and SM, 50 microg) twice daily
substantially improved morning lung function and sustained these improvements for
over a period of 24 weeks compared with FP or SM treatment alone in patients with
COPD, with no additional safety concerns for the combination treatment vs that
with the individual components.


PMID: 12970006  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


569. Praxis (Bern 1994). 2003 Jul 30;92(31-32):1324-5.

[Inhalation of beta-2 agonists or corticosteroids as single drugs in comparison
with combination therapy of patients with COPD].

[Article in German]

Steurer-Stey C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Oberärztin Pneumologie, Medizinische Poliklinik des Universitätsspitals
Zürich.


PMID: 12934343  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


570. Respiration. 2003 May-Jun;70(3):242-8.

Effects of inhaled corticosteroids with different lung deposition on exhaled
hydrogen peroxide in stable COPD patients.

van Beurden WJ(1), Harff GA, Dekhuijzen PN, van der Poel-Smet SM, Smeenk FW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonology, Catharina Hospital Eindhoven, The Netherlands.
wendy.beurden@wanadoo.nl

Comment in
    Respiration. 2003 May-Jun;70(3):238-9.

BACKGROUND: The effects of inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) on markers of oxidative 
stress in patients with stable COPD are unclear.
OBJECTIVES: The aim was to investigate the effect of ICS on exhaled H(2)O(2) in
stable COPD patients and to compare ICS with different lung deposition.
METHODS: Forty-one stable patients with moderate COPD (FEV(1) approximately 60%
predicted) were randomized to sequence 1; first HFA-134a beclomethasone
dipropionate (HFA-BDP, an ICS with more peripheral deposition) 400 microg b.i.d.,
then fluticasone propionate (FP, an ICS with more central deposition) 375 microg 
b.i.d. (n = 20) or sequence 2; first FP, then HFA-BDP (n = 21). Both 4-week
treatment periods were preceded by a 4-week washout period. After each period,
the concentration of H(2)O(2) in exhaled breath condensate was measured.
RESULTS: The H(2)O(2) concentration decreased significantly after the first
treatment period in both sequence 1 and 2 (p < 0.05, p = 0.01, respectively). In 
neither sequence was there a return to baseline values after the second washout, 
indicating a carry-over effect. The concentrations remained low in both sequences
during the second treatment period.
CONCLUSIONS: Both ICS appeared to reduce exhaled H(2)O(2) in stable COPD
patients. However, this study showed no difference between ICS with different
deposition patterns, which in part may be due to the carry-over effect.

Copyright 2003 S. Karger AG, Basel

DOI: 72004 
PMID: 12915742  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


571. Thorax. 2003 Aug;58(8):654-8.

Prednisolone response in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease:
results from the ISOLDE study.

Burge PS(1), Calverley PM, Jones PW, Spencer S, Anderson JA.

Author information: 
(1)Birmingham Heartlands Hospital, Bordesley Green East, Birmingham B9 5SS, UK.
University Hospital Aintree, Liverpool L9 7AL, UK.
sherwood.burge@heartsol.wmids.nhs.uk

Comment in
    Thorax. 2003 Aug;58(8):647-8.
    Thorax. 2004 Feb;59(2):179; author reply 179.

BACKGROUND: A trial of corticosteroids has been recommended for all patients with
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), with the subsequent "response"
determining the treatment selected. This approach assumes that patients can be
reliably divided into responder and non-responder groups. We have assessed
whether such a separation is statistically valid, which factors influence the
change in forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV(1)) after prednisolone, and
whether the prednisolone response predicts 3 year changes in FEV(1), health
status, or number of exacerbations during placebo or fluticasone propionate
treatment.
METHODS: Oral prednisolone 0.6 mg/kg was given for 14 days to 524 patients with
COPD before randomised treatment for 3 years with fluticasone propionate or
placebo. Factors relating to change in FEV(1) after prednisolone were
investigated using multiple regression. The response to prednisolone was entered 
into separate mixed effects models of decline in FEV(1) and health status during 
the 3 years of the study.
RESULTS: The post-bronchodilator FEV(1) increased by a mean 60 ml (CI 46 to 74)
after prednisolone with a wide unimodal distribution. Current smoking was the
factor most strongly associated with the change in FEV(1) after prednisolone,
with an increase of 35 ml in current smokers and 74 ml in confirmed ex-smokers
(p<0.001). There was no relationship between the change in FEV(1) after
prednisolone and the response to inhaled bronchodilators, baseline FEV(1), atopic
status, age, or sex. The response to prednisolone, however expressed, was
unrelated to the subsequent change in FEV(1) over the following 3 years on either
placebo or fluticasone propionate. Regression to the mean effects explained much 
of the apparent prednisolone response. The significant effect of treatment on
decline in health status was not predicted by the prednisolone response.
CONCLUSION: Patients with COPD cannot be separated into discrete groups of
corticosteroid responders and non-responders. Current smoking reduces the FEV(1) 
response to prednisolone. Prednisolone testing is an unreliable predictor of the 
benefit from inhaled fluticasone propionate in individual patients.


PMCID: PMC1746769
PMID: 12885977  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


572. Expert Opin Pharmacother. 2003 Aug;4(8):1393-406.

Budesonide/formoterol for the treatment of asthma.

Buhl R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary Division, Mainz University Hospital, Langenbeckstrasse 1, D-55131
Mainz, Germany. R.Buhl@3-med.klinik.uni-mainz.de

Budesonide/formoterol (Symbicort), AstraZeneca plc) is a novel treatment for
asthma, combining an inhaled corticosteroid - budesonide, and a long-acting
beta(2)-agonist - formoterol, in a single inhaler, the Turbuhaler. Randomised,
clinical studies in patients with asthma have demonstrated that
budesonide/formoterol is more effective than the inhaled corticosteroids,
budesonide and fluticasone alone, and at least as effective as both
monocomponents in separate inhalers. Results from clinical studies suggest a
synergistic effect when both drugs are administered via one inhaler, although the
mechanisms for this are not fully understood. Budesonide/formoterol has a rapid
onset of effect, apparent within 1 min of treatment, which is largely because of 
the properties of formoterol. Once- and twice-daily dosing with
budesonide/formoterol are effective treatment options for patients with mild or
moderate asthma. Studies have also shown that the beneficial safety profiles and 
dose relationships of both budesonide and formoterol allow dose adjustments of
budesonide/formoterol in response to variations in the patient's asthma. Findings
from the budesonide/formoterol adjustable maintenance dosing programme, comparing
fixed and adjustable, symptom-guided dosing regimens, demonstrate that patients
achieve equally good asthma control with adjustable dosing (from one inhalation
twice-daily to more than four inhalations twice-daily), but at a significantly
lower overall drug load. Adverse events, mainly expected inhaled corticosteroid
and long-acting beta(2)agonist class effects, have been few in number and mild in
nature. In addition, there is growing evidence that budesonide/formoterol is also
effective in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. The future for 
treatment with budesonide/formoterol may include as-needed administration in
addition to maintenance therapy.

DOI: 10.1517/14656566.4.8.1393   
PMID: 12877646  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


573. MMW Fortschr Med. 2003 Jun 12;145(24):20.

[New studies refute steroid opponents. COPD--after all a case for
corticosteroids?].

[Article in German]

Calverley P.


PMID: 12866294  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


574. Pulm Pharmacol Ther. 2003;16(4):241-6.

Salmeterol & fluticasone 50 microg/250 microg bid in combination provides a
better long-term control than salmeterol 50 microg bid alone and placebo in COPD 
patients already treated with theophylline.

Dal Negro RW(1), Pomari C, Tognella S, Micheletto C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Lung, Orlandi General Hospital, Bussolengo, Verona, Italy.
rdalnegro@ulss22.ven.it

Bronchodilator agents are central to the symptomatic management of Chronic
Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD), and long-acting inhaled bronchodilators are
regarded as more convenient. The role of inhaled corticosteroids still remains
controversial, but there is increasing evidence that they may improve FEV(1) and 
symptoms in the long-term.AIM: of the present small pilot study was to compare
Salmeterol & Fluticasone (SM&FP) 50/250 microg bid via a single Diskus inhaler
with SM 50 microg bid alone, and with placebo (P) in the treatment of moderate
COPD.
METHODS: Eighteen moderate COPD patients (53-77 yr, mean basal FEV(1)=49.1%
pred.+/-5.0 s.d.; mean FEV(1) reversibility=3.6% bsln+/-3.8 s.d.) treated with
theophylline 400 mg/day and beta(2) short acting prn, were divided into three
matched groups of six subjects according to a double-blind design, and treated
with SM&FP 50/250 microcg, or SM 50 microcg alone, or P via Diskus inhaler bid
for 52 weeks. In bsln, after 4, 12, 24, 36 and 52 weeks, FEV(1) (% pred), morning
PEF (l/s), the daily symptom score, and the number of exacerbations (compared
with the previous year) were considered. Statistics. t-test, anova in each
treatment group, and anova among basal values and among the 52 week values were
used, being p<0.05 accepted. Also changes (DeltaFEV(1)) from baseline were
compared at different control times.
RESULTS: The mean number of exacerbations/yr decreased from 3.5+/-0.8 to
1.16+/-0.75 s.d. exacerbation/yr in the SM&FP group (t-test p<0.001); from
3.0+/-0.89 to 2.3+/-0.81 s.d. in the SM group (t-test p=ns); and from 3.16+/-1.16
to 4.16+/-0.75 s.d. in the P group (t-test p=ns). Patients receiving SM&FP showed
the highest mean improvement in FEV(1) (+7.3%+/-3.3 s.d.) over the baseline
pre-treatment value after 36 weeks of treatment (anova p<0.001), being FEV(1)
unchanged after 52 weeks of treatment in SM group (+0.33%+/-2.4 s.d.) and with a 
substantial decrease following P (-2.6%+/-1.2 s.d.) (anova p<0.001). Morning PEF 
(l/min) increased in subjects treated with SM&FP (anova p<0.001), while it
remained unchanged in SM and P group (in both, anova p=ns). After 52 weeks of
treatment, only subjects treated with SM&FP showed a reduction of the daily
symptoms score from 3.6+/-0.7 to 2.0+/-0.2 s.d. (anova p=0.008). Daily beta(2)
short acting prn consumption was reduced only in SM&FP group from 4.2+/-0.81 to
2.2+/-1.2 s.d. after 52 weeks (anova p<0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: SM&FP 50/250 microcg regularly assumed in combination via a single
Diskus inhaler for a 52 week period improves respiratory function (such as
FEV(1), morning PEF), and and symptom score significantly in moderate COPD
previously treated with theophylline, and at an higher extent than SM alone or P.
The use of beta(2) short acting prn is also reduced, together with the number of 
exacerbations.


PMID: 12850128  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


575. ACP J Club. 2003 Jul-Aug;139(1):14.

Discontinuation of inhaled fluticasone led to increased exacerbations in chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease.

Stanbrook MB(1).

Author information: 
(1)University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Comment on
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2002 Nov 15;166(10):1358-63.


PMID: 12841718  [PubMed]


576. J Aerosol Med. 2003 Summer;16(2):131-41.

Inhalation profiles in asthmatics and COPD patients: reproducibility and effect
of instruction.

Broeders ME(1), Molema J, Hop WC, Folgering HT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonary Diseases Dekkerswald, University of Nijmegen,
Groesbeek, The Netherlands. m.broeders@zonnet.nl

Turbuhaler and Salbutamol-Diskus produce therapeutic doses at peak inspiratory
flow (PIF) of >30 L/min. However, the optimum flow for Fluticasone-Diskus and
Turbuhaler, in terms of total emitted dose and fine particle mass, is >60 L/min. 
The Turbuhaler achieved a higher output at this flow, as compared to Diskus. For 
pMDI 25 < PIF < 90 L/min, an actuation time of 0.0-0.2 sec is optimal. The aim of
this study was to examine the incidence of optimum inhalation profiles, the
effect of instruction, reproducibility, and the relationship between inhalation
profiles and patient characteristics in stable asthmatics and
mild/moderate/severe COPD patients. For each device, triplicate inhalation
profiles were recorded during 6 sessions in a 10-week period. All patients
achieved PIF > 30 L/min using Diskus. After instruction, all Diskus inhalations
were performed with >60 L/min, except 7% of the inhalations of the severe COPD
patients. At least 95% of the Turbuhaler inhalations was also performed with the 
minimum flow; however, 19% of the inhalations of the severe COPD patients were
not optimally performed. The hand-lung coordination was inadequate in 40% of pMDI
inhalation profiles, and 80% was performed with a too high flow. The
reproducibility of PIF of both dry powder inhalers (DPIs) was very high
(coefficient of variation = 4-10%). The reproducibility of the pMDI variables was
lower (coefficient of variation = 9-18%). The major lung function variables
predictive for PIF(diskus) and PIF(turbuhaler) were maximal inspiratory mouth
pressure (MIP), PIF, and inspiratory capacity. No significant predictive lung
function variables for PIF(pMDI) were found. Most patients performed reproducible
optimum inhalation profiles through Diskus and Turbuhaler. However, in the severe
COPD group, 7-19% of the patients were not able to generate the optimum flows
through the DPIs. For these patients, a flow-independent aerosol delivery system 
might be more suitable. The majority of patients were using the pMDI incorrectly.
Instruction had no effect. So, we concluded that the pMDI should not be used in
these patient groups because of the coordination problems.

DOI: 10.1089/089426803321919898 
PMID: 12823907  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


577. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2003 Jun;111(6):1416; author reply 1416-7.

Rapid effect of inhaled fluticasone on airway responsiveness to AMP: research
implications.

Prosperini G, Spicuzza L, Polosa R.

Comment on
    J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2002 Oct;110(4):603-6.


PMID: 12789254  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


578. Eur Respir J. 2003 Apr;21(4):574-81.

Fluticasone reduces IL-6 and IL-8 production of cystic fibrosis bronchial
epithelial cells via IKK-beta kinase pathway.

Escotte S(1), Tabary O, Dusser D, Majer-Teboul C, Puchelle E, Jacquot J.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM UMRS 514, IFR 53, CHU Maison Blanche, Reims Cedex, France.

Inhaled fluticasone propionate (FP) is widely used to reduce pulmonary
inflammation in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, but the potential effects 
of FP on airway epithelial cells from patients with cystic fibrosis (CF) are
unknown. In CF disease, a nonregulated inflammatory lung response occurs through 
exaggerated nuclear factor (NF)-kappaB activation and elevated pro-inflammatory
cytokines production by airway epithelial cells. To determine whether FP reduces 
cytokine production in bronchial epithelial cells via NF-kappaB, the authors
investigated the nonstimulated and the Pseudomonas aeruginosa lipopolysaccharide 
(LPS) stimulated production of NF-kappaB-dependent interleukin (IL)-6, IL-8 and
RANTES (regulated on activation, T-cell expressed and secreted) along with the
activation of NF-kappaB in non-CF and CF human bronchial gland epithelial cells. 
It was demonstrated that a relevant concentration of FP (10(-8) M) inhibited
constitutive and P. aeruginosa LPS-induced IL-6 and IL-8 production of non-CF and
CF bronchial epithelial cells. Interestingly, the expression of two IkappaB
kinases (IKK)-alpha/beta, the degradation of cytosolic IkappaB-beta inhibitor and
the NF-kappaB deoxyribonucleic acid binding activity were markedly reduced after 
FP treatment in both CF and non-CF bronchial epithelial cells. It was shown by
the authors that fluticasone propionate exerts an anti-inflammatory effect by
blocking a signal transduction leading to a reduced level of IkappaB-alpha/beta
kinases in bronchial epithelial cells. In particular the strong effect on the
IkappaB-beta kinase, which is known to be elevated in bronchial epithelial cells 
in cystic fibrosis patients, was observed.


PMID: 12762338  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


579. Lancet. 2003 May 10;361(9369):1652; author reply 1652-3.

Combined salmeterol and fluticasone for COPD.

Khamis RY, Rajakulasingam RK.

Comment on
    Lancet. 2003 Feb 8;361(9356):449-56.

DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(03)13275-8 
PMID: 12747905  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


580. Lancet. 2003 May 10;361(9369):1652; author reply 1652-3.

Combined salmeterol and fluticasone for COPD.

Pakhale SS, Goldstein RS.

Comment on
    Lancet. 2003 Feb 8;361(9356):449-56.

DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(03)13274-6 
PMID: 12747904  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


581. Lancet. 2003 May 10;361(9369):1652; author reply 1652-3.

Combined salmeterol and fluticasone for COPD.

Hyde C, Dretzke J.

Comment on
    Lancet. 2003 Feb 8;361(9356):449-56.

DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(03)13273-4 
PMID: 12747903  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


582. Lancet. 2003 May 10;361(9369):1651; author reply 1652-3.

Combined salmeterol and fluticasone for COPD.

MacAllister R.

Comment on
    Lancet. 2003 Feb 8;361(9356):449-56.

DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(03)13271-0 
PMID: 12747902  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


583. Lancet. 2003 May 10;361(9369):1651; author reply 1652-3.

Combined salmeterol and fluticasone for COPD.

Vassiliou V.

Comment on
    Lancet. 2003 Feb 8;361(9356):449-56.

DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(03)13272-2 
PMID: 12747901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


584. Lancet. 2003 May 10;361(9369):1650-1; author reply 1652-3.

Combined salmeterol and fluticasone for COPD.

Thirstrup S, Kampmann JP.

Comment on
    Lancet. 2003 Feb 8;361(9356):449-56.

DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(03)13270-9 
PMID: 12747900  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


585. CMAJ. 2003 May 13;168(10):1296-7.

Treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: Combination or component
therapy?

Hackam DG(1).

Author information: 
(1)St. Joseph's Hospital, Department of Medicine, McMaster University, Hamilton, 
Ont.


PMCID: PMC154193
PMID: 12743078  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


586. Respir Med. 2003 May;97(5):453-7.

Bronchodilator effect of an inhaled combination therapy with salmeterol +
fluticasone and formoterol + budesonide in patients with COPD.

Cazzola M(1), Santus P, Di Marco F, Boveri B, Castagna F, Carlucci P, Matera MG, 
Centanni S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, A. Cardarelli Hospital, Unit of Pneumology
and Allergology, Naples, Italy. mcazzola@qubisoft.it

In the present trial, we compared the broncholytic efficacy of the combination
therapy with 50 microg salmeterol + 250 microg fluticasone and 12 microg
formoterol + 400 microg budesonide, both in a single inhaler device, in 16
patients with moderate-to-severe COPD. The study was performed using a
single-blind crossover randomized study. Lung function, pulse oximetry (SpO2) and
heart rate were monitored before and 15, 30, 60, 120, 180, 240, 300, 360, 480,
600, and 720 min after bronchodilator inhalation. Both combinations were
effective in reducing airflow obstruction. FEV1 AUC(0-12 h) was 2.83 l (95% CI:
2.13-3.54) after salmeterol/fluticasone and 2.57 l (95% CI: 1.97-3.2) after
formoterol/budesonide. Formoterol/budesonide elicited the mean maximum
improvement in FEV1 above baseline after 120 min (0.29 l; 95% CI: 0.21-0.37) and 
salmeterol/fluticasone after 300 min (0.32 l; 95% CI: 0.23-0.41). At 720 min, the
increase in FEV1 over baseline values was 0.10 l (95% CI: 0.07-0.12) after
salmeterol/fluticasone and 0.10 l (95% CI: 0.07-0.13) after
formoterol/budesonide. The mean peak increase in heart rate occurred 300 min
after formoterol/budesonide (1.5 b/min; 95% CI--2.3 to 5.3) and 360 min after
salmeterol/fluticasone (2.6 b/min; 95% CI--1.9 to 7.0). SpO2 did not change. All 
differences between salmeterol/fluticasone and formoterol/budesonide were not
significant (P > 0.05) except those in FEV1 at 120 and 360 min. The results
indicate that an inhaled combination therapy with a long-acting beta2-agonist and
an inhaled corticosteroid appears to be effective in improving airway limitation 
after acute administration in patients suffering from COPD.


PMID: 12735659  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


587. Osteoporos Int. 2003 May;14(3):179-90. Epub 2003 Apr 23.

Inhaled corticosteroids effects on bone in asthmatic and COPD patients: a
quantitative systematic review.

Richy F(1), Bousquet J, Ehrlich GE, Meunier PJ, Israel E, Morii H, Devogelaer JP,
Peel N, Haim M, Bruyere O, Reginster JY.

Author information: 
(1)WHO Collaborating Center for Public Health Aspects of Osteoarticular
Disorders, Liège, Belgium. florent.richy@ulg.ac.be

Deleterious effect of oral corticosteroids on bone has been well documented,
whereas this remains debated for inhaled ones (ICS). Our objectives were to
analyze the effects of ICS on bone mineral density, fracture risk and bone
markers. We performed an exhaustive systematic research of all controlled trials 
potentially containing pertinent data, peer-reviewed by a dedicated WHO expert
group, and comprehensive meta-analyses of the data. Inclusion criteria were ICS, 
and BMD/markers/fractures in asthma/chronic obstructive pulmonary diseases (COPD)
and healthy patients. Analyses were performed in a conservative fashion using
professional dedicated softwares and stratified by outcome, study design and ICS 
type. Results were expressed as standardized mean difference/effect size (ES),
relative risk (RR) or odds ratio (OR), depending on study design and outcome
units. Publication bias was investigated. Twenty-three trials were reviewed; 11
papers fit the inclusion criteria and were assessed for the main analysis.
Quality scores for the randomized controlled trials (RCTs) were 80%, 71% for the 
prospective cohort studies, and 78% for the retrospective cohort and
cross-sectional studies. We globally assessed ICS effects on BMD and found
deleterious effects: ES=0.61 ( p=0.001) for healthy subjects, and ES=0.27 (
p<0.001) for asthma/COPD patients. For these patients, this effect was 0.21 (
p<0.01) at the lumbar spine, and 0.26 ( p<0.001) at the hip or femoral neck. A
single study evaluated the impact of ICS on hip fracture and reported an
increased OR of 1.6 (1.24; 2.03). Lumbar fracture rate differences did not reach 
the level of statistical significance: 1.87 (0.5; 6.94). Osteocalcin and PICP
were decreased and ICTP, pyridinoline and deoxypyridinoline levels were not
significantly affected. Budesonide (BUD) appeared to be the ICS inducing the less
deleterious effects on bone, followed by beclomethasone dipropionate (BDP) and
triamcinolone (TRI). Publication bias investigation provided non-significant
results. In our meta-analyses, BUD at a mean daily dose (SD) of 686 microg (158
microg), BDP at 703 microg (123 microg) and TRI at 1,000 microg (282 microg) were
found to affect bone mineral density and markers in patients suffering from the
two major respiratory diseases. These findings could have practical implication
in the long-term management of asthmatic and COPD patients.

DOI: 10.1007/s00198-003-1398-z 
PMID: 12730758  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


588. Br J Clin Pharmacol. 2003 Apr;55(4):375-81.

Pharmacokinetics and systemic effects of inhaled fluticasone propionate in
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Singh SD(1), Whale C, Houghton N, Daley-Yates P, Kirby SM, Woodcock AA.

Author information: 
(1)Medicines Evaluation Unit, North-west Lung Research Centre, South Manchester
University Hospital Trust, Southmoor Road, Wythenshawe, Manchester M23 9LT, UK.
dave_sd@hotmail.com

AIMS: We have previously shown that the systemic exposure to inhaled fluticasone 
propionate (FP) is reduced in asthmatics compared with healthy subjects. We have 
now compared its pharmacokinetics in patients suffering from chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD, n = 10) and matched healthy subjects (n = 13).
METHODS: A double-blind, randomized, cross-over study design was used. Plasma FP 
and serum cortisol were measured for 12 h after subjects received
hydrofluoroalkane FP 1000 microg day-1 inhaled (via an MDI and spacer) for 7 days
and following a single 1000- microg intravenous dose.
RESULTS: The pharmacokinetics differed in the two groups. After inhalation,
geometric least square means were significantly lower in the COPD group for the
plasma AUC (1961 vs 2996 pg ml-1 h-1 for COPD and controls, respectively; P =
0.03) and the Cmax (235 vs 421 pg ml-1 for COPD and controls, respectively; P =
0.03). Suppression of serum cortisol concentration over 12 h was greater in
healthy controls. Weighted mean serum cortisol concentration (nmol l-1) in
healthy subjects and COPD was 93 and 170, respectively (P = 0.03). The
intravenous pharmacokinetic parameters for FP were comparable in the two groups, 
resulting in similar suppression of serum cortisol.
CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that the altered pharmacokinetics of inhaled fluticasone
propionate in COPD caused less hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal suppression than in
healthy controls. This is further evidence that the systemic effects of inhaled
corticosteroids should be assessed in patients and not healthy subjects.


PMCID: PMC1884235
PMID: 12680886  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


589. Int J Pharm. 2003 Apr 14;255(1-2):175-87.

A novel method for assessing dissolution of aerosol inhaler products.

Davies NM(1), Feddah MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, College of Pharmacy, Washington State
University, P.O. Box 646534, Pullman, WA 99164-6534, USA. ndavies@wsu.edu

Glucocorticoids administered by inhalation remain a first-line treatment of
patients with asthma allergic rhinitis and advanced chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease. Budesonide (BD), fluticasone propionate (FP) and triamcinolone acetonide
(TA) have high hepatic first-pass inactivation of the swallowed fraction of the
inhaled dose, whereas there is no first-pass metabolism in the lung. Hence, the
lung bioavailability will determine the overall systemic absorption and the
systemic bioactivity. Efficacy of inhaled agents in the respiratory tract depends
on the site of deposition and physicochemical properties of the drug, which
dictates rate of dissolution, absorption, metabolism and elimination. However, to
date no official method exists for testing dissolution rates from inhalation
aerosols. An in vitro flow through dissolution method may be useful to provide
information on rate of release and determine formulation differences between
products or in product development. After administration of three glucocorticoids
into a cascade impactor they underwent dissolution in a flow through cell
utilising water, simulated lung fluid (SLF) and modified SLF with
L-alpha-phosphatidylcholine (DPPC) as a dissolution medium, at constant flow and 
temperature. Modified SLF significantly increased the dissolution rate compared
with SLF alone. This novel technique appears to be a useful method of evaluating 
dissolution of these glucocorticoids and may also be applied to other respiratory
products administered via aerosols.


PMID: 12672613  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


590. Expert Rev Pharmacoecon Outcomes Res. 2003 Apr;3(2):121-4. doi:
10.1586/14737167.3.2.121.

Salmeterol/fluticasone combination in COPD: is together better?

Antoniu SA(1), Mititiuc I.

Author information: 
(1)Clinic of Pulmonary Disease, University of Medicine and Pharmacy 'Gr.T.Popa'
Iasi, 30 Dr I Cihac Str., 6600 Iasi, Romania. sabinaantoniu@excite.com

Comment on
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2002 Oct 15;166(8):1084-91.
    Lancet. 2003 Feb 8;361(9356):449-56.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease represents one of the chronic conditions
for which many therapies have become available during the last few decades. They 
are aimed at reducing symptoms such as dyspnea, cough and sputum and many of them
are given on inhalatory route. Among them, bronchodilators, such as; salmeterol
or formoterol and inhaled steroids, such as budesonide or fluticasone have each
proven their effectiveness in improving many clinical outcomes such as dyspnea,
exacerbations number, lung function decline or health status. Currently
combinations of these two classes are available in an attempt to make the
inhalatory therapy more effective. These studies analyse the effectiveness of
salmeterol/fluticasone combination from a clinical point of view and for a short 
period of time.

DOI: 10.1586/14737167.3.2.121 
PMID: 19807359  [PubMed]


591. Eur Respir J. 2003 Mar;21(3):559-60; author reply 560.

Survival in COPD patients after regular use of fluticasone propionate and
salmeterol.

Marchand E.

Comment on
    Eur Respir J. 2002 Oct;20(4):819-25.


PMID: 12662020  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


592. Respir Med. 2003 Mar;97(3):212-20.

Cost-effectiveness of fluticasone propionate in the treatment of chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease: a double-blind randomized, placebo-controlled
trial.

Ayres JG(1), Price MJ, Efthimiou J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Birmingham Heartlands and Solihull
Hospital NHS Trust (Teaching), Bordesley Green East, U.K. j.g.ayres@abdn.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a debilitating
disease and places a large financial burden on health-care systems and society.
We prospectively evaluated the cost-effectiveness offluticasone propionate (FP)
treatment in patients with moderate-to-severe COPD, who were symptomatic on
regular bronchodilator therapy.
METHODS: An economic analysis was performed in a 6-month, randomized,
double-blind clinical trial comparing FP 1,000 microg/day with placebo in 281
patients aged 45-79 years with symptomatic moderate-to-severe COPD. Data on
clinical efficacy, health-care resource use and productivity loss associated with
the management of COPD were prospectively collected. The main outcome measures
were the incremental cost-effectiveness of achieving a > or = 10% improvement in 
FEV1 and of remaining exacerbation-free throughout the study. The economic
evaluation was costed from the perspective of the NHS (direct costs) and of
society (direct and indirect costs).
RESULTS: FP was significantly more effective than placebo in terms of the
proportions of patients demonstrating a > or = 10% improvement in FEV1 (32 vs.
19%; P = 0.02) and remaining free of moderate/severe exacerbations (75 vs. 63%; P
= 0.02). The difference between the groups in total costs was not significantly
different. Incremental cost-effectiveness analyses showed that the additional
clinical benefits of FP relativeto placebo, in terms of a > or = 10% improvement 
in FEV1 or an increased number of patients free of moderate/severe exacerbations,
were achieved at minimal additional costs from an NHS perspective (additional
0.25 pounds per day for bath) or at a net saving from a societal perspective.
Sensitivity analysis showed that these results were robust to changes in the
underlying assumptions.
CONCLUSIONS: Treatment with FP was associated with statistically significant
clinical benefits in patients with moderate-to-severe COPD currently symptomatic 
on regular bronchodilator therapy. As the differences in direct and total costs
compared with placebo were small and non-significant, this treatment can be
considered cost-effective in this patient population.


PMID: 12645827  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


593. Med Klin (Munich). 2002 Dec 15;97 Suppl 2:15-9.

[Do we need inhalative steroids in chronic COPD patients?].

[Article in German]

Welte T(1), Gillissen A.

Author information: 
(1)Bereich Pneumologie und internistische Intensivmedizin,
Otto-von-Guericke-Universität Magdeburg. tobias.welte@medizin.uni-magdeburg.de

The use of inhaled steroids in the management of chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD) is controversially discussed. Neither the optimistic view of the
90s nor the current pessimistic view on these substances seems to be justified.
It becomes apparent that a more differentiated approach, depending on the
clinical situation and the cellular composition in the airways, is necessary.
Patients with severe inflammation, poor lung function, and frequent exacerbations
seem to benefit more from inhaled steroids. Patients in early stages of the
disease with occasional symptoms only, and patients predominantly suffering from 
emphysema than from bronchitis seem to have no benefit from this treatment
option. Special attention should be turned to mixed types with asthma-like
symptoms. The combination of inhaled long-acting beta 2-mimetics and steroids
seems to be of advantage; for a final judgment, however, the results of ongoing
clinical trials have to be awaited.


PMID: 12593177  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


594. Med Klin (Munich). 2002 Dec 15;97 Suppl 2:1.

[The MMW Drug Prize 2002: Prize for a new classic with innovation potential].

[Article in German]

Schultze-Werninghaus G.


PMID: 12593173  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


595. Lancet. 2003 Feb 8;361(9356):449-56.

Combined salmeterol and fluticasone in the treatment of chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease: a randomised controlled trial.

Calverley P(1), Pauwels R, Vestbo J, Jones P, Pride N, Gulsvik A, Anderson J,
Maden C; TRial of Inhaled STeroids ANd long-acting beta2 agonists study group.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Clinical Sciences Centre, University Hospital Aintree,
Liverpool, UK. pmacal@liverpool.ac.uk

Erratum in
    Lancet. 2003 May 10;361(9369):1660.

Comment in
    Lancet. 2003 May 10;361(9369):1650-1; author reply 1652-3.
    Lancet. 2003 May 10;361(9369):1651; author reply 1652-3.
    Lancet. 2003 May 10;361(9369):1651; author reply 1652-3.
    Lancet. 2003 May 10;361(9369):1652; author reply 1652-3.
    Expert Rev Pharmacoecon Outcomes Res. 2003 Apr;3(2):121-4.
    Lancet. 2003 May 10;361(9369):1652; author reply 1652-3.
    Lancet. 2003 Feb 8;361(9356):444-5.
    Lancet. 2003 May 10;361(9369):1652; author reply 1652-3.

BACKGROUND: Inhaled long-acting beta2 agonists improve lung function and health
status in symptomatic chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), whereas
inhaled corticosteroids reduce the frequency of acute episodes of symptom
exacerbation and delay deterioration in health status. We postulated that a
combination of these treatments would be better than each component used alone.
METHODS: 1465 patients with COPD were recruited from outpatient departments in 25
countries. They were treated in a randomised, double-blind, parallel-group,
placebo-controlled study with either 50 microg salmeterol twice daily (n=372),
500 microg fluticasone twice daily (n=374), 50 microg salmeterol and 500 microg
fluticasone twice daily (n=358), or placebo (n=361) for 12 months. The primary
outcome was the pretreatment forced expiratory volume in 1s (FEV1) after 12
months treatment' and after patients had abstained from all bronchodilators for
at least 6h and from study medication for at least 12h. Secondary outcomes were
other lung function measurements, symptoms and rescue treatment use, the number
of exacerbations, patient withdrawals, and disease-specific health status. We
assessed adverse events, serum cortisol concentrations, skin bruising, and
electrocardiograms. Analysis was as predefined in the study protocol.
FINDINGS: All active treatments improved lung function, symptoms, and health
status and reduced use of rescue medication and frequency of exacerbations.
Combination therapy improved pretreatment FEV1 significantly more than did
placebo (treatment difference 133 mL, 95% CI 105-161, p<0.0001), salmeterol (73
mL, 46-101, p<0.0001), or fluticasone alone (95 mL, 67-122, p<0.0001).
Combination treatment produced a clinically significant improvement in health
status and the greatest reduction in daily symptoms. All treatments were well
tolerated with no difference in the frequency of adverse events, bruising, or
clinically significant falls in serum cortisol concentration.
INTERPRETATION: Because inhaled long-acting beta2 agonists and corticosteroid
combination treatment produces better control of symptoms and lung function, with
no greater risk of side-effects than that with use of either component alone,
this combination treatment should be considered for patients with COPD.

DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(03)12459-2 
PMID: 12583942  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


596. Lancet. 2003 Feb 8;361(9356):444-5.

COPD: treatments benefit patients.

Rennard SI(1).

Author information: 
(1)University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE 68198, USA. srennard@unmc.edu

Comment on
    Lancet. 2003 Feb 8;361(9356):449-56.

DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(03)12467-1 
PMID: 12583937  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


597. Eur Respir J. 2003 Jan;21(1):68-73.

Disease severity and the effect of fluticasone propionate on chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease exacerbations.

Jones PW(1), Willits LR, Burge PS, Calverley PM; Inhaled Steroids in Obstructive 
Lung Disease in Europe study investigators.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Physiological Medicine, St George's Hospital Medical School,
London, UK. pjones@sghms.ac.uk

Exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) are associated with
worse health and increased healthcare utilisation. The Inhaled Steroids in
Obstructive Lung Disease in Europe (ISOLDE) study in COPD showed a 26% reduction 
in the yearly rate of exacerbations in patients treated with fluticasone
propionate (FP) compared to placebo, but did not indicate which patients showed
greatest benefit. In this study the patients were stratified into mild and
moderate-to-severe COPD using the American Thoracic Society criterion of forced
expiratory volume in one second (FEV1) 50% predicted, and the total number of
exacerbations and those requiring treatment with oral corticosteroids were
examined. There were 391 (195 FP) patients with mild COPD and 359 (180 FP)
patients with moderate-to-severe disease. The exacerbation rate was highly skewed
in mild disease, but more normally distributed in moderate-to-severe disease. FP 
reduced the overall exacerbation rate in moderate-to-severe disease (FP median
rate 1.47 yr(-1), placebo 1.75 yr(-1)), but not in mild disease (FP 0.67 yr(-1), 
placebo 0.92 yr(-1)). FP use was associated with fewer patients with > or = 1
exacerbation x yr(-1) being treated with oral corticosteroids (mild: FP 8%,
placebo 16%; moderate-to-severe: FP 17%, placebo 30%). Effects of fluticasone
propionate on exacerbations were seen predominantly in patients with a
postbronchodilator forced expiratory volume in one second <50% predicted. These
data support recommendations in the Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive
Disease treatment guidelines that inhaled corticosteroids should be considered in
patients with moderate-to-severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease who
experience recurrent exacerbations.


PMID: 12570111  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


598. MMW Fortschr Med. 2002 Oct 31;144(44):55.

[Combination of beta-1 agonist and corticosteroid is advantageous not only in
asthma. COPD patients spared exacerbations].

[Article in German]

[No authors listed]


PMID: 12494604  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


599. Eur Respir J. 2002 Oct;20(4):819-25.

Survival in COPD patients after regular use of fluticasone propionate and
salmeterol in general practice.

Soriano JB(1), Vestbo J, Pride NB, Kiri V, Maden C, Maier WC.

Author information: 
(1)Worldwide Epidemiology Dept, GlaxoSmithKline Research and Development,
Greenford, Middlesex, UK. joan.b.soriano@gsk.com

Comment in
    Eur Respir J. 2003 Feb;21(2):202-3.
    Eur Respir J. 2002 Oct;20(4):797-8.
    Eur Respir J. 2003 Mar;21(3):559-60; author reply 560.

Despite substantial evidence regarding the benefits of combined use of inhaled
corticosteroids and long-acting beta2-agonists in asthma, such evidence remains
limited for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Observational data may 
provide an insight into the expected survival in clinical trials of fluticasone
propionate (FP) and salmeterol in COPD. Newly physician-diagnosed COPD patients
identified in primary care during 1990-1999 aged > or = 50 yrs, of both sexes and
with regular prescriptions of respiratory drugs were identified in the UK General
Practice Research Database. Three-year survival in 1,045 COPD patients treated
with FP and salmeterol was compared with that in 3,620 COPD patients who
regularly used other bronchodilators but not inhaled corticosteroids or
long-acting beta2-agonists. Standard methods of survival analysis were used,
including adjustment for possible confounders. Survival at year 3 was
significantly greater in FP and/or salmeterol users (78.6%) than in the reference
group (63.6%). After adjusting for confounders, the survival advantage observed
was highest in combined users of FP and salmeterol (hazard ratio (HR) 0.48 (95%
confidence interval 0.31-0.73)), followed by users of FP alone (HR 0.62
(0.45-0.85)) and regular users of salmeterol alone (HR 0.79 (0.58-1.07)) versus
the reference group. Mortality decreased with increasing number of prescriptions 
of FP and/or salmeterol. In conclusion, regular use of fluticasone propionate
alone or in combination with salmeterol is associated with increased survival of 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease patients managed in primary care.


PMID: 12412670  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


600. Eur Respir J. 2002 Oct;20(4):797-8.

Medical therapy for COPD: lessons from the real world.

Calverley PM.

Comment on
    Eur Respir J. 2002 Oct;20(4):819-25.


PMID: 12412666  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


601. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2002 Nov 15;166(10):1358-63. Epub 2002 Sep 5.

Effect of discontinuation of inhaled corticosteroids in patients with chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease: the COPE study.

van der Valk P(1), Monninkhof E, van der Palen J, Zielhuis G, van Herwaarden C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Medisch Spectrum Twente, Enschede, The
Netherlands. valkpapa@knmg.nl

Comment in
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2003 Jul 15;168(2):256-7; author reply 257.
    ACP J Club. 2003 Jul-Aug;139(1):14.

The aim of this double-blind single center study (the COPE study) was to
investigate the effect of discontinuation of the inhaled corticosteroid
fluticasone propionate (FP) on exacerbations and health-related quality of life
in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. After 4 months of
treatment with FP (1,000 microg/day), 244 patients were randomized to either
continue FP or to receive placebo for 6 months: 123 patients continued FP (FP
group), and 121 received placebo (placebo group). In the FP group, 58 (47%)
patients developed at least one exacerbation compared with 69 (57%) in the
placebo group. The hazard ratio of a first exacerbation in the placebo group
compared with the FP group was 1.5 (95% confidence interval [CI] 1.1-2.1). In the
placebo group 26 patients (21.5%) experienced rapid recurrent exacerbations and
were subsequently unblinded and prescribed FP compared with 6 patients (4.9%) in 
the FP group (relative risk = 4.4; 95% CI 1.9-10.3). Over a 6-month period, a
significant difference in favor of the FP group was observed in the total score
(+2.48 95% CI 0.37-4.58), activity domain (+4.64 95% CI 1.60-7.68), and symptom
domain (+4.58 95% CI 1.05-8.10) of the St. George's Respiratory Questionnaire.
This study indicates that discontinuation of FP in patients with chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease is associated with a more rapid onset and higher
recurrence-risk of exacerbations and a significant deterioration in aspects of
Health-Related Quality of Life.

DOI: 10.1164/rccm.200206-512OC 
PMID: 12406823  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


602. Lung. 2002;180(4):191-201.

Controlled trial of inhaled fluticasone propionate in moderate to severe COPD.

Thompson WH(1), Carvalho P, Souza JP, Charan NB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA.

Inhaled corticosteroids are often used in the treatment of stable chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), however, studies of these agents have had
mixed results. Previous trials have often excluded subjects with bronchodilator
response, have failed to evaluate effect on gas exchange, and have usually looked
at only post- rather than prebronchodilator forced expiratory volume (FEV). Our
objective was to better assess the efficacy of topical corticosteroids in the
treatment of COPD. We used a prospective, randomized, double-blinded,
placebo-controlled, crossover study at the Outpatient Department, Department of
Veterans Affairs Medical Center. Thirty-six COPD patients with a mean (+/- SD)
FEV1 of 1.10 +/- 0.43 L, with or without significant bronchodilator response
participated in the study. Subjects received a 3-month course of inhaled
fluticasone propionate (220 micro g/puff) or identical-appearing placebo by
metered-dose inhaler at 2 puffs twice daily, followed by crossover to the
alternative inhaler for an additional 3 months. Fluticasone treatment resulted in
a higher prebronchodilator FEV1 (1.17 +/- 0.08 L [mean +/- SEM] versus 1.07 +/-
0.08 L, p = 0.001), a higher PaO2 (66.6 +/- 1.4 mmHg versus 63.6 +/- 1.6 mmHg, p 
= 0.002), and a better dyspnea score on the chronic respiratory questionnaire
(3.70 +/- 0.18 versus 3.47 +/- 0.19, p = 0.03). A trend towards fewer
exacerbations with fluticasone did not quite meet statistical significance (p =
0.11). Inhaled fluticasone over 3 months improved prebronchodilator airflow
obstruction and oxygenation while decreasing dyspnea in moderate to severe COPD. 
Postbronchodilator FEV1 was not significantly changed.

DOI: 10.1007/s004080000093 
PMID: 12391509  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


603. MMW Fortschr Med. 2002 Aug 22;144(33-34):53.

[Beta mimetic drug plus steroid. Powerful duo also in COPD].

[Article in German]

[No authors listed]


PMID: 12380146  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


604. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2002 Oct 15;166(8):1084-91.

Effectiveness of fluticasone propionate and salmeterol combination delivered via 
the Diskus device in the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Mahler DA(1), Wire P, Horstman D, Chang CN, Yates J, Fischer T, Shah T.

Author information: 
(1)Dartmouth Hitchcock Medical Center, Section of Pulmonary and Critical Care
Medicine, 1 Medical Center Drive, Lebanon, NH 03756-0001, USA.
donald.a.mahler@hitchcock.org

Comment in
    Expert Rev Pharmacoecon Outcomes Res. 2003 Apr;3(2):121-4.

This randomized controlled trial examined the benefits of combining an inhaled
corticosteroid, fluticasone propionate (F), with an inhaled long-acting
beta(2)-agonist, salmeterol (S), to treat the inflammatory and
bronchoconstrictive components of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). A
total of 691 patients with COPD received the combination of F and S (FSC), S (50 
mcg), F (500 mcg), or placebo twice daily via the Diskus device for 24 weeks. A
significantly greater increase in predose FEV(1) at the endpoint was observed
after FSC (156 ml) compared with S (107 ml, p = 0.012) and placebo (-4 ml, p <
0.0001). A significantly greater increase in 2-hour postdose FEV(1) at the
endpoint was observed after treatment with FSC (261 ml) compared with F (138 ml, 
p < 0.001) and placebo (28 ml, p < 0.001). There were greater improvements in the
Transition Dyspnea Index with FSC (2.1) compared with F (1.3, p = 0.033), S (0.9,
p < 0.001), and placebo (0.4, p < 0.0001). The incidence of adverse effects
(except for an increase in oral candidiasis with FSC and F) was similar among the
treatment groups. We conclude that FSC improved lung function and reduced the
severity of dyspnea compared with individual components and placebo.

DOI: 10.1164/rccm.2112055 
PMID: 12379552  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


605. Expert Rev Pharmacoecon Outcomes Res. 2002 Oct;2(5):415-7. doi:
10.1586/14737167.2.5.415.

Fluticasone propionate in COPD airway inflammation: there is a partial effect.

Antoniu SA(1), Donner CF.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary Diseases, Salvatore Maugeri Foundation IRCCS, via per
Revislate 13, Veruno 28010 (NO), Italy. santoniu@fsm.it

Comment on
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2002 Jun 15;165(12):1592-6.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease is a mainly tobacco-related disease
currently representing the fourth highest cause of mortality worldwide. It is
characterized by progressive chronic airway obstruction, the underlying
pathogenic mechanism being inflammatory. Currently, apart from neutrophils and
macrophages, there is an evolving role of T-lymphocytes, especially in smokers
who develop chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Oral steroids produce a
clinical improvement in approximately 10% of chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease patients. Inhaled steroids, such as fluticasone propionate, failed to
stop lung function deterioration, but reduced the health status decline and
number of exacerbations. Its effect on the inflammatory process was analysed in
the study authored by Hattotuwa et al. The primary outcome was the effect of
fluticasone propionate on the inflammatory cells present in the bronchial
biopsies. Secondary outcomes were the symptoms, lung function decline and number 
of exacerbations. Fluticasone propionate had a partial effect on inflammation did
not influence the progressive airway obstruction, partially improved the symptoms
and reduced the number of exacerbations.

DOI: 10.1586/14737167.2.5.415 
PMID: 19807464  [PubMed]


606. Pharmacotherapy. 2002 Sep;22(9):1117-23.

Fluticasone is associated with lower asthma-related costs than leukotriene
modifiers in a real-world analysis.

Armstrong EP(1), Malone DC.

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmacy, University of Arizona, Tucson 85721, USA.

STUDY OBJECTIVE: To compare the impact of fluticasone propionate versus three
leukotriene modifiers-montelukast, zafirlukast, and zileuton-on the cost of
asthma within a managed care organization.
DESIGN: Retrospective quasi-experimental comparison.
SETTING: Managed care organization with approximately 350,000 enrollees.
PATIENTS: Three hundred forty-seven patients with asthma who received at least
two prescriptions for either fluticasone or a leukotriene modifier. Patients
receiving both fluticasone and a leukotriene modifier were excluded.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: Multivariate analysis was used to compare total
asthma-related costs between treatment groups. A significant difference in total 
asthma-related costs was found between patients receiving fluticasone (adjusted
mean cost $511) compared with those receiving a leukotriene modifier ($1,092;
p=0.0001). Other significant predictors of postindex asthma-related costs were
pre-index asthma-related costs, a severity adjustment score, and the diagnosis of
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Patients taking a leukotriene modifier
obtained more short-acting beta-agonists than patients receiving fluticasone
(6.49 +/- 4.05 vs 4.30 +/- 3.41, p < 0.0001). A survival analysis of time to
receive any additional controller therapy revealed that patients receiving
fluticasone were significantly less likely to receive another controller than
were those receiving a leukotriene modifier (p=0.0014).
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that fluticasone is associated with lower
asthma-related costs than leukotriene modifiers.


PMID: 12222547  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


607. Thorax. 2002 Sep;57(9):799-803.

Effects of fluticasone propionate on inflammatory cells in COPD: an
ultrastructural examination of endobronchial biopsy tissue.

Gizycki MJ(1), Hattotuwa KL, Barnes N, Jeffery PK.

Author information: 
(1)Lung Pathology Unit, Imperial College School of Medicine at the Royal Brompton
Hospital, London, UK London Chest Hospital, London, UK.

BACKGROUND: Inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) markedly reduce bronchial mucosal
inflammation in asthma but whether they have an anti-inflammatory effect in
airway tissue in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is unknown.
METHODS: A study of endobronchial biopsy samples was conducted as part of a
double blind, placebo controlled, randomised trial of parallel design. Patients
had mild to moderately severe COPD (FEV(1) 25-80% of predicted) and were given 3 
months treatment with ICS, fluticasone propionate (FP; 500 micro g twice daily,
n=14) or placebo (n=10). Biopsy tissue taken at baseline and after treatment was 
examined by transmission electron microscopy to count the numbers of all
ultrastructurally distinct inflammatory cells.
RESULTS: Compared with their baseline values, FP resulted in a significant
decrease (on average 65%) in the numbers of mucosal mast cells (median 7.8 (range
1-33) v 2.8 (1-14), p<0.05). The reductive effect of FP held true when the
post-treatment values of the placebo and FP groups were compared: 8.8 (1-24) v
2.8 (1-14) (p<0.05). Unexpectedly, there were significantly more neutrophils in
the FP than in the placebo group: 4.0 (0-23) v 1.7 (0-8), respectively (p<0.05). 
There were no alterations to other cell types including mononuclear cells.
Symptoms markedly improved in the patients treated with FP for 3 months.
CONCLUSION: Fluticasone propionate given for 3 months to patients with COPD has
selective effects on the inflammatory cells in the bronchial mucosa: the
reduction in mast cell numbers may account for the improvement in symptoms over
this time.


PMCID: PMC1746422
PMID: 12200525  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


608. Clin Infect Dis. 2002 Sep 1;35(5):e54-6. Epub 2002 Jul 31.

Invasive pulmonary filamentous fungal infection in a patient receiving inhaled
corticosteroid therapy.

Peter E(1), Bakri F, Ball DM, Cheney RT, Segal BH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, School of Medicine and Biochemical Sciences, State
University of New York, Buffalo, NY, USA.

We report a case of invasive pulmonary filamentous fungal infection in a patient 
with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease who was treated with a conventional
dose of inhaled fluticasone in the absence of other causes of immunosuppression. 
This case demonstrates the potential risk for opportunistic fungal infections in 
patients treated with high-potency lipophilic inhaled corticosteroids.

DOI: 10.1086/341971 
PMID: 12173150  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


609. Thorax. 2002 Aug;57(8):694-700.

Effects of fluticasone propionate in COPD patients with bronchial
hyperresponsiveness.

Verhoeven GT(1), Hegmans JP, Mulder PG, Bogaard JM, Hoogsteden HC, Prins JB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonary and Intensive Care Medicine, Erasmus Medical Center
Rotterdam, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. verhoeveng@mcrz.nl

BACKGROUND: Treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) with
inhaled corticosteroids does not appear to be as effective as similar treatment
of asthma. It seems that only certain subgroups of patients with COPD benefit
from steroid treatment. A study was undertaken to examine whether inhaled
fluticasone propionate (FP) had an effect on lung function and on indices of
inflammation in a subgroup of COPD patients with bronchial hyperresponsiveness
(BHR).
METHODS: Twenty three patients with COPD were studied. Patients had to be
persistent current smokers between 40 and 70 years of age. Non-specific BHR was
defined as a PC(20) for histamine of <or=8 mg/ml. Patients received either 2 x
500 microg FP or placebo for 6 months. Expiratory volumes were measured at
monthly visits, BHR was determined at the start of the study and after 3 and 6
months, and bronchial biopsy specimens were taken at the start and after 6 months
of treatment. Biopsy specimens from asymptomatic smokers served as controls.
RESULTS: In contrast to asthma, indices of BHR were not significantly influenced 
by treatment with FP. Forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV(1)) showed a
steep decline in the placebo group but remained stable in patients treated with
FP. FEV(1)/FVC, and maximal expiratory flows at 50% and 25% FVC (MEF(50),
MEF(25)) were significantly increased in the FP treated patients compared with
the placebo group. Biopsy specimens were analysed for the presence of CD3+, CD4+,
CD8+, MBP+, CD15+, CD68+, CD1a, and tryptase cells. FP treatment resulted in
marginal reductions in these indices of inflammation.
CONCLUSION: In patients with COPD and BHR, FP has a positive effect on indices of
lung function compared with placebo. Bronchial inflammation analysed in bronchial
biopsy specimens is only marginally reduced.


PMCID: PMC1746396
PMID: 12149529  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


610. Transplantation. 2002 Jun 15;73(11):1793-9.

Addition of inhaled corticosteroids to systemic immunosuppression after lung
transplantation: a double-blind, placebo-controlled trial.

Whitford H(1), Walters EH, Levvey B, Kotsimbos T, Orsida B, Ward C, Pais M, Reid 
S, Williams T, Snell G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, The Alfred Hospital, Commercial Road,
Prahran, Victoria, Australia 3181.

Comment in
    Transplantation. 2003 Jul 15;76(1):263-4.

BACKGROUND: It is postulated that bronchiolitis obliterans syndrome (BOS) is
preceded by airway inflammation that has been described even in stable lung
transplant recipients. Airway inflammation is known to be suppressed by inhaled
steroids in other chronic inflammatory lung diseases, e.g., asthma and chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease. BOS is the major cause of morbidity and mortality 
after lung transplantation.
OBJECTIVE: To examine the effect of inhaled corticosteroids on the development of
BOS in lung transplant recipients.
METHODS: Thirty patients were recruited and randomized in a double-blind fashion 
to receive either 750 microg of fluticasone propionate (FP) or an
identical-appearing placebo twice daily for 3 months; 20 of this group continued 
until 2 years posttransplantation. Detailed spirometry was performed regularly
throughout the study.
RESULTS: In the short-term study no differences were found in any examined
parameters. In the long-term component of the study no differences were found in 
the development of neither BOS nor survival. There were minor differences in
bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) lymphocyte percentages.
CONCLUSIONS: FP is ineffective for the prevention of BOS after lung
transplantation despite the airway inflammation that characterizes this
condition. Inadequate local delivery, timing of the therapy relative to
transplantation and inherent steroid resistance of this condition may explain the
negative finding of this study.


PMID: 12085003  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


611. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2002 Jun 15;165(12):1592-6.

The effects of inhaled fluticasone on airway inflammation in chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease: a double-blind, placebo-controlled biopsy study.

Hattotuwa KL(1), Gizycki MJ, Ansari TW, Jeffery PK, Barnes NC.

Author information: 
(1)Lung Pathology Unit, Imperial College School of Medicine at the Royal Brompton
Hospital, London, United Kingdom.

Comment in
    Expert Rev Pharmacoecon Outcomes Res. 2002 Oct;2(5):415-7.
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2002 Jun 15;165(12):1579-80.

Inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) are effective in the treatment of asthma and
markedly reduce the numbers of inflammatory cells in bronchial biopsies. However,
the effect of ICS on the inflammatory profile of biopsies in smokers with chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is unknown. We have performed a
double-blind, placebo-controlled, randomized study to compare fluticasone
propionate (FP) 500 microg twice daily via a dry powder inhaler and placebo (P)
over a 3-month period in subjects with COPD. Fiberoptic bronchoscopy and
bronchial biopsy was carried out at baseline and after the 3 months of treatment.
Thirty-one subjects completed the trial and 30 paired biopsies were available for
analysis. Compared with P (n = 14), subjects on inhaled FP (n = 16) had no
significant reductions in the primary endpoints: CD8+, CD68+ cells, or
neutrophils, considered to be of importance in COPD. However, there was a
reduction in the CD8:CD4 ratio in the epithelium and of the numbers of
subepithelial mast cells in the FP group. CD4+ cells were significantly raised in
the P group in both subepithelium and epithelium. Symptoms significantly
improved, and there were significantly fewer exacerbations in subjects on FP,
compared to subjects on P. The data indicate that inhaled fluticasone does affect
selected aspects of airway inflammation in COPD, and this may explain, in part,
the decrease in exacerbations seen in long-term studies with fluticasone
propionate.

DOI: 10.1164/rccm.2105025 
PMID: 12070058  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


612. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2002 Jun 15;165(12):1579-80.

Inhaled glucocorticosteroids and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: how full 
is the glass?

Pauwels R.

Comment on
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2002 Jun 15;165(12):1592-6.

DOI: 10.1164/rccm.2204029 
PMID: 12070055  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


613. J Aerosol Med. 2002 Spring;15(1):65-73.

Mass output and particle size distribution of glucocorticosteroids emitted from
different inhalation devices depending on various inspiratory parameters.

Kamin WE(1), Genz T, Roeder S, Scheuch G, Trammer T, Juenemann R, Cloes RM.

Author information: 
(1)Johannes Gutenberg University, Mainz, Germany.

Efficient inhalation therapy depends on successful delivery of the drug to the
lung. The efficacy of drug delivery is not only influenced by the characteristics
of the inhalation device, but also by the patient's handling of the device and by
the inspiratory maneuver achieved through the device. We analyzed the output
characteristics of three different chlorofluorocarbon (CFC)-free breath-actuated 
inhalers for inhaled glucocorticosteroids (BUD Turbohaler, FP Diskus/Accuhaler
and HFA-BDP Autohaler, respectively). Mass output and particle size distribution 
of drug aerosol delivered by the inhalers were determined depending on different 
inhalation parameters in vitro using an Andersen cascade impactor. We found that,
beside the peak inspiratory flow (PIF), other factors such as flow acceleration
and inhalation volume also have significant effects on aerosol generation with
respect to mass output and particle size distribution. Thus, these parameters
should be taken into account when a suitable device for an individual patient is 
to be selected. The dependency on inspiratory parameters was most pronounced for 
the dry powder inhalers. The Turbohaler showed by far the highest variance in
particle output (fine particle fraction ranging from 3.4% to 22.1% of label
claim), whereas the Diskus was less dependent on variations in inhalation (10.6% 
to 18.5% of label claim). The most constant aerosol output was found for the
Autohaler, which also released the highest fine particle fraction (43.1% to 56.6%
of label claim).

DOI: 10.1089/08942680252908593 
PMID: 12006147  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


614. Expert Opin Pharmacother. 2002 Mar;3(3):341-50.

Seretide for obstructive lung disease.

Chapman KR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Asthma Centre and Pulmonary Rehabilitation Program, Toronto Western Hospital, 
University Health Network, Suite 4-011 ECW, 399 Bathurst Street, Toronto,
Ontario, M5T 2S8, Canada. kchapman@ca.inter.net

Seretide (Advair [North America], GlaxoSmithKline) is an inhaler combination
formulation intended for the maintenance therapy of obstructive airways disease. 
Seretide was developed and made available initially as three multi-dose, dry
powder inhaler formulations delivering 50 microg/puff of the long acting beta(2) 
agonist salmeterol and either 100, 250 or 500 microg/puff of the inhaled
corticosteroid fluticasone propionate. In addition to the initial multi-dose dry 
powder inhaler system (Diskus or Accuhaler), a chlorofluorocarbon (CFC)-free
pressurised aerosol formulation has become available. Studied mostly extensively 
as a maintenance therapy for patients with persistent asthma, the combination
inhaler is at least equivalent to its components administered separately and is
superior to monotherapy with salmeterol or inhaled corticosteroid in both
paediatric and adult populations. The combination has a logical role in the
treatment of moderate-to-severe asthma, offering the advantage of increased
convenience and possibly improved compliance. In addition to improvements in lung
function, symptom scores and quality of life, the combination therapy reduces
exacerbation rates, an outcome that contributes to favourable cost-effectiveness.
A role as initial maintenance therapy in all forms of persistent asthma is also
plausible but there are fewer data concerning the impact of Seretide in milder
forms of persistent asthma. Clinical trials are underway to examine the potential
role of Seretide in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
Salmeterol has been shown to be an effective first-line bronchodilator in COPD
and fluticasone has been shown to reduce the frequency and or severity of
exacerbations in COPD patients in two key trials. At a time when the prevalence
of both asthma and COPD is increasing, Seretide is a valuable step in the
management of these common obstructive lung diseases.

DOI: 10.1517/14656566.3.3.341    
PMID: 11866683  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


615. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol. 2001 Dec;87(6):465-73.

Salmeterol 100 microg: an analysis of its tolerability in single- and
chronic-dose studies.

Shrewsbury S(1), Hallett C.

Author information: 
(1)GlaxoSmithKline UK Limited, Uxbridge, Middlesex, United Kingdom.
sbs40926@gsk.com

Comment in
    Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol. 2001 Dec;87(6):445-6.

BACKGROUND: A combination product containing fluticasone propionate 100 or 250
microg and salmeterol 50 microg has recently been made available in the United
States. Some patients, if previously instructed to double their inhaled
corticosteroids, may double this product, inadvertently receiving higher doses of
salmeterol, potentially causing systemic beta2-agonist-related effects.
OBJECTIVES: To examine the systemic effects of single and chronic doses of
salmeterol 100 microg.
METHODS: Forty-four studies including a salmeterol 100 microg treatment arm were 
identified. Data on predictable systemic effects were available in 10 single-dose
and 9 chronic-dose studies lasting more than 7 days, in patients with asthma (6
adult, 2 pediatric) or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (1 study), which
were included in a weighted, pooled analysis.
RESULTS: Single 100-microg dose studies: mean change from baseline in heart rate 
was +2.3 beats per minute and systolic blood pressure +0.4 mm Hg. Tremor and
palpitations were reported in 5.7% and 2.8%. Other systemic effects included a
decrease in serum potassium for 3 subjects (2.1%); an increase in serum glucose, 
1 subject (0.7%); and electrocardiographic (ECG) events, 24 cases (17.0%).
Twenty-three of these were from one crossover study which reported 27 ECG events 
after placebo. Chronic dose studies (salmeterol 100 microg): mean change in heart
rate and systolic blood pressure were +1.8 beats per minute and -0.2 mm Hg.
Tremor and palpitations were reported in 5.6% and 1.7% of 1,504 patients.
Thirteen recorded a decrease in serum potassium (0.9%) and 5 an increase in serum
glucose (0.3%). Nine patients had ECG events (0.6%). Eight of these were
"arrhythmia" from one study, which also reported 12 events before treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: The mean systemic effects of salmeterol 100 microg are small and of 
doubtful clinical relevance. Patients (and their caregivers) can be reassured
that inadvertently taking double doses of the new combination product are
unlikely to affect them adversely.


PMID: 11770693  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


616. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2001 Dec 1;164(11):2057-66.

The cost effectiveness of early treatment with fluticasone propionate 250 microg 
twice a day in subjects with obstructive airway disease. Results of the DIMCA
program.

van den Boom G(1), Rutten-van Mölken MP, Molema J, Tirimanna PR, van Weel C, van 
Schayck CP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Practice and Social Medicine, University of Nijmegen,
Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

In a two-stage detection program, subjects with signs of obstructive airway
disease were selected from a random sample of the general population. Subjects (n
= 82) were randomly assigned to either fluticasone propionate 250 microg twice a 
day or placebo twice a day via pMDI in a 1-yr, double-blind trial if they met
criteria for persistent airway obstruction, increased bronchial
hyperresponsiveness, or a rapid decline in FEV(1). Main outcome measures were
postbronchodilator FEV(1), quality-adjusted life years (QALYs), and direct
medical cost. Secondary measures were prebronchodilator FEV(1), PC(20),
health-related quality of life (CRQ), symptom-free weeks, episode-free weeks,
exacerbations, and indirect cost. Subgroup analysis was based on reversibility of
obstruction. Analysis revealed a significant gain in postbronchodilator FEV(1)
(98 ml/yr; p = 0.01) in favor of fluticasone. Only subjects with reversible
obstruction showed an improvement in PC(20) (1.4 doubling dose; p = 0.03). Early 
treatment resulted in 2.7 QALYs gained per 100 treated subjects (p = 0.17) and in
a clinically relevant improvement in dyspnea (CRQ; p < 0.03). The incremental
cost effectiveness ratios were US$13,016/QALY for early treatment and
US$33,921/QALY for the combination of detection and treatment. The incremental
cost for one additional subject with a clinically relevant difference in dyspnea 
was US$1,674. In conclusion, early intervention with fluticasone resulted in
significant health gains at relatively low financial cost.

DOI: 10.1164/ajrccm.164.11.2003151 
PMID: 11739135  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


617. Eur J Pharmacol. 2001 Nov 23;431(3):365-71.

Beclomethasone, budesonide and fluticasone propionate inhibit human neutrophil
apoptosis.

Zhang X(1), Moilanen E, Kankaanranta H.

Author information: 
(1)Medical School, University of Tampere, Tampere, Finland.

Inhaled glucocorticoids are widely used to treat chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease without much evidence of efficiency in this disease where neutrophils may
contribute to the pathophysiology. This prompted us to test the effects of
several currently used inhaled and systemic glucocorticoids on human neutrophil
apoptosis. Beclomethasone, budesonide, dexamethasone, fluticasone propionate,
hydrocortisone and prednisolone inhibited apoptosis in a concentration-dependent 
manner as assessed by flow cytometric analysis, annexin-V binding and
morphological analysis. The maximal inhibition of apoptosis was 50-60%. The order
of potency was fluticasone propionate (EC(50) 0.6+/-0.2 nM) approximately equal
to budesonide (EC(50) 0.8+/-0.2 nM)> dexamethasone approximately equal to
prednisolone approximately equal to beclomethasone approximately equal to
hydrocortisone. The inhibitory effects of glucocorticoids were reversed by
mifepristone. Moreover, glucocorticoids slightly enhanced the inhibitory effect
of granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) on neutrophil
apoptosis. The present data suggests that budesonide and fluticasone propionate
prolong human neutrophil survival by inhibiting apoptosis at clinically relevant 
drug concentrations via an effect on glucocorticoid receptor.


PMID: 11730731  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


618. Expert Opin Pharmacother. 2001 Jul;2(7):1177-86.

Triamcinolone: new and old indications.

Doggrell SA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Doggrell Biomedical Communications, Lynfield, Auckland, New Zealand.
s_doggrell@yahoo.com

Triamcinolone is a commonly used synthetic corticosteroid that has recently been 
tested in a large clinical trial for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and
shown to have some benefits. To our knowledge, there are no reviews of the
pharmacotherapy of triamcinolone. This review has a brief overview of the
pharmacology of triamcinolone, followed by a discussion of the clinical trials
with triamcinolone. Triamcinolone is used in the treatment of respiratory
inflammation, rheumatoid arthritis and a variety of other inflammatory
conditions.

DOI: 10.1517/14656566.2.7.1177   
PMID: 11583068  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


619. Drugs. 2001;61(11):1535-44.

Should inhaled corticosteroids be used in the long term treatment of chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease?

Burge S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Birmingham Heartlands Hospital, England.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a progressive disease with
alveolar destruction (emphysema) and bronchiolar fibrosis (obstructive
bronchitis) in variable proportions. Reducing disease progression, as assessed by
forced expiratory volume in I second (FEV1) decline, health-related quality of
life, exacerbation rate and mortality, is a more realistic outcome than
physiological improvement. This paper reviews all the published studies of at
least 100 patients followed for at least 2 years. Studies have included patients 
with mild COPD (Copenhagen City Lung Study) to advanced symptomatic disease
[Inhaled Steroids in Obstructive Lung Disease (ISOLDE)], with 2 studies of those 
with relatively early symptoms [European Respiratory Society Study on Chronic
Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (EUROSCOP) and Lung Health-21. Exacerbation
frequency, and probably severity, are reduced by high dose inhaled
corticosteroids. Exacerbations are only frequent in more advanced disease,
limiting the use of this outcome in EUROSCOP and Lung Health-2. Exacerbations are
associated with reduced health-related quality of life. ISOLDE clearly showed a
reduced rate in decline of the disease-specific St George's Respiratory
Questionnaire with fluticasone propionate, partly related to the reduced
exacerbations. The symptom component of the score showed the greatest difference 
between placebo and fluticasone propionate. None of the larger studies were able 
to reproduce the statistically significant reduction in the rate of decline in
FEV1 suggested by the smaller, earlier studies. This might at least in part be as
a result of the statistical modelling used which cannot adequately compensate for
those with more rapidly progressive disease dropping out earlier. The equivalent 
doses of inhaled corticosteroids differed approximately fivefold between the
major studies. The more positive results were obtained with higher doses.
Oropharyngeal adverse effects were similar to those seen in patients with asthma;
bruising was increased in one study with budesonide, otherwise adverse effects
were similar to placebo. Bone loss was specifically studied in subgroups of
patients in EUROSCOP and Lung Health-2. Budesonide 800 microg/day was associated 
with less bone loss than placebo, whereas triamcinolone 1200 microg/day was
associated with excess bone loss. High dose inhaled corticosteroids have a
favourable risk/benefit ratio in patients with advanced disease, particularly
those with frequent exacerbations, and no benefit for those with very mild
disease. It is not possible from the data to make firm recommendations for the
important intermediate group where delaying progression is likely to lead to
greatest benefit. I believe high dose inhaled steroids are warranted for those
with intermediate severity COPD, who have frequent exacerbations or significant
COPD-related symptoms.


PMID: 11577791  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


620. Respir Med. 2001 May;95(5):324-30.

Ex-vivo product performance of Diskus and Turbuhaler inhalers using inhalation
profiles from patients with severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Burnell PK(1), Small T, Doig S, Johal B, Jenkins R, Gibson GJ.

Author information: 
(1)GlaxoSmithKline Research and Development, Ware, Hertfordshire, UK.
pkpb8907@glaxowellcome.co.uk

Dosing performance of dry powder inhalers is dependent on patient's inspiratory
effort. This study compares the inhalation profiles generated by patients with
severe obstructive lung disease using Diskus and Turbuhaler inhalers. The patient
profiles are subsequently used to determine the dosing performance of fluticasone
propionate Diskus and budesonide Turbuhaler inhalers. Inhalation profiles were
recorded in COPD patients (FEV1 < or = 30% predicted) as they inhaled with
maximal effort through the inhalers. The profiles were used in an inhalation
simulator to assess the dosing performance by measuring the total emitted dose
and the fine particle mass for each inhaler type. Peak inspiratory flow was
significantly higher through the Diskus (mean 82.31 min(-1)) compared with
Turbuhaler (mean 53.51 min(-1), difference = 28.8 l min(-1); P < 0.0001). In
addition, in direct comparison of the two devices. the Diskus was shown to
deliver a more consistent dose irrespective of flow than the Turbuhaler in this
patient population. These findings may be of importance in optimising selection
of devices for patients with severe airway obstruction.


PMID: 11392571  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


621. Mediators Inflamm. 2001 Feb;10(1):21-6.

Effects of fluticasone propionate inhalation on levels of arachidonic acid
metabolites in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Verhoeven GT(1), Garrelds IM, Hoogsteden HC, Zijlstra FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonary and Intensive Care Medicine, University Hospital
Dijkzigt and Erasmus University, EMCR, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
Verhoeven@lond.azr.nl

BACKGROUND: In smoking COPD patients the bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) fluid
contains high numbers of inflammatory cells. These cells might produce
arachidonic acid (AA) metabolites, which contribute to inflammation and an
increased bronchomotor tone.
AIMS: To investigate levels of AA metabolites in BAL fluid, before and after
inhaled glucocorticoid therapy: fluticasone propionate (FP) 1 mg per day, or
placebo.
METHODS: A double-blind placebo controlled trial lasting six months. COPD
patients were selected by clinical criteria and the presence of bronchial
hyper-responsiveness (BHR). Lung function was recorded and in BAL fluid we
counted cell numbers and measured LTB4, LTC4/D4/E4, PGE2, 6kPGF1alpha, PGF2alpha 
and TxB2. A control group consisted of asymptomatic smokers (n=6).
RESULTS: Paired data were obtained from 9 FP treated and 11 placebo patients. BAL
cells were almost exclusively alveolar macrophages. In patients and controls both
cellularity and levels of AA metabolites were equal Cell numbers did not change
after treatment. Statistically significant decreases after FP therapy were
noticed for PGE2 (30%), 6kPGF1alpha (41%) and PGF2alpha (54%).
CONCLUSIONS: In COPD, the capability of inflammatory cells to produce certain AA 
metabolites was decreased after inhaled FP treatment. This result is discussed in
its relation to clinical effects, the influence of smoking, and the results of an
earlier, similar study in asthma patients.

DOI: 10.1080/09629350123056 
PMCID: PMC1781690
PMID: 11324900  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


622. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2001 Jan;163(1):122-8.

Health status deterioration in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease.

Spencer S(1), Calverley PM, Sherwood Burge P, Jones PW; ISOLDE Study Group.
Inhaled Steroids in Obstructive Lung Disease.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiological Medicine, St George's Hospital Medical School,
London, United Kingdom. sspencer@sghms.ac.uk

This study examined health status decline in patients with chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD). Data are from the Inhaled Steroids in Obstructive Lung 
Disease (ISOLDE) trial. After an 8-wk run-in, 751 patients (566 male), mean age
64 yr, were randomized to receive fluticasone propionate (FP) 500 microg twice
daily (376 patients) or placebo (375 patients). Mean baseline postbronchodilator 
FEV1 was 50 +/- 15% predicted. Patients completed the St George's Respiratory
Questionnaire (SGRQ) and the Short-Form 36 (SF-36) at baseline and every 6 mo for
3 yr. FEV1 and smoking status were assessed at baseline and at 3-mo intervals. A 
total of 387 (212 FP) patients completed the trial. All SGRQ components (p = 0.03
to 0.004) and Physical Function, Mental Health, Energy/ Vitality, and Physical
Role Limitation scales of the SF-36 (p = 0.05 to 0.005) deteriorated faster in
the placebo group. FEV1 and SGRQ scores correlated at baseline values (r = -0.25,
p < 0.0001), as did change in FEV1 and change in SGRQ (Delta r = -0.24, p <
0.0001). At baseline values smokers had worse SGRQ Total, Symptoms, and Impacts
scores than ex-smokers. This difference was maintained throughout the study.
Smoking status did not influence the rate of decline in health status. The SGRQ
Total scores of FP-treated patients took 59% longer than placebo to deteriorate
by a clinically significant amount. We conclude that health status decline in
moderate to severe COPD can be reduced by high-dose fluticasone.

DOI: 10.1164/ajrccm.163.1.2005009 
PMID: 11208636  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


623. Drugs. 2000 Nov;60(5):1141-78.

Budesonide inhalation suspension: a review of its use in infants, children and
adults with inflammatory respiratory disorders.

Hvizdos KM(1), Jarvis B.

Author information: 
(1)Adis International Limited, Auckland, New Zealand. demail@adis.co.nz

Budesonide, a topically active corticosteroid, has a broad spectrum of clinically
significant local anti-inflammatory effects in patients with inflammatory lung
diseases including persistent asthma. In infants and young children with
persistent asthma, day- and night-time symptom scores, and the number of days in 
which beta2-agonist bronchodilators were required, were significantly lower
during randomised, double-blind treatment with budesonide inhalation suspension
0.5 to 2 mg/day than placebo in 3 multicentre trials. Significantly fewer
children discontinued therapy with budesonide inhalation suspension than with
placebo because of worsening asthma symptoms in a study that included children
who were receiving inhaled corticosteroids at baseline. Recent evidence indicates
that budesonide inhalation suspension is significantly more effective than
nebulised sodium cromoglycate in improving control of asthma in young children
with persistent asthma. At a dosage of 2 mg/day, budesonide inhalation suspension
significantly reduced the number of asthma exacerbations and requirements for
systemic corticosteroids in preschool children with severe persistent asthma. In 
children with acute asthma or wheezing, the preparation was as effective as, or
more effective than oral prednisolone in improving symptoms. In children with
croup, single 2 or 4mg dosages of budesonide inhalation suspension were
significantly more effective than placebo and as effective as oral dexamethasone 
0.6 mg/kg or nebulised L-epinephrine (adrenaline) 4mg in alleviating croup
symptoms and preventing or reducing the duration of hospitalisation. Early
initiation of therapy with budesonide inhalation suspension 1 mg/day appears to
reduce the need for mechanical ventilation and decrease overall corticosteroid
usage in preterm very low birthweight infants at risk for chronic lung disease.
In adults with persistent asthma, budesonide inhalation suspension < or =8 mg/day
has been compared with inhaled budesonide 1.6 mg/day and fluticasone propionate 2
mg/day administered by metered dose inhaler. Greater improvements in asthma
control occurred in patients during treatment with budesonide inhalation
suspension than with budesonide via metered dose inhaler, whereas fluticasone
propionate produced greater increases in morning peak expiratory flow rates than 
nebulised budesonide. Several small studies suggest that the preparation has an
oral corticosteroid-sparing effect in adults with persistent asthma and that it
may be as effective as oral corticosteroids during acute exacerbations of asthma 
or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. The frequency of adverse events was
similar in children receiving budesonide inhalation suspension 0.25 to 2 mg/day
or placebo in 12-week studies. During treatment with budesonide inhalation
suspension 0.5 to 1 mg/day in 3 nonblind 52-week studies, growth velocity in
children was generally unaffected; however, a small but statistically significant
decrease in growth velocity was detected in children who were not using inhaled
corticosteroids prior to the introduction of budesonide inhalation suspension.
Hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis function was not affected by short (12 weeks)
or long (52 weeks) term treatment with nebulised budesonide. In conclusion,
budesonide inhalation suspension is the most widely available nebulised
corticosteroid, and in the US is the only inhaled corticosteroid indicated in
children aged > or =1 year with persistent asthma. The preparation is suitable
for use in infants, children and adults with persistent asthma and in infants and
children with croup.


PMID: 11129126  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


624. Presse Med. 2000 Sep 16;29(16):1479-87.

[Corticosteroid therapy of non-asthmatic chronic obstructive
bronchopneumopathies].

[Article in French]

Jébrak G(1), Pichot-Vérité MH, Marceau A, Rullon I.

Author information: 
(1)Service de Pneumologie et de Réanimation respiratoire, Hôpital Beaujon,
Clichy.

BASIS OF TREATMENT: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a common
condition. Medical, and particularly drug, therapy still provides insufficiently 
effective relief. Corticosteroid treatment relies on the effect of these drugs on
the underlying inflammatory mechanisms. Their efficacy has been demonstrated in
asthma which exhibits certain features common with COPD.INDICATIONS: Short-term
corticosteroid regimens are generally well tolerated. Clinical data favor their
use in certain cases of acute decompensation. Long-term systemic regimens are not
warranted due to the risk of adverse effects and the difficulty in maintaining
appropriate dosages. Inhaled corticosteroids are widely used although the
efficacy remains controversial.
IMPORTANT DRAWBACKS: Clear evidence of efficacy from large controlled trials is
still lacking. The difficulty encountered in obtaining such evidence is an
indication of the minimal impact of such treatment and raises the question of its
clinical pertinence. Patients exhibiting features similar to those observed in
asthma (atopy, eosinophilia, improvement with bronchodilatation, non-smokers...) 
should be able to benefit from corticosteroids. For others a therapeutic test
would be advisable to identify responders who could benefit from a preventive
effect on the progression of COPD or associated asthma. A test lasting a few
weeks at sufficient dosage is needed for subjective and objective (respiratory
function tests) assessment. This costly therapy would not be warranted in
non-responders, particularly in light of the expected secondary effects. Current 
evidence does not point to corticosteroid therapy as the much needed fully
effective treatment for COPD.


PMID: 11039096  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


625. Chest. 2000 Oct;118(4):990-9.

Controlled short-term trial of fluticasone propionate in ventilator-dependent
patients with COPD.

Nava S(1), Compagnoni ML.

Author information: 
(1)Respiratory Intensive Care Unit, Fondazione S. Mougeri, Istituto Scientifico
di Pavia, FRCCS, Pavia, Italy. snava@fsm.it

Comment in
    Chest. 2000 Oct;118(4):889-91.

BACKGROUND: There is no agreement about the efficacy of systemic corticosteroids 
in patients with COPD, but corticosteroids often are employed during
exacerbations of the disease. The use of systemic or inhaled corticosteroids in
patients in stable condition is even more controversial, even though the more
severely affected patients seem to respond better. Unfortunately, in this subset 
of patients, the use of forced expiratory maneuvers frequently fails to detect
significant functional response.
STUDY OBJECTIVES: We evaluated the short-term effects of an inhaled
corticosteroid, fluticasone propionate (FP), on FEV(1) and on the mechanical
properties of patients in stable condition with severe COPD and chronic
hypercapnic respiratory failure who were receiving long-term ventilatory support.
This allowed us to measure respiratory mechanics (RM) passively, thereby avoiding
any problems linked with voluntary maneuvers.
DESIGN: Randomized, placebo-controlled, crossover study.
SETTING: A respiratory ICU.
PATIENTS: Twelve hypercapnic COPD patients (mean [+/- SD] PaCO(2), 60+/-11 mm Hg;
mean FEV(1), 13+/-5% predicted; and mean FEV(1)/FVC, 31 +/- 7%) were enrolled.
INTERVENTIONS: A daily dose of 2,000 microg FP or placebo was administered via
metered-dose inhaler during mechanical ventilation for 5 consecutive days. A
washout of 72 h was allowed between regimens.
MEASUREMENTS: End-expiratory and end-inspiratory airway occlusions were performed
to assess static intrinsic positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEPi,st), static
compliance of the respiratory system (Cst,rs), maximal respiratory resistance
(Rmax, rs), and minimal respiratory resistance (Rmin,rs). The bronchodilator
response also was assessed by FEV(1) level.
RESULTS: No significant changes were found in RM after administration of the
placebo. By day 6, FP had induced the following significant decreases: PEEPi,st, 
4.3+/-2.4 to 3.1+/-1.7 cm H(2)O (p<0.01); Rmax,rs, 19.0+/-6.5 to 14.6+/-6 cm
H(2)O/L/s (p<0.001); and Rmin,rs, 14.8+/-4.2 to 10.5+/-3.4 cm H(2)O/L/s
(p<0.001). The Cst,rs and the effective additional resistance of the respiratory 
system did not change significantly, the latter suggesting that the major effect 
of FP was on the airway caliber (Rmin,rs). FEV(1) changes significantly (p<0.01) 
underestimated the bronchodilator response, as compared with changes in Rmin,rs.
CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that in patients in stable condition with severe COPD
and chronic hypercapnic respiratory failure, a brief trial of FP may induce a
bronchodilator response, mainly related to a reduction in airway resistances,
that is not detected by the usual pulmonary function tests.


PMID: 11035668  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


626. J Fam Pract. 2000 Sep;49(9):781-2.

Are high-dose inhaled steroids effective for chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD)?

Rosenbaum D(1), Merenstein D, McCormally T.

Author information: 
(1)Fairfax Family Practice, Virginia, USA. danrosenbaum99@aol.com


PMID: 11032197  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


627. J Asthma. 2000 May;37(3):225-34.

Compliance during long-term treatment with fluticasone propionate in subjects
with early signs of asthma or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD):
results of the Detection, Intervention, and Monitoring Program of COPD and Asthma
(DIMCA) Study.

van Grunsven PM(1), van Schayck CP, van Deuveren M, van Herwaarden CL, Akkermans 
RP, van Weel C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Family Practice and Social Medicine, University of Nijmegen, The
Netherlands. P.vanGrunsven@HSV.KUN.NL

In a prospective study, we investigated the long-term compliance to fluticasone
propionate (FP) by dry powder inhalation (Rotadisk) in subjects with early signs 
of asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) without an established
diagnosis. Subjects were selected from a large screening program on early stages 
of asthma and COPD (Detection, Intervention, and Monitoring Program of COPD and
Asthma [DIMCA] program) in the general practice. Forty-eight adult subjects with 
"early signs of COPD" (slightly increased forced expiratory volume in 1 sec
[FEV1] decline of >0.04L/year) and 29 adult subjects with "early signs of asthma"
(signs of bronchial hyperresponsiveness or reversibility) participated in a
randomized placebo-controlled trial with FP (Flixotide 500 microg daily) versus
placebo with a duration of 2 years or 1 year, respectively. Compliance was
measured by counting Rotadisks returned. By means of a questionnaire,
participants were asked about perceived effects and/or side effects of the trial 
drug. The mean overall individual compliance rates of 72% (range 7%-102%) in the 
early COPD trial and 71% (range 8%-99%) in the early asthma trial were maintained
throughout the study. Perceived effectiveness (12% of the participants) or side
effects (30% of the participants) of the trial drug were not related to
compliance. The willingness of patients to use the trial drug in daily practice
if efficacy would be proved was statistically significantly related to compliance
during the trial (p = 0.017). It was concluded that the compliance rates found
were relatively high in patients with symptoms of mild asthma or COPD without an 
established diagnosis. Conviction of the importance of treatment influenced
compliance more positively than perceived (side) effects. These results again
emphasize the importance of patient education in establishing early treatment
with inhaled corticosteroids.


PMID: 10831147  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


628. BMJ. 2000 May 13;320(7245):1297-303.

Randomised, double blind, placebo controlled study of fluticasone propionate in
patients with moderate to severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: the
ISOLDE trial.

Burge PS(1), Calverley PM, Jones PW, Spencer S, Anderson JA, Maslen TK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Birmingham Heartlands Hospital, Birmingham
B9 5SS. burgeps@aol.com

Comment in
    BMJ. 2000 Nov 25;321(7272):1349-50.
    BMJ. 2000 Nov 25;321(7272):1349.
    BMJ. 2000 Nov 25;321(7272):1349.

OBJECTIVES: To determine the effect of long term inhaled corticosteroids on lung 
function, exacerbations, and health status in patients with moderate to severe
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
DESIGN: Double blind, placebo controlled study.
SETTING: Eighteen UK hospitals.
PARTICIPANTS: 751 men and women aged between 40 and 75 years with mean forced
expiratory volume in one second (FEV(1)) 50% of predicted normal.
INTERVENTIONS: Inhaled fluticasone propionate 500 microgram twice daily from a
metered dose inhaler or identical placebo.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Efficacy measures: rate of decline in FEV(1) after the
bronchodilator and in health status, frequency of exacerbations, respiratory
withdrawals. Safety measures: morning serum cortisol concentration, incidence of 
adverse events.
RESULTS: There was no significant difference in the annual rate of decline in
FEV(1 )(P=0.16). Mean FEV(1) after bronchodilator remained significantly higher
throughout the study with fluticasone propionate compared with placebo (P<0.001).
Median exacerbation rate was reduced by 25% from 1.32 a year on placebo to 0.99 a
year on with fluticasone propionate (P=0.026). Health status deteriorated by 3.2 
units a year on placebo and 2.0 units a year on fluticasone propionate
(P=0.0043). Withdrawals because of respiratory disease not related to malignancy 
were higher in the placebo group (25% v 19%, P=0.034).
CONCLUSIONS: Fluticasone propionate 500 microgram twice daily did not affect the 
rate of decline in FEV(1) but did produce a small increase in FEV(1). Patients on
fluticasone propionate had fewer exacerbations and a slower decline in health
status. These improvements in clinical outcomes support the use of this treatment
in patients with moderate to severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.


PMCID: PMC27372
PMID: 10807619  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


629. Curr Opin Pulm Med. 2000 Mar;6(2):104-9.

Inhaled steroid therapy in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Whittaker AJ(1), Spiro SG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, The Middlesex Hospital, London, United
Kingdom.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) remains difficult to manage.
Patients with COPD present with progressive dyspnea; difficulty in stopping
smoking; recurrent exacerbations; and, ultimately, respiratory failure. Because
of the lack of proven treatments for COPD and because inhaled corticosteroids can
prevent airway inflammation and permanent lung damage in patients with asthma, it
has become common practice to prescribe inhaled corticosteroids for patients with
COPD despite a lack of data suggesting that these agents have any long-term
benefit in these patients. In the past 12 months, three randomized, double-blind,
placebo-controlled clinical trials (the European Respiratory Society Study on
Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease, the Copenhagen City Lung Study, and the
Inhaled Steroids in Obstructive Lung Disease study) designed to assess the
long-term effect of inhaled corticosteroids in patients with varying severity of 
airway obstruction have been presented. The results of these studies have been
disappointing; they show little to suggest that any long-term benefit is gained
from using inhaled corticosteroids in most patients with COPD, whether they
continue to smoke or not.


PMID: 10741768  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


630. Respiration. 2000;67(1):71-6.

Inhaled corticosteroids may reduce neutrophilic inflammation in patients with
stable chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Yildiz F(1), Kaur AC, Ilgazli A, Celikoglu M, Kaçar Ozkara S, Paksoy N, Ozkarakaş
O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Kocaeli University School of Medicine,
Kocaeli, Turkey. yildizfu@superonline.com

BACKGROUND: Although both inhaled and oral corticosteroids have anti-inflammatory
effects causing improvement in clinical symptoms and spirometry in the treatment 
of asthma, the role of corticosteroids in the management of chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD) is controversial.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the effects of inhaled corticosteroids on sputum
neutrophilia in clinically stable COPD patients.
METHODS: In total, 18 patients were enrolled in the study. During 2 months, 9
patients in group A inhaled fluticasone propionate (FP) 500 microg 3 times daily.
In group B 9 patients received placebo. All of the patients continued to inhale
both salbutamol and ipratropium bromide. In 9 patients, sustained-released
theophylline was also administered. Blood samples, spirometric tests, blood gas
analyses, and either spontaneous or induced sputum cultures were evaluated on
entry into the study, after a 2 months of treatment and following the 6-week
washout period.
RESULTS: After the 2-month FP treatment, no significant changes in the number of 
peripheral blood neutrophils, blood gas and spirometry data were observed in both
groups. In group A, the total cell number and the number of neutrophils decreased
from a mean of 3. 4 +/- 1.3 x 10(6) cells/g and 0.6 +/- 0.3 x 10(6) neutrophils/g
on entry into study to 1.9 +/- 0.6 x 10(6) cells/g and 0.02 +/- 0.01 x 10(6)
neutrophils/g after 8-week treatment with FP, returning to 3.3 +/- 1.1 x 10(6)
cells/g and 0.5 +/- 0.3 x 10(6) neutrophils/g following the washout period. The
percentages of neutrophils were 55. 6 and 77.9% in groups A and B after 2 months 
of FP treatment. There was no significant change in group B values during the
study.
CONCLUSION: These data suggest that neutrophilic inflammation in sputum may be
decreased by inhaled corticosteroids in clinically stable COPD patients.

Copyright 2000 S. Karger AG, Basel

DOI: 29466 
PMID: 10705266  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


631. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 1999 Nov;160(5 Pt 1):1635-9.

Effect of high dose inhaled steroid on cells, cytokines, and proteases in induced
sputum in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Culpitt SV(1), Maziak W, Loukidis S, Nightingale JA, Matthews JL, Barnes PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Medicine, National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial
College, London.

Inhaled corticosteroids are widely prescribed for the treatment of stable chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), despite lack of proven efficacy. Because
COPD involves airway inflammation and probable protease-antiprotease imbalance,
we examined the effect of high dose fluticasone propionate on markers of activity
of both pathogenetic mechanisms. Thirteen patients with COPD were treated with
fluticasone propionate (500 microg twice a day) for 4 wk, delivered via MDI and
spacer, in a double-blind crossover study. There was no clinical benefit in terms
of lung function or symptom scores, and induced sputum inflammatory cells,
percentage neutrophils, and IL-8 levels were unchanged. Sputum supernatant
elastase activity, matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-1, MMP-9, and the antiproteases
secretory leukoprotease inhibitor (SLPI) and tissue inhibitor of
metalloproteinase (TIMP)-1 were similarly unaffected by treatment. These results 
add to previous evidence that inhaled steroids have no anti-inflammatory action
in stable COPD. Furthermore, inhaled steroids do not appear to redress the
protease-antiprotease imbalance that is thought to be important in the
pathogenesis of airway obstruction.

DOI: 10.1164/ajrccm.160.5.9811058 
PMID: 10556133  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


632. Nihon Rinsho. 1999 Sep;57(9):2035-40.

[Recent progress on the therapy for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD)--usefulness and practice of the step-by-step pharmacologic therapy].

[Article in Japanese]

Ishii T(1), Matsuse T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Geriatric Medicine, University of Tokyo.

Recently, a step-by-step pharmacologic therapy for chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD) has been recommended by several principal organizations. The
characteristic of this therapy is that it is a stepwise approach organized
according to the severity of disease and is mainly composed of bronchodilators
including beta 2-agonists and anticholinergic agents, theophylline, and oral
corticosteroids, and the goal of this therapy is to induce bronchodilation,
decrease the inflammatory reaction, and facilitate expectoration. Since the
effectiveness of one of the inhaled corticosteroids has been also indicated by
the multicentre randomised trial in a few years, they may have an important role 
in the long-term treatment of COPD.


PMID: 10497402  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


633. Clin Exp Allergy. 1999 Jun;29 Suppl 2:116-24.

Airway inflammation in asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease with
special emphasis on the antigen-presenting dendritic cell: influence of treatment
with fluticasone propionate.

Hoogsteden HC(1), Verhoeven GT, Lambrecht BN, Prins JB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonary and Intensive Care Medicine, Erasmus Medical Centre
Rotterdam, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

Erratum in
    Clin Exp Allergy 2000 Jan;30(1):152.

Asthma is a chronic inflammatory disorder of the airways characterized by
variable airflow limitation and airway hyperresponsiveness. The type of
inflammatory response in asthma is compatible with a major contribution of
professional antigen-presenting cells. The airways in chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD) are also markedly inflamed; however, the predominant
types of inflammatory cells and the main anatomical site of the lesion appear to 
differ from those in asthma. COPD is characterized by reduced maximum expiratory 
flow and slow forced emptying of the lungs. Steroids are the most prominent
medication used in the treatment of asthma and COPD; however, the beneficial
effect of steroid treatment in COPD is subject of debate. We investigated the
efficacy of fluticasone propionate (FP) treatment in atopic asthmatics and in
COPD patients with bronchial hyperreactivity who smoke. The effect of the
treatment on bronchial hyperreactivity and indices of the methacholine
dose-response curve were analysed, as well as indices of inflammation of the
airway mucosa with special emphasis on the antigen presenting dendritic cell.
Treatment of allergic asthmatic patients resulted in improvement of lung function
(FEV1), a decrease in bronchial hyperresponsiveness and a decrease of maximal
airway narrowing. During the FP-treatment of COPD patients, FEV1 remained stable,
while FEV1 deteriorated significantly in the placebo group. Therefore, steroid
treatment may have a beneficial effect in COPD patients with bronchial
hyperresponsiveness (BHR). Since immunohistochemical analysis of bronchial biopsy
specimens from asthma and COPD patients show disease-specific aspects of
inflammation, the anti-inflammatory effect of FP is obtained through modulation
of different cell populations in asthma and COPD.


PMID: 10421834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


634. Lancet. 1998 Jun 20;351(9119):1890-1.

Fluticasone propionate for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Morice A.

Comment on
    Lancet. 1998 Mar 14;351(9105):773-80.
    Lancet. 1998 Mar 14;351(9105):766-7.

DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(05)78844-9 
PMID: 9652700  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


635. Eur Respir J. 1998 May;11(5):1178-81.

The role of "fear of corticosteroids" in nonparticipation in early intervention
with inhaled corticosteroids in asthma and COPD in general practice.

van Grunsven PM(1), van Schayck CP, van Kollenburg HJ, van Bosheide K, van den
Hoogen HJ, Molema J, van Weel C.

Author information: 
(1)Dept of General Practice and Social Medicine, University of Nijmegen, The
Netherlands.

Treatment of chronic airflow obstruction with inhaled corticosteroids at an early
stage has been shown to preserve the lung function. We tested the hypothesis that
"fear of corticosteroids" may be an important reason for nonparticipation in the 
Detection, early Intervention and Monitoring programme on Chronic obstruction
pulmonary disease (COPD) and Asthma ("DIMCA") project. One thousand seven hundred
and forty nine adult subjects from 10 general practices were invited to
participate in the several parts of the "DIMCA" programme. Refusers were
questioned about the reason(s) for nonparticipation. Together the screening,
monitoring and three drug interventions of the study showed on average 25-35%
refusers. The most frequent reasons for nonparticipation were absence of
pulmonary symptoms and lack of time. For those invited to take part in one of the
three drug interventions, "dislike of medication" was the most important reason
for nonparticipation (33, 45 and 67% of the refusers). "Fear of corticosteroids" 
specifically was the reason for nonparticipation in 8% of the refusers on the
basis of "dislike of medication". We concluded that a specific fear of
corticosteroids was not a major obstacle for early intervention with inhaled
corticosteroids.


PMID: 9648974  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


636. Lancet. 1998 Mar 14;351(9105):773-80.

Multicentre randomised placebo-controlled trial of inhaled fluticasone propionate
in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. International COPD Study 
Group.

Paggiaro PL(1), Dahle R, Bakran I, Frith L, Hollingworth K, Efthimiou J.

Author information: 
(1)Respiratory Pathophysiology, University of Pisa, Italy.

Erratum in
    Lancet 1998 Jun 27;351(9120):1968.

Comment in
    Lancet. 1998 Mar 14;351(9105):766-7.
    Lancet. 1998 Jun 20;351(9119):1890-1.
    ACP J Club. 1998 Sep-Oct;129(2):45.

BACKGROUND: The efficacy of inhaled corticosteroids in the treatment of chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) remains controversial because of a lack of
placebo-controlled studies. We compared the effect of inhaled fluticasone
propionate with placebo in the treatment of patients with COPD.
METHODS: We used a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled design. We
enrolled from 13 European countries, New Zealand, and South Africa, 281
outpatient current or ex-smokers, aged between 50 and 75 years. They had a forced
expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1) of between 35% and 90% of predicted normal
values, a ratio of FEV1 to forced vital capacity of 70% or less and
bronchodilator reversibility of less than 15%, as well as a history of chronic
bronchitis. Patients were randomly assigned fluticasone propionate 500 microg
(n=142) or placebo (n=139) twice daily via a metered-dose inhaler for 6 months.
The main outcome measures were the number of patients who had at least one
exacerbation by the end of treatment, the number and severity of exacerbations,
clinic lung function, diary card symptoms and peak expiratory flow and 6 min
walking distance.
FINDINGS: 51 (37%) patients in the placebo group compared with 45 (32%) in the
fluticasone propionate group had had at least one exacerbation by the end of
treatment (p=0.449). Significantly more patients had moderate or severe
exacerbations in the placebo group than in the fluticasone propionate group (86% 
vs 60%, p<0.001). Diary-card and clinic morning peak expiratory flows improved
significantly in the fluticasone propionate group (p<0.001, p=0.048,
respectively), as did clinic FEV1 (p<0.001), forced vital capacity (p<0.001), and
mid-expiratory flow (p=0.01). Symptom scores for median daily cough and sputum
volume were significantly lower with fluticasone propionate treatment than with
placebo (p=0.004 and p=0.016, respectively). At the end of treatment, patients on
fluticasone propionate had increased their 6 min walking distance significantly
more than those on placebo (p=0.032). Fluticasone propionate was tolerated as
well as placebo, with few adverse effects and without a clinically important
effect on mean serum cortisol concentration.
INTERPRETATION: Fluticasone propionate may be of clinical benefit in patients
with COPD over at least 6 months. Inhaled corticosteroids may have an important
role in the long-term treatment of COPD.


PMID: 9519948  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


637. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 1998 Mar;157(3 Pt 1):998-1002.

Exhaled nitric oxide in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Maziak W(1), Loukides S, Culpitt S, Sullivan P, Kharitonov SA, Barnes PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Medicine, National Heart and Lung Institute, London,
United Kingdom.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is characterized by progressive
airflow obstruction and a neutrophilic inflammation. Exhaled nitric oxide (NO)
may be a marker of disease activity in a variety of lung diseases. We measured
exhaled NO in patients with documented COPD and investigated whether the
concentration of exhaled NO is related to the severity of disease as defined by
lung function. We also investigated whether concentration of exhaled NO was
different in COPD patients who received inhaled steroids compared with
steroid-naive patients. We studied 13 current smokers with COPD, eight exsmokers 
with COPD, 12 patients with unstable COPD (exacerbation or severe disease), and
10 smokers with chronic bronchitis without airflow limitation. Exhaled NO levels 
were significantly higher in patients with unstable COPD (12.7 +/- 1.5 ppb) than 
in other groups (p < 0.01). Exhaled NO levels were significantly higher in
smokers with COPD than in smokers with chronic bronchitis (4.3 +/- 0.5 versus 2.5
+/- 0.5 ppb, p < 0.05), and were even higher in patients with COPD who had
stopped smoking (6.3 +/- 0.6 ppb, p < 0.01). Exhaled NO levels showed a
significant negative correlation with their lung function assessed by % predicted
FEV1 values (r = -0.6, p < 0.001). Exhaled NO levels in patients treated with
inhaled steroids were significantly higher compared with steroid-naive patients
(8.2 +/- 1.2 ppb versus 5 +/- 0.4 ppb, p < 0.05), but the first group included
more severe patients as assessed by lung function. We conclude that exhaled NO
could serve as a useful, practical marker for monitoring disease activity in
COPD.

DOI: 10.1164/ajrccm.157.3.97-05009 
PMID: 9517624  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


638. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 1996 Feb;153(2):616-21.

Effect of fluticasone propionate on sputum of patients with chronic bronchitis
and emphysema.

Llewellyn-Jones CG(1), Harris TA, Stockley RA.

Author information: 
(1)Lung Immunobiochemical Research Laboratory, General Hospital, Birmingham,
United Kingdom.

The effects of fluticasone propionate (FP) on sputum chemotactic activity,
elastase inhibitory potential, albumin concentrations, and peripheral neutrophil 
function were studied in a group of patients with clinically stable,
smoking-related chronic bronchitis and emphysema. Seventeen patients (50 to 75 yr
of age) were entered into a double-blind, placebo-controlled study of 1.5 mg
inhaled FP/d for 8 wk. Following treatment with FP the chemotactic activity of
the sputum sol phase was lower than the corresponding values for the placebo
group (p < 0.01). Values fell from a mean of 21.75 (+/- 1.58) during the run-in
period to 18.37 (+/- 1.46; p < 0.01) after 4 wk and 17.63 (+/- 1.86; p < 0.05)
after 8 wk treatment returning to 22.08 (+/- 1.26) cell/field after the washout
period. The neutrophil elastase inhibitory capacity of the sputum sol phase
increased (p < 0.025) with treatment from a mean of 0.177 microM elastase
inhibited/L (+/- 0.05) pretreatment to 0.413 microM (+/- 0.054) after 4 wk and
0.415 microM (+/- 0.054) after 8 wk returning to 0.270 microM (+/- 0.07) after
the washout period. Treatment with FP did not result in a change in the
peripheral neutrophil functions studied or sputum albumin and myeloperoxidase
concentrations. The results suggest that FP may play a protective role in these
patients through a reduction in the chemotactic activity of lung secretions and
potentially a reduction in the recruitment of neutrophils to the lung, and also
by directly affecting the proteinase/antiproteinase balance, in favor of
antiproteinases, within lung secretions.

DOI: 10.1164/ajrccm.153.2.8564107 
PMID: 8564107  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]
1. COPD. 2016 Aug 11:1-7. [Epub ahead of print]

Efficacy and Safety of Indacaterol/Glycopyrronium (IND/GLY) Versus
Salmeterol/Fluticasone in Chinese Patients with Moderate-to-Severe Chronic
Obstructive Pulmonary Disease: The Chinese Cohort from the LANTERN Study.

Zhong N(1), Wang C(2), Zhou X(3), Zhang N(1), Humphries M(4), Wang L(4), Patalano
F(5), Banerji D(6).

Author information: 
(1)a State Key Laboratory of Respiratory Disease, National Clinical Research
Center for Respiratory Disease, Guangzhou Institute of Respiratory Disease, First
Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou Medical University , Guangzhou , Guangdong ,
China. (2)b Institute of Respiratory Disease, Xin Qiao Hospital, Third Military
Medical University , Chongqing City , Chongqing , China. (3)c Department of
Respiratory Medicine , Southwest Hospital, Third Military Medical University ,
Chongqing City , Chongqing , China. (4)d Beijing Novartis Pharma Co. Ltd. ,
Shanghai , China. (5)e Novartis Pharma AG , Basel , Switzerland. (6)f Novartis
Pharmaceuticals Corporation , East Hanover , New Jersey , USA.

Inhaled indacaterol/glycopyrronium fixed-dose combination (IND/GLY) is approved
in over 80 countries, including the EU, Japan, Australia and Switzerland and the 
US. The LANTERN study evaluated the efficacy of IND/GLY compared with inhaled
long-acting β2-agonist (LABA)/inhaled corticosteroid (ICS) or
salmeterol/fluticasone (SFC) in patients with moderate-to-severe COPD with a
history of ≤1 exacerbation in the previous year. Here we present the efficacy and
safety of IND/GLY versus SFC in the Chinese cohort from the LANTERN study.
LANTERN was a 26-week, multicenter, randomized, double-blind, double-dummy,
parallel-group study conducted in patients with moderate-to-severe COPD with a
history of ≤1 exacerbation in the previous year. The patients were randomized
(1:1) to once-daily IND/GLY (110/50 μg) or twice-daily SFC (50/500 μg). The
primary endpoint was non-inferiority of IND/GLY versus SFC in terms of trough
FEV1. Of the total 744 patients randomized in the LANTERN study, 598 (80.4%) were
from Mainland China and randomized to IND/GLY (n = 298) or SFC (n = 300), and 553
(92.5%) completed the study. IND/GLY showed superiority over SFC with a
statistically significant and clinically meaningful improvement in trough FEV1,
FEV1 AUC0-4h, peak FEV1 and trough forced vital capacity (FVC) change from the
baseline. Annualized rate of moderate or severe COPD exacerbations was
significantly lower (43%) with IND/GLY compared with SFC (rate ratio: 0.57, p =
0.015). Overall, adverse events were lower for IND/GLY (34.6%) versus SFC
(43.1%). IND/GLY was superior in achieving bronchodilation versus SFC in a
Chinese subgroup of patients from this study. Clinicaltrials.gov identifier:
NCT01709903.

DOI: 10.1080/15412555.2016.1182970 
PMID: 27715335  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2016 Sep 21;11:2341-2348. eCollection 2016.

Effectiveness using higher inhaled corticosteroid dosage in patients with COPD by
different blood eosinophilic counts.

Cheng SL(1), Lin CH(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Far Eastern Memorial Hospital, Taipei;
Department of Chemical Engineering and Materials Science, Yuan Ze University,
Zhongli, Taoyuan City. (2)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Chest
Medicine, Changhua Christian Hospital, Changhua; Department of Respiratory Care, 
College of Health Sciences, Chang Jung Christian University, Tainan; School of
Medicine, Chung Shan Medical University, Taichung City, Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: Blood eosinophil counts have been documented as a good biomarker for 
patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) using inhaled
corticosteroid (ICS) therapy. However, the effectiveness and safety of
prescribing high or medium dose of ICS for patients with different eosinophil
counts are unknown.
METHODS: A post hoc analysis of a previous prospective randomized study was
performed for COPD patients using higher dose (HD: Fluticasone 1,000 μg/day) or
medium dose (MD: Fluticasone 500 μg/day) of ICS combined with Salmeterol (100
μg/day). Patients were classified into two groups: those with high eosinophil
counts (HE ≥3%) and those with low eosinophil counts (LE <3%). Lung function was 
evaluated with forced expiratory volume in 1 second, forced vital capacity, and
COPD assessment test. Frequencies of acute exacerbation and pneumonia were also
measured.
RESULTS: Two hundred and forty-eight patients were studied and classified into
higher eosinophil (HE) (n=85, 34.3%) and lower eosinophil (LE) groups (n=163,
65.7%). The levels of forced expiratory volume in 1 second were significantly
increased in patients of HE group treated with HD therapy, compared with the
other groups (HE/HD: 125.9±27.2 mL vs HE/MD: 94.3±23.7 mL, vs LE/HD: 70.4±20.5
mL, vs LE/MD: 49.8±16.7 mL; P<0.05) at the end of the study. Quality of life
(COPD assessment test) markedly improved in HE/HD group than in MD/LE group
(HE/HD: 9±5 vs LE/MD: 16±7, P=0.02). The frequency of acute exacerbation was more
decreased in HE/HD group patients, compared with that in LE/MD group (HE/HD:
13.5% vs LE/MD: 28.7%, P<0.01). Pneumonia incidence was similar in the treatment 
groups (HE/HD: 3.2%, HE/MD: 2.6%, LE/HD: 3.5%, LE/MD 2.8%; P=0.38).
CONCLUSION: The study results support using blood eosinophil counts as a
biomarker of ICS response and show the benefits of greater improvement of lung
function, quality of life, and decreased exacerbation frequency in COPD patients 
with blood eosinophil counts higher than 3%, especially treated with higher dose 
of ICS.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S115132 
PMID: 27703344  [PubMed - in process]


3. Rev Med Chil. 2016 Jul;144(7):931-6. doi: 10.4067/S0034-98872016000700016.

[Cushing syndrome in a HIV patient using inhaled steroids. Report of one case].

[Article in Spanish]

Frías A(1), Ortiz A(2), Soto M(2), Muñoz F(3), Chacón C(3).

Author information: 
(1)Escuela de Postgrado, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad Católica del Maule,
Talca, Chile, afriasoyarzun@gmail.com. (2)Facultad de Medicina, Universidad
Católica del Maule, Talca, Chile. (3)Servicio de Medicina, Hospital Regional de
Talca, Talca, Chile.

We report a 41-year-old man with HIV and a chronic obstructive pulmonary disease,
treated for seven months with Fluticasone/Salmeterol and antiretroviral therapy
(Lamivudine, Tenofovir, Atazanavir and Ritonavir). While using these medications,
the patients developed a Cushing syndrome in a period of five months. After
performing laboratory and imaging tests, it was concluded that the most probable 
cause of the syndrome was the interaction of inhaled steroids with Ritonavir.
After discontinuing these medications the syndrome reverted in a period of 8
months.

DOI: 10.4067/S0034-98872016000700016 
PMID: 27661558  [PubMed - in process]


4. J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract. 2016 Sep-Oct;4(5):884-9. doi:
10.1016/j.jaip.2016.07.006.

Comparative Analysis of Persistence to Treatment among Patients with Asthma or
COPD Receiving AirFluSal Forspiro or Seretide Diskus Salmeterol/Fluticasone
Propionate Combination Therapy.

Bender BG(1), Hernandez Vecino RA(2), McGrath K(3), Jones S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, National Jewish Health, Denver, Colo. Electronic
address: BenderB@NJHealth.org. (2)Global Medical Affairs, Sandoz International
GmbH, Holzkirchen, Germany. (3)Health Informatics, Healthcare at Home Ltd.,
Burton upon Trent, East Staffordshire, United Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: Low adherence and persistence to inhaled therapy result in poor
outcomes in patients with asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD). Although adherence has been widely studied, growing awareness of the
large number of patients who abandon their asthma treatment suggests that
persistence to treatment may be more relevant for longer term outcomes.
OBJECTIVE: The objective of this study was to compare persistence to
salmeterol/fluticasone propionate combination treatment as AirFluSal Forspiro
with persistence to Seretide Diskus in patients with asthma or COPD aged 12 years
and above.
METHODS: This study analyzed dispensing data from a large German pharmacy
database. Male and female patients who were prescribed AirFluSal Forspiro were
randomly paired with those who were prescribed Seretide Diskus controlling for
month of treatment initiation (to limit potential seasonality effects), age
groups, and gender. Matched patient pair analysis was conducted on a total of
11,774 patients (45.1% male) to compare persistence between the 2 products.
RESULTS: The survival probability estimates at 12 months were 0.229 (0.02
standard error) for AirFluSal Forspiro versus 0.105 (0.025 standard error) for
Seretide Diskus. The Renyi family of tests demonstrated a statistically
significant difference (P = .01) in persistence to AirFluSal Forspiro compared
with Seretide Diskus in the overall survival experience of the 2 populations.
CONCLUSIONS: In this large retrospective pharmacy database analysis, patients
using AirFluSal Forspiro were more likely to persist with treatment compared with
those using Seretide Diskus as demonstrated by the overall survival experience of
the 2 populations (12-month study period). These new data provide a basis for
further research to better understand persistence behavior and to develop
strategies to address poor persistence.

Copyright © 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaip.2016.07.006 
PMID: 27587319  [PubMed - in process]


5. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2016 Aug 22;11:1973-81. doi:
10.2147/COPD.S106142. eCollection 2016.

Daily home-based spirometry during withdrawal of inhaled corticosteroid in severe
to very severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Rodriguez-Roisin R(1), Tetzlaff K(2), Watz H(3), Wouters EF(4), Disse B(5),
Finnigan H(6), Magnussen H(3), Calverley PM(7).

Author information: 
(1)Respiratory Institute, Servei de Pneumologia, Hospital Clínic IDIBAPS-CIBERES,
Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain. (2)Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma GmbH &
Co. KG, Ingelheim, Germany; Department of Sports Medicine, University of
Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany. (3)Pulmonary Research Institute at Lung Clinic
Grosshansdorf, Airway Research Center North, German Center for Lung Research,
Grosshansdorf, Germany. (4)Department of Respiratory Medicine, University
Hospital Maastricht, Maastricht University, Maastricht, the Netherlands.
(5)Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma GmbH & Co. KG, Ingelheim, Germany. (6)Department
of Biostatistics and Data Sciences, Boehringer Ingelheim, Bracknell, UK.
(7)Institute of Ageing and Chronic Disease, Aintree University Hospital,
Liverpool, UK.

The WISDOM study (NCT00975195) reported a change in lung function following
withdrawal of fluticasone propionate in patients with severe to very severe COPD 
treated with tiotropium and salmeterol. However, little is known about the
validity of home-based spirometry measurements of lung function in COPD.
Therefore, as part of this study, following suitable training, patients recorded 
daily home-based spirometry measurements in addition to undergoing periodic
in-clinic spirometric testing throughout the study duration. We subsequently
determined the validity of home-based spirometry for detecting changes in lung
function by comparing in-clinic and home-based forced expiratory volume in 1
second in patients who underwent stepwise fluticasone propionate withdrawal over 
12 weeks versus patients remaining on fluticasone propionate for 52 weeks.
Bland-Altman analysis of these data confirmed good agreement between in-clinic
and home-based measurements, both across all visits and at the individual visits 
at study weeks 6, 12, 18, and 52. There was a measurable difference between the
forced expiratory volume in 1 second values recorded at home and in the clinic
(mean difference of -0.05 L), which may be due to suboptimal patient effort in
performing unsupervised recordings. However, this difference remained consistent 
over time. Overall, these data demonstrate that home-based and in-clinic
spirometric measurements were equally valid and reliable for assessing lung
function in patients with COPD, and suggest that home-based spirometry may be a
useful tool to facilitate analysis of changes in lung function on a day-to-day
basis.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S106142 
PMCID: PMC5001655
PMID: 27578972  [PubMed - in process]


6. Appl Health Econ Health Policy. 2016 Oct;14(5):579-94. doi:
10.1007/s40258-016-0256-z.

Cost Effectiveness of the Long-Acting β2-Adrenergic Agonist (LABA)/Long-Acting
Muscarinic Antagonist Dual Bronchodilator Indacaterol/Glycopyrronium Versus the
LABA/Inhaled Corticosteroid Combination Salmeterol/Fluticasone in Patients with
Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease: Analyses Conducted for Canada, France,
Italy, and Portugal.

Reza Maleki-Yazdi M(1), Molimard M(2), Keininger DL(3), Gruenberger JB(3),
Carrasco J(4), Pitotti C(5), Sauvage E(6), Chehab S(7), Price D(8).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Respiratory Medicine, Women's College Hospital, University of
Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada. maleki.pccrc@on.aibn.com. (2)Department of Medical 
Pharmacology, CHU and University of Bordeaux, 33076, Bordeaux Cedex, France.
(3)Primary Care Franchise, Novartis Pharma AG, Postfach, 4002, Basel,
Switzerland. (4)Health Economics and Outcomes Research, Novartis Farma-Produtos
Farmacêuticos SA., Paço de Arcos, Portugal. (5)Health Economics, Novartis Farma
S.p.A., Largo Umberto Boccioni 1, 21041, Origgio, VA, Italy. (6)Strategy Pricing,
Novartis Pharma S.A.S., 2-4, rue Lionel Terray, BP 308, 92506, Rueil-Malmaison
Cedex, France. (7)Health Policy and Patient Access, Novartis Pharmaceuticals
Canada Inc., 385, boulev. Bouchard, CDN-Dorval, Quebec, H9S 1A9, Canada.
(8)Academic Primary Care, Division of Applied Health Sciences, University of
Aberdeen, Polwarth Building, Aberdeen, AB25 2ZD, UK.

OBJECTIVE: The objective of this study was to assess the cost effectiveness of
the dual bronchodilator indacaterol/glycopyrronium (IND/GLY) compared with
salmeterol/fluticasone combination (SFC) in patients with moderate-to-severe
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) who had a history of one or no
exacerbations in the previous year, in Canada, France, Italy, and Portugal.
METHODS: A patient-level simulation was developed to compare the costs and
outcomes of IND/GLY versus SFC based on data from the LANTERN trial
(NCT01709903). Monte-Carlo simulation methods were employed to follow individual 
patients over various time horizons. Population and efficacy inputs were derived 
from the LANTERN trial. Considering the payers' perspective, only direct costs
were included. Costs and health outcomes were discounted annually at 3.0 % for
all countries. Unit costs were taken from publically available sources with all
costs converted to euros (€). The cost base year was 2015. Deterministic and
probabilistic sensitivity analyses were undertaken to test the robustness of the 
model results.
RESULTS: IND/GLY was found to be the dominant (more effective and less costly)
treatment option compared with SFC in all four countries. The use of IND/GLY was 
associated with mean total cost savings per patient over a lifetime of €6202,
€1974, €1611, and €220 in Canada, France, Italy, and Portugal, respectively.
Sensitivity analysis showed that exacerbation rates had the largest impact on
incremental costs and quality-adjusted life-years (QALYs). The probability of
IND/GLY being cost effective was estimated to be >95 % for thresholds above
€5000/QALY.
CONCLUSION: In patients with moderate to severe COPD, IND/GLY is likely to be a
cost-effective treatment alternative compared with SFC.

DOI: 10.1007/s40258-016-0256-z 
PMID: 27516088  [PubMed - in process]


7. Eur Respir J. 2016 Oct;48(4):1030-1039. doi: 10.1183/13993003.00216-2016. Epub
2016 Aug 4.

Efficacy and safety of aclidinium/formoterol versus salmeterol/fluticasone: a
phase 3 COPD study.

Vogelmeier C(1), Paggiaro PL(2), Dorca J(3), Sliwinski P(4), Mallet M(5), Kirsten
AM(6), Beier J(7), Seoane B(8), Segarra RM(8), Leselbaum A(9).

Author information: 
(1)Dept of Medicine, Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, University Medical
Center Giessen and Marburg, Member of the German Center for Lung Research (DZL), 
Philipps-University Marburg, Marburg, Germany
claus.vogelmeier@med.uni-marburg.de. (2)Respiratory Pathophysiology, University
Hospital of Pisa, Pisa, Italy. (3)Hospital Universitari de Bellvitge, University 
of Barcelona, and Institut d'Investigació Biomèdica de Bellvitge (IDIBELL),
Barcelona, Spain. (4)2nd Dept of Respiratory Medicine, Institute of Tuberculosis 
and Lung Diseases, Warsaw, Poland. (5)Moncton Respirology Clinic, Moncton, NB,
Canada. (6)Pulmonary Research Institute at Lung Clinic Grosshansdorf, Airway
Research Center North, Member of the Germany Center for Lung Research (DZL),
Grosshansdorf, Germany. (7)insaf Respiratory Research Institute, Wiesbaden,
Germany. (8)AstraZeneca, Barcelona, Spain. (9)Almirall SA, Barcelona, Spain.

The efficacy and safety of twice-daily aclidinium bromide/formoterol fumarate was
compared with that of salmeterol/fluticasone propionate in patients with stable, 
moderate-to-severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).AFFIRM COPD
(Aclidinium and Formoterol Findings in Respiratory Medicine COPD) was a 24-week, 
double-blind, double-dummy, active-controlled study. Patients were randomised
(1:1) to aclidinium/formoterol 400/12 µg twice-daily via Genuair/Pressair or
salmeterol/fluticasone 50/500 µg twice-daily via Accuhaler. The primary end-point
was peak forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1) at week 24. Other end-points
included Transition Dyspnoea Index (TDI) focal score at week 24, TDI and St
George's Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ) responders, COPD Assessment Test and
SGRQ scores, assessment of COPD symptoms and exacerbations, use of reliever
medication, and device preference. Adverse events were monitored throughout.In
total, 933 patients were eligible (mean age 63.4 years, 65.1% male).
Aclidinium/formoterol was superior to salmeterol/fluticasone in peak FEV1 and
noninferior in TDI. Health status and reduction in exacerbation risk were similar
in both groups. While both treatments were well tolerated, pneumonia occurred
less frequently with aclidinium/formoterol than salmeterol/fluticasone.In stable 
COPD, aclidinium/formoterol significantly improved bronchodilation versus
salmeterol/fluticasone, with equivalent benefits in symptom control and reduction
in exacerbation risk. Both treatments were well tolerated and treatment-related
adverse events were less common with aclidinium/formoterol.

Copyright ©ERS 2016.

DOI: 10.1183/13993003.00216-2016 
PMID: 27492833  [PubMed - in process]


8. Tuberk Toraks. 2016 Jun;64(2):112-8.

Compare the efficacy and safety of long-acting anticholinergic and a combination 
of inhaled steroids and long-acting beta-2 agonist in moderate chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease.

Saraç P(1), Sayıner A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chest Diseases, Faculty of Medicine, Ege University, Izmir,
Turkey. ptaskiranlar@hotmail.com.

INTRODUCTION: The treatment of COPD (Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease) aims 
to improve the patients's well-being and to reduce mortality, morbidity and the
development of exacerbations. This study was thus designed to compare the
efficacy and tolerability of salmeterol/fluticasone combination with tiotropium
in patients with moderate COPD.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: This was an open, prospective, randomized trial in COPD
patients whose FEV1 (forced expiratory volume in 1 second) levels were between
80% and 50% predicted. A total of 44 patients who met the inclusion and exlusion 
criteria and who gave written informed consent were included in the study. At the
end of the two week wash-out period, the patients were randomized to receive
either salmeterol 50 µg/fluticasone 500 µg combination as dry powder inhaler
twice daily (SF Group) or tiotropium dry powder inhaler 18 µg once daily (T
Group) for one year. These were equally distributed in the two groups (22
patients in each study group). At follow-up, the patients were required to come
to the outpatient clinic at the third, sixth, ninth and twelfth months.
RESULT: There were no statistically significant difference between the two groups
with regards to demographic features and baseline measurements. There were 1.2 ± 
1.7 exacerbations in SF Group and 2.1 ± 2.2 exacerbations in T Group (p= 0.070). 
The time to the first exacerbation was 4.2 ± 4.0 and 4.2 ± 3.3 months,
respectively (p= 0.697). The number of severe exacerbations that resulted in
admission to the emergency department or hospital was 0.6 ± 1.0 and 1.1 ± 1.4,
respectively (p= 0.245). Significant improvements were observed in CAT (CPOD
Assessment Test) scores in both groups during the treatment period (p< 0.0001);
but there was no difference between the two groups.
CONCLUSIONS: This study has shown that in patients with moderate COPD, treatment 
with combined corticosteroid and long-acting beta-2 agonist provides similar
improvements in pulmonary function tests, patient-reported outcomes and exercise 
capacity as compared a long-acting anticholinergics.


PMID: 27481077  [PubMed - in process]


9. Lancet Respir Med. 2016 Sep;4(9):731-41. doi: 10.1016/S2213-2600(16)30148-5. Epub
2016 Jul 23.

Blood eosinophil count and pneumonia risk in patients with chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease: a patient-level meta-analysis.

Pavord ID(1), Lettis S(2), Anzueto A(3), Barnes N(4).

Author information: 
(1)Respiratory Medicine Unit, Nuffield Department of Medicine, University of
Oxford, UK. Electronic address: ian.pavord@ndm.ox.ac.uk. (2)Statistics and
Programming, GSK, Stockley Park, UK. (3)University of Texas Health Science Center
at San Antonio, South Texas Veterans Health Care System, San Antonio, TX, USA.
(4)Respiratory Medical Franchise, GSK, Brentford, UK; William Harvey Research
Institute, Barts and The London School of Medicine and Dentistry, London, UK.

BACKGROUND: Inhaled corticosteroids are important in the management of chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), but can slightly increase the risk of
pneumonia in patients with moderate-to-severe COPD. Patients with circulating
eosinophil counts of 2% or more of blood leucocytes respond better to inhaled
corticosteroids than do those with counts of less than 2% and it was therefore
postulated that blood eosinophil count might also have an effect on the risk of
pneumonia in patients with COPD. In this post-hoc meta-analysis, we investigate
whether a 2% threshold can identify patients who differ in their risk of
pneumonia, irrespective of inhaled corticosteroid treatment.
METHODS: From the GlaxoSmithKline trial registry, we selected randomised,
double-blind, clinical trials of patients with COPD that had: inhaled
corticosteroid arms (fluticasone propionate and salmeterol or fluticasone furoate
and vilanterol); a control arm (not given inhaled fluticasone); and
pre-randomisation measurements of blood eosinophil counts and were of at least 24
weeks in duration. With use of specified terms from the Medical Dictionary for
Regulatory Activities we identified pneumonia adverse events in patient-level
data. We calculated number of patients with pneumonia events, stratified by
baseline blood eosinophil count (<2% vs ≥2% of blood leucocytes) and whether or
not patients had received inhaled corticosteroids.
FINDINGS: We identified ten trials (conducted between 1998 and 2011), with
eosinophil count data available for 10 861 patients with COPD. 4043 patients had 
baseline blood eosinophil counts of less than 2% and 6818 patients had baseline
blood eosinophil counts of 2% or more. 149 (3·7%) patients with counts less than 
2% had one or more pneumonia adverse events compared with 215 (3·2%) with counts 
of 2% or more (hazard ratio [HR] 1·31; 95% CI 1·06-1·62). In patients not treated
with inhaled corticosteroids, 40 (3·8%) patients with less than 2% blood
eosinophil counts had a pneumonia event versus 48 (2·4%) with 2% or more blood
eosinophils (HR 1·53; 95% CI 1·01-2·31). In patients treated with inhaled
corticosteroids, events occurred in 107 (4·5%) versus 164 (3·9%; HR 1·25; 95% CI 
0·98-1·60), respectively.
INTERPRETATION: Using 2% baseline eosinophil count as a threshold, patients with 
COPD with lower blood eosinophil counts had more pneumonia events than did those 
with higher counts. The magnitude of this increased risk was small and should be 
further explored in large, prospective studies. These data should be considered
when making treatment decisions, alongside existing evidence that patients with
COPD and baseline blood eosinophil counts less than 2% have a poorer response to 
inhaled corticosteroids.
FUNDING: GlaxoSmithKline.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S2213-2600(16)30148-5 
PMID: 27460163  [PubMed - in process]


10. BMC Health Serv Res. 2016 Jul 12;16:251. doi: 10.1186/s12913-016-1482-7.

The economic burden of asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and the
impact of poor inhalation technique with commonly prescribed dry powder inhalers 
in three European countries.

Lewis A(1), Torvinen S(2), Dekhuijzen PN(3), Chrystyn H(4), Watson AT(1),
Blackney M(5), Plich A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Covance Market Access, London, UK. (2)Teva Pharmaceuticals Europe B.V,
Haarlem, Netherlands. (3)Department of Pulmonary Diseases, Radboud University
Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands. (4)Talmedica Ltd., Rossendale,
and Faculty of Human and Health Sciences, University of Plymouth, Plymouth,
United Kingdom. (5)Covance Market Access, London, UK.
michael.blackney@covance.com.

BACKGROUND: Asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) are common
chronic inflammatory respiratory diseases, which impose a substantial burden on
healthcare systems and society. Fixed-dose combinations (FDCs) of inhaled
corticosteroids (ICS) and long-acting β2 agonists (LABA), often administered
using dry powder inhalers (DPIs), are frequently prescribed to control persistent
asthma and COPD. Use of DPIs has been associated with poor inhalation technique, 
which can lead to increased healthcare resource use and costs.
METHODS: A model was developed to estimate the healthcare resource use and costs 
associated with asthma and COPD management in people using commonly prescribed
DPIs (budesonide + formoterol Turbuhaler(®) or fluticasone + salmeterol
Accuhaler(®)) over 1 year in Spain, Sweden and the United Kingdom (UK). The model
considered direct costs (inhaler acquisition costs and scheduled and unscheduled 
healthcare costs), indirect costs (productive days lost), and estimated the
contribution of poor inhalation technique to the burden of illness.
RESULTS: The direct cost burden of managing asthma and COPD for people using
budesonide + formoterol Turbuhaler(®) or fluticasone + salmeterol Accuhaler(®) in
2015 was estimated at €813 million, €560 million, and €774 million for Spain,
Sweden and the UK, respectively. Poor inhalation technique comprised 2.2-7.7 % of
direct costs, totalling €105 million across the three countries. When lost
productivity costs were included, total expenditure increased to €1.4 billion,
€1.7 billion and €3.3 billion in Spain, Sweden and the UK, respectively, with
€782 million attributable to poor inhalation technique across the three
countries. Sensitivity analyses showed that the model results were most sensitive
to changes in the proportion of patients prescribed ICS and LABA FDCs, and least 
sensitive to differences in the number of antimicrobials and oral corticosteroids
prescribed.
CONCLUSIONS: The cost of managing asthma and COPD using commonly prescribed DPIs 
is considerable. A substantial, and avoidable, contributor to this burden is poor
inhalation technique. Measures that can improve inhalation technique with current
DPIs, such as easier-to-use inhalers or better patient training, could offer
benefits to patients and healthcare providers through improving disease outcomes 
and lowering costs.

DOI: 10.1186/s12913-016-1482-7 
PMCID: PMC4942909
PMID: 27406133  [PubMed - in process]


11. NPJ Prim Care Respir Med. 2016 Jun 16;26:16030. doi: 10.1038/npjpcrm.2016.30.

Extrafine beclometasone diproprionate/formoterol fumarate: a review of its
effects in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Singh D(1), Corradi M(2), Spinola M(3), Petruzzelli S(3), Papi A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Medicines Evaluation Unit, Centre for Respiratory Medicine and Allergy, The
University of Manchester and University Hospital of South Manchester NHS
Foundation Trust, Manchester, UK. (2)Department of Clinical and Experimental
Medicine, University of Parma, Parma, Italy. (3)Chiesi Farmaceutici, Parma,
Italy. (4)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of
Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy.

A fixed-dose inhaled corticosteroid/long-acting β2-agonist (ICS/LABA) combination
of extrafine beclometasone dipropionate and formoterol fumarate (BDP/FF) has been
recently approved for use in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Small 
airway inflammation and remodelling are cardinal features of COPD; therefore, the
ability of this extrafine formulation to reach the small, as well as the large,
airways is likely to be therapeutically important by enabling treatment of
inflammatory processes in the whole bronchial tree. The clinical development of
extrafine BDP/FF has demonstrated significant benefits over extrafine FF in terms
of lung function improvement and reduction of the exacerbation rate, thus
supporting the beneficial effect of an ICS combined to a LABA in COPD patients.
Head-to-head comparison studies versus other ICS/LABA combinations have shown
that the extrafine formulation enables the clinical benefits to be achieved with 
a lower dose of ICS. Extrafine BDP/FF showed lung function and dyspnoea
improvements comparable to other ICS/LABAs, and a significantly faster onset of
action was observed when compared with a salmeterol-containing fixed-dose
combination. This review summarises the clinical evidence supporting the efficacy
of extrafine BDP/FF in COPD and confirming that extrafine BDP/FF achieves the
type of health benefit expected from such a targeted ICS/LABA combination in
COPD.

DOI: 10.1038/npjpcrm.2016.30 
PMCID: PMC4910970
PMID: 27309985  [PubMed - in process]


12. BMJ Open. 2016 Jun 1;6(6):e010099. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2015-010099.

Identification of responders to inhaled corticosteroids in a chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease population using cluster analysis.

Hinds DR(1), DiSantostefano RL(1), Le HV(2), Pascoe S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Worldwide Epidemiology, GSK, Research Triangle Park, North
Carolina, USA. (2)Department of Worldwide Epidemiology, GSK, Research Triangle
Park, North Carolina, USA PAREXEL International, Durham, North Carolina, USA.
(3)Respiratory Medicines Development, GSK, King of Prussia, Pennsylvania, USA.

OBJECTIVES: To identify clusters of patients who may benefit from treatment with 
an inhaled corticosteroid (ICS)/long-acting β2 agonist (LABA) versus LABA alone, 
in terms of exacerbation reduction, and to validate previously identified
clusters of patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) (based on 
diuretic use and reversibility).
DESIGN: Post hoc supervised cluster analysis using a modified recursive
partitioning algorithm of two 1-year randomised, controlled trials of fluticasone
furoate (FF)/vilanterol (VI) versus VI alone, with the primary end points of the 
annual rate of moderate-to-severe exacerbations.
SETTING: Global.
PARTICIPANTS: 3255 patients with COPD (intent-to-treat populations) with a
history of exacerbations in the past year.
INTERVENTIONS: FF/VI 50/25 µg, 100/25 µg or 200/25 µg, or VI 25 µg; all one time 
per day.
OUTCOME MEASURES: Mean annual COPD exacerbation rate to identify clusters of
patients who benefit from adding an ICS (FF) to VI bronchodilator therapy.
RESULTS: Three clusters were identified, including two groups that benefit from
FF/VI versus VI: patients with blood eosinophils >2.4% (RR=0.68, 95% CI 0.58 to
0.79), or blood eosinophils ≤2.4% and smoking history ≤46 pack-years, experienced
a reduced rate of exacerbations with FF/VI versus VI (RR=0.78, 95% CI 0.63 to
0.96), whereas those with blood eosinophils ≤2.4% and smoking history >46
pack-years were identified as non-responders (RR=1.22, 95% CI 0.94 to 1.58).
Clusters of patients previously identified in the fluticasone
propionate/salmeterol (SAL) versus SAL trials of similar design were not
validated; all clusters of patients tended to benefit from FF/VI versus VI alone 
irrespective of diuretic use and reversibility.
CONCLUSIONS: In patients with COPD with a history of exacerbations, those with
greater blood eosinophils or a lower smoking history may benefit more from
ICS/LABA versus LABA alone as measured by a reduced rate of exacerbations. In
terms of eosinophils, this finding is consistent with findings from other
studies; however, the validity of the 2.4% cut-off and the impact of smoking
history require further investigation.
TRIAL REGISTRATION NUMBERS: NCT01009463; NCT01017952; Post-results.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://www.bmj.com/company/products-services/rights-and-licensing/

DOI: 10.1136/bmjopen-2015-010099 
PMCID: PMC4893846
PMID: 27251682  [PubMed - in process]


13. Medicine (Baltimore). 2016 May;95(20):e3702. doi: 10.1097/MD.0000000000003702.

Chinese Herbal Medicine and Salmeterol and Fluticasone Propionate for Chronic
Obstructive Pulmonary Disease: Systematic Review and Network Meta-Analysis.

Chung VC(1), Wu X, Ma PH, Ho RS, Poon SK, Hui DS, Wong SY, Wu JC.

Author information: 
(1)From the Hong Kong Institute of Integrative Medicine (VCC, XW, SYW, JCW),
Jockey Club School of Public Health and Primary Care (VCC, XW, PHM, RSH, DSH,
SYW), Department of Medicine & Therapeutics, The Chinese University of Hong Kong,
Sha Tin, Hong Kong (DSH, JCW), and School of Information Technologies, The
University of Sydney, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia (SKP).

Among Chinese populations worldwide, Chinese herbal medicines (CHMs) are often
used as an adjunct to pharmacotherapy in managing chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD). However, the relative performance among different CHM is
unknown.The aim of this study was to evaluate comparative effectiveness of
different CHM when used with salmeterol and fluticasone propionate (SFP),
compared with SFP alone.This study is a systematic review of randomized
controlled trials (RCTs) with network meta-analyses (NMAs).Eight electronic
databases were searched. Data from RCTs were extracted for random effect pairwise
meta-analyses. Pooled relative risk (RR) with 95% confidence interval (CI) was
used to quantify the impact of CHM and SFP on forced expiratory volume in
1 second (FEV1), St George's Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ) scoring, and
6-Minute Walk Test (6MWT). NMA was used to explore the most effective CHM when
used with SFP.Eleven RCTs (n = 925) assessing 11 different CHM were included.
Result from pairwise meta-analyses indicated favorable, clinically relevant
benefit of CHM and SFP on FEV1 [7 studies, pooled weighted mean difference
(WMD) = 0.20 L, 95% CI: 0.06-0.34 L], SGRQ scoring (5 studies, pooled
WMD = -4.99, 95% CI: -7.73 to -2.24), and 6MWT (3 studies, pooled WMD = 32.84 m, 
95% CI: 18.26-47.42). Results from NMA showed no differences on the comparative
effectiveness among CHM formulations for improving FEV1. For SGRQ, NMA suggested 
that Runfeijianpibushen decoction and Renshenbufei pills performed best. Use of
CHM on top of SFP can provide clinically relevant benefit for COPD patients on
FEV1 and SGRQ. Additional use of Runfeijianpibushen decoction and Renshenbufei
pills showed better effect on improving SGRQ.Use of CHM and SFP may provide
clinically relevant benefit for COPD patients on FEV1, SGRQ, and 6MWT. Use of
different CHM formulae included in this NMA showed similar effect for increasing 
FEV1, while the additional use of Runfeijianpibushen formula and Renshenbufei
Pills showed better effect on improving SGRQ. Well conducted, adequately powered 
trials are needed to confirm their effectiveness in the future.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000003702 
PMCID: PMC4902426
PMID: 27196484  [PubMed - in process]


14. N Engl J Med. 2016 Jun 9;374(23):2222-34. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1516385. Epub 2016
May 15.

Indacaterol-Glycopyrronium versus Salmeterol-Fluticasone for COPD.

Wedzicha JA(1), Banerji D(1), Chapman KR(1), Vestbo J(1), Roche N(1), Ayers
RT(1), Thach C(1), Fogel R(1), Patalano F(1), Vogelmeier CF(1); FLAME
Investigators.

Collaborators: Ambrosino N, Budani H, Carminio C, Casal E, De Salvo M, Delgado
Vizcarra G, Fazio C, Gene R, Hasner C, Luna C, Maillo M, Mariño G, Massola F,
Mattarucco W, Molina A, Otaola M, Rey LB, Rodriguez A, Rojas RA, Taborda J,
Tolcachier A, Victorio C, Wehbe L, Willigs Rolon M, Yanez A, Voves R, Wuertz J,
Wuertz P, Ablinger O, Forstner B, Wallner G, Olschewski H, Koeberl G, Studnicka
M, Kaehler C, Vincken W, Driesen P, Demedts I, Janssens W, Martinot JB, Aumann J,
Derom E, Ninane V, Corhay JL, Bogerd SP, Vanderheyde K, Fremault A, Schlesser M, 
Janssens E, Jordens P, Verhaeghe W, Verbuyst R, Ilieva-Fartunova V, Shikov R,
Hodzhev V, Kostov K, Ivanov Y, Peneva M, Youroukova V, Georgiev O, Subashki M,
Milcheva V, Chapman KR, Del Carpio J, Fera T, Field S, Killorn P, Landry D,
Larivee P, Pek B, Tellier G, Mazza G, Sherkin M, Frechette A, Soler T, Pavie J,
Miranda G, Zheng J, Huang W, Wen Z, Wang H, Cai B, Sun S, Wen F, Xiong W, Wang C,
Huang Y, Wang L, Xiao Z, Wen G, Liu J, Wan H, Chen P, Yan X, Huang J, Cao J, Li
Z, Huang M, Vallejo JS, Cardona G, Isaza D, Bolivar F, Tudoric N, Vuksan-Cusa T, 
Samarzija M, Tauchman A, Hadrava M, Holub S, Zitkova M, Ali M, Kopecka D,
Presperinova J, Povysilova L, Cmakalova M, Mares J, Kocianova J, Skacel Z, Kasak 
V, Musil J, Blahova M, Jirmanova I, Kolek V, Backer V, Ulrik CS, Nielsen C,
Ottesen A, Seersholm N, Boedtger U, Grzywacz Z, Meyer CN, Nielsen S, Jogi R,
Meren M, Samaruutel P, Venho K, Elo J, Patovirta RL, Nieminen E, Raatikainen L,
Saarelainen P, Herer B, Deslee G, Devouassoux G, Jasnot JY, Berger P, Proust A,
Bourdin A, Boye A, Ballenberger S, Beck E, Benedix A, Birkholz SC, Bollmann L,
Budweiser S, Deckelmann R, Deimling A, Eberhardt F, Eckhardt G, Eller J,
Esselmann A, Feldmeyer F, Feussner W, Foerster K, Franz KH, Fritzsche A, Gebhardt
R, Gernhold M, Gessner C, Haase PU, Heindl S, Hoheisel G, Hueting R, Jaeger B,
Jandl M, Junggeburth J, Kaessner F, Keller C, Kirschner J, Kleinecke-Pohl U,
Kroker A, Lammert-Huenger G, Ludwig-Sengpiel A, Mikloweit P, Mueller H, Noga O,
Reinhardt J, Rueckert P, Schaper L, Schlegel V, Schmoller T, Schuermann W,
Toepfer V, Wiemer S, Winkler J, Botzen U, Djacenko S, Entzian P, Herzig J,
Hofbauer P, Kornmann O, Marten I, Overlack A, Preiss G, Schlenska C, Sohrab S,
Steffen H, Westerhausen U, Zeisler KH, Zemke K, Zingler W, Zuechner D, Kaiser A, 
Tyler K, Ginko T, Marosis K, Gaga A, Siafakas N, Kakoura M, Koulouris N,
Vasilakopoulos T, Papiris S, Zarogoulidis K, Antoniadis A, Kallergis K,
Gourgoulianis K, Contreras E, Espana E, Gonzalez E, Guerra J, Martinez G, Hui DS,
Losonczy G, Vasas S, Varga J, Mark Z, Schlezak J, Balint B, Somfay A, Jonsson M, 
D'Souza G, Arbat A, Sundarakumar S, Vijaykumar NB, Dhar R, Shah N, Kashyap AK,
Srikanth K, Tripathi S, Gupta N, Samiuddin M, Swarnakar R, Paggiaro PL, Idotta G,
Mazza F, Cerveri I, Colombo F, Barbaro MP, Riario Sforza GG, Pomari C, Zucchi L, 
Gigliotti F, Clini E, Aiolfi S, Gasparini S, Ceriana P, Spanevello A, Carone M,
Barisione G, Miyao N, Kiyosue A, Nakatani Y, Harada T, Hayakawa H, Kato M, Ogushi
F, Nakamura H, Yoshida M, Hataji O, Matsui H, Matsumoto M, Taniguchi H, Takeda A,
Kishimoto N, Nishio M, Kinoshita M, Kato R, Hara N, Tamada T, Hashimoto S, Suzuki
M, Hiramatsu T, Shuto H, In KH, Lee S, Kim S, Kim J, Kim D, Park M, Kim J, Yoo C,
Lee Y, Babjoniseva A, Mitrofanova L, Smiltena I, Matukiene V, Nausediene V,
Miliauskas S, Susinskiene D, Vebriene J, Vaicius D, Volosevic T, Kiziela A,
Sileikiene V, Sansores R, Ramirez E, Diaz J, Caleco M, Llamas FS, Bantje T, Gans 
SJ, Goosens M, Sinninghe-Damste HE, de Hosson SM, Wielders PL, van der Valk P,
Michels AJ, Gronert J, Norheim PD, Sparby JA, Risberg K, Karlsson T, Roedolen T, 
Tomala T, Diaz D, Maliwat A, Hernandez JF, Antczak A, Mroz R, Siergiejko Z,
Waszkuc-Golonko J, Olechnowicz D, Napora P, Batura-Gabryel H, Barbara C, Cardoso 
J, Moita J, Rodrigues B, Pires N, Guimaraes JM, Andre N, Ribeiro V, Mihaicuta S, 
Petrui ID, Tudorache V, Bulugean L, Adina M, Rajnoveanu R, Olar D, Matei D, Toma 
C, Gica C, Ambert L, Mihaescu T, Alexandrescu D, Popovici C, Glontescu ID,
Boisteanu D, Vigdorovits M, Jimborean G, Mihaltan F, Abrosimov V, Platonov D,
Astafieva N, Nosov V, Martynenko T, Gantseva K, Shilkina N, Gaydar E, Ignatova G,
Khamitov R, Stankovic I, Cekerevac I, Ilic A, Vukcevic M, Hrebenar S, Lescisinova
H, Golubov A, Oravcova H, Zacik M, Zambova RT, Arpasova K, Orolin M, Jurco P,
Kretik V, Kavkova D, Mihalecova Y, Sarkanova K, Kovacikova L, Kubikova Y,
Rozborilova E, Smith C, Abdullah I, Bruning A, Visser S, Abdullah I, van Zyl-Smit
R, Richter D, Ras G, Joubert J, Irusen, de Saracho JO, Echave-Sustaeta J, Pascual
LR, Casan P, Ramos D, Roldan J, Gonzalez JE, Lista JD, Morera J, Sanchez I,
Caballero LM, Rodriguez E, Galdiz J, Naval E, Fernandez E, Santa Cruz A, Ruiz AB,
Costa JS, Ferrer A, Roig V, Velasco JL, Bjermer L, Jul-Nielsen H, Tengmark BO,
Blom KB, Perng DW, Yu CJ, Cheng SL, Hsu WH, Tsai YH, Hsiue TR, Lin MC, Boonsawat 
W, Pothirat C, Keeratichananont W, Nayci S, Saryal S, Gunen H, Sayiner A,
Ortakoylu G, Yorgancioglu A, Ozkurt S, Harrison R, Jones N, Bourne S, Saralaya D,
Kerrane J, DeSoyza A, Fuller L, Litchfield J, Bourke S, Collier D, Gunstone A.

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2016 Jun 9;374(23):2284-6.
    N Engl J Med. 2016 Sep;375(9):897-8.
    N Engl J Med. 2016 Sep;375(9):899-900.
    N Engl J Med. 2016 Sep;375(9):898-9.
    N Engl J Med. 2016 Sep;375(9):898.

BACKGROUND: Most guidelines recommend either a long-acting beta-agonist (LABA)
plus an inhaled glucocorticoid or a long-acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA) as
the first-choice treatment for patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD) who have a high risk of exacerbations. The role of treatment with 
a LABA-LAMA regimen in these patients is unclear.
METHODS: We conducted a 52-week, randomized, double-blind, double-dummy,
noninferiority trial. Patients who had COPD with a history of at least one
exacerbation during the previous year were randomly assigned to receive, by
inhalation, either the LABA indacaterol (110 μg) plus the LAMA glycopyrronium (50
μg) once daily or the LABA salmeterol (50 μg) plus the inhaled glucocorticoid
fluticasone (500 μg) twice daily. The primary outcome was the annual rate of all 
COPD exacerbations.
RESULTS: A total of 1680 patients were assigned to the indacaterol-glycopyrronium
group, and 1682 to the salmeterol-fluticasone group. Indacaterol-glycopyrronium
showed not only noninferiority but also superiority to salmeterol-fluticasone in 
reducing the annual rate of all COPD exacerbations; the rate was 11% lower in the
indacaterol-glycopyrronium group than in the salmeterol-fluticasone group (3.59
vs. 4.03; rate ratio, 0.89; 95% confidence interval [CI], 0.83 to 0.96; P=0.003).
The indacaterol-glycopyrronium group had a longer time to the first exacerbation 
than did the salmeterol-fluticasone group (71 days [95% CI, 60 to 82] vs. 51 days
[95% CI, 46 to 57]; hazard ratio, 0.84 [95% CI, 0.78 to 0.91], representing a 16%
lower risk; P<0.001). The annual rate of moderate or severe exacerbations was
lower in the indacaterol-glycopyrronium group than in the salmeterol-fluticasone 
group (0.98 vs. 1.19; rate ratio, 0.83; 95% CI, 0.75 to 0.91; P<0.001), and the
time to the first moderate or severe exacerbation was longer in the
indacaterol-glycopyrronium group than in the salmeterol-fluticasone group (hazard
ratio, 0.78; 95% CI, 0.70 to 0.86; P<0.001), as was the time to the first severe 
exacerbation (hazard ratio, 0.81; 95% CI, 0.66 to 1.00; P=0.046). The effect of
indacaterol-glycopyrronium versus salmeterol-fluticasone on the rate of COPD
exacerbations was independent of the baseline blood eosinophil count. The
incidence of adverse events and deaths was similar in the two groups. The
incidence of pneumonia was 3.2% in the indacaterol-glycopyrronium group and 4.8% 
in the salmeterol-fluticasone group (P=0.02).
CONCLUSIONS: Indacaterol-glycopyrronium was more effective than
salmeterol-fluticasone in preventing COPD exacerbations in patients with a
history of exacerbation during the previous year. (Funded by Novartis; FLAME
ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT01782326.).

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa1516385 
PMID: 27181606  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Lancet Respir Med. 2016 May;4(5):390-8. doi: 10.1016/S2213-2600(16)00100-4. Epub 
2016 Apr 7.

Blood eosinophil count and exacerbations in severe chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease after withdrawal of inhaled corticosteroids: a post-hoc analysis of the
WISDOM trial.

Watz H(1), Tetzlaff K(2), Wouters EF(3), Kirsten A(4), Magnussen H(4),
Rodriguez-Roisin R(5), Vogelmeier C(6), Fabbri LM(7), Chanez P(8), Dahl R(9),
Disse B(10), Finnigan H(11), Calverley PM(12).

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary Research Institute at Lung Clinic Grosshansdorf, Airway Research
Center North, German Center for Lung Research, Grosshansdorf, Germany. Electronic
address: h.watz@pulmoresearch.de. (2)Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma GmbH and Co KG, 
Ingelheim, Germany; Department of Sports Medicine, University of Tübingen,
Tübingen, Germany. (3)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Maastricht University
Medical Center, Maastricht, Netherlands. (4)Pulmonary Research Institute at Lung 
Clinic Grosshansdorf, Airway Research Center North, German Center for Lung
Research, Grosshansdorf, Germany. (5)Universitat de Barcelona, Hospital Clínic
IDIBAPS-CIBERES, Barcelona, Spain. (6)Department of Medicine, Pulmonary and
Critical Care Medicine, University Medical Center Giessen and Marburg,
Philipps-Universität Marburg, German Center for Lung Research, Marburg, Germany. 
(7)Department of Metabolic Medicine, University of Modena & Reggio Emilia,
Modena, NOCSAE, AUSL Modena, Baggiovara, Italy. (8)Aix-Marseille Université,
Department of Respiratory Diseases and CIC Nord, AP-HM-Hôpital Nord, Marseille,
France. (9)University of Southern Denmark, Odense, Denmark. (10)Boehringer
Ingelheim Pharma GmbH and Co KG, Ingelheim, Germany. (11)Department of
Biostatistics and Data Sciences, Boehringer Ingelheim, Bracknell, UK.
(12)Institute of Ageing and Chronic Disease, Aintree University Hospital,
Liverpool, UK.

BACKGROUND: Blood eosinophil counts might predict response to inhaled
corticosteroids (ICS) in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD) and a history of exacerbations. We used data from the WISDOM trial to
assess whether patients with COPD with higher blood eosinophil counts would be
more likely to have exacerbations if ICS treatment was withdrawn.
METHODS: WISDOM was a 12-month, randomised, parallel-group trial in which
patients received 18 μg tiotropium, 100 μg salmeterol, and 1000 μg fluticasone
propionate daily for 6 weeks and were then randomly assigned (1:1) electronically
to receive either continued or reduced ICS over 12 weeks. We did a post-hoc
analysis after complete ICS withdrawal (months 3-12) to compare rate of
exacerbations and time to exacerbation outcomes on the basis of blood eosinophil 
subgroups of increasing cutoff levels. The WISDOM trial is registered at
ClinicalTrials.gov, number NCT00975195.
FINDINGS: In the 2296 patients receiving treatment after ICS withdrawal, moderate
or severe exacerbation rate was higher in the ICS-withdrawal group versus the
ICS-continuation group in patients with eosinophil counts (out of total white
blood cell count) of 2% or greater (rate ratio 1·22 [95% CI 1·02-1·48]), 4% or
greater (1·63 [1·19-2·24]), and 5% or greater (1·82 [1·20-2·76]). The increase in
exacerbation rate became more pronounced as the eosinophil cutoff level rose,
with significant treatment-by-subgroup interaction reached for 4% and 5% only.
Similar results were seen with eosinophil cutoffs of 300 cells per μL and 400
cells per μL, and mutually exclusive subgroups.
INTERPRETATION: Blood eosinophil counts at screening were related to the
exacerbation rate after complete ICS withdrawal in patients with severe to very
severe COPD and a history of exacerbations. Our data suggest that counts of 4% or
greater or 300 cells per μL or more might identify a deleterious effect of ICS
withdrawal, an effect not seen in most patients with eosinophil counts below
these thresholds.
FUNDING: Boehringer Ingelheim.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S2213-2600(16)00100-4 
PMID: 27066739  [PubMed - in process]


16. J Manag Care Spec Pharm. 2016 Apr;22(4):316-23. doi: 10.18553/jmcp.2016.22.4.316.

Evaluation of a Therapeutic Interchange from Fluticasone/Salmeterol to
Mometasone/Formoterol in Patients with Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease.

Yip E(1), Karimi S(2), Pien LT(3).

Author information: 
(1)1 Primary Care Clinical Pharmacy Specialist, Kaiser Permanente Mid-Atlantic
States, Upper Marlboro, Maryland. (2)2 Primary Care Clinical Pharmacy Specialist,
Kaiser Permanente Mid-Atlantic States, Manassas, Virginia. (3)3 Primary Care
Clinical Pharmacy Specialist, Kaiser Permanente Mid-Atlantic States, Springfield,
Virginia.

BACKGROUND: Combination treatment with an inhaled corticosteroid and long-acting 
beta2-agonist is among the many treatment options for chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD) that has been shown to improve clinical outcomes. While 
mometasone/formoterol does not currently have an FDA-approved indication for
COPD, evidence from 2 phase 3 trials demonstrated that mometasone/formoterol can 
improve lung function and was well tolerated in patients with moderate-to-very
severe COPD. Based on these data, a therapeutic interchange was implemented in
the Kaiser Permanente Mid-Atlantic States region to convert patients with a COPD 
diagnosis from fluticasone/salmeterol to mometasone/formoterol.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the impact of a therapeutic interchange from
fluticasone/salmeterol to mometasone/formoterol on health outcomes in patients
with COPD in a large ambulatory and managed care setting.
METHODS: The investigators retrospectively reviewed the electronic medical
records of patients with a COPD diagnosis who had a prescription for
fluticasone/salmeterol converted to mometasone/formoterol between March 6, 2011, 
to March 6, 2013. Kaiser Permanente's Pharmacy and Therapeutics Committee
provided recommended equivalent doses for conversion from fluticasone/salmeterol 
to mometasone/formoterol. Nonetheless, the final approval for the change in
medication and selection of the dose was left to each physician's clinical
judgment. Patients were excluded if they were (a) prescribed
fluticasone/salmeterol 100/50 mcg, which has no equivalent mometasone/formoterol 
dose; (b) less than aged 18 years; or (c) prescribed fluticasone/salmeterol for a
duration of less than 6 months preconversion to mometasone/formoterol. In
addition, patients who left the Kaiser Permanente network or became deceased
during the study period of interest were excluded. After the application of the
inclusion and exclusion criteria, 521 patients were included in the data
analysis. The primary endpoint was the determination of the difference in the
occurrence of COPD exacerbations 6 months pre- and postconversion from
fluticasone/salmeterol to mometasone/formoterol. COPD exacerbations were defined 
by the diagnosis or documentation of a COPD exacerbation during any
hospitalizations, urgent care (UC)/emergency department (ED) visits, or clinic
encounters. Secondary outcomes included the determination of the difference in
the occurrence of intensive care unit admissions, hospitalizations, UC/ED visits,
and clinic encounters for COPD exacerbations 6 months pre- and postconversion;
number of patients who required modification in therapy; and any reasons for
mometasone/for-moterol discontinuation postconversion. Patients served as their
own controls to compare any differences in outcomes while taking
mometasone/formoterol versus fluticasone/salmeterol.
RESULTS: Within our patient population, 34.2% (n = 178) of patients experienced
at least 1 COPD exacerbation while prescribed fluticasone/salmeterol compared
with 28.6% (n = 149) of patients while prescribed mometasone/formoterol (P =
0.030). Mometasone/formoterol therapy did not demonstrate any statistically
significant differences in the secondary outcomes (P < 0.050). A later subgroup
analysis of the primary outcome revealed that factors associated with a
statistically significant decrease in the occurrence of COPD exacerbations were
male sex (P = 0.023), comorbid asthma (P = 0.026), and conversion from
fluticasone/salmeterol to a more potent dose of mometasone/formoterol (P =
0.014).
CONCLUSIONS: There was a statistically significant decrease in the proportion of 
patients who experienced COPD exacerbations postconversion from
fluticasone/salmeterol to mometasone/formoterol. This study is an example of a
real-world therapeutic interchange that provides additional data to support the
use of mometasone/formoterol for its unlabeled COPD indication.
DISCLOSURES: No outside funding supported this study. The authors report no
financial or other conflicts of interest related to the subject of this article. 
All authors contributed to study design and manuscript revision. Yip collected
and analyzed data and prepared the manuscript.

DOI: 10.18553/jmcp.2016.22.4.316 
PMID: 27023685  [PubMed - in process]


17. J Manag Care Spec Pharm. 2016 Mar;22(3):293-304. doi:
10.18553/jmcp.2016.22.3.293.

Health Care Utilization and Costs After Initiating Budesonide/Formoterol
Combination or Fluticasone/Salmeterol Combination Among COPD Patients New to
ICS/LABA Treatment.

Davis JR(1), Kern DM(2), Williams SA(3), Tunceli O(4), Wu B(5), Hollis S(6),
Strange C(7), Trudo F(8).

Author information: 
(1)1 Director, Health Economics and Outcomes Research, AstraZeneca
Pharmaceuticals, Wilmington, Delaware. (2)2 Associate Research Director, Industry
Sponsored Research, HealthCore, Wilmington, Delaware. (3)3 Senior Director,
Medical Evidence Center, AstraZeneca Pharmaceuticals, Gaithersburg, Maryland.
(4)4 Director, Industry Sponsored Research, HealthCore, Wilmington, Delaware.
(5)5 Research Manager, Industry Sponsored Research, HealthCore, Wilmington,
Delaware. (6)6 Senior Director and Biometrics Team Leader, AstraZeneca
Pharmaceuticals, Alderley Park, Cheshire, United Kingdom. (7)7 Professor,
Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Medical University of South
Carolina, Charleston. (8)8 Medical Lead, Respiratory, AstraZeneca
Pharmaceuticals, Wilmington, Delaware.

BACKGROUND: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) affects approximately 15
million people in the United States and accounts for approximately $36 billion in
economic burden, primarily due to medical costs. To address the increasing
clinical and economic burden, the Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung 
Disease emphasizes the use of therapies that help prevent COPD exacerbations,
including inhaled corticosteroid/long-acting beta2-agonist (ICS/LABA).
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate health care costs and utilization among COPD patients
newly initiating ICS/LABA combination therapy with budesonide/formoterol (BFC) or
fluticasone/salmeterol (FSC) in a managed care system.
METHODS: COPD patients aged 40 years and older who initiated BFC (160/4.5 μg) or 
FSC (250/50 μg) treatment between March 1, 2009, and March 31, 2012, were
identified using claims data from major U.S. health plans. BFC and FSC patients
were propensity score matched (1:1) on age, sex, prior asthma diagnosis, prior
COPD-related health care utilization, and respiratory medication use.
COPD-related, pneumonia-related, and all-cause costs and utilization were
analyzed during the 12-month follow-up period. Post-index costs were assessed
with generalized linear models (GLMs) with gamma distribution. Health care
utilization data were analyzed via logistic regression (any event vs. none) and
GLMs with negative binomial distribution (number of visits) and were adjusted for
the analogous pre-index variable as well as pre-index characteristics that
remained imbalanced after matching.
RESULTS: After matching, each cohort had 3,697 patients balanced on age (mean 64 
years), sex (female 52% BFC and 54% FSC), asthma and other comorbid conditions,
prior COPD-related health care utilization, and respiratory medication use.
During the 12-month follow-up, COPD-related costs averaged $316 less for BFC
versus FSC patients ($4,326 vs. $4,846; P = 0.003), reflecting lower inpatient
($966 vs. $1,202; P < 0.001), pharmacy ($1,482 vs. $1,609; P = 0.002), and
outpatient/office ($1,378 vs. $1,436; P = 0.048) costs, but higher emergency
department ($257 vs. $252; P = 0.033) costs. Pneumonia-related health care costs 
were also lower on average for BFC patients ($2,855 vs. $3,605; P < 0.001).
Similarly, initiating BFC was associated with lower all-use health care costs
versus initiating FSC ($21,580 vs. $24,483; P < 0.001, respectively). No
differences in health care utilization were found between the 2 groups.
CONCLUSIONS: In this study, although no difference was observed in rates of
health care utilization, COPD patients initiating BFC treatment incurred lower
average COPD-related, pneumonia-related, and all-cause costs versus FSC
initiators, which was driven by cumulative differences in inpatient, outpatient, 
and pharmacy costs.

DOI: 10.18553/jmcp.2016.22.3.293 
PMID: 27003559  [PubMed - in process]


18. FASEB J. 2016 May;30(5):2014-26. doi: 10.1096/fj.201500135. Epub 2016 Feb 17.

Corticosteroid modulation of immunoglobulin expression and B-cell function in
COPD.

Lee J(1), Machin M(1), Russell KE(1), Pavlidis S(2), Zhu J(1), Barnes PJ(1),
Chung KF(1), Adcock IM(1), Durham AL(3).

Author information: 
(1)Airway Disease Section, National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College
London, London, United Kingdom; and. (2)Janssen Research and Development, High
Wycombe, United Kingdom. (3)Airway Disease Section, National Heart and Lung
Institute, Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom; and
a.durham@imperial.ac.uk.

We investigated changes in gene expression that occur in chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD) after corticosteroid treatment and sought to identify
the mechanisms that regulate these changes. Biopsy samples were taken from
patients with COPD (Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease stage 
I to II) before and after treatment with fluticasone propionate (FP)/salmeterol
(SM) (50/500, 4 wk). Gene expression was measured by microarray and was confirmed
by real-time reverse transcription-quantitative PCR (RT-qPCR). The effect of FP
on IgG expression and B-cell proliferation in the presence of oxidative stress
was also studied. FP/SM significantly increased the expression of 180 genes while
repressing 343 genes. The top 5 down-regulated genes were associated with
immunoglobulin production, whereas the immunomodulatory FK506 binding protein
(FK506BP) was up-regulated. Genes including IL6, IL8, and TBET-encoding TBX21
were unaffected. FP reduced IgG protein and mRNA expression and proliferation of 
human B cells through the dephosphorylation of ERK-1/2 via increased DUSP1
(dual-specificity protein phosphatase 1) expression. Consistent with in vivo
data, oxidative stress did not prevent FP-induced suppression of IgG expression
in human B cells in vitro Changes in expression were validated by RT-qPCR and by 
gene set enrichment analysis in distinct COPD cohorts. FP may reduce the adaptive
immune response in COPD and may be more effective in patients with an increased
B-cell/antibody response indicated by high autoantibody titers.-Lee, J., Machin, 
M., Russell, K. E., Pavlidis, S., Zhu, J., Barnes, P. J., Chung, K. F., Adcock,
I. M., Durham, A. L. Corticosteroid modulation of immunoglobulin expression and
B-cell function in COPD.

© FASEB.

DOI: 10.1096/fj.201500135 
PMID: 26887440  [PubMed - in process]


19. Expert Rev Pharmacoecon Outcomes Res. 2016;16(2):167-92. doi:
10.1586/14737167.2016.1148602. Epub 2016 Feb 22.

Economic evaluations of fluticasone-propionate/salmeterol combination therapy for
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: a review of published studies.

Roberts MH(1,)(2), Borrego ME(1), Kharat AA(1), Marshik PL(1), Mapel DW(2).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Pharmacy Practice and Administrative Sciences , University of 
New Mexico College of Pharmacy , Albuquerque , NM , USA. (2)b LCF Research,
Health Services Research Division , Albuquerque , NM , USA.

This review identifies and evaluates the comprehensive reporting of peer-reviewed
economic evaluations of the effectiveness of fluticasone-propionate/salmeterol
combination (FSC) therapy for maintenance treatment of chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD). Economic evaluations were included if published in
English since 2003. Evaluation categories included in the review were
cost-effectiveness, cost-utility, and cost-consequence analyses. FSC is
cost-effective in comparison to short-acting bronchodilators (SABDs). Cost and
outcome differences between FSC and other long-acting therapies were modest.
Studies exhibited large variations in populations, designs and environment,
limiting the ability to draw conclusions. Many new maintenance treatments for
COPD have been approved since 2010. Most have yet to be compared to older
treatments like FSC. Evaluations are needed that consider costs and outcomes from
a societal perspective (e.g., patients' ability to keep working) and evaluations 
that include subgroup analyses to investigate differential impacts according to
clusters of patient characteristics.

DOI: 10.1586/14737167.2016.1148602 
PMID: 26839089  [PubMed - in process]


20. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2015 Nov 20;10:2535-48. doi:
10.2147/COPD.S93321. eCollection 2015.

Applying the wisdom of stepping down inhaled corticosteroids in patients with
COPD: a proposed algorithm for clinical practice.

Kaplan AG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Family Physician Airways Group of Canada, University of Toronto, Toronto,
Ontario, Canada ; Department of Family and Community Medicine, University of
Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Current guidelines for the management of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD) recommend limiting the use of inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) to patients
with more severe disease and/or increased exacerbation risk. However, there are
discrepancies between guidelines and real-life practice, as ICS are being
overprescribed. In light of the increasing concerns about the clinical benefit
and long-term risks associated with ICS use, therapy needs to be carefully
weighed on a case-by-case basis, including in patients already on ICS. Several
studies sought out to determine the effects of withdrawing ICS in patients with
COPD. Early studies have deterred clinicians from reducing ICS in patients with
COPD as they reported that an abrupt withdrawal of ICS precipitates
exacerbations, and results in a deterioration in lung function and symptoms.
However, these studies were fraught with numerous methodological limitations.
Recently, two randomized controlled trials and a real-life prospective study
revealed that ICS can be safely withdrawn in certain patients. Of these, the
WISDOM (Withdrawal of Inhaled Steroids During Optimized Bronchodilator
Management) trial was the largest and first to examine stepwise withdrawal of ICS
in patients with COPD receiving maintenance therapy of long-acting
bronchodilators (ie, tiotropium and salmeterol). Even with therapy being in line 
with the current guidelines, the findings of the WISDOM trial indicate that not
all patients benefit from including ICS in their treatment regimen. Indeed, only 
certain COPD phenotypes seem to benefit from ICS therapy, and validated markers
that predict ICS response are urgently warranted in clinical practice.
Furthermore, we are now better equipped with a larger armamentarium of novel and 
more effective long-acting β2-agonist/long-acting muscarinic antagonist
combinations that can be considered by clinicians to optimize bronchodilation and
allow for safer ICS withdrawal. In addition to providing a review of the
aforementioned, this perspective article proposes an algorithm for the stepwise
withdrawal of ICS in real-life clinical practice.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S93321 
PMCID: PMC4664433
PMID: 26648711  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Saf. 2016 Mar;25(3):278-86. doi: 10.1002/pds.3923. Epub
2015 Dec 9.

Confounding by drug formulary restriction in pharmacoepidemiologic research.

Filion KB(1,)(2,)(3), Eberg M(1), Ernst P(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Clinical Epidemiology, Lady Davis Institute, Jewish General
Hospital, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada. (2)Department of Medicine,
McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada. (3)Department of Epidemiology,
Biostatistics, and Occupational Health, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec,
Canada.

PURPOSE: The potential consequences of confounding due to drug formulary
restrictions in pharmacoepidemiologic research remain incompletely understood.
Our objective was to illustrate this potential bias using the example of
fluticasone/salmeterol combination therapy, an oral inhaler used to treat asthma 
and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, whose use is restricted in the
province of Quebec, Canada.
METHODS: We identified all new users of fluticasone/salmeterol in Quebec's
administrative databases and classified those who received their initial
dispensing of fluticasone/salmeterol between 1 September 1999 and 30 September
2003 as users from the liberal period and those who received it between 1 January
2004 and 31 October 2006 as users from the restricted period. The primary outcome
was time to first hospitalization for respiratory causes within 12 months of
cohort entry.
RESULTS: Our cohort included 72 154 new users from the liberal period and 5058
from the restricted period. Compared with use during the liberal period, use
during the restricted period was associated with an increased rate of
hospitalization for respiratory causes (crude hazard ratio [HR] = 1.41, 95%
confidence interval [CI] = 1.32, 1.51). Subsequent adjustment for age, sex, and
hospitalization for respiratory causes in the previous year attenuated the
association (HR = 1.05, 95%CI = 0.98, 1.12). Further adjustment for other
potential confounders resulted in a lower rate during the restricted period
(HR = 0.78, 95%CI = 0.73, 0.83).
CONCLUSIONS: Formulary restrictions can result in substantial and unexpected
confounding and should be considered during the design and analysis of
pharmacoepidemiologic studies.

Copyright © 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/pds.3923 
PMID: 26648236  [PubMed - in process]


22. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2015 Nov 4;10:2393-404. doi:
10.2147/COPD.S89948. eCollection 2015.

Triple therapy with salmeterol/fluticasone propionate 50/250 plus tiotropium
bromide improve lung function versus individual treatments in moderate-to-severe 
Japanese COPD patients: a randomized controlled trial - Evaluation of Airway sGaw
after treatment with tripLE.

Saito T(1), Takeda A(2), Hashimoto K(3), Kobayashi A(4), Hayamizu T(5), Hagan
GW(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Ibarakihigashi National Hospital, Naka,
Ibaraki, Japan. (2)Center for Pulmonary Medicine, Asahikawa Medical Center,
Asahikawa, Hokkaido, Japan. (3)AMC Nishiumeda Clinic, Osaka, Japan. (4)Biomedical
Science Department, GlaxoSmithKline KK, Tokyo, Japan. (5)Medical Affairs
Respiratory Department, GlaxoSmithKline KK, Tokyo, Japan. (6)Independent
Consultant, Marbella, Spain.

Erratum in
    Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2016;11:1031-3.

PURPOSE: Triple therapy using salmeterol/fluticasone propionate (FP) and
tiotropium bromide is commonly used to treat chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD), but sparse efficacy data exist in COPD patients with fewer
symptoms and with a lower dose of inhaled corticosteroid in Japanese patients.
The effects of of salmeterol/fluticasone propionate 50/250 μg (SFC250) twice
daily plus tiotropium 18 μg (TIO) once daily and individual treatments on lung
function were compared.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Fifty three Japanese COPD patients participated in this
randomized, double-blind, double-dummy, Williams square design crossover study.
Lung function was assessed by plethysmography and spirometry.
RESULTS: The primary endpoint of postdose specific airway conductance area under 
the curve (AUC0-4h) on day 28 was significantly higher following SFC250 + TIO
(0.854) compared with TIO (0.737, 15.8%) and SFC250 (0.663, 28.8%) alone. SFC250 
+ TIO significantly improved trough forced expiratory volume in 1 second from
baseline versus TIO (0.161 L, P<0.001) and SFC250 (0.103 L, P=0.008). SFC250 +
TIO significantly improved residual volume compared with TIO (P<0.001) and SFC250
(P=0.003) on day 28. Nonsignificant improvements were seen in trough inspiratory 
capacity, total lung capacity, and thoracic gas volume. There was no mean change 
seen in rescue medication.
CONCLUSION: Triple therapy using SFC250 + TIO was well tolerated and gave a
greater improvement in bronchodilation compared with TIO and SFC250 alone in
Japanese patients with COPD. There was improvement in few symptoms, but no mean
change was seen in patient-reported outcomes measured by rescue medication use.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S89948 
PMCID: PMC4639514
PMID: 26604737  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. BMC Pulm Med. 2015 Nov 11;15:145. doi: 10.1186/s12890-015-0138-4.

Mortality and drug therapy in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease: a network meta-analysis.

Scott DA(1), Woods B(2,)(3), Thompson JC(4), Clark JF(5), Hawkins N(6), Chambers 
M(7), Celli BR(8), Calverley P(9).

Author information: 
(1)ICON Health Economics and Epidemiology, Seacourt Tower, West Way, Oxford, OX2 
0JJ, UK. david.scott@iconplc.com. (2)ICON Health Economics and Epidemiology,
Seacourt Tower, West Way, Oxford, OX2 0JJ, UK. beth.woods@york.ac.uk. (3)Centre
for Health Economics, University of York, York, UK. beth.woods@york.ac.uk.
(4)ICON Health Economics and Epidemiology, Seacourt Tower, West Way, Oxford, OX2 
0JJ, UK. juliette.thompson@iconplc.com. (5)ICON Health Economics and
Epidemiology, Seacourt Tower, West Way, Oxford, OX2 0JJ, UK.
james.clark-wright@pharmagenesis.com. (6)ICON Health Economics and Epidemiology, 
Seacourt Tower, West Way, Oxford, OX2 0JJ, UK. neil.hawkins@iconplc.com.
(7)GlaxoSmithKline, Brentford, UK. mgchambers@ntlworld.com. (8)Brigham and
Women's Hospital, Harvard University, Boston, MA, USA. bcelli@copdnet.org.
(9)Institute of Aging and Chronic Disease, University of Liverpool, Liverpool,
UK. pmacal@liverpool.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: Increasing evidence suggests pharmacological treatments may impact on
overall survival in Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD) patients.
Individual clinical trials are rarely powered to detect mortality differences
between treatments and may not include all treatment options relevant to
healthcare decision makers.
METHODS: A systematic review was conducted to identify RCTs of COPD treatments
reporting mortality; evidence was synthesised using network meta-analysis (NMA). 
The analysis included 40 RCTs; a quantitative indirect comparison between 14
treatments using data from 55,220 patients was conducted.
RESULTS: The analysis reported two treatments reducing all-cause mortality;
salmeterol/fluticasone propionate combination (SFC) was associated with a
reduction in mortality versus placebo in the fixed effects (HR 0.79; 95 % Crl
0.67, 0.94) but not the random effects model (0.79; 0.56, 1.09). Indacaterol was 
associated with a reduction in mortality versus placebo in fixed (0.28; 0.08 to
0.85) and random effects (0.29; 0.08, 0.89) models. Mean estimates and credible
intervals for hazard ratios for indacaterol versus placebo are based on a small
number of events; estimates may change when the results of future studies are
included. These results were maintained across a variety of assumptions and
provide evidence that SFC and indacaterol may lead to improved survival in COPD
patients.
CONCLUSION: Results of an NMA of COPD treatments suggest that SFC and indacaterol
may reduce mortality. Further research is warranted to strengthen this
conclusion.

DOI: 10.1186/s12890-015-0138-4 
PMCID: PMC4642642
PMID: 26559138  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Pol Arch Med Wewn. 2015;125(11):859-66. Epub 2015 Oct 30.

Current role of anticholinergic drugs in the treatment of asthma - key messages
for clinical practice.

Pizzichini MM, Kerstjens HA, Pizzichini E.

Erratum in
    Pol Arch Med Wewn. 2015;125(12):954.

Anticholinergic bronchodilators such as tiotropium, a potent long-acting drug,
are central to the symptomatic treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease. Its role in asthma treatment has been recently investigated. This review
critically evaluates documented evidence of clinical trials and assesses the
therapeutic implications of anticholinergic drugs in asthma management. So far,
the results of 10 Phases II and III randomized controlled trials evaluating the
effect of adding tiotropium to the treatment of mild-to-moderate or severe asthma
have been published. These trials had a duration of 4 to 52 weeks and involved
3368 subjects with mild-to-moderate asthma and 1019 subjects with severe asthma
[corrected]. Also, 1 systematic review and 6 meta-analyses have appraised the
results of published and unpublished trials investigating the role of tiotropium 
in asthma. The results of the trials in mild to moderate asthma showed that
adding tiotropium to inhaled corticosteroids (ICSs) was not inferior to adding
long-acting β2-agonists (LABAs). In addition, the safety and efficacy of
tiotropium were similar to those of salmeterol. The results of studies on severe 
asthma showed that adding tiotropium to a treatment with high doses of an ICS
plus LABA results in further improvement in lung function, increases the time to 
the first severe exacerbation of asthma and to worsening of asthma, and improves 
asthma control. Except for dry mouth, the safety profile of tiotropium was
similar to placebo both in moderate and in severe asthma. Adding tiotropium to an
ICS or ICS plus LABA improves lung function, symptoms, and asthma control, and in
severe asthma, it increases the time to exacerbations, with good safety profile. 
The effect seems independent of baseline characteristics such as age, level of
bronchial obstruction, smoking status, allergic status, and bronchial
reversibility.


PMID: 26529261  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. BMJ Open. 2015 Oct 26;5(10):e009183. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2015-009183.

Comparative safety and effectiveness of long-acting inhaled agents for treating
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: a systematic review and network
meta-analysis.

Tricco AC(1), Strifler L(2), Veroniki AA(2), Yazdi F(3), Khan PA(2), Scott A(2), 
Ng C(2), Antony J(2), Mrklas K(4), D'Souza J(2), Cardoso R(2), Straus SE(5).

Author information: 
(1)Knowledge Translation Program, Li Ka Shing Knowledge Institute, St. Michael's 
Hospital, Toronto, Ontario, Canada Epidemiology Division, Dalla Lana School of
Public Health, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. (2)Knowledge
Translation Program, Li Ka Shing Knowledge Institute, St. Michael's Hospital,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada. (3)Ottawa Hospital Research Institute, Center for
Practice Changing Research Building, The Ottawa Hospital-General Campus, Ottawa, 
Ontario, Canada. (4)Knowledge Translation Program, Li Ka Shing Knowledge
Institute, St. Michael's Hospital, Toronto, Ontario, Canada Alberta Health
Services, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada. (5)Knowledge Translation Program, Li Ka
Shing Knowledge Institute, St. Michael's Hospital, Toronto, Ontario, Canada
Department of Geriatric Medicine, University of Toronto, 27 Kings College Circle,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

OBJECTIVE: To compare the safety and effectiveness of long-acting β-antagonists
(LABA), long-acting antimuscarinic agents (LAMA) and inhaled corticosteroids
(ICS) for managing chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
SETTING: Systematic review and network meta-analysis (NMA).
PARTICIPANTS: 208 randomised clinical trials (RCTs) including 134,692 adults with
COPD.
INTERVENTIONS: LABA, LAMA and/or ICS, alone or in combination, versus each other 
or placebo.
PRIMARY AND SECONDARY OUTCOMES: The proportion of patients with
moderate-to-severe exacerbations. The number of patients experiencing mortality, 
pneumonia, serious arrhythmia and cardiovascular-related mortality (CVM) were
secondary outcomes.
RESULTS: NMA was conducted including 20 RCTs for moderate-to-severe exacerbations
for 26,141 patients with an exacerbation in the past year. 32 treatments were
effective versus placebo including: tiotropium, budesonide/formoterol,
salmeterol, indacaterol, fluticasone/salmeterol, indacaterol/glycopyrronium,
tiotropium/fluticasone/salmeterol and tiotropium/budesonide/formoterol.
Tiotropium/budesonide/formoterol was most effective (99.2% probability of being
the most effective according to the Surface Under the Cumulative RAnking (SUCRA) 
curve). NMA was conducted on mortality (88 RCTs, 97 526 patients);
fluticasone/salmeterol was more effective in reducing mortality than placebo,
formoterol and fluticasone alone, and was the most effective (SUCRA=71%). NMA was
conducted on CVM (37 RCTs, 55,156 patients) and the following were safest:
salmeterol versus each OF placebo, tiotropium and tiotropium (Soft Mist Inhaler
(SMR)); fluticasone versus tiotropium (SMR); and salmeterol/fluticasone versus
tiotropium and tiotropium (SMR). Triamcinolone acetonide was the most harmful
(SUCRA=81%). NMA was conducted on pneumonia occurrence (54 RCTs, 61 551
patients). 24 treatments were more harmful, including 2 that increased risk of
pneumonia versus placebo; fluticasone and fluticasone/salmeterol. The most
harmful agent was fluticasone/salmeterol (SUCRA=89%). NMA was conducted for
arrhythmia; no statistically significant differences between agents were
identified.
CONCLUSIONS: Many inhaled agents are available for COPD, some are safer and more 
effective than others. Our results can be used by patients and physicians to
tailor administration of these agents.
PROTOCOL REGISTRATION NUMBER: PROSPERO # CRD42013006725.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://www.bmj.com/company/products-services/rights-and-licensing/

DOI: 10.1136/bmjopen-2015-009183 
PMCID: PMC4636655
PMID: 26503392  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Pulm Pharmacol Ther. 2015 Dec;35:28-33. doi: 10.1016/j.pupt.2015.10.005. Epub
2015 Oct 22.

A comparison of the efficacy of once-daily fluticasone furoate/vilanterole with
twice-daily fluticasone propionate/salmeterol in asthma-COPD overlap syndrome.

Ishiura Y(1), Fujimura M(2), Shiba Y(3), Ohkura N(4), Hara J(4), Kasahara K(4).

Author information: 
(1)Respiratory Medicine, Toyama City Hospital, Toyama, Japan. Electronic address:
ishiura-@p2322.nsk.ne.jp. (2)Respiratory Medicine, National Hospital Organization
Nanao Hospital, Nanao, Japan. (3)Respiratory Medicine, Toyama City Hospital,
Toyama, Japan. (4)Respiratory Medicine, Kanazawa University Hospital, Kanazawa,
Japan.

BACKGROUND: Asthma-chronic obstructive pulmonary disease overlap syndrome (ACOS) 
is important because patients with ACOS have significantly worse outcomes
compared with those with asthma or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)
alone. Inhaled corticosteroids (ICS), together with a long-acting β2 agonist
(LABA), are recommended, but no therapeutic studies for ACOS have been conducted.
Recently, fluticasone furoate/vilanterole (FF/VI) has been approved as the first 
once-daily ICS/LABA combination therapy for asthma and COPD.
METHODS: A 12-week, randomized, open-label cross-over study was conducted in 16
patients with ACOS to compare the effectiveness of once-daily FF/VI 200/25 μg vs.
twice-daily fluticasone propionate/salmeterol (FP/SAL) 500/50 μg. The study
period included a 4-week run-in, the first 4-week treatment, and the second
4-week treatment. Respiratory functions, including forced expiratory volume in
1 s (FEV1) and respiratory impedance using the forced oscillation technique
(FOT), were measured, as was fractional exhaled nitric oxide (FeNO). A COPD
assessment test (CAT) scores and asthma control test (ACT) scores were recorded
0, 4, and 8 weeks after randomization.
RESULTS: The mean values for the FEV1 were 1.33 (±0.29) L in the run-in period,
1.38 (±0.39) L after the FP/SAL treatment period, and 1.47 (±0.38) L after the
FF/VI treatment period. The FEV1 value after the FF/VI treatment was
significantly greater than the value after the run-in period (p < 0.01). FOT
parameters, FeNO levels, CAT scores, ACT scores, and other blood tests were not
significantly different during the run-in period, the FP/SAL treatment period,
and the FF/VI treatment period.
CONCLUSIONS: FF/VI, the first once-daily ICS/LABA, can provide substantial
improvement in lung functions, indicating that FF/VI should be considered for the
regular treatment of ACOS.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pupt.2015.10.005 
PMID: 26497109  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2015 Oct 22;(10):CD008989. doi:
10.1002/14651858.CD008989.pub3.

Long-acting beta2-agonist in addition to tiotropium versus either tiotropium or
long-acting beta2-agonist alone for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Farne HA(1), Cates CJ.

Author information: 
(1)National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College London, London, UK.

Update of
    Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2012;(4):CD008989.

BACKGROUND: Long-acting bronchodilators, comprising long-acting beta2-agonists
(LABA) and long-acting anti-muscarinic agents (LAMA, principally tiotropium), are
commonly used for managing persistent symptoms of chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD). Combining these treatments, which have different mechanisms of
action, may be more effective than the individual components. However, the
benefits and risks of combining tiotropium and LABAs for the treatment of COPD
are unclear.
OBJECTIVES: To compare the relative effects on markers of quality of life,
exacerbations, symptoms, lung function and serious adverse events in people with 
COPD randomised to LABA plus tiotropium versus tiotropium alone; or LABA plus
tiotropium versus LABA alone.
SEARCH METHODS: We searched the Cochrane Airways Group Specialised Register of
trials and ClinicalTrials.gov up to July 2015.
SELECTION CRITERIA: We included parallel-group, randomised controlled trials of
three months or longer comparing treatment with tiotropium in addition to LABA
against tiotropium or LABA alone for people with COPD.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Two review authors independently assessed trials
for inclusion and then extracted data on trial quality and the outcome results.
We contacted study authors for additional information. We collected information
on adverse effects from the trials.
MAIN RESULTS: This review included 10 trials on 10,894 participants, mostly
recruiting participants with moderate or severe COPD. All of the trials compared 
tiotropium in addition to LABA to tiotropium alone, and four trials additionally 
compared LAMA plus LABA with LABA alone. Four studies used the LABA olodaterol,
three used indacaterol, two used formoterol, and one used salmeterol.Compared to 
tiotropium alone, treatment with tiotropium plus LABA resulted in a slightly
larger improvement in mean health-related quality of life (St George's
Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ) (mean difference (MD) -1.34, 95% confidence
interval (CI) -1.87 to -0.80; 6709 participants; 5 studies). The MD was smaller
than the four units that is considered clinically important, but a responder
analysis indicated that 7% more participants receiving tiotropium plus LABA had a
noticeable benefit (greater than four units) from treatment in comparison to
tiotropium alone. In the control arm in one study, which was tiotropium alone,
the SGRQ improved by falling 4.5 units from baseline and with tiotropium plus
LABA the improvement was a fall of a further 1.3 units (on average). Most of the 
data came from studies using olodaterol. High withdrawal rates in the trials
increased the uncertainty in this result, and the GRADE assessment for this
outcome was therefore moderate. There were no significant differences in the
other primary outcomes (hospital admission or mortality).The secondary outcome of
pre-bronchodilator forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV1) showed a small
mean increase with the addition of LABA over the control arm (MD 0.06, 95% CI
0.05 to 0.07; 9573 participants; 10 studies), which showed a change from baseline
ranging from 0.03 L to 0.13 L with tiotropium alone. None of the other secondary 
outcomes (exacerbations, symptom scores, serious adverse events, and withdrawals)
showed any statistically significant differences between the groups. There was
moderate heterogeneity for both exacerbations and withdrawals.This review
included data on four LABAs: two administered twice daily (salmeterol,
formoterol) and two once daily (indacaterol, olodaterol). The results were
largely from studies of olodaterol and there was insufficient information to
assess whether the other LABAs were equivalent to olodaterol or each
other.Comparing LABA plus tiotropium treatment with LABA alone, there was a small
but significant improvement in SGRQ (MD -1.25, 95% CI -2.14 to -0.37; 3378
participants; 4 studies). The data came mostly from studies using olodaterol and,
although the difference was smaller than four units, this still represented an
increase of 10 people with a clinically important improvement for 100 treated.
There was also an improvement in FEV1 (MD 0.07, 95% CI 0.06 to 0.09; 3513
participants; 4 studies), and in addition an improvement in exacerbation rates
(odds ratio (OR) 0.80, 95% CI 0.69 to 0.93; 3514 participants; 3 studies).
AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: The results from this review indicated a small mean
improvement in health-related quality of life and FEV1 for participants on a
combination of tiotropium and LABA compared to either agent alone, and this
translated into a small increase in the number of responders on combination
treatment. In addition, adding tiotropium to LABA reduced exacerbations, although
adding LABA to tiotropium did not. Hospital admission and mortality were not
altered by adding LABA to tiotropium, although there may not be enough data.
While it is possible that this is affected by higher attrition in the tiotropium 
group, one would expect that participants withdrawn from the study would have had
less favourable outcomes; this means that the expected direction of attrition
bias would be to reduce the estimated benefit of the combination treatment. The
results were largely from studies of olodaterol and there was insufficient
information to assess whether the other LABAs were equivalent to olodaterol or
each other.

DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD008989.pub3 
PMID: 26490945  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. COPD. 2016;13(1):1-10. doi: 10.3109/15412555.2015.1034256. Epub 2015 Oct 9.

Efficacy and Safety of Umeclidinium Added to Fluticasone Propionate/Salmeterol in
Patients with COPD: Results of Two Randomized, Double-Blind Studies.

Siler TM(1), Kerwin E(2), Singletary K(3), Brooks J(4), Church A(3).

Author information: 
(1)a Midwest Chest Consultants, PC, St. Charles , Missouri , USA. (2)b Clinical
Research Institute of Southern Oregon , Medford , Oregon , USA. (3)c GSK,
Respiratory and Immuno-Inflammation, Research Triangle Park , North Carolina ,
USA. (4)d GSK, Respiratory Medicines Development Centre, Stockley Park , Uxbridge
, United Kingdom.

Combinations of drugs with distinct and complementary mechanisms of action may
offer improved efficacy in the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD). In two 12-week, double-blind, parallel-group studies, patients with COPD 
were randomized 1:1:1 to once-daily umeclidinium (UMEC; 62.5 μg and 125 μg) or
placebo (PBO), added to twice-daily fluticasone propionate/salmeterol (FP/SAL;
250/50 μg). In both studies, the primary efficacy measure was trough forced
expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1) at Day 85. Secondary endpoints were
weighted-mean (WM) FEV1 over 0-6 hours post-dose (Day 84) and rescue albuterol
use. Health-related quality of life outcomes (St. George's Respiratory
Questionnaire [SGRQ] and COPD assessment test [CAT]) were also examined. Safety
was assessed throughout. Both UMEC+FP/SAL doses provided statistically
significant improvements in trough FEV1 (Day 85: 0.127-0.148 L) versus
PBO+FP/SAL. Similarly, both UMEC+FP/SAL doses provided statistically-significant 
improvements in 0-6 hours post-dose WM FEV1 versus PBO+FP/SAL (Day 84:
0.144-0.165 L). Rescue use over Weeks 1-12 decreased with UMEC+FP/SAL in both
studies versus PBO+FP/SAL (Study 1, 0.3 puffs/day [both doses]; Study 2, 0.5
puffs/day [UMEC 125+FP/SAL]). Decreases from baseline in CAT score were generally
larger for both doses of UMEC+FP/SAL versus PBO+FP/SAL (except for Day 84 Study
2). In Study 1, no differences in SGRQ score were observed between UMEC+FP/SAL
and PBO+FP/SAL; however, in Study 2, statistically significant improvements were 
observed with UMEC 62.5+FP/SAL (Day 28) and UMEC 125+FP/SAL (Days 28 and 84)
versus PBO+FP/SAL. The incidence of on-treatment adverse events across all
treatment groups was 37-41% in Study 1 and 36-38% in Study 2. Overall, these data
indicate that the combination of UMEC+FP/SAL can provide additional benefits over
FP/SAL alone in patients with COPD.

DOI: 10.3109/15412555.2015.1034256 
PMID: 26451734  [PubMed - in process]


29. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2015 Sep 9;10:1863-81. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S87082.
eCollection 2015.

Comparative efficacy of combination bronchodilator therapies in COPD: a network
meta-analysis.

Huisman EL(1), Cockle SM(2), Ismaila AS(3), Karabis A(1), Punekar YS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Mapi Group, Real World Strategy and Analytics and Strategic Market Access,
Houten, the Netherlands. (2)Value Evidence and Outcomes, GlaxoSmithKline,
Uxbridge, UK. (3)Value Evidence and Outcomes, GlaxoSmithKline R&D, Research
Triangle Park, NC, USA ; Clinical Epidemiology and Biostatistics, McMaster
University, Hamilton, ON, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Several new fixed-dose combination bronchodilators have been recently
launched, and assessing their efficacy relative to each other, and with open dual
combinations is desirable. This network meta-analysis (NMA) assessed the efficacy
of umeclidinium and vilanterol (UMEC/VI) with that of available dual
bronchodilators in single/separate inhalers.
METHODS: A systematic literature review identified randomized controlled trials
of ≥10 weeks among chronic obstructive pulmonary disease patients (≥40 years),
assessing the efficacy of combination bronchodilators in single or separate
inhalers. Comparative assessment was conducted on change from baseline in trough 
forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1), St George's Respiratory
Questionnaire (SGRQ) total scores, transitional dyspnea index (TDI) focal scores,
and rescue medication use at 12 weeks and 24 weeks using an NMA within a Bayesian
framework.
RESULTS: A systematic literature review identified 77 articles of 26 trials
comparing UMEC/VI, indacaterol/glycopyrronium (QVA149), formoterol plus
tiotropium (TIO) 18 μg, salmeterol plus TIO, or indacaterol plus TIO, with TIO
and placebo as common comparators at 12 weeks and approximately 24 weeks. The NMA
showed that at 24 weeks, efficacy of UMEC/VI was not significantly different
compared with QVA149 on trough FEV1 (14.1 mL [95% credible interval: -14.2,
42.3]), SGRQ total score (0.18 [-1.28, 1.63]), TDI focal score (-0.30 [-0.73,
0.13]), and rescue medication use (0.02 [-0.27, 0.32]); compared with salmeterol 
plus TIO on trough FEV1 (67.4 mL [-25.3, 159.4]), SGRQ total score (-0.11 [-1.84,
1.61]), and TDI focal score (0.58 [-0.33, 1.50]); and compared with formoterol
plus TIO 18 μg on SGRQ total score (-0.68 [-1.77, 0.39]). Results at week 12 were
consistent with week 24 outcomes. Due to lack of availability of evidence, no
comparison was made with formoterol plus TIO on FEV1 or TDI at 24 weeks.
CONCLUSION: UMEC/VI has comparable efficacy to other dual-bronchodilator
combinations on available efficacy endpoints.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S87082 
PMCID: PMC4573199
PMID: 26392761  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. PLoS One. 2015 Sep 17;10(9):e0137904. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0137904.
eCollection 2015.

Inhaled Long-Acting β2-Agonists Do Not Increase Fatal Cardiovascular Adverse
Events in COPD: A Meta-Analysis.

Xia N(1), Wang H(2), Nie X(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Diseases, Xuanwu Hospital, Capital Medical
University, Beijing, China. (2)Department of Cardiology, Fuwai Hospital, National
Center for Cardiovascular Diseases, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and
Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, China.

BACKGROUND: The cardiovascular safety of inhaled long-acting β2-agonists (LABAs) 
in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a controversial 
problem. Certain studies have suggested that inhaled LABAs lead to an increased
risk of cardiovascular events in patients with COPD. This meta-analysis aimed to 
assess the cardiovascular safety of inhaled LABAs in COPD.
METHODS: A meta-analysis of randomized, double-blind, parallel-group,
placebo-controlled trials for LABA treatment of COPD with at least 3 months of
follow-up was performed. The fixed-effects model was used to evaluate the effects
of LABAs on fatal cardiovascular adverse events. Adverse events were collected
for each trial, and the relative risk (RR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI) for 
LABA/placebo were estimated.
RESULTS: There were 24 trials included in this meta-analysis. Compared with
placebo, inhaled LABAs significantly decreased fatal cardiovascular adverse
events in COPD patients (RR 0.65, 95% CI 0.50 to 0.86, P = 0.002). In sensitivity
analysis, there was still no increased risk of fatal cardiovascular events (RR
0.68, 95%CI 0.46 to 1.01, P = 0.06) after excluding the trial with the largest
weight. Among the different types of LABAs, only salmeterol had a significant
effect (RR 0.64, 95% CI 0.46 to 0.90). In subgroup analyses, inhaled LABAs were
able to significantly decrease fatal cardiovascular events in long-term trials
(RR 0.64, 95% CI 0.47 to 0.87) and in trials with severe COPD patients (RR 0.69, 
95% CI 0.50 to 0.96).
CONCLUSION: Inhaled LABAs do not increase the risk of fatal cardiovascular events
in COPD patients.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0137904 
PMCID: PMC4574772
PMID: 26378450  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Genet Test Mol Biomarkers. 2015 Oct;19(10):566-72. doi: 10.1089/gtmb.2015.0108.
Epub 2015 Sep 1.

Impact of ABCB1 single-nucleotide polymorphisms on treatment outcomes with
salmeterol/fluticasone combination therapy for stable chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease.

Wang XW(1), Zhang YL(2), Xiong Y(3).

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Respiratory Diseases, Hubei Zhongshan Hospital , Wuhan,
People's Republic of China . (2)2 Department of Internal Medicine, Wuhan
Institute of Tuberculosis Prevention , Wuhan, People's Republic of China . (3)3
Department of Laboratory, Wuhan Union Hospital , Wuhan, People's Republic of
China .

OBJECTIVES: To investigate the relationship between ABCB1 single-nucleotide
polymorphisms and the efficacy of salmeterol/fluticasone combination (SFC)
inhalation therapy for stable chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) in a
Chinese Han population.
METHODS: A total of 362 patients with stable COPD were recruited between July
2012 and March 2014. Based on the therapeutic effects of lung function
improvement and COPD Assessment Test (CAT) scores, all patients were either
placed into the effective group (n = 138) or the ineffective group (n = 224).
Three common polymorphisms (rs1045642C > T, rs1128503C > T, and rs1202184A > G)
in the ABCB1 gene were analyzed by polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment
length polymorphism in these patients. All data were analyzed by SPSS version
18.0 software.
RESULTS: The genotype and allele frequencies of the ABCB1 rs1045642C > T
polymorphic locus were significantly different between the effective group and
the ineffective group under the codominant, recessive, and allele models (all
p < 0.05). Haplotype analysis of ABCB1 indicated that CTA
(rs1045642C-rs1128503T-rs1202184A) haplotype frequencies in the effective group
were significantly lower than the ineffective group (p = 0.022), but TCG
(rs1045642T-rs1128503C-rs1202184G) haplotype frequencies in the effective group
were significantly higher than the ineffective group (p = 0.048). Logistic
regression analysis showed that smoking history and rs1045642 CT + CC/TT may be
correlated with the efficacy of SFC inhalation therapy in stable COPD patients.
CONCLUSION: ABCB1 rs1045642C > T polymorphism and CTA/TCG haplotypes, as well as 
smoking history may influence the efficacy of SFC inhalation therapy in stable
COPD patients in the Chinese Han population.

DOI: 10.1089/gtmb.2015.0108 
PMID: 26327575  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Breathe (Sheff). 2015 Mar;11(1):81-2. doi: 10.1183/20734735.111215.

Hot topics from the Assemblies.

[No authors listed]

INSTEAD: a randomised switch trial of indacaterol versus salmeterol/fluticasone
in moderate COPD Authors: Rossi A, van der Molen T, Ricardo del Olmo, et al. Eur 
Respir J 2014; 44: 6, 1548-1556 SUMMARY: Inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) remain a
highly controversial treatment for stable chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD). Data linking high-dose ICS with complications, such as pneumonia and
fractures, has necessitated a re-evaluation of their role in COPD management.
Guidelines currently suggest ICS for patients with a forced expiratory volume in 
1 s (FEV1) <50% predicted (or <60% in some regions) and a history of
exacerbations. Nevertheless, it is well known that ICS and combination
ICS/long-acting β-agonist (LABA) treatments are commonly used outside these
groups. In view of the increasingly recognised dangers of ICS treatment, data
demonstrating the safety of discontinuing ICS treatment is welcome.

DOI: 10.1183/20734735.111215 
PMCID: PMC4487384
PMID: 26306109  [PubMed]


33. BMC Pulm Med. 2015 Aug 19;15:91. doi: 10.1186/s12890-015-0092-1.

Umeclidinium/vilanterol versus fluticasone propionate/salmeterol in COPD: a
randomised trial.

Singh D(1), Worsley S(2), Zhu CQ(3), Hardaker L(4), Church A(5).

Author information: 
(1)University of Manchester, Medicines Evaluation Unit, Langley Building,
University Hospital of South Manchester Foundations Trust, Southmoor Road,
Manchester, M23 9QZ, UK. dsingh@meu.org.uk. (2)Respiratory Medicines Development 
Centre, GSK, London, UK. sally.d.worsley@gsk.com. (3)Quantitative Sciences
Division, GSK, London, UK. chang-qing.2.zhu@gsk.com. (4)Global Clinical Safety
and Pharmacovigilance, GSK, London, UK. liz.x.hardaker@gsk.com. (5)Respiratory
Medicines Development Center, GSK, Research Triangle Park, North Carolina, USA.
alison.x.church@gsk.com.

BACKGROUND: Umeclidinium (UMEC; long-acting muscarinic antagonist) plus
vilanterol (VI; long-acting beta2 agonist [LABA]) and the LABA/inhaled
corticosteroid fluticasone propionate/salmeterol (FP/SAL) are approved
maintenance treatments for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). This
12-week, multicentre, double-blind, parallel-group, double-dummy study compared
the efficacy and safety of these treatments in symptomatic patients with
moderate-to-severe COPD with no exacerbations in the year prior to enrolment.
METHODS: Patients (n = 717) were randomised 1:1 to once-daily UMEC/VI 62.5/25 mcg
or twice-daily FP/SAL 500/50 mcg. Endpoints included 0-24 h weighted mean (wm)
forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1) (Day 84; primary), trough FEV1 (Day 85;
secondary), other lung function endpoints, symptoms, quality of life (QoL) and
safety.
RESULTS: Improvements with UMEC/VI versus FP/SAL were 0.080 L (95 % confidence
interval: 0.046-0.113; wmFEV1) and 0.090 L (0.055-0.125; trough FEV1) (both
p < 0.001). UMEC/VI statistically significantly improved all other lung function 
measures versus FP/SAL. Both treatments demonstrated a clinically meaningful
improvement in symptoms (Transition Dyspnoea Index ≥1 unit) and QoL (St George's 
Respiratory Questionnaire Total score ≥4 unit decrease from baseline) over 12
weeks. The incidence of adverse events was 28 % (UMEC/VI) and 29 % (FP/SAL);
nasopharyngitis and headache were most common.
CONCLUSIONS: Once-daily UMEC/VI 62.5/25 mcg over 12 weeks resulted in significant
and sustained improvements in lung function versus twice-daily FP/SAL 500/50 mcg 
in patients with moderate-to-severe COPD and with no exacerbations in the year
prior to enrolment.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: NCT01822899 Registration date: March 28, 2013.

DOI: 10.1186/s12890-015-0092-1 
PMCID: PMC4545560
PMID: 26286141  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Perspect Clin Res. 2015 Jul-Sep;6(3):150-8. doi: 10.4103/2229-3485.159940.

Cost-effectiveness analysis of three different combinations of inhalers for
severe and very severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease patients at a
tertiary care teaching hospital of South India.

Altaf M(1), Zubedi AM(1), Nazneen F(1), Kareemulla S(1), Ali SA(1), Aleemuddin
NM(2), Hannan Hazari MA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy Practice and PharmD, Deccan School of Pharmacy,
Jawaharlal Nehru Technological University, Hyderabad, Telangana, India.
(2)Department of Pulmonology, Deccan College of Medical Sciences, Hyderabad,
Telangana, India. (3)Department of Physiology, Deccan College of Medical
Sciences, Hyderabad, Telangana, India.

BACKGROUND: This study aims at simplifying the practical patient management and
offers some general indications for pharmacotherapeutic choice by the
implementation of (Global Initiative for Chronic Lung Disease) guidelines. This
study was designed to evaluate the clinical and economic consequences of
salmeterol/fluticasone (SF), formoterol/budesonide (FB), and
formoterol/fluticasone (FF) in severe and very severe chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD) patients.
OBJECTIVES: The aim was to find out the most cost-effective drug combination
between the three combinations (SF/FB/FF) in COPD patients.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A prospective observational comparative study
(cost-effectiveness analysis), in which 90 severe (30 ≤ forced expiratory volume 
in 1 s [FEV1] <50% predicted) and very severe (FEV1 < 30% predicted) COPD
patients (outpatients/inpatients) who are prescribed with any one of the
following combinations (SF/FB/FF) were selected. In our study, we have divided 90
COPD patients into three groups (Group I, Group II, and Group III) each group
consisting of 30 patients. Group I was prescribed with medication SF, Group II
with medication FB, and Group III with medication FF. We used five different
parameters such as spirometry test (mean FEV1 initial and final visit), number of
symptom-free days (SFDs), number of moderate and severe exacerbations, Number of 
days of hospitalization and direct, indirect, and total cost to assess the
cost-effectiveness of SF/FB/FF. Comparison of cost and effects was done during
the period of 6 months of using SF/FB/FF.
RESULTS: The average FEV1 for Group I, Group II, and Group III subjects at
initial visit was 33.47%, 33.73%, and 33.20% and was increased to 36.60%, 35.8%, 
and 33.4%, respectively. A 3% increment in FEV1 was reported for Group I subjects
(SF) and was highly significant statistically (t = -8.833, P = 0.000) at 95% CI. 
For Group II subjects (FB), a 2% increment in FEV1 was reported and was highly
significant statistically (t = -9.001, P = 0.000) at 95% CI. For Group III (FF)
subjects 0.2% increment in FEV1. The overall mean total cost for Group I, Group
II, and Group III subjects during the 6 months period was found to be Rs.
29,725/-, Rs. 32,602/- and Rs. 37,155/-. Incremental cost-effectiveness of FB
versus SF was Rs. 37,781/- per avoided exacerbation and Rs. 661/-per SFD.
CONCLUSION: This study highlights the favorable therapeutic performance of
combined inhaled bronchodilators and corticosteroids (SF/FB/FF), thus suggesting 
that healthcare costs would be also affected positively. Results from our study
showed that SF and FB were the most effective strategies in the treatment of
COPD, with a slight clinical superiority of SF. The FF strategy was not much
effective (i.e. associated with fewer outcomes and higher costs).

DOI: 10.4103/2229-3485.159940 
PMCID: PMC4504057
PMID: 26229751  [PubMed]


35. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2015 Jul 23;10:1383-92. doi:
10.2147/COPD.S55488. eCollection 2015.

Clinical role of dual bronchodilation with an indacaterol-glycopyrronium
combination in the management of COPD: its impact on patient-related outcomes and
quality of life.

Rossi A(1), Zanardi E(2), Poletti V(3), Cazzola M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary Unit, University of Verona, Verona, Italy. (2)Department of
Respiratory and General Rehabilitation, ULSS 20, Verona, Italy. (3)Pulmonary
Unit, GB Morgani Hospital, AUSL 20, Forli, Italy. (4)Pulmonary Unit, University
of Rome, Tor Vergata, Italy.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is the result of persistent and
progressive pathologic abnormalities in the small airways, most often associated 
with alveolar loss. Smoking cessation is the most effective intervention to slow 
down the progression of COPD. Long-acting inhaled bronchodilators are prescribed 
for the symptomatic relief at any stage of disease severity. For patients whose
COPD cannot be not sufficiently controlled with long-acting bronchodilator
monotherapy, international guidelines suggest the possibility of associating a
long-acting beta2 agonist (LABA) with a long-acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA),
ie, dual bronchodilation. This is not a new concept as the combination of
short-acting agents has been popular in the past. In recent years, several
fixed-dose combinations containing a LAMA and a LABA in a single inhaler have
been approved by regulatory authorities in several countries. Among the new
LAMA/LABA combinations, the fixed-dose combination of indacaterol 110
µg/glycopyrronium 50 µg (QVA149) has been shown in a series of clinical trials to
be as safe as the single components and placebo, and more effective than placebo 
and the single components with regard to lung function, symptoms, and
patient-oriented outcomes. Furthermore, QVA149 achieved better bronchodilation
than salmeterol 50 µg/fluticasone 500 µg twice daily. Compared with tiotropium, a
well-recognized treatment for COPD, the percentage of patients that exceed the
minimal clinical important difference for dyspnea and health-related quality of
life measurements was superior with QVA149. Other patient-oriented outcomes, such
as daily symptoms, night-time awakening, and use of rescue medication
consistently favored QVA149. Finally, QVA149 was significantly superior to LAMAs 
for reducing all types of exacerbation. In conclusion, several years after
introduction of dual bronchodilation, the fixed-dose combination of indacaterol
110 µg/glycopyrronium 50 µg in a single inhaler for once-daily administration via
the Breezhaler device (QVA149) has been demonstrated to be a safe and effective
treatment for COPD patients.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S55488 
PMCID: PMC4516211
PMID: 26229457  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Eur J Pharm Biopharm. 2015 Oct;96:132-42. doi: 10.1016/j.ejpb.2015.07.017. Epub
2015 Jul 26.

Formulation of a novel fixed dose combination of salmeterol xinafoate and
mometasone furoate for inhaled drug delivery.

Liu S(1), Watts AB(2), Du J(3), Bui A(3), Hengsawas S(3), Peters JI(4), Williams 
RO 3rd(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Shandong University School of Medicine, 44# Wenhua
Xi Road, Jinan, Shandong 250012, People's Republic of China; Division of
Pharmaceutics, College of Pharmacy, The University of Texas at Austin, 1
University Station A1929, Austin, TX 78712, USA. (2)Drug Dynamics Institute,
College of Pharmacy, The University of Texas at Austin, 1 University Station
A1902, Austin, TX 78712, USA. (3)Division of Pharmaceutics, College of Pharmacy, 
The University of Texas at Austin, 1 University Station A1929, Austin, TX 78712, 
USA. (4)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care, University of Texas Health
Science Center, San Antonio, TX 78229, USA. (5)Division of Pharmaceutics, College
of Pharmacy, The University of Texas at Austin, 1 University Station A1929,
Austin, TX 78712, USA. Electronic address: bill.williams@austin.utexas.edu.

Co-administration of an inhaled corticosteroid and long acting beta agonist for
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease has reduced mortality compared to either
drug alone. This combination reduces exacerbations, hospitalization, emergency
department visits and health care costs. A novel fixed-dose combination of the
long acting beta-2 agonist salmeterol xinafoate (SX) and the corticosteroid
mometasone furoate (MF) were prepared in a composite particle formulation as
brittle matrix powder (BMP) and investigated for suitability as an inhaled
combination product. In this study, BMP fixed dose combinations of SX and MF with
or without stabilizing excipients (lactose, mannitol, glycine and trehalose) were
prepared and characterized with respect to their thermal properties, morphology, 
aerodynamic performance and physical stability. BMP combination formulations of
SX and MF exhibited improved aerodynamic properties when delivered by dry powder 
inhalation as compared to the micronized blends of the same substances.
Aerodynamic evaluation was carried out by next generation pharmaceutical impactor
(NGI) with a marketed DPI device. Results demonstrated that co-deposition
occurred when SX and MF were formulated together as composite particles in a BMP,
while physical blends resulted in inconsistent deposition and dose uniformity. As
a result of the bottom-up particle engineering approach, combination BMP
formulations allow for dual API composite formulations to be dispersed as
aerosolized particles. Aerosolized BMP combination formulations resulted in
delivered dose uniformity and co-deposition of each API. Further, an
excipient-free formulation, BMP SXMF, delivered approximately 50% of the loaded
dose in the respirable range and demonstrated stability at ambient conditions for
6months. Single dose 24-h pharmacokinetic studies in rats demonstrated that lung 
tissue deposition and blood circulation (AUC0-24h) of two APIs were higher for
the BMP combination group exhibiting a significantly higher lung concentration of
drugs than for the crystalline physical blend. While high system drug levels are 
generally undesirable in lung targeted therapies, high blood levels in this
rodent study could be indicative of increased pulmonary tissue exposure using BMP
formulations.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejpb.2015.07.017 
PMID: 26220015  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Expert Opin Pharmacother. 2015;16(13):2009-21. doi:
10.1517/14656566.2015.1070826. Epub 2015 Jul 20.

Pharmacological basis and scientific rationale underlying the targeted use of
inhaled corticosteroid/long-acting β2-adrenergic agonist combinations in chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease treatment.

Pelaia G(1), Muzzio CC, Vatrella A, Maselli R, Magnoni MS, Rizzi A.

Author information: 
(1)University 'Magna Græcia' of Catanzaro, Department of Medical and Surgical
Sciences, Section of Respiratory Diseases , Catanzaro , Italy.

INTRODUCTION: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a complex
respiratory disorder, whose medical and socioeconomic burden as one of the main
causes of morbidity and mortality is increasing worldwide. COPD pathophysiology
includes chronic airway/lung inflammation and progressive airflow limitation.
Therefore, anti-inflammatory and bronchodilator agents are key players in COPD
treatment.
AREAS COVERED: This review article discusses the complementary molecular
interactions connecting the respective mechanisms of action of inhaled
corticosteroids (ICS) and long-acting β2-adrenergic agonists (LABAs). Moreover,
attention is also focused on clinical trials, which have shown that ICS/LABA
combinations are very effective in improving COPD symptoms and lung function,
being also able to significantly reduce disease exacerbations.
EXPERT OPINION: In selected subgroups of COPD patients, ICS/LABA combinations
represent a very useful therapeutic approach for this widespread chronic
respiratory disease. In addition to the well-known fixed-dose drug associations
such as fluticasone propionate/salmeterol xinafoate and budesonide/formoterol
fumarate, other newly developed ICS/LABA combinations are currently emerging as
very interesting pharmacological options for COPD treatment.

DOI: 10.1517/14656566.2015.1070826 
PMID: 26194120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Adv Ther. 2015 Jun;32(6):537-47. doi: 10.1007/s12325-015-0216-2. Epub 2015 Jun
23.

Tiotropium and Salmeterol in COPD Patients at Risk of Exacerbations: A Post Hoc
Analysis from POET-COPD(®).

Vogelmeier CF(1), Asijee GM, Kupas K, Beeh KM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division for Pulmonary Diseases, Hospital of 
the University of Giessen and Marburg, Marburg, Germany,
claus.vogelmeier@med.uni-marburg.de.

INTRODUCTION: Among patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD),
the frequency and severity of past exacerbations potentiates future events. The
impact of current therapies on exacerbation frequency and severity in patients
with different exacerbation risks is not well known.
METHODS: A post hoc analysis of patients at low (≤1 exacerbation [oral
steroids/antibiotics requirement] and no COPD-related hospitalization in the year
preceding trial entry) or high (≥2 exacerbations [oral steroids/antibiotics
requirement] or ≥1 COPD-related hospitalization[s] in the year preceding trial
entry) exacerbation risk, from the Prevention of Exacerbations with Tiotropium in
Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (POET-COPD(®)) database.
RESULTS: Compared with salmeterol, tiotropium significantly increased time to
first COPD exacerbation (hazard ratio 0.84; 95% confidence interval [CI]
0.76-0.92; p = 0.0002) and reduced the number of COPD exacerbations (rate ratio
0.90; 95% CI 0.81-0.99; p = 0.0383) in patients at high exacerbation risk. With
treatment, the risk of remaining in the high-risk exacerbator subgroup was
statistically lower with tiotropium versus salmeterol (risk ratio [RR] 0.89; 95% 
CI 0.80-1.00; p = 0.0478). For low-risk patients, time to first COPD exacerbation
and number of COPD exacerbations were numerically lower with tiotropium versus
salmeterol. With treatment, the risk of transitioning from a low to a high
exacerbation risk was lower with tiotropium versus salmeterol (RR 0.87; 95% CI
0.71-1.07; p = 0.1968).
DISCUSSION: This analysis confirms the higher efficacy of tiotropium versus
salmeterol in prolonging time to first COPD exacerbation and reducing number of
exacerbations in patients both at low and high exacerbation risk.
FUNDING: Boehringer Ingelheim and Pfizer.
CLINICAL TRIAL REGISTRATION NUMBER: ClinicalTrials.gov NCT00563381.

DOI: 10.1007/s12325-015-0216-2 
PMCID: PMC4487350
PMID: 26100349  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Ther Clin Risk Manag. 2015 Jun 2;11:889-99. doi: 10.2147/TCRM.S55116. eCollection
2015.

Fluticasone-formoterol: a systematic review of its potential role in the
treatment of asthma.

Prosser TR(1), Bollmeier SG(1).

Author information: 
(1)St Louis College of Pharmacy, St Louis, MO, USA.

BACKGROUND: The purpose of this systematic review is to summarize and evaluate
the available published data regarding the efficacy and safety of a combination
product containing fluticasone propionate/formoterol (FP-F) in order to establish
its potential role compared with other inhaled combination
corticosteroid/long-acting beta2 receptor agonists for the maintenance treatment 
of asthma.
METHODS: A PubMed and EMBASE search was conducted using the terms "fluticasone
propionate", "formoterol fumarate", "Flutiform(®)", and "asthma" in July 2014 to 
identify trials using this combination specifically for the treatment of asthma. 
Additional information was gathered from references cited in the identified
publications, the package insert, and the ClinicalTrials. gov registry. All
randomized controlled clinical trials for humans in asthma were evaluated for
inclusion. Data from animal trials, clinical trials for chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease, and non-English sources were excluded.
RESULTS: Seven short-term safety and efficacy trials of FP-F compared with its
individual components and two comparison trials of FP-F versus other combination 
products were identified. Generally, the incidence of drug-related adverse events
was low and consistent with previously reported drug class-related adverse events
(ie, pharyngitis, dysphonia, and headache). The combination of FP-F was shown to 
be noninferior to fluticasone propionate/salmeterol for improving predose forced 
expiratory volume at one second (FEV1) and 2 hours post dose FEV1. FP-F was also 
noninferior to budesonide/formoterol in improving predose FEV1. Other clinical
endpoints, including various symptom scores, asthma control, quality of life, and
subjects' assessment of the medications were not significantly different.
CONCLUSION: Poor asthma control is common. The data from short-term studies
indicate that this inhaled corticosteroid and long-acting beta2 receptor agonist 
combination product is non-inferior to similar combination products available. As
FP-F is available in different strengths, the corticosteroid dose can be titrated
without changing devices. A potential advantage is that those with good
technique, the same type of device could be used for both their controller and
rapid relief inhaler medicines. The choice of this combination versus other
similar products may be based primarily on cost.

DOI: 10.2147/TCRM.S55116 
PMCID: PMC4459636
PMID: 26082638  [PubMed]


40. Profiles Drug Subst Excip Relat Methodol. 2015;40:321-69. doi:
10.1016/bs.podrm.2015.02.002. Epub 2015 Apr 1.

Salmeterol Xinafoate.

Anwar MM(1), El-Haggar RS(2), Zaghary WA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Therapeutical Chemistry Department, National Research Centre, Dokki, Cairo,
Egypt. (2)Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, Faculty of Pharmacy, Helwan
University, Cairo, Egypt; Department of Medicinal Chemistry, Pharmacy Program,
Batterjee Medical College, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia. (3)Department of Pharmaceutical 
Chemistry, Faculty of Pharmacy, Helwan University, Cairo, Egypt; Department of
Pharmaceutical Chemistry, College of Pharmacy, King Saud University, Riyadh,
Saudi Arabia. Electronic address: wafaa.zaghary@pharm.helwan.edu.eg.

Salmeterol xinafoate is a potent and a long-acting β2-adrenoceptor agonist. It is
prescribed for the treatment of severe persistent asthma and chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease. Different methods were used to prepare (R)-(-)-salmeterol such
as: mixing a sample of 4-benzyloxy-3-hydroxymethyl-ω-bromoacetophenone with
sodium lauryl sulfate and the mixture was added to the microbial culture of
Rhodotorula rubra, treatment of p-hydroxyacetophenone with Eschenmoser's salt and
carbonate exchange resin followed by a sequence of supported reagents and
scavenging agents or via Rh-catalyzed asymmetric transfer hydrogenation. The
enantioselective synthesis of (S)-salmeterol was achieved via asymmetric
reduction of the azidoketone 4 by Pichia angusta yeast. Physical characteristics 
of salmeterol xinafoate were confirmed via: X-ray powder diffraction pattern,
thermal analysis and UV, vibrational, nuclear magnetic resonance, and mass
spectroscopical data. Initial improvement in asthma control may occur within 30
min following oral inhalation of salmeterol in fixed combination with fluticasone
propionate. Clinically important improvements are maintained for up to 12 h in
most patients. It is extensively metabolized in the liver by hydroxylation, thus 
increased plasma concentrations may occur in patients with hepatic impairment.

© 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/bs.podrm.2015.02.002 
PMID: 26051688  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Eur J Intern Med. 2015 Jul;26(6):379-84. doi: 10.1016/j.ejim.2015.05.001. Epub
2015 Jun 3.

Why use long acting bronchodilators in chronic obstructive lung diseases? An
extensive review on formoterol and salmeterol.

Santus P(1), Radovanovic D(1), Paggiaro P(2), Papi A(3), Sanduzzi A(4),
Scichilone N(5), Braido F(6).

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Scienze della Salute. Pneumologia Riabilitativa Fondazione
Salvatore Maugeri, Istituto Scientifico di Milano-IRCCS. Università degli Studi
di Milano, Italy. (2)Cardio-Thoracic and Vascular Department, University Hospital
of Pisa, Italy. (3)Respiratory Medicine, Department of Medical Sciences,
University of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy. (4)Section of Respiratory Diseases,
Department of Surgery and Clinical Medicine, University of Naples, Italy.
(5)Department of Internal Medicine, Section of Pulmonology (DIBIMIS), University 
of Palermo, Italy. (6)Allergy and Respiratory Diseases Clinic, DIMI, University
of Genoa, IRCS AOU San Martino-IST, Genoa, Italy. Electronic address:
fulvio.braido@unige.it.

Long-acting β2-adrenoceptor agonists, formoterol and salmeterol, represent a
milestone in the treatments of chronic obstructive lung diseases. Although no
specific indications concerning the choice of one molecule rather than another
are provided by asthma and COPD guidelines, they present different
pharmacological properties resulting in distinct clinical employment
possibilities. In particular, salmeterol has a low intrinsic efficacy working as 
a partial receptor agonist, while formoterol is a full agonist with high
intrinsic efficacy. From a clinical perspective, in the presence of low
β2-adrenoceptors availability, like in inflamed airways, a full agonist can
maintain its bronchodilatory and non-smooth muscle activities while a partial
agonist may be less effective. Furthermore, formoterol presents a faster onset of
action than salmeterol. This phenomenon, combined with the molecule safety
profile, leads to a prompt amelioration of the symptoms, and allows using this
drug in asthma as an "as needed" treatment in patients already on regular
treatment. The fast onset of action and the full agonism of formoterol need to be
considered in order to select the best pharmacological treatment of asthma and
COPD.

Copyright © 2015 European Federation of Internal Medicine. Published by Elsevier 
B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejim.2015.05.001 
PMID: 26049917  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2015 Jun 2;(6):CD011438. doi:
10.1002/14651858.CD011438.pub2.

Long-acting muscarinic antagonists (LAMA) added to inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) 
versus addition of long-acting beta2-agonists (LABA) for adults with asthma.

Kew KM(1), Evans DJ, Allison DE, Boyter AC.

Author information: 
(1)Population Health Research Institute, St George's, University of London,
Cranmer Terrace, London, UK, SW17 0RE.

BACKGROUND: Poorly controlled asthma and preventable exacerbations place a
significant strain on healthcare, often requiring additional medications,
hospital stays or treatment in the emergency department.Long-acting
beta2-agonists (LABA) are the preferred add-on treatment for adults with asthma
whose symptoms are not well controlled on inhaled corticosteroids (ICS), but have
important safety concerns in asthma. Long-acting muscarinic antagonists (LAMA)
have confirmed efficacy in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and are now
being considered as an alternative add-on therapy for people with uncontrolled
asthma.
OBJECTIVES: To assess the efficacy and safety of adding a LAMA to ICS compared
with adding a LABA for adults whose asthma is not well controlled on ICS alone.
SEARCH METHODS: We searched the Cochrane Airways Group's Specialised Register
(CAGR) from inception to April 2015, and imposed no restriction on language of
publication. We searched additional resources to pick up unpublished studies,
including ClinicalTrials.gov, World Health Organization trials portal, reference 
lists of primary studies and existing reviews, and manufacturers' trial
registries. The most recent search was conducted in April 2015.
SELECTION CRITERIA: We searched for parallel and cross-over RCTs in which adults 
whose asthma was not well controlled with ICS alone were randomised to receive
LAMA add-on or LABA add-on for at least 12 weeks.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Two review authors independently screened the
electronic and additional searches and extracted data from study reports. We used
Covidence for duplicate screening, extraction of study characteristics and
numerical data, and risk of bias ratings.The pre-specified primary outcomes were 
exacerbations requiring oral corticosteroids (OCS), quality of life and serious
adverse events.
MAIN RESULTS: We included eight studies meeting the inclusion criteria, but four 
double-blind, double-dummy studies of around 2000 people dominated the analyses. 
These four trials were between 14 and 24 weeks long, all comparing tiotropium
(usually Respimat) with salmeterol on top of medium doses of ICS.Studies
reporting exacerbations requiring OCS showed no difference between the two
add-ons, but our confidence in the effect was low due to inconsistency between
studies and because the confidence intervals (CI) included significant benefit of
either treatment (odds ratio (OR) 1.05, 95% CI 0.50 to 2.18; 1753 participants; 3
studies); three more people per 1000 might have an exacerbation on LAMA, but the 
CIs ranged from 29 fewer to 61 more. Imprecision was also an issue for serious
adverse events and exacerbations requiring hospital admission, rated low (serious
adverse events) and very low quality (exacerbations requiring hospital
admission), because there were so few events in the analyses.People taking LAMA
scored slightly worse on two scales measuring quality of life (Asthma Quality of 
Life Questionnaire; AQLQ) and asthma control (Asthma Control Questionnaire; ACQ);
the evidence was rated high quality but the effects were small and unlikely to be
clinically significant (AQLQ: mean difference (MD) -0.12, 95% CI -0.18 to -0.05; 
1745 participants; 1745; 4 studies; ACQ: MD 0.06, 95% CI 0.00 to 0.13; 1483
participants; 3 studies).There was some evidence to support small benefits of
LAMA over LABA on lung function, including on our pre-specified preferred measure
trough forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV1) (MD 0.05 L, 95% CI 0.01 to
0.09; 1745 participants, 4 studies). However, the effects on other measures
varied, and it is not clear whether the magnitude of the differences were
clinically significant.More people had adverse events on LAMA but the difference 
with LABA was not statistically significant.
AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: Direct evidence of LAMA versus LABA as add-on therapy is
currently limited to studies of less than six months comparing tiotropium
(Respimat) to salmeterol, and we do not know how they compare in terms of
exacerbations and serious adverse events. There was moderate quality evidence
that LAMAs show small benefits over LABA on some measures of lung function, and
high quality evidence that LABAs are slightly better for quality of life, but the
differences were all small. Given the much larger evidence base for LABA versus
placebo for people whose asthma is not well controlled on ICS, the current
evidence is not strong enough to say that LAMA can be substituted for LABA as
add-on therapy.The results of this review, alongside pending results from related
reviews assessing the use of LAMA in other clinical scenarios, will help to
define the role of these drugs in asthma and it is important that they be updated
as results from ongoing and planned trials emerge.

DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD011438.pub2 
PMID: 26031392  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Respir Med. 2015 Jul;109(7):870-81. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2015.04.018. Epub 2015
May 8.

Improvements in lung function with umeclidinium/vilanterol versus fluticasone
propionate/salmeterol in patients with moderate-to-severe COPD and infrequent
exacerbations.

Donohue JF(1), Worsley S(2), Zhu CQ(3), Hardaker L(4), Church A(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of North Carolina College of Medicine,
Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA. Electronic address: james_donohue@med.unc.edu. (2)The
Respiratory Medicines Development Centre, Stockley Park West, 1-3 Ironbridge
Road, Uxbridge, Middlesex UB11 1BT, UK. Electronic address:
sally.d.worsley@gsk.com. (3)The Quantitative Sciences Division, GSK, Stockley
Park West, 1-3 Ironbridge Road, Uxbridge, Middlesex UB11 1BT, UK. Electronic
address: chang-qing.2.zhu@gsk.com. (4)Global Clinical Safety and
Pharmacovigilance, GSK, Stockley Park West, 1-3 Ironbridge Road, Uxbridge,
Middlesex UB11 1BT, UK. Electronic address: liz.x.hardaker@gsk.com. (5)The
Respiratory Medicines Development Center, GSK, 5 Moore Drive, PO Box 13398,
Research Triangle Park, NC 27709-3398, USA. Electronic address:
alison.x.church@gsk.com.

Comment in
    Respir Med. 2016 Jan;110:79-80.
    Respir Med. 2016 Jan;110:81.

BACKGROUND: Umeclidinium (UMEC; long-acting muscarinic antagonist
[LAMA])/vilanterol (VI; long-acting beta2-agonist [LABA]) and fluticasone
propionate/salmeterol (FP/SAL) (inhaled corticosteroid/LABA) are approved
maintenance therapies for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Two
studies compared efficacy and safety of UMEC/VI with FP/SAL in patients with
moderate-to-severe COPD with no exacerbations in the previous year.
METHODS: In these 12-week, multicenter, double-blind, parallel-group,
double-dummy trials, randomized (1:1) patients received once-daily UMEC/VI
62.5/25 mcg or twice-daily FP/SAL 250/50 mcg (DB2114930 n = 353 and 353;
DB2114951 n = 349 and 348, respectively; intent-to-treat). Endpoints included
0-24 h weighted mean (wm) forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1) (Day 84;
primary), trough FEV1 (Day 85; secondary), other lung function endpoints,
dyspnea, quality of life (QoL) and safety.
RESULTS: UMEC/VI demonstrated statistically significant, clinically meaningful
improvements in lung function measures versus FP/SAL. For 0-24 h wmFEV1 (Day 84),
improvements with UMEC/VI versus FP/SAL were 74 mL (95% confidence interval [CI]:
38-110; DB2114930) and 101 mL (63-139; DB2114951) (both p < 0.001). Trough FEV1
improvements were 82 mL (45-119) and 98 mL (59-137) (both p < 0.001) for UMEC/VI 
versus FP/SAL, respectively. Both treatments demonstrated similar, clinically
meaningful improvements from baseline in dyspnea (Transition Dyspnea Index focal 
score >1 unit) and QoL (St George's Respiratory Questionnaire Total score >4-unit
decrease) in both studies with no statistical differences between treatments.
Adverse event rates were similar: 26 and 30% UMEC/VI; 27 and 31% FP/SAL.
CONCLUSIONS: Once-daily UMEC/VI 62.5/25 mcg over 12 weeks resulted in
statistically significant, clinically meaningful improvements in lung function
versus twice-daily FP/SAL 250/50 mcg in patients with moderate-to-severe COPD
with infrequent exacerbations. Both treatments improved dyspnea and QoL.
CLINICAL TRIAL REGISTRATION: DB2114930/NCT01817764; DB2114951/NCT01879410.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2015.04.018 
PMID: 26006754  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2015 Apr 21;10:813-22. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S56067.
eCollection 2015.

Role of combined indacaterol and glycopyrronium bromide (QVA149) for the
treatment of COPD in Japan.

Horita N(1), Kaneko T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonology, Yokohama City University Graduate School of
Medicine, Yokohama, Japan.

Once-daily dual-bronchodilator therapy with combined indacaterol and
glycopyrronium bromide in one device (Ultibro, Breezhaler), often called QVA149, 
was first approved in 2013 in Japan and Europe. As of November 2014, more than 40
countries had approved this medication except for the USA. This is the first dual
bronchodilator in one device. Now, the Breezhaler is the only device that can
provide long-acting muscarinic antagonist (glycopyrronium bromide), long-acting
beta agonist (indacaterol), and a combination of the two medications (QVA149).
The choice among the three medications allows a patient to use the same
inhalation device even when the regimen is changed from single-bronchodilator
therapy to dual-bronchodilator therapy. In addition, the quick bronchodilation
effect and once-daily administration can improve patient adherence to medical
treatment for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). To our knowledge, as 
of November 2014, the safety and the efficacy of QVA149 have been evaluated in 14
randomized controlled trials. The 14 trials generally showed good safety
profiles, and there were better or not-inferior bronchodilator effects of QVA149 
when compared with placebo, or other inhaled medication. According to the
Japanese Respiratory Society guidelines, QVA149 is a combination of the two
first-line bronchodilators. Our meta-analysis indicated that QVA149 is superior
to the salmeterol-fluticasone combination to treat COPD in respect of the
frequency of adverse effects, exacerbation, pneumonia, and improvement of trough 
forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1). Thus, we believe that QVA149 can be 
a key medication for COPD treatments.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S56067 
PMCID: PMC4410821
PMID: 25960646  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2015 Apr 17;10:803-11. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S79842.
eCollection 2015.

Anti-inflammatory effects of salmeterol/fluticasone propionate 50/250 mcg
combination therapy in Japanese patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease.

Asai K(1), Kobayashi A(2), Makihara Y(3), Johnson M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka City
University, Osaka, Japan. (2)Biomedical Data Sciences, GlaxoSmithKline, Tokyo,
Japan. (3)Medical Affairs Respiratory Department, GlaxoSmithKline, Tokyo, Japan. 
(4)Respiratory Global Franchise, GlaxoSmithKline, Uxbridge, UK.

PURPOSE: Using sputum neutrophils as the primary measure, and other inflammation 
biomarkers, this study evaluated the anti-inflammatory effects of the combination
salmeterol 50 mcg and fluticasone propionate 250 mcg (SFC 250) in Japanese
patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Patients were treated in a randomized, double-blind,
parallel group, placebo-controlled trial with SFC 250 twice daily (n=26) or
placebo (n=26) for 12 weeks. At the start and end of treatment, inflammation
biomarkers (sputum and serum), lung function, and health status (COPD Assessment 
Test [CAT] questionnaire) were measured.
RESULTS: Although a numerical decrease in differential neutrophil count was
observed from baseline, SFC 250 did not significantly reduce sputum neutrophils
compared with placebo, nor were there significant changes from baseline in the
other biomarkers (sputum or serum), lung function, or CAT, versus placebo.
Squamous epithelial cell contamination in some sputum samples rendered them
unacceptable for analysis, which reduced the sample size to n=19 (SFC 250) and
n=10 (placebo). However, inclusion of contaminated samples did not affect the
overall trend of the outcome. Ad hoc bootstrap statistical analysis showed a
27.9% (SFC 250) and 1.3% (placebo) decrease in sputum neutrophils. Sputum IL-8
decreased by 43.2% after SFC 250 but increased by 48.3% with placebo. Responder
analyses showed 42% of patients had ≥20% decrease in neutrophils from baseline;
and 47% of patients had a ≥200 pg/mL change in sputum IL-8 following SFC 250
versus 20% after placebo; both changes are considered clinically relevant.
CONCLUSION: This study provides additional information about inflammation in
Japanese COPD patients and is the first to study the anti-inflammatory effects of
SFC 250 in this context and population. In the primary analysis, SFC 250 did not 
produce significant changes from baseline in sputum neutrophil levels or other
sputum or serum inflammatory markers compared with placebo. Secondary ad hoc
statistical analysis showed that SFC 250 reduced the number of sputum neutrophils
and IL-8 compared with placebo.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S79842 
PMCID: PMC4407765
PMID: 25945045  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Expert Opin Pharmacother. 2015;16(10):1539-41. doi:
10.1517/14656566.2015.1043888. Epub 2015 May 4.

Efficacy of indacaterol as a single therapy versus salmeterol/fluticasone therapy
in patients with milder chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Ruxandra U(1), Antoniu SA, Mihaltan F, Boisteanu D.

Author information: 
(1)University of Oradea , Oradea , Romania.

Comment on
    Eur Respir J. 2014 Dec;44(6):1548-56.

INTRODUCTION: In non-exacerbation chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)
with mild lung function impairment, single bronchodilator therapy might be as
effective as combined inhaled corticosteroid/bronchodilator therapy, whereas the 
risk of pneumonia associated with the latter would be practically absent.
AREAS COVERED: We performed an analysis of a recent study evaluating the efficacy
and safety of inhaled indacaterol versus inhaled salmeterol/fluticasone in COPD
patients.
EXPERT OPINION: Both therapies were found to exert comparable effects on lung
function, symptom severity and health status.

DOI: 10.1517/14656566.2015.1043888 
PMID: 25936440  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2015 Apr 15;10:775-89. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S80656.
eCollection 2015.

Role of the fixed combination of fluticasone and salmeterol in adult Chinese
patients with asthma and COPD.

Gao J(1), Pleasants RA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Diseases, Peking Union Medical College Hospital,
Peking Union Medical College and Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing,
People's Republic of China. (2)Division of Pulmonary, Allergy, and Critical Care 
Medicine, Department of Medicine, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC,
USA.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and asthma are common airway
disorders characterized by chronic airway inflammation and airflow obstruction,
and are a leading cause of morbidity and mortality in the People's Republic of
China. These two diseases pose a high economic burden on the family and the whole
of society. Despite evidence-based Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung
Disease and Global Initiative for Asthma guidelines being available for the
diagnosis and management of COPD and asthma, many of these patients are not
properly diagnosed or managed in the People's Republic of China. The value of
combination therapy with inhaled corticosteroids and long-acting β2-agonists has 
been established in the management of asthma and COPD globally. Combinations of
inhaled corticosteroids and long-acting β2-agonists such as fluticasone and
salmeterol, have been shown to be effective for improving symptoms, health
status, and reducing exacerbations in both diseases. In this review, we discuss
the efficacy and safety of this combination therapy from key studies,
particularly in the People's Republic of China.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S80656 
PMCID: PMC4403740
PMID: 25926729  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Respir Res. 2015 Apr 23;16:52. doi: 10.1186/s12931-015-0210-x.

Comparative effectiveness of budesonide/formoterol combination and
fluticasone/salmeterol combination among chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
patients new to controller treatment: a US administrative claims database study.

Kern DM(1), Davis J(2), Williams SA(3), Tunceli O(4), Wu B(5), Hollis S(6),
Strange C(7), Trudo F(8).

Author information: 
(1)HealthCore, Inc., 123 Justison St, Suite 200, Wilmington, DE, 19801-5134, USA.
dkern@healthcore.com. (2)AstraZeneca Pharmaceuticals, 1800 Concord Pike,
Wilmington, DE, 19850, USA. Jill.Davis@astrazeneca.com. (3)AstraZeneca
Pharmaceuticals, One MedImmune Way, Gaithersburg, MD, 20878, USA.
Setareh.Williams@astrazeneca.com. (4)HealthCore, Inc., 123 Justison St, Suite
200, Wilmington, DE, 19801-5134, USA. otunceli@healthcore.com. (5)HealthCore,
Inc., 123 Justison St, Suite 200, Wilmington, DE, 19801-5134, USA.
bwu@healthcore.com. (6)AstraZeneca Pharmaceuticals, Alderley Park, Cheshire, UK. 
Sally.Hollis@astrazeneca.com. (7)Department of Medicine, Division of Pulmonary
and Critical Care Medicine, Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, SC,
29425, USA. strangec@musc.edu. (8)AstraZeneca Pharmaceuticals, 1800 Concord Pike,
Wilmington, DE, 19850, USA. Frank.Trudo@astrazeneca.com.

BACKGROUND: Inhaled corticosteroid/long-acting β2-agonist combinations (ICS/LABA)
have emerged as first line therapies for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD) patients with exacerbation history. No randomized clinical trial has
compared exacerbation rates among COPD patients receiving budesonide/formoterol
combination (BFC) and fluticasone/salmeterol combination (FSC) to date, and only 
limited comparative data are available. This study compared the real-world
effectiveness of approved BFC and FSC treatments among matched cohorts of COPD
patients in a large US managed care setting.
METHODS: COPD patients (≥40 years) naive to ICS/LABA who initiated BFC or FSC
treatments between 03/01/2009-03/31/2012 were identified in a geographically
diverse US managed care database and followed for 12 months; index date was
defined as first prescription fill date. Patients with a cancer diagnosis or
chronic (≥180 days) oral corticosteroid (OCS) use within 12 months prior to index
were excluded. Patients were matched 1-to-1 on demographic and pre-initiation
clinical characteristics using propensity scores from a random forest model. The 
primary efficacy outcome was COPD exacerbation rate, and secondary efficacy
outcomes included exacerbation rates by event type and healthcare resource
utilization. Pneumonia objectives included rates of any diagnosis of pneumonia
and pneumonia-related healthcare resource utilization.
RESULTS: Matching of the identified 3,788 BFC and 6,439 FSC patients resulted in 
3,697 patients in each group. Matched patients were well balanced on age (mean=64
years), gender (BFC: 52% female; FSC: 54%), prior COPD-related medication use,
healthcare utilization, and comorbid conditions. During follow-up, no significant
difference was seen between BFC and FSC patients for number of COPD-related
exacerbations overall (rate ratio [RR]=1.02, 95% CI=[0.96,1.09], p=0.56) or by
event type: COPD-related hospitalizations (RR=0.96), COPD-related ED visits
(RR=1.11), and COPD-related office/outpatient visits with OCS and/or antibiotic
use (RR=1.01). The proportion of patients diagnosed with pneumonia during the
post-index period was similar for patients in each group (BFC =17.3%, FSC =19.0%,
odds ratio=0.92 [0.81,1.04], p=0.19), and no difference was detected for
pneumonia-related healthcare utilization by place of service.
CONCLUSION: This study demonstrated no difference in COPD-related exacerbations
or pneumonia events between BFC and FSC treatment groups for patients new to
ICS/LABA treatment in a real-world setting.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov identifier NCT01921127 .

DOI: 10.1186/s12931-015-0210-x 
PMCID: PMC4409772
PMID: 25899176  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Thorax. 2015 Jun;70(6):519-27. doi: 10.1136/thoraxjnl-2014-206670. Epub 2015 Apr 
3.

Glycopyrronium once-daily significantly improves lung function and health status 
when combined with salmeterol/fluticasone in patients with COPD: the GLISTEN
study, a randomised controlled trial.

Frith PA(1), Thompson PJ(2), Ratnavadivel R(3), Chang CL(4), Bremner P(5), Day
P(6), Frenzel C(7), Kurstjens N(7); Glisten Study Group.

Collaborators: Waddell A, Daniel A, Khoussousi A, Springfield A, Veale A, Graham 
AN, Gallagher B, Pande BR, O'Kane B, Jones C, Baldi C, Helm C, O'Dochartaigh C,
Chambers D, Quinn D, Yull D, Karthigesu D, Then E, Graham F, Faigenbaum F, Geddam
G, Cameron G, Blom H, Goldman H, Snell H, Chia I, Jeong J, Liew J, Salvaris J,
Pryke J, Reid J, Kolbe J, O'Sullivan J, Pak J, Upham J, Feiber J, Ford JO, Yong
K, Perrin K, Noonan L, Atlas L, Murdoch L, Pearce M, Bloch M, Holmes M, Chia M,
Epton M, Leadston M, Tandon M, Chitgopeker M, Liebenberg N, Hendry N, Olaniyi O, 
Singh O, Kendall P, Van Niekerk P, Willet R, Tomlins R, Pillay S, Sharifeh S,
Carson S, Bingham S, Walford T, Erasmus T, Claridge T, Hess Z.

Author information: 
(1)Respiratory Clinical Research Unit, Repatriation General Hospital, Adelaide,
South Australia, Australia. (2)The Lung Health Clinic, Centre for Asthma Allergy 
and Respiratory Research, University of Western Australia, and the Lung Institute
of Western Australia, Perth, Western Australia, Australia. (3)Department of
Respiratory Medicine, Gosford Hospital, Gosford, New South Wales, Australia.
(4)Department of Respiratory and Sleep Medicine, Waikato Hospital, Hamilton, New 
Zealand. (5)St John of God Hospital, Murdoch, Western Australia, Australia.
(6)Medical Centre, Redcliffe Peninsula 7 Day Medical Centre, Brisbane,
Queensland, Australia. (7)Clinical Development and Medical Affairs, Novartis
Pharmaceuticals Australia Pty Limited, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia.

Comment in
    Thorax. 2015 Oct;70(10):991.

BACKGROUND: The optimal use of various therapeutic combinations for
moderate/severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is unclear. The
GLISTEN trial compared the efficacy of two long-acting anti-muscarinic
antagonists (LAMA), when combined with an inhaled corticosteroid (ICS) and a
long-acting β2 agonist (LABA).
METHODS: This randomised, blinded, placebo-controlled trial in moderate/severe
COPD patients compared once-daily glycopyrronium (GLY) 50 µg, once-daily
tiotropium (TIO) 18 µg or placebo (PLA), when combined with
salmeterol/fluticasone propionate (SAL/FP) 50/500 µg twice daily. The primary
objective was to determine the non-inferiority of GLY+SAL/FP versus TIO+SAL/FP on
trough FEV1 after 12 weeks. An important secondary objective was whether addition
of GLY to SAL/FP was better than SAL/FP alone.
RESULTS: 773 patients (mean FEV1 57.2% predicted) were randomised; 84.9%
completed the trial. At week 12, GLY+SAL/FP demonstrated non-inferiority to
TIO+SAL/FP for trough FEV1: least square mean treatment difference (LSMdiff)
-7 mL (SE 17.4) with a lower limit for non-inferiority of -60 mL. There was
significant increase in week 12 trough FEV1 with GLY+SAL/FP versus PLA+SAL/FP
(LSMdiff 101 mL, p<0.001). At 12 weeks, GLY+SAL/FP produced significant
improvement in St George's Respiratory Questionnaire total score versus
PLA+SAL/FP (LSMdiff -2.154, p=0.02). GLY+SAL/FP demonstrated significant rescue
medication reduction versus PLA+SAL/FP (LSMdiff -0.72 puffs/day, p<0.001).
Serious adverse events were similar for GLY+SAL/FP, TIO+SAL/FP and PLA+SAL/FP
with an incidence of 5.8%, 8.5% and 5.8%, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: GLY+SAL/FP showed comparable improvements in lung function, health
status and rescue medication to TIO+SAL/FP. Importantly, addition of GLY to
SAL/FP demonstrated significant improvements in lung function, health status and 
rescue medication compared to SAL/FP.
TRIAL REGISTRATION NUMBER: NCT01513460.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

DOI: 10.1136/thoraxjnl-2014-206670 
PMCID: PMC4453631
PMID: 25841237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Eur J Radiol. 2015 Jun;84(6):1196-201. doi: 10.1016/j.ejrad.2015.02.022. Epub
2015 Mar 9.

Regional bronchodilator response assessed by computed tomography in chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease.

Shimizu K(1), Makita H(1), Hasegawa M(1), Kimura H(1), Fuke S(1), Nagai K(1),
Yoshida T(1), Suzuki M(1), Konno S(1), Ito YM(2), Nishimura M(3).

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Medicine, Hokkaido University School of Medicine, N-15
W-7, Kita-Ku, Sapporo 060-8638, Japan. (2)Department of Biostatistics, Hokkaido
University Graduate School of Medicine, N-15 W-7, Kita-Ku, Sapporo 060-8638,
Japan. (3)First Department of Medicine, Hokkaido University School of Medicine,
N-15 W-7, Kita-Ku, Sapporo 060-8638, Japan. Electronic address:
ma-nishi@med.hokudai.ac.jp.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: The reliability of CT assessment of regional
bronchodilation is not universally accepted. In this study, using our proprietary
3D-CT software, we first examined airway inner luminal area (Ai) before and after
inhalation of SFC in a group of COPD patients and then evaluated the same
parameters for two sets of CT data obtained from clinically stable subjects with 
no intervention.
METHODS: We conducted CT at deep inspiration and pulmonary function tests before 
and one week after inhalation of SFC in 23 COPD patients. As a non-intervention
group, we used two sets of CT data obtained with one-year interval in another
group of subjects who demonstrated stable pulmonary function (n=8). We measured
Ai at the mid-portions of 3rd to 6th generation in 8 bronchi of the right lung, a
total of 32 identical sites before and after intervention.
RESULTS: The average bronchodilation at all sites (ΔAi%: 28.2 ± 4.1 (SE)%)
(r=0.65, p<0.001) and that of each generation significantly correlated with %
improvement of FEV1 (ΔFEV1%), which increased from 1.40 ± 0.10 L to 1.58 ± 0.10
L. When subjects were classified into two groups in terms of mean ΔFEV1%, even
the poor responders (ΔFEV1% <14% above baseline, n=13) displayed significantly
larger ΔAi% compared with the non-intervention group (19.1 ± 4.6% versus 2.1 ±
3.9%). Inter-observer variability for overall ΔAi% was within acceptable levels.
CONCLUSIONS: CT can reliably detect the regional bronchodilation in 3rd to 6th
generation airways when ΔFEV1 is as small as 180 ml on average. This study was
registered in the UMIN Clinical Trials Registry (UMIN-CTR) system
(http://www.umin.ac.jp/. No. UMIN 000002668).

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejrad.2015.02.022 
PMID: 25805332  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. PLoS One. 2015 Mar 23;10(3):e0120095. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0120095.
eCollection 2015.

ASM-024, a piperazinium compound, promotes the in vitro relaxation of
β2-adrenoreceptor desensitized tracheas.

Israël-Assayag E(1), Beaulieu MJ(2), Cormier Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institut universitaire de cardiologie et de pneumologie de Québec (IUCPQ),
Québec, Québec, Canada; Asmacure Ltée, Québec, Québec, Canada. (2)Institut
universitaire de cardiologie et de pneumologie de Québec (IUCPQ), Québec, Québec,
Canada.

Inhaled β2-adrenoreceptor agonists are widely used in asthma and chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) for bronchoconstriction relief.
β2-Adrenoreceptor agonists relax airway smooth muscle cells via cyclic adenosine 
monophosphate (cAMP) mediated pathways. However, prolonged stimulation induces
functional desensitization of the β2-adrenoreceptors (β2-AR), potentially leading
to reduced clinical efficacy with chronic or prolonged administration. ASM-024, a
small synthetic molecule in clinical stage development, has shown activity at the
level of nicotinic receptors and possibly at the muscarinic level and presents
anti-inflammatory and bronchodilator properties. Aerosolized ASM-024 reduces
airway resistance in mice and promotes in-vitro relaxation of tracheal and
bronchial preparations from animal and human tissues. ASM-024 increased in vitro 
relaxation response to maximally effective concentration of short-acting beta-2
agonists in dog and human bronchi. Although the precise mechanisms by which
ASM-024 promotes airway smooth muscle (ASM) relaxation remain unclear, we
hypothesized that ASM-024 will attenuate and/or abrogate agonist-induced
contraction and remain effective despite β2-AR tachyphylaxis. β2-AR tachyphylaxis
was induced with salbutamol, salmeterol and formoterol on guinea pig tracheas.
The addition of ASM-024 relaxed concentration-dependently intact or β2-AR
desensitized tracheal rings precontracted with methacholine. ASM-024 did not
induce any elevation of intracellular cAMP in isolated smooth muscle cells;
moreover, blockade of the cAMP pathway with an adenylate cyclase inhibitor had no
significant effect on ASM-024-induced guinea pig trachea relaxation.
Collectively, these findings show that ASM-024 elicits relaxation of β2-AR
desensitized tracheal preparations and suggest that ASM-024 mediates smooth
muscle relaxation through a different target and signaling pathway than
β2-adrenergic receptor agonists. These findings suggest ASM-024 could potentially
provide clinical benefit when used adjunctively with inhaled β2-adrenoreceptor
agonists in those patients exhibiting a reduced response to their chronic use.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0120095 
PMCID: PMC4370676
PMID: 25799096  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2015 May 15;308(10):L1068-77. doi:
10.1152/ajplung.00395.2014. Epub 2015 Mar 20.

Roflumilast combined with adenosine increases mucosal hydration in human airway
epithelial cultures after cigarette smoke exposure.

Tyrrell J(1), Qian X(2), Freire J(2), Tarran R(3).

Author information: 
(1)Cystic Fibrosis/Pulmonary Research and Treatment Center, University of North
Carolina, Chapel Hill, North Carolina; (2)Forest Research Institute,
Incorporated, Jersey City, New Jersey. (3)Cystic Fibrosis/Pulmonary Research and 
Treatment Center, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North Carolina;
tarran@med.unc.edu.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a growing cause of morbidity and 
mortality worldwide. Recent studies have shown that cigarette smoke (CS) induces 
cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) dysfunction, which
leads to airway-surface liquid (ASL) dehydration. This in turn contributes to the
mucus dehydration and impaired mucociliary clearance that are seen in the chronic
bronchitis form of COPD. Roflumilast is a phosphodiesterase 4 inhibitor that may 
improve lung function and reduce the frequency of exacerbations in patients with 
COPD. Although roflumilast can affect cAMP metabolism, little is known about the 
downstream pharmacological effects in the airways. We hypothesized that
roflumilast would increase ASL rehydration in human bronchial epithelial cultures
(HBECs) after chronic CS exposure. cAMP production was measured by Förster
resonance energy transfer in HEK293T cells and by ELISA in HBECs. ASL height was 
measured by xz-confocal microscopy after air exposure or following HBEC exposure 
to freshly produced CS. Roflumilast had little effect on cAMP or ASL height when 
applied on its own; however, roflumilast significantly potentiated
adenosine-induced increases in cAMP and ASL height in CS-exposed HBECs.
Roflumilast increased the rate of ASL height recovery in cultures after CS
exposure compared with controls. In contrast, the β2-adrenergic receptor agonists
isoproterenol and salmeterol failed to increase ASL height after CS exposure. Our
data suggest that roflumilast can increase ASL hydration in CS-exposed HBECs,
which is predicted to be beneficial for the treatment of mucus dehydration/mucus 
stasis in patients with COPD chronic bronchitis.

Copyright © 2015 the American Physiological Society.

DOI: 10.1152/ajplung.00395.2014 
PMCID: PMC4437008
PMID: 25795727  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. AAPS J. 2015 Jul;17(4):871-80. doi: 10.1208/s12248-015-9751-7. Epub 2015 Mar 21.

In Vitro, Pharmacokinetic, Pharmacodynamic, and Safety Comparisons of Single and 
Combined Administration of Tiotropium and Salmeterol in COPD Patients Using
Different Dry Powder Inhalers.

Horhota ST(1), van Noord JA, Verkleij CB, Bour LJ, Sharma A, Trunk M, Cornelissen
PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Research and Development, Boehringer Ingelheim Pharmaceuticals Inc.,
Ridgefield, Connecticut, 06877, USA, steve.horhota@comcast.net.

In vitro Andersen cascade impactor-sized mass (ISM) and aerodynamic fine particle
mass (FPM) <5 μm for tiotropium and salmeterol combined in a novel inhalation
powder formulation containing 7.5 μg tiotropium/25 μg salmeterol (TSHH) were
similar (within ±15%) to reference products containing 18 μg of tiotropium
(Spiriva® HandiHaler®) (TioHH) and 50 μg of salmeterol (Serevent® Diskus®)
(SalD). The pharmacokinetics (PK), pharmacodynamics, safety, and tolerability of 
the novel fixed-dose TSHH formulation administered once daily was compared with
the single-agent therapies TioHH (once daily [qd]) and SalD (twice daily [bid])
and with the jointly administered combination of TioHH (qd) plus SalD (bid) in a 
randomized, 22-week, open-label, four-way crossover study in 50 patients with
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). For tiotropium, TSHH and TioHH were
bioequivalent based on mean steady-state plasma area under the plasma
concentration-time curves (AUC), while the urinary excretion amount was higher
for TSHH and not bioequivalent to TioHH. Tiotropium peak plasma concentrations at
steady state (C max,ss) were 40% higher with TSHH. For salmeterol, substantial
differences were observed in plasma AUCs and Cmax,ss. No significant differences 
in 8-h forced expiratory volume in 1 s or forced vital capacity were detected for
the TSHH (qd) against the combination of TioHH (qd) with SalD (bid). Maintenance 
therapy with tiotropium plus salmeterol as TSHH or as the jointly administered
reference products is superior to either agent alone, safe, and well tolerated in
COPD patients. In vitro results were not predictive of clinical PK findings for
both tiotropium and salmeterol for the TSHH dry powder inhaler product.

DOI: 10.1208/s12248-015-9751-7 
PMCID: PMC4476986
PMID: 25794622  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Mol Pharmacol. 2015 Jun;87(6):954-64. doi: 10.1124/mol.114.096800. Epub 2015 Mar 
17.

Salmeterol Efficacy and Bias in the Activation and Kinase-Mediated
Desensitization of β2-Adrenergic Receptors.

Gimenez LE(1), Baameur F(1), Vayttaden SJ(1), Clark RB(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville,
Tennessee (L.E.G.); Division of Internal Medicine, Department of Symptom
Research, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas (F.B.);
and Department of Integrative Biology and Pharmacology, University of Texas
Health Science Center, Houston, Texas (S.J.V., R.B.C.). (2)Department of
Pharmacology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee
(L.E.G.); Division of Internal Medicine, Department of Symptom Research,
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas (F.B.); and
Department of Integrative Biology and Pharmacology, University of Texas Health
Science Center, Houston, Texas (S.J.V., R.B.C.) richard.b.clark@uth.tmc.edu.

Salmeterol is a long-acting β2-adrenergic receptor (β2AR) agonist that is widely 
used as a bronchodilator for the treatment of persistent asthma and chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease in conjunction with steroids. Previous studies
demonstrated that salmeterol showed weak efficacy for activation of adenylyl
cyclase; however, its efficacy in the complex desensitization of the β2AR remains
poorly understood. In this work, we provide insights into the roles played by the
G protein-coupled receptor kinase/arrestin and protein kinase A in
salmeterol-mediated desensitization through bioluminescence resonance energy
transfer (BRET) studies of liganded-β2AR binding to arrestin and through kinetic 
studies of cAMP turnover. First, BRET demonstrated a much reduced efficacy for
salmeterol recruitment of arrestin to β2AR relative to isoproterenol. The ratio
of BRETISO/BRETSALM after 5-minute stimulation was 20 and decreased to 5 after 35
minutes, reflecting a progressive decline in BRETISO and a stable BRETSALM.
Second, to assess salmeterol efficacy for functional desensitization, we examined
the kinetics of salmeterol-induced cAMP accumulation (0-30 minutes) in human
airway smooth muscle cells in the presence and absence of phosphodiesterase
inhibition. Analysis of shaping of cAMP turnover for both agonists demonstrated
significant salmeterol desensitization, although it was reduced relative to
isoproterenol. Using an isoproterenol rescue protocol after either short-term (10
minutes) or long-term (2 and 14 hours) salmeterol pretreatments, we found that
salmeterol progressively depressed isoproterenol stimulation but did not prevent 
subsequent rescue by isoproterenol and additional isoproterenol-mediated
desensitization. Our findings reveal a complex efficacy for functional
desensitization, demonstrating that although salmeterol shows weak efficacy for
adenylyl cyclase activation and G protein-coupled receptor
kinase/arrestin-mediated desensitization, it acts as a strong agonist in highly
amplified protein kinase A-mediated events.

U.S. Government work not protected by U.S. copyright.

DOI: 10.1124/mol.114.096800 
PMCID: PMC4429720
PMID: 25784721  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Mol Pharm. 2015 Aug 3;12(8):2633-41. doi: 10.1021/mp500854e. Epub 2015 Mar 18.

Beta-2 Adrenergic Agonists Are Substrates and Inhibitors of Human Organic Cation 
Transporter 1.

Salomon JJ(1), Hagos Y(2,)(3), Petzke S(2), Kühne A(3), Gausterer JC(1), Hosoya
K(4), Ehrhardt C(1).

Author information: 
(1)†School of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences and Trinity Biomedical
Sciences Institute, Trinity College Dublin, Dublin 2, Ireland. (2)‡Zentrum für
Physiologie und Pathophysiologie, Georg-August-Universität, 37073 Göttingen,
Germany. (3)§PortaCellTec Biosciences GmbH, 37073 Göttingen, Germany.
(4)∥Graduate School of Medicine and Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of
Toyama, 930-0887 Toyama, Japan.

Beta-2-adrenergic agonists are first line therapeutics in the treatment of asthma
and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Upon inhalation,
bronchodilation is achieved after binding to β2-receptors, which are primarily
localized on airway smooth muscle cells. Given that β2-adrenergic agonists
chemically are bases, they carry net positive charge at physiologic pH value in
the lungs (i.e., pH 7.4). Here, we studied whether β2-agonists interact with
organic cation transporters (OCT) and whether this interaction exerted an
influence on their passage across the respiratory epithelium to their target
receptors. [14C]-TEA uptake into proximal (i.e., Calu-3) and distal (i.e., A549
and NCI-H441) lung epithelial cells was significantly reduced in the presence of 
salbutamol sulfate, formoterol fumarate, and salmeterol xinafoate in vitro.
Expression of all five members of the OCT/N family has been confirmed in human
pulmonary epithelial cells in situ and in vitro, which makes the identification
of the transporter(s) responsible for the β2-agonist interaction challenging.
Thus, additional experiments were carried out in HEK-293 cells transfected with
hOCT1-3. The most pronounced inhibition of organic cation uptake by β2-agonists
was observed in hOCT1 overexpressing HEK-293 cells. hOCT3 transfected HEK-293
cells were affected to a lesser extent, and in hOCT2 transfectants only marginal 
inhibition of organic cation uptake by β2-agonists was observed. Bidirectional
transport studies across confluent NCI-H441 cell monolayers revealed a net
absorptive transport of [3H]-salbutamol, which was sensitive to inhibition by the
OCT1 modulator, verapamil. Accordingly, salbutamol uptake into hOCT1
overexpressing HEK-293 cells was time- and concentration-dependent and could be
completely blocked by decynium-22. Taken together, our data suggest that
β2-agonists are specific substrates and inhibitors of OCT1 in human respiratory
epithelial cells and that this transporter might play a role in the pulmonary
disposition of drugs of this class.

DOI: 10.1021/mp500854e 
PMID: 25751092  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Pulm Pharmacol Ther. 2015 Jun;32:101-8. doi: 10.1016/j.pupt.2015.02.008. Epub
2015 Mar 3.

The impact of treatment with indacaterol in patients with COPD: A post-hoc
analysis according to GOLD 2011 categories A to D.

Kerstjens HA(1), Deslée G(2), Dahl R(3), Donohue JF(4), Young D(5), Lawrence
D(6), Kornmann O(7).

Author information: 
(1)University of Groningen, University Medical Center, and Groningen Research
Institute for Asthma and COPD GRIAC, Groningen, the Netherlands. Electronic
address: h.a.m.kerstjens@umcg.nl. (2)Service de Pneumologie, Hôpital Maison
Blanche, INSERM U903, CHU de Reims, France. Electronic address:
gdeslee@chu-reims.fr. (3)Allergy Centre, Odense University Hospital, Odense,
Denmark. Electronic address: Ronald.Dahl2@rsyd.dk. (4)Department of Medicine,
University of North Carolina, NC, USA. Electronic address:
james_donohue@med.unc.edu. (5)Novartis Horsham Research Centre, Horsham, West
Sussex, UK. Electronic address: david.young@young-communications.com. (6)Novartis
Pharmaceuticals Corporation, East Hanover, NJ, USA. Electronic address:
david-1.lawrence@novartis.com. (7)IKF Pneumologie Frankfurt, Clinical Research
Centre Respiratory Diseases, Frankfurt, Germany. Electronic address:
kornmann@ikf-pneumologie.de.

BACKGROUND: Indacaterol is an inhaled, once-daily, ultra-long-acting β2-agonist
for the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). We report on
the effectiveness of indacaterol and other bronchodilators compared with placebo 
in patients across the Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease
(GOLD) 2011 categories A to D.
METHODS: A post-hoc, subgroup pooled analysis of 6-month efficacy data from three
randomized, placebo-controlled, parallel-group studies involving 3862 patients
was performed across GOLD 2011 categories A to D, according to baseline forced
expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1) % predicted, modified Medical Research Council
(mMRC) dyspnea scale, and exacerbation history in the 12 months prior to entry.
Efficacy of once-daily indacaterol 150 and 300 μg, open-label tiotropium 18 μg,
twice-daily salmeterol 50 μg, and formoterol 12 μg was compared with placebo. End
points analysed were trough FEV1, transition dyspnea index (TDI), and St George's
Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ) total score, all at Week 26, and mean rescue
medication use over 26 weeks.
RESULTS: Indacaterol 150 and 300 μg significantly improved FEV1, compared with
placebo across all GOLD groups. Indacaterol 150 and 300 μg also significantly
improved TDI, SGRQ total score, and mean rescue medication use compared with
placebo across most GOLD subgroups.
CONCLUSIONS: Treatment selection according to patient's symptoms as well as lung 
function is an important consideration in maintenance treatment of COPD.
Indacaterol 150 and 300 μg effectively improved lung function and symptoms in
patients across all GOLD 2011 categories.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pupt.2015.02.008 
PMID: 25743376  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Ther Adv Respir Dis. 2015 Apr;9(2):49-55. doi: 10.1177/1753465815572065. Epub
2015 Feb 17.

Combination therapy with indacaterol and glycopyrronium bromide in the management
of COPD: an update on the evidence for efficacy and safety.

Ridolo E(1), Montagni M(1), Riario-Sforza GG(2), Baroni M(2), Incorvaia C(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of Parma, Parma, 
Italy. (2)Pulmonary Rehabilitation, ICP Hospital, Milan, Italy. (3)Pulmonary
Rehabilitation, ICP Hospital, Milan, Italy cristoforo.incorvaia@gmail.com.

The international guidelines on chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)
recommend inhaled bronchodilators for maintenance treatment of the disease. These
drugs include β2-agonists and muscarinic antagonists, which are both available as
short-acting agents (to be used as needed for dyspnea) and long-acting agents. To
the latter belong salmeterol and formoterol (long-acting β2-agonists) and
indacaterol, vilanterol and olodaterol (very long-acting β2-agonist) as
β2-agonists, and tiotropium, aclidinium and glycopyrronium bromide as long-acting
muscarinic antagonists. The efficacy and safety of indacaterol and glycopyrronium
as monotherapies has been demonstrated in several controlled trials. However, in 
some patients with moderate-to-severe COPD, symptoms are poorly controlled by
bronchodilator monotherapy; in these cases the addition of a second
bronchodilator from a different pharmacological class may be beneficial. Here we 
review the evidence from published randomized trials concerning the efficacy and 
safety of the once-daily fixed-dose dual bronchodilator combining indacaterol and
glycopyrronium.

© The Author(s), 2015.

DOI: 10.1177/1753465815572065 
PMID: 25691493  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. J Med Chem. 2015 Mar 26;58(6):2609-22. doi: 10.1021/jm501915g. Epub 2015 Feb 9.

Discovery of
(R)-1-(3-((2-chloro-4-(((2-hydroxy-2-(8-hydroxy-2-oxo-1,2-dihydroquinolin-5-yl)et
hyl)amino)methyl)-5-methoxyphenyl)amino)-3-oxopropyl)piperidin-4-yl
[1,1'-biphenyl]-2-ylcarbamate (TD-5959, GSK961081, batefenterol): first-in-class 
dual pharmacology multivalent muscarinic antagonist and β₂ agonist (MABA) for the
treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).

Hughes AD(1), Chen Y(1), Hegde SS(1), Jasper JR(1), Jaw-Tsai S(1), Lee TW(1),
McNamara A(1), Pulido-Rios MT(1), Steinfeld T(1), Mammen M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of †Medicinal Chemistry, ‡Pharmacology, §Drug Metabolism and
Pharmacokinetics, and ∥Molecular and Cellular Biology, Theravance Biopharma,
Inc., 901 Gateway Boulevard, South San Francisco, California 94080, United
States.

Through application of our multivalent approach to drug discovery we previously
reported the first discovery of dual pharmacology MABA bronchodilators,
exemplified by 1. Herein we describe the subsequent lead optimization of both
muscarinic antagonist and β2 agonist activities, through modification of the
linker motif, to achieve 24 h duration of action in a guinea pig
bronchoprotection model. Concomitantly we targeted high lung selectivities, low
systemic exposures and identified crystalline forms suitable for inhalation
devices. This article culminates with the discovery of our first clinical
candidate 12f (TD-5959, GSK961081, batefenterol). In a phase 2b trial,
batefenterol produced statistical and clinically significant differences compared
to placebo and numerically greater improvements in the primary end point of
trough FEV1 compared to salmeterol after 4 weeks of dosing in patients with
moderate to severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).

DOI: 10.1021/jm501915g 
PMID: 25629394  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. J Med Chem. 2015 May 28;58(10):4131-64. doi: 10.1021/jm5013227. Epub 2015 Feb 9.

Bronchodilating drugs for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: current status
and future trends.

Montuschi P(1), Ciabattoni G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Faculty of Medicine, Catholic University of the
Sacred Heart, Largo Francesco Vito, 1, Rome, 00168, Italy.

Inhaled bronchodilators, including long-acting muscarinic receptor antagonists
(LAMA) and long-acting β2-adrenoreceptor agonists (LABA), are the mainstay of
pharmacological treatment of stable chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
Among approved LAMA, tiotropium bromide, glycopyrronium bromide, and umeclidinium
bromide are administered once daily, whereas aclidinium bromide is administered
every 12 h. New LAMA are under development for COPD. Among the approved LABA,
indacaterol has a 24 h duration of action, whereas salmeterol and formoterol
require twice-daily administration. New once-daily LABA, including vilanterol,
olodaterol, milveterol, carmoterol, and abediterol, are in development. LAMA/LABA
fixed dose combinations (FDCs) provide the convenience of two bronchodilators
with different mechanism of action in a single inhaler.
Indacaterol/glycopyrronium, umeclidinium/vilanterol, and olodaterol/tiotropium
FDCs have been approved or are under approval and are likely to become a standard
pharmacological strategy for COPD. Inhaled dual-pharmacology compounds, combining
muscarinic antagonism and β2-agonism (MABA) in a single molecule, potentially
provide additive or synergistic bronchodilation over either inhaled
antimuscarinic or β2-agonist monotherapy.

DOI: 10.1021/jm5013227 
PMID: 25587755  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2015 Jan 10;1:CD010139. doi:
10.1002/14651858.CD010139.pub2.

Indacaterol, a once-daily beta2-agonist, versus twice-daily beta₂-agonists or
placebo for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Geake JB(1), Dabscheck EJ, Wood-Baker R, Cates CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Medicine, The Prince Charles Hospital, Chermside,
Queensland, Australia, 4032.

BACKGROUND: Indacaterol is an inhaled long-acting beta2-agonist that is
administered once daily and has been investigated as a treatment for chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Four different doses have been investigated
(75 mcg, 150 mcg, 300 mcg and 600 mcg). The relative effects of different doses
of once-daily indacaterol in the management of patients with COPD are uncertain.
OBJECTIVES: To compare the efficacy and safety of indacaterol versus placebo and 
alternative twice-daily long-acting beta2-agonists for the treatment of patients 
with stable COPD.
SEARCH METHODS: We identified trials from the Cochrane Airways Group Specialised 
Register of trials (CAGR), handsearched respiratory journals and meeting
abstracts and searched the Novartis trials registry and ClinicalTrials.gov. The
date of the most recent search was 8 November 2014.
SELECTION CRITERIA: We included all randomised controlled trials comparing
indacaterol at any dose versus placebo or alternative long-acting beta2-agonists.
Trials were required to be of at least 12 weeks' duration and had to include
adults older than 18 years with a confirmed spirometric diagnosis of COPD.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Two review authors (JBG, EJD) independently
assessed for possible inclusion all citations identified as a result of the
search. Disagreements were resolved through discussion or, if required, through
resolution by a third review author (RWB). One review author (JBG) extracted data
from trials identified by the search and entered these data into Review Manager
5.1 for statistical analysis. Data entry was cross-checked by a second review
author (EJD, CJC).
MAIN RESULTS: A total of 13 trials with 9961 participants were included in the
review. Ten trials with a total of 8562 participants involved an indacaterol
versus placebo comparison. Five trials with a total of 4133 participants involved
an indacaterol versus twice-daily beta2-agonist comparison. The comparator
beta2-agonists were salmeterol, formoterol and eformoterol. One of these trials, 
with a total of 90 participants, provided no data that could be used in this
review. Two trials included both indacaterol versus placebo and indacaterol
versus twice-daily beta2-agonist comparisons. Trials were between 12 weeks and 52
weeks in duration. Overall the quality of the evidence was strong, and risk of
significant bias was minimal in most of the included studies. Enrolled
participants had stable COPD across a range of spirometric severities. Forced
expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1) was generally between 30% and 80% predicted,
and a mean FEV1 of approximately 50% was predicted in most studies. Patients with
concurrent respiratory disease, including asthma, were excluded. Concomitant use 
of inhaled corticosteroids was permitted.The primary objectives were to compare
trough FEV1 at the end of dosing, exacerbation rates and quality of life.
Significant adverse events, mortality and dyspnoea were included as secondary
outcomes. Compared with placebo, a significant and clinically relevant
improvement in trough FEV1 was noted with indacaterol (mean difference (MD)
149.11, 95% confidence interval (CI) 137.09 to 161.12). In addition, compared
with placebo, a significant improvement in mean St George Respiratory
Questionaire (SGRQ) score (MD -3.60, 95% CI -4.36 to -2.83) was reported, and the
proportion of participants experiencing clinically relevant improvement in SGRQ
score was significantly greater (odds ratio (OR) 1.63, 95% CI 1.46 to 1.84).
Compared with twice-daily beta2-agonists, a small but statistically significant
increase in trough FEV1 was seen with indacaterol (MD 61.71 mL, 95% CI 41.24 to
82.17). Differences between indacaterol and twice-daily beta2-agonists in mean
SGRQ scores (MD -0.81, 95% CI -2.28 to 0.66) and in the proportions of
participants achieving clinically relevant improvements in SGRQ scores (OR 1.07, 
95% CI 0.87 to 1.32) were not statistically significant, but the confidence
intervals are too wide to permit the conclusion that the treatments were
equivalent. Data were insufficient for analysis of differences in exacerbation
rates for both placebo and twice-daily beta2-agonist comparisons.
AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: For patients with stable COPD, use of indacaterol versus
placebo results in statistically significant and clinically meaningful
improvements in lung function and quality of life. The clinical benefit for lung 
function is at least as good as that seen with twice-daily long-acting
beta2-agonists. The comparative effect on quality of life remains uncertain, as
important differences cannot be excluded.

DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD010139.pub2 
PMID: 25575340  [PubMed - in process]


61. Expert Opin Drug Saf. 2015 Mar;14(3):463-72. doi: 10.1517/14740338.2015.998196.
Epub 2015 Jan 7.

Review of drug safety and efficacy of arformoterol in chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease.

Loh CH(1), Donohue JF, Ohar JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Wake Forest School of Medicine, Medical
Center Boulevard , Winston-Salem, NC 27157-1054 , USA.

INTRODUCTION: The global initiative for chronic obstructive lung disease
guidelines recommend maintenance therapy using long-acting bronchodilators for
patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) who have daily
symptoms. Arformoterol is the (R, R) - enantiomer of the racemic formoterol and
is more potent than (R, R/ S, S) - formoterol.
AREAS COVERED: Currently, arformoterol is one of two nebulized long-acting
β-agonists on the market. It has a low incidence of cardiovascular side effects
with incidence of arrhythmia and ischemia similar to placebo. β-adrenergic
adverse effects are infrequent, numerically lower than formoterol, but have a
quicker onset of action than salmeterol. There was no observed clinical tolerance
over 12 months. arformoterol is safe in combination therapy with inhaled
corticosteroids, tiotropium and rescue inhalers. A 12-month Phase IV trial found 
no increased risk of respiratory death or COPD exacerbation-related
hospitalizations. arformoterol can potentially benefit patients with
hyperinflation and low inspiratory flow rates.
EXPERT OPINION: The introduction of the centers for medicare and medicaid
services penalization for COPD readmissions may boost the appeal of long-acting
bronchodilators as new discharge medications. With the advent of ultra
long-acting bronchodilators, its potential as a once daily agent in isolation or 
combination with these new therapies needs further study.

DOI: 10.1517/14740338.2015.998196 
PMID: 25563342  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Zhongguo Zhen Jiu. 2014 Oct;34(10):951-5.

[Efficacy on chronic obstructive pulmonary disease at stable stage treated with
cutting method and western medication].

[Article in Chinese]

Xu JH, Xu B, Deng YQ.

OBJECTIVE: To compare the difference in clinical efficacy on chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD) at stable stage in the patients among the combined
therapy of cutting method and western medication (combined therapy), simple
cutting method and simple western medication.
METHODS: One hundred and twenty cases of COPD were randomized into three groups, 
40 cases in each one. In the cutting method group, for excessive phlegm
pattern/syndrome, Feishu (BL 13), Danzhong (CV 17), Dingchuan (EX-B 1) and Yuji
(LU 10) were selected as the main acupoints, and Lieque (LU 7) and Pianli (LI 6) 
were as the supplementary acupoints. For the pattern/syndrome of failure to
consolidate kidney primary, Shenshu (BL 23), Pishu (BL 20), Guanyuan (CV 4) and
Yuji (LU 10) were selected as main acupoints, and Jueyinshu (BL 14) and Zusanli
(ST 36) were as the supplementary acupoint. Three acupoints were selected
alternatively in each treatment and the cutting method was applied once every 10 
days. Three treatments made one session. Two sessions of treatment were required.
In the western medication group, salbutamol sulfate aerosol, one press (200
μg/press) was used each night, as well as salmeterol xinafoate and fluticasone
propionate powder for inhalation, one inhalation each night. The treatment of 1
month made one session. Two sessions were required. In the combined therapy
group, the cutting method and western medication were applied in combination. The
results of clinical symptom score, lung function test, arterial blood gas
analysis, degree of inflation as well as clinical efficacy were observed before
and after treatment in each group.
RESULTS: Except the degree of lung inflation, the clinical symptom score, indices
of lung function test, partial pressure of arterial blood gas (PaO2) and partial 
pressure of carbon dioxide (PaCO2) were all obviously improved after treatment as
compared with those before treatment in each group (all P<0.05). They were
apparently improved after treatment in the combined therapy group and the cutting
method group as compared with those in the western medication group (all P<0.05).
The total effective rate was 77.5% (31/40) in the combined therapy group and was 
75.0% (30/40) in the cutting method group, both better than 60.0% (24/40) in the 
western medication group (both P<0.05).
CONCLUSION: The simple cutting method based on syndrome differentiation and the
combined therapy with western medication achieve the superior efficacy on COPD at
stable stage as compared with the simple western medication. The effect mechanism
is possibly related to the improvement of bronchial airway function through
constant acupoint stimulation.


PMID: 25543420  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Basic Clin Pharmacol Toxicol. 2015 Apr;116(4):291-307. doi: 10.1111/bcpt.12366.
Epub 2015 Jan 22.

Diagnosis and pharmacotherapy of stable chronic obstructive pulmonary disease:
the finnish guidelines.

Kankaanranta H(1), Harju T, Kilpeläinen M, Mazur W, Lehto JT, Katajisto M, Peisa 
T, Meinander T, Lehtimäki L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Seinäjoki Central Hospital, Seinäjoki,
Finland; Department of Respiratory Medicine, University of Tampere, Tampere,
Finland.

The Finnish Medical Society Duodecim initiated and managed the update of the
Finnish national guideline for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). The 
Finnish COPD guideline was revised to acknowledge the progress in diagnosis and
management of COPD. This Finnish COPD guideline in English language is a part of 
the original guideline and focuses on the diagnosis, assessment and
pharmacotherapy of stable COPD. It is intended to be used mainly in primary
health care but not forgetting respiratory specialists and other healthcare
workers. The new recommendations and statements are based on the best evidence
available from the medical literature, other published national guidelines and
the GOLD (Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease) report. This
guideline introduces the diagnostic approach, differential diagnostics towards
asthma, assessment and treatment strategy to control symptoms and to prevent
exacerbations. The pharmacotherapy is based on the symptoms and a clinical
phenotype of the individual patient. The guideline defines three clinically
relevant phenotypes including the low and high exacerbation risk phenotypes and
the neglected asthma-COPD overlap syndrome (ACOS). These clinical phenotypes can 
help clinicians to identify patients that respond to specific pharmacological
interventions. For the low exacerbation risk phenotype, pharmacotherapy with
short-acting β2 -agonists (salbutamol, terbutaline) or anticholinergics
(ipratropium) or their combination (fenoterol-ipratropium) is recommended in
patients with less symptoms. If short-acting bronchodilators are not enough to
control symptoms, a long-acting β2 -agonist (formoterol, indacaterol, olodaterol 
or salmeterol) or a long-acting anticholinergic (muscarinic receptor antagonists;
aclidinium, glycopyrronium, tiotropium, umeclidinium) or their combination is
recommended. For the high exacerbation risk phenotype, pharmacotherapy with a
long-acting anticholinergic or a fixed combination of an inhaled glucocorticoid
and a long-acting β2 -agonist (budesonide-formoterol, beclomethasone
dipropionate-formoterol, fluticasone propionate-salmeterol or fluticasone
furoate-vilanterol) is recommended as a first choice. Other treatment options for
this phenotype include combination of long-acting bronchodilators given from
separate inhalers or as a fixed combination (glycopyrronium-indacaterol or
umeclidinium-vilanterol) or a triple combination of an inhaled glucocorticoid, a 
long-acting β2 -agonist and a long-acting anticholinergic. If the patient has
severe-to-very severe COPD (FEV1  < 50% predicted), chronic bronchitis and
frequent exacerbations despite long-acting bronchodilators, the pharmacotherapy
may include also roflumilast. ACOS is a phenotype of COPD in which there are
features that comply with both asthma and COPD. Patients belonging to this
phenotype have usually been excluded from studies evaluating the effects of drugs
both in asthma and in COPD. Thus, evidence-based recommendation of treatment
cannot be given. The treatment should cover both diseases. Generally, the therapy
should include at least inhaled glucocorticoids (beclomethasone dipropionate,
budesonide, ciclesonide, fluticasone furoate, fluticasone propionate or
mometasone) combined with a long-acting bronchodilator (β2 -agonist or
anticholinergic or both).

© 2014 The Authors. Basic & Clinical Pharmacology & Toxicology published by John 
Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of Nordic Association for the Publication of BCPT
(former Nordic Pharmacological Society).

DOI: 10.1111/bcpt.12366 
PMCID: PMC4409821
PMID: 25515181  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Expert Rev Respir Med. 2015 Feb;9(1):5-12. doi: 10.1586/17476348.2015.986468.
Epub 2014 Dec 6.

Fluticasone furoate and vilanterol inhalation powder for the treatment of chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease.

Matera MG(1), Capuano A, Cazzola M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Medicine, Section of Pharmacology 'L. Donatelli',
Centre of Excellence for Cardiovascular Diseases, Second University of Naples,
Naples, Italy.

Fluticasone furoate/vilanterol (FF/VI) is a novel inhaled
corticosteroid/long-acting β₂-agonist (ICS/LABA) fixed dose combination that, by 
simplifying the dosing schedule, allows, for the first time in a member of the
ICS/LABA class, a shift from twice-daily to once-daily treatment. FF/VI is
delivered via a novel, single-step activation, multi-dose dry powder inhaler for 
oral inhalation, Ellipta. Regrettably, there are no head-to-head trials that have
shown superiority in the safety or efficacy of FF versus other ICSs, but evidence
shows that VI has a quicker onset of effect versus salmeterol. However, the
clinical utility of this effect in a maintenance medication is still
questionable. Furthermore, benefits of FF/VI over twice-daily ICS/LABA comparator
have not been shown yet and, in addition, its adverse event profile is generally 
consistent with the known class effects of an ICS/LABA fixed dose combination. In
particular, there is an increase in the risk of pneumonia among patients treated 
with FF/VI relative to VI, mainly among those who benefit most from FF/VI.
Nevertheless, the interesting pharmacological profiles of both FF and VI, the
possibility that FF/VI can be administered once-daily, and the attractive
characteristics of Ellipta are important features that could help FF/VI to be a
successful combination in the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

DOI: 10.1586/17476348.2015.986468 
PMID: 25482512  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Pulm Pharmacol Ther. 2015 Feb;30:44-50. doi: 10.1016/j.pupt.2014.10.006. Epub
2014 Nov 6.

Differences in the efficacy and safety among inhaled corticosteroids
(ICS)/long-acting beta2-agonists (LABA) combinations in the treatment of chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD): Role of ICS.

Latorre M(1), Novelli F(1), Vagaggini B(1), Braido F(2), Papi A(3), Sanduzzi
A(4), Santus P(5), Scichilone N(6), Paggiaro P(7).

Author information: 
(1)Cardio-Thoracic and Vascular Department, Pathophysiology Unit, University of
Pisa, Italy. (2)Allergy and Respiratory Diseases Clinic, DIMI, University of
Genoa, IRCS AOU San Martino-IST, Genoa, Italy. (3)Respiratory Medicine,
Department of Medical Sciences, University of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy. (4)Section
of Respiratory Diseases, Department of Surgery and Clinical Medicine, University 
of Naples, Italy. (5)Dipartimento di Scienze della Salute, Pneumologia
Riabilitativa Fondazione Salvatore Maugeri, Istituto Scientifico di Milano-IRCCS.
Università degli Studi di Milano, Italy. (6)Department of Internal Medicine,
Section of Pulmonology (DIBIMIS), University of Palermo, Palermo, Italy.
(7)Cardio-Thoracic and Vascular Department, Pathophysiology Unit, University of
Pisa, Italy. Electronic address: pierluigi.paggiaro@unipi.it.

Inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) are frequently recommended for the treatment of
asthma and COPD, often in combination with long-acting beta2-agonists (LABA),
depending on the severity of the disease and/or on the specific phenotype.
Several ICS/LABA combinations are currently available that differ in their
pharmacokinetic characteristics and dose of both components. Thus, this review
assesses differences in the efficacy and the safety profiles of the ICS
components in the two more frequently used ICS/LABA combinations
(budesonide/formoterol and fluticasone/salmeterol) for the management of COPD.
Whereas the basic mechanism of action is similar for all ICS (binding with the
intracellular glucocorticoid receptor, which mediates both genomic and non
genomic effects), the pharmacokinetic and characteristics of ICS are quite
different in terms of receptor affinity, bioavailability, lipophilicity and drug 
persistence in the airways. Fluticasone persists longer in airway mucus and
requires more time to dissolve in the lining fluid and then enter the airway
wall, whereas budesonide is cleared more quickly from the airways. Comparative
efficacy of the two major ICS/LABA combinations recommended for the treatment of 
COPD show similar efficacy in terms of reduction of exacerbations, improvement in
forced expiratory volume in the first second (FEV1) and quality of life. One
retrospective cohort study suggested a greater efficacy for the
budesonide/formoterol combination on hospital or emergency department admissions,
oral corticosteroid courses, and addition of tiotropium, and an observational
real-life study reported a greater reduction of COPD exacerbations with
budesonide/formoterol than with fluticasom/salmeterol combination. Among the
potential side effects of chronic ICS treatment in patients with COPD, recently
the use of fluticasone or fluticasone/salmeterol combination has been associated 
with a higher prevalence of pneumonia in the major long-term studies. On the
other hand, no similar increased risk of pneumonia has been reported in patients 
with COPD treated with the budesonide/formoterol combination. A recent
population-based cohort study from the Quebec database showed that the adjusted
odds ratio for having severe pneumonia was higher for fluticasone (2.1) than for 
budesonide (1.17) or other ICS (1.41). Of the ICS studied, only fluticasone
demonstrated a dose-related increase in risk of pneumonia in patients with COPD. 
This difference between fluticasone and budesonide may be explained by the longer
retention of fluticasone in the airways, with potentially greater inhibition of
type-1 innate immunity. Therefore, the risk:benefit ratio should be evaluated
thoroughly when choosing an ICS/LABA combination for patients with COPD.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pupt.2014.10.006 
PMID: 25445928  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Drugs. 2015 Jan;75(1):61-74. doi: 10.1007/s40265-014-0326-1.

Umeclidinium/vilanterol: a review of its use as maintenance therapy in adults
with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Blair HA(1), Deeks ED.

Author information: 
(1)Springer, Private Bag 65901, Mairangi Bay 0754, Auckland, New Zealand,
demail@springer.com.

Umeclidinium/vilanterol (Anoro(®) Ellipta™; Laventair™) is an inhaled fixed-dose 
combination of a long-acting muscarinic receptor antagonist and a long-acting
β2-adrenoceptor agonist. It is available in several countries, including Japan,
the USA, Canada and those of the EU, where it is indicated for oral inhalation in
adults with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Umeclidinium/vilanterol
is administered once daily using the Ellipta™ multi-dose dry powder inhaler,
which is regarded as easy to use. Umeclidinium/vilanterol (62.5/25 µg once daily,
equivalent to a delivered dose of 55/22 µg once daily) was effective and well
tolerated in adult patients with COPD participating in large, multicentre trials 
of up to 24 weeks' duration. Umeclidinium/vilanterol improved pulmonary function 
to a significantly greater extent than placebo and each of the individual
components. Moreover, umeclidinium/vilanterol was significantly more effective
than once-daily tiotropium bromide monotherapy and a twice-daily fixed
combination of salmeterol/fluticasone propionate at improving pulmonary function.
Umeclidinium/vilanterol also had beneficial effects on dyspnoea, use of rescue
medication, exacerbations, health-related quality of life and, in one study,
exercise endurance. Umeclidinium/vilanterol is generally well tolerated in
patients with COPD, with the most common adverse events in clinical trials being 
headache and nasopharyngitis. Umeclidinium/vilanterol was not associated with a
clinically relevant increased risk of cardiovascular adverse events in patients
with COPD, when data from several clinical trials were pooled. Thus, inhaled
umeclidinium/vilanterol extends the treatment options currently available for the
maintenance treatment of adults with COPD and has the convenience of once-daily
administration.

DOI: 10.1007/s40265-014-0326-1 
PMID: 25398674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Br J Clin Pharmacol. 2015 May;79(5):695-708. doi: 10.1111/bcp.12545.

New combination bronchodilators for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease:
current evidence and future perspectives.

Singh D(1).

Author information: 
(1)University of Manchester, Medicines Evaluation Unit, University Hospital of
South Manchester NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester, M23 9QZ, UK.

Fixed dose combination (FDC) dual bronchodilators that co-administer a long
acting β2 -adrenoceptor agonist (LABA) and a long acting muscarinic antagonist
(LAMA) are a new class of inhaled treatment for chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD). This review focuses on the clinical evidence for the benefit of
LABA/LAMA FDCs compared with monocomponent treatments, and also compared with
active comparators that are widely used for the treatment of COPD, namely
tiotropium and salmeterol-fluticasone. Novel FDC dual bronchodilators include
QVA149 and umeclidinium/vilanterol (UMEC/VI). Long term clinical trials show that
QVA149 and UMEC/VI are superior to monocomponent therapy in terms of trough
forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1), although the FEV1 improvement was limited
to approximately 80-90% of the added monocomponent values. This suggests that the
effect of combining a LABA and a LAMA is not fully additive. LABA/LAMA FDC were
associated with the largest mean changes in symptoms and health status that were 
above the minimal clinically important difference, in contrast to the
monocomponents. Furthermore, these LABA/LAMA FDCs demonstrated superiority over
the active comparators tiotropium and salmeterol-fluticasone in terms of trough
FEV1 and patient-reported outcomes. LABA/LAMA FDCs offer a simplified means of
maximizing bronchodilation for COPD patients, with the improvements in lung
function being mirrored by benefits in terms of symptoms and exacerbations. The
use of LABA/LAMA FDCs in clinical practice is set to grow and further studies are
needed to define their optimal place in treatment guidelines.

© 2014 The Author. British Journal of Clinical Pharmacology published by John
Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of The British Pharmacological Society.

DOI: 10.1111/bcp.12545 
PMCID: PMC4415707
PMID: 25377687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Eur Respir J. 2014 Dec;44(6):1548-56. doi: 10.1183/09031936.00126814. Epub 2014
Oct 30.

INSTEAD: a randomised switch trial of indacaterol versus salmeterol/fluticasone
in moderate COPD.

Rossi A(1), van der Molen T(2), del Olmo R(3), Papi A(4), Wehbe L(5), Quinn M(6),
Lu C(6), Young D(7), Cameron R(7), Bucchioni E(8), Altman P(6).

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary Unit, University of Verona, Verona, Italy andrea.rossi_03@univr.it. 
(2)University Medical Center Groningen, University of Groningen, Groningen, the
Netherlands. (3)Fundación CIDEA and Hospital Maria Ferrer, Buenos Aires,
Argentina. (4)University of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy. (5)Fundacion Enfisema,
Buenos Aires, Argentina. (6)Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corporation, East Hanover,
NJ, USA. (7)Novartis Horsham Research Centre, Horsham, UK. (8)Novartis Farma,
Origgio, Italy.

Comment in
    Eur Respir J. 2014 Dec;44(6):1391-3.
    Eur Respir J. 2015 Apr;45(4):1188-9.
    Eur Respir J. 2015 Apr;45(4):1187-8.
    Expert Opin Pharmacother. 2015;16(10):1539-41.

The Indacaterol: Switching Non-exacerbating Patients with Moderate COPD From
Salmeterol/Fluticasone to Indacaterol (INSTEAD) study investigated the effect of 
switching patients at low risk of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)
exacerbations from salmeterol/fluticasone (SFC; inhaled corticosteroid (ICS)
regimen) to indacaterol monotherapy (non-ICS regimen). This 26-week,
double-blind, double-dummy, parallel-group, phase IV study, randomised 581
patients with moderate COPD to indacaterol 150 μg once daily or SFC 50/500 μg
twice daily. Patients had been receiving SFC 50/500 μg for ≥3 months, with no
COPD exacerbations for more than a year before the study (patients for whom ICS
is not recommended). The primary objective was to demonstrate non-inferiority of 
indacaterol to SFC, measured by trough forced expiratory volume in 1 second
(FEV₁) after 12 weeks (non-inferiority margin of 0.06 L). The primary objective
was met, with a mean treatment difference of 9 mL (95% CI -45-26 mL). There were 
no significant differences between treatments in terms of breathlessness
(transition dyspnoea index) or health status (Saint George's Respiratory
Questionnaire) at weeks 12 or 26, or rescue medication use or COPD exacerbation
rates over 26 weeks. Safety profiles of both treatments were as expected. This
study demonstrated that patients with moderate COPD and no exacerbations in the
previous year can be switched from SFC to indacaterol 150 μg with no efficacy
loss.

©ERS 2014.

DOI: 10.1183/09031936.00126814 
PMID: 25359348  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Int J Clin Exp Med. 2014 Sep 15;7(9):2907-11. eCollection 2014.

Salmeterol combined with fluticasone propionate improved COPD in patients during 
stable stage.

Lu D(1), Ma J(2), Yang X(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Disease, People's Hospital of Xinjiang Uygur
Autonomous Region Wulumuqi, Xinjiang 830000, China. (2)Department of Pharmacy,
People's Hospital of Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Region Wulumuqi, Xinjiang 830000, 
China.

PURPOSE: To evaluate the clinical effect of inhaled Salmeterol with Fluticasone
propionate (50:500 μg) in patients with moderate to severe chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD) during the stable stage of the disease.
METHODS: Sixty patients with moderate to severe COPD were randomly divided into
trial and control groups (N=30 each). In the trial group, patients inhaled
Salmeterol with Fluticasone (50:500 μg) propionate twice daily via turbuhaler for
3 months. In the control group, patients used slow- released theophylline, 200
mg, twice daily for 3 months; patients took an expectorant (Ambroxol
Hydrochloride, 10 ml, three times daily) if necessary. Clinical symptoms and
physical signs were graded using St. George's respiratory disease questionnaire
(SGRQ). Changes in lung function were assessed.
RESULTS: Indicators of lung function including the values of FEV1, FEV1/FVC, and 
FEV1/predicted values were significantly higher after treatment in the trial
group than in the control group (P<0.05). SGRQ values in the trial group
decreased significantly after treatment (P<0.05).
CONCLUSION: Inhaled Salmeterol 50 μg and Fluticasone propionate 500 μg can
significantly improve the lung function and clinical symptoms of patients with
stable moderate to severe COPD.


PMCID: PMC4211807
PMID: 25356157  [PubMed]


70. Mol Pharmacol. 2015 Jan;87(1):103-20. doi: 10.1124/mol.114.095364. Epub 2014 Oct 
16.

Salmeterol's extreme β2 selectivity is due to residues in both extracellular
loops and transmembrane domains.

Baker JG(1), Proudman RG(2), Hill SJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Cell Signalling, School of Life Sciences, Queen's Medical Centre, University
of Nottingham, Nottingham, United Kingdom jillian.baker@nottingham.ac.uk. (2)Cell
Signalling, School of Life Sciences, Queen's Medical Centre, University of
Nottingham, Nottingham, United Kingdom.

Salmeterol is a long-acting β2-agonist, widely used as an inhaled treatment of
asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. It has very high β2-affinity
(log KD -8.95) and is very selective for the β2-adrenoceptor (1000-fold
selectivity over the β1-adrenoceptor). This study used a mutagenesis approach to 
determine the exact amino acids in the human β2-adrenoceptor responsible for this
very high selectivity. Wild-type β2- and β1-adrenoceptors, chimeric
β2/β1-adrenoceptors, and receptors with single-point mutations were transfected
into Chinese hamster ovary-K1 cells, and affinity and function were studied using
[(3)H]CGP 12177 [(-)-4-(3-tert-butylamino-2-hydroxypropoxy)-benzimidazol-2-one]
whole-cell binding and [(3)H]cAMP accumulation. Extracellular loop 3 (and
specifically amino acid K305) had the largest single effect by reducing
salmeterol's affinity for the β2-adrenoceptor by 31-fold. H296 in transmembrane 6
also had a major effect (18-fold reduction in salmeterol affinity). Combining
these, in the double mutant β2-H296K-K305D, reduced salmeterol's affinity by
275-fold, to within 4-fold of that of the β1-adrenoceptor, without affecting the 
affinity or selectivity of other β2-agonists (salbutamol, formoterol, fenoterol, 
clenbuterol, or adrenaline). Another important amino acid was Y308 in
transmembrane 7, although this also affected the affinity and selectivity of
other agonists. F194 in extracellular loop 2 and R304 in extracellular loop 3
also had minor effects. None of these mutations (including the double mutant
β2-H296K-K305D) affected the efficacy or duration of action of salmeterol. This
suggests that the high affinity and selectivity of salmeterol are due to specific
amino acids within the receptor itself, but that the duration of action is at
least in part due to other factors, for example lipophilicity.

Copyright © 2014 by The American Society for Pharmacology and Experimental
Therapeutics.

DOI: 10.1124/mol.114.095364 
PMID: 25324048  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Respir Med. 2014 Dec;108(12):1786-93. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2014.09.015. Epub 2014 
Oct 2.

Cost-effectiveness of the LABA/LAMA dual bronchodilator
indacaterol/glycopyrronium in a Swedish healthcare setting.

Price D(1), Keininger D(2), Costa-Scharplatz M(3), Mezzi K(2), Dimova M(4),
Asukai Y(4), Ställberg B(5).

Author information: 
(1)Academic Primary Care, Division of Applied Health Sciences, University of
Aberdeen, Polwarth Building, Aberdeen AB25 2ZD, UK. (2)Primary Care Franchise,
Novartis Pharma AG, Postfach, CH-4002 Basel, Switzerland. (3)Novartis Pharma AB, 
Box 1150, TÄBY, Stockholm S-183 79, Sweden. Electronic address:
madlaina.costa-scharplatz@novartis.com. (4)IMS Health Economics and Outcomes
Research, 210 Pentonville Road, London N1 9JY, UK. (5)Department of Public Health
and Caring Sciences, Family Medicine and Preventive Medicine, Uppsala University,
Uppsala, Sweden.

BACKGROUND: Indacaterol/glycopyrronium (IND/GLY) is a once-daily inhaled
fixed-dose combination of indacaterol (IND), a long-acting β2-adrenergic agonist 
(LABA), and glycopyrronium (GLY), a long-acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA) for 
use as maintenance treatment to relieve symptoms of chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD) in adults.
OBJECTIVE: To determine the economic benefits of IND/GLY compared with the free
combination of indacaterol and glycopyrronium (IND + GLY), and with the
fixed-dose combination of salmeterol/fluticasone (SFC), in a moderate-to-severe
COPD population with low-exacerbation risk. The model-based analysis extrapolated
results up to lifetime time horizon and calculated costs per quality-adjusted
life year.
METHODS: Assuming equal efficacy, a cost-minimisation analysis compared IND/GLY
vs IND + GLY using model inputs from the double-blind, randomised SHINE trial.
The double-blind, randomised ILLUMINATE and TORCH trials were used to analyse
cost-effectiveness versus SFC. To consider ICS-related pneumonia events,
published odds ratio comparing an ICS-exposed group to a control group of COPD
patients was used. Direct and indirect drug costs as well as drug acquisition
costs (in Swedish Krona [SEK]) were derived from published Swedish sources. Cost 
and effects were discounted with 3%. Uncertainty was assessed by one-way and
probabilistic sensitivity analyses (PSA).
RESULTS: IND/GLY was cost-saving vs IND + GLY with incremental savings of SEK
(EUR) 768 (85), and 3309 (368) per patient over one and five years. IND/GLY was
found to be less costly and more effective compared to SFC with cost savings of
SEK (EUR) 2744 (303), 8854 (976), 13,938 (1536), 27,495 (3031) and 43,033 (4744) 
over one, three, five, ten years and lifetime. The PSA indicated that all
iterations produced dominant results for IND/GLY.
CONCLUSION: IND/GLY is cost-minimising vs IND + GLY and dominates SFC in the
maintenance treatment of COPD patients in Sweden. Encouraging dual bronchodilator
therapy over an ICS-containing combination results in lower total costs and
better outcomes compared to combination therapy including fluticasone in
moderate-to-severe COPD patients with low exacerbation risk.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2014.09.015 
PMID: 25307414  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Ugeskr Laeger. 2014 Sep 15;176(38). pii: V02140088.

[The combination of indacaterol and glycopyrronium has effects on symptoms, lung 
function, and rate of exacerbations in COPD patients].

[Article in Danish]

Ulrik CS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Lungemedicinsk Afdeling, Hvidovre -Hospital, Kettegård Allé 30, 2650 Hvidovre.
E-mail: csulrik@dadlnet.dk.

Long-acting bronchodilators are the mainstay of pharmacological therapy for
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). This paper reviews the efficacy of 
the once-daily fixed-dose dual bronchodilator combination of indacaterol and
glycopyrronium in COPD patients. Compared with single therapy with indacaterol,
glycopyrronium and tiotropium and fixed combination salmeterol/fluticasone,
fixed-dose indacaterol/glycopyrronium has clinically relevant effects on
symptoms, health status, lung function, and rate of exacerbations and by that
suggests a potential for dual bronchodilation as an important maintenance
therapeutic option for some patients with COPD.


PMID: 25294211  [PubMed - in process]


73. NPJ Prim Care Respir Med. 2014 Oct 2;24:14069. doi: 10.1038/npjpcrm.2014.69.

Impact of multiple-dose versus single-dose inhaler devices on COPD patients'
persistence with long-acting β₂-agonists: a dispensing database analysis.

van Boven JF(1), van Raaij JJ(1), van der Galiën R(1), Postma MJ(1), van der
Molen T(2), Dekhuijzen PN(3), Vegter S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Unit of PharmacoEpidemiology and PharmacoEconomics, Department of Pharmacy,
University of Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands. (2)Department of Primary
Care, University Medical Centre Groningen, University of Groningen, Groningen,
The Netherlands. (3)Department of Pulmonary Diseases, Radboud University Medical 
Centre, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: With a growing availability of different devices and types of
medication, additional evidence is required to assist clinicians in prescribing
the optimal medication in relation to chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD) patients' persistence with long-acting β2-agonists (LABAs).
AIMS: To assess the impact of the type of inhaler device (multiple-dose versus
single-dose inhalers) on 1-year persistence and switching patterns with LABAs.
METHODS: A retrospective observational cohort study was performed comparing a
cohort of patients initiating multiple-dose inhalers and a cohort initiating
single-dose inhalers. The study population consisted of long-acting
bronchodilator naive COPD patients, initiating inhalation therapy with mono-LABAs
(formoterol, indacaterol or salmeterol). Analyses were performed using pharmacy
dispensing data from 1994 to 2012, obtained from the IADB.nl database. Study
outcomes were 1-year persistence and switching patterns. RESULTS were adjusted
for initial prescriber, initial medication, dosing regimen and relevant
comorbidities.
RESULTS: In all, 575 patients initiating LABAs were included in the final study
cohort. Among them, 475 (83%) initiated a multiple-dose inhaler and 100 (17%) a
single-dose inhaler. Further, 269 (47%) initiated formoterol, 9 (2%) indacaterol 
and 297 (52%) salmeterol. There was no significant difference in persistence
between users of multiple-dose or single-dose inhalers (hazard ratio: 0.98, 95%
confidence interval: 0.76-1.26, P=0.99). Over 80% re-started or switched
medication.
CONCLUSIONS: There seems no impact of inhaler device (multiple-dose versus
single-dose inhalers) on COPD patients' persistence with LABAs. Over 80% of
patients who initially seemed to discontinue LABAs, re-started their initial
medication or switched inhalers or medication within 1 year.

DOI: 10.1038/npjpcrm.2014.69 
PMCID: PMC4373462
PMID: 25274453  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. J Aerosol Med Pulm Drug Deliv. 2015 Jun;28(3):219-28. doi:
10.1089/jamp.2014.1142. Epub 2014 Sep 29.

Inhaler devices for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: insights from patients
and healthcare practitioners.

Molimard M(1), Colthorpe P(2).

Author information: 
(1)1Département de Pharmacologie, CHU de Bordeaux, Universite Bordeaux, INSERM
U657, Bordeaux Cedex, France. (2)2Novartis Pharma AG, Basel, Switzerland.

BACKGROUND: The choice of inhaler device for patients with chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD) depends upon multiple attributes. An online survey was
devised to assess COPD patients' and healthcare practitioners' (HCPs; physicians 
and nurses) opinions and preferences for inhaler devices.
METHODS: Patients diagnosed with COPD ≥6 months from United States (US), United
Kingdom (UK), France, and Germany, and HCPs from the US, UK, France, Italy, and
Japan were enrolled to participate in an online quantitative 35 minutes survey. A
proprietary analytical tool from Sawtooth Software was used to collect,
randomize, and analyze participant opinions and preferences of device attributes,
including functionality.
RESULTS: A total of 245 patients (mean age, 60.7 years) completed the survey. Of 
these, 124 and 121 patients were taking fluticasone/salmeterol, and tiotropium,
respectively. Patients cited ease of use, dose recording, and dose capacity
(single or multi-dose) as important attributes for the device. Key factors that
patients considered would make the device easier to use were fewer steps to
operate the inhaler, confirmation that the dose has been taken correctly, easier 
coordination of breathing manoeuver, and least resistance while inhaling. A total
of 504 HCPs (380 physicians and 124 nurses) completed the survey, and cited
patient satisfaction and ease of use as the most important attributes when
selecting an inhaler device for patients. Dose recording and multi-dose versus
single-dose designs were given less importance than other attributes such as
patient satisfaction and cost by HCPs.
CONCLUSION: The survey provides important insights into what patients and HCPs
consider to be key attributes of an ideal inhaler device for COPD management.
Given that patients with COPD self-administer their COPD chronic medication and
need to deliver the correct dose, it is important to consider these insights for 
the appropriate management of COPD.

DOI: 10.1089/jamp.2014.1142 
PMCID: PMC4559157
PMID: 25265316  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Respir Res. 2014 Sep 24;15:105. doi: 10.1186/s12931-014-0105-2.

Fluticasone propionate/salmeterol 250/50 μg versus salmeterol 50 μg after chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease exacerbation.

Ohar JA(1), Crater GD, Emmett A, Ferro TJ, Morris AN, Raphiou I, Sriram PS,
Dransfield MT.

Author information: 
(1)Wake Forest University Medical Center, 1 Medical Center Boulevard,
Winston-Salem, NC, USA. johar@wakehealth.edu.

BACKGROUND: Inhaled long-acting beta2 agonists used alone and in combination with
an inhaled corticosteroid reduce the risk of exacerbations in patients with
stable COPD. However, the relative efficacy of these agents in preventing
recurrent exacerbations in those recovering from an initial episode is not known.
This study compared the rate of COPD exacerbations over the 26 weeks after an
initial exacerbation in patients receiving the combination of fluticasone
propionate and salmeterol (FP/SAL) or SAL alone.
METHODS: Patients (n = 639) aged ≥40 years were randomized to either twice-daily 
inhaled FP/SAL 250/50 μg or SAL 50 μg. Primary, and secondary, endpoints were
rates of recurrent severe, and moderate/severe, exacerbations of COPD. Lung
function, health outcomes and levels of biomarkers of systemic inflammation were 
also assessed.
RESULTS: There was no statistically significant treatment difference in rates of 
recurrent severe exacerbations (treatment ratio 0.92 [95% CI: 0.58, 1.45]) and
moderate/severe exacerbations (0.82 [0.64, 1.06]) between FP/SAL and SAL in the
intent-to-treat population. Pre-dose morning FEV1 change from baseline was
greater (0.10 L [0.04, 0.16]) with FP/SAL than SAL. No treatment difference was
seen for other endpoints including patient-reported health outcomes and biomarker
levels for the full cohort.
CONCLUSIONS: No significant treatment difference between FP/SAL and SAL was seen 
in COPD exacerbation recurrence for the complete cohort. Treatment benefit with
FP/SAL over SAL (treatment ratio 0.68 [0.47, 0.97]) was seen in patients having
FEV1 ≥ 30% and prior exposure to ICS. No unexpected safety issues were identified
with either treatment. Patients with the most severe COPD may be more refractory 
to treatment.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov (identifier NCT01110200). This study was
funded by GlaxoSmithKline (study number ADC113874).

DOI: 10.1186/s12931-014-0105-2 
PMCID: PMC4176847
PMID: 25248764  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Pharm Res. 2015 Feb;32(2):617-27. doi: 10.1007/s11095-014-1490-4. Epub 2014 Sep
18.

Prediction of disease progression, treatment response and dropout in chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).

Musuamba FT(1), Teutonico D, Maas HJ, Facius A, Yang S, Danhof M, Della Pasqua O.

Author information: 
(1)Gorlaeus Laboratories, Division of Pharmacology, Leiden Academic Centre for
Drug Research, P.O. Box 9502, 2300 RA, Leiden, The Netherlands.

PURPOSE: Drug development in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) has
been characterised by unacceptably high failure rates. In addition to the poor
sensitivity in forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV1), numerous causes are
known to contribute to this phenomenon, which can be clustered into drug-,
disease- and design-related factors. Here we present a model-based approach to
describe disease progression, treatment response and dropout in clinical trials
with COPD patients.
METHODS: Data from six phase II trials lasting up to 6 months were used. Disease 
progression (trough FEV1 measurements) was modelled by a time-varying function,
whilst the treatment effect was described by an indirect response model. A
time-to-event model was used for dropout
RESULTS: All relevant parameters were characterised with acceptable precision.
Two parameters were necessary to model the dropout patterns, which was found to
be partly linked to the treatment failure. Disease severity at baseline, previous
use of corticosteroids, gender and height were significant covariates on disease 
baseline whereas disease severity and reversibility to salbutamol/salmeterol were
significant covariates on Emax for salmeterol active arm.
CONCLUSION: Incorporation of the various interacting factors into a single model 
will offer the basis for patient enrichment and improved dose rationale in COPD.

DOI: 10.1007/s11095-014-1490-4 
PMCID: PMC4300418
PMID: 25231008  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Drugs. 2014 Sep;74(14):1635-57. doi: 10.1007/s40265-014-0284-7.

Turning a molecule into a medicine: the development of indacaterol as a novel
once-daily bronchodilator treatment for patients with COPD.

Murphy L(1), Rennard S, Donohue J, Molimard M, Dahl R, Beeh KM, Dederichs J,
Fülle HJ, Higgins M, Young D.

Author information: 
(1)Novartis Horsham Research Centre, Novartis Pharmaceuticals UK Limited,
Wimblehurst Road, Horsham, West Sussex, RH12 5AB, UK,
lorraine.murphy@novartis.com.

Indacaterol is the first once-daily, long-acting β2-adrenergic agonist (LABA)
approved for the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
Indacaterol was developed using a combination of informed drug design and
molecular chemistry to generate a β2-adrenergic agonist with a fast onset and
long duration of action, enabling once-daily dosing with an acceptable safety
profile. Early preclinical studies with indacaterol demonstrated these
characteristics, and this promising molecule was taken into clinical development,
originally for asthma treatment. Subsequent safety concerns over LABA monotherapy
in patients with asthma redirected indacaterol's development to centre on COPD,
where a good evidence base and guideline recommendations for bronchodilator
monotherapy existed. Clinical development was initially complicated by different 
inhaler devices and differing doses of indacaterol. Using a phase III innovative 
adaptive-design clinical trial (INHANCE), indacaterol 150 and 300 μg once-daily
doses were selected to be taken forward into the phase III INERGIZE programme.
This programme delivered placebo-controlled and active-comparator data, including
comparisons with formoterol, tiotropium and salmeterol/fluticasone, as well as
the use of indacaterol in combination with tiotropium. Together, these studies
provided a comprehensive assessment of the benefit-risk profile of indacaterol,
allowing for regulatory submission. Indacaterol was first approved at once-daily 
doses of 150 and 300 μg in the European Union in 2009, followed by 150 µg in
Japan (2011) and China (2012), and 75 μg in the United States (2011). To date,
indacaterol is approved and marketed in more than 100 countries worldwide for
once-daily maintenance treatment of COPD.

DOI: 10.1007/s40265-014-0284-7 
PMID: 25212789  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. N Engl J Med. 2014 Oct 2;371(14):1285-94. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1407154. Epub 2014
Sep 8.

Withdrawal of inhaled glucocorticoids and exacerbations of COPD.

Magnussen H(1), Disse B, Rodriguez-Roisin R, Kirsten A, Watz H, Tetzlaff K, Towse
L, Finnigan H, Dahl R, Decramer M, Chanez P, Wouters EF, Calverley PM; WISDOM
Investigators.

Collaborators: Chia M, Peters M, Polasek J, Sajkov D, Seale P, Wheatley J, Bedert
L, Decramer M, Driesen P, Fievez P, Flemale A, Martinot JB, Mentens Y, Ninane V, 
Péche R, Plas B, van Zandweghe L, Adalberto R, Carmo Moreira MA, Fritscher C,
Gondim H, Jardim JR, Dancheva A, Kostov K, Lllieva-Fartunova V, Metev H,
Osmanliev D, Rashkov Palaveev K, Taseva M, Troshanova E, Bai C, Baiqiang C, Li H,
Lin Y, Tang Y, Wu Y, Xin J, Yao W, Backer V, Dahl R, Titlestad I, Arvin-Berod C, 
Boyer GR, Brouquieres D, Brousse C, Caillaud D, Castelnau O, Cavailles A, Chanez 
P, Claussner Paulignan M, Dupouy J, Gutgobert C, Jasnot JY, Le Merre C, Meziane
L, Paganin F, Pegliasco H, Proust A, Raspaud C, Tarodo de la Fuente P, Verdier S,
Andreas S, Bewig B, Büttner C, Eich A, Gebhardt R, Herth F, Kardos P, Keller C,
Koch A, Korn S, Kronsbein J, Käßner F, Magnussen H, Mikloweit P, Pfeifer M,
Schröder-Babo W, Schultebraucks R, Vogelmeier C, Knorr R, Neurohr C, Gaga M,
Gourgoulianis K, Kakoura M, Kosmas E, Koulouris N, Papiris S, Siafakas N,
Sichletides L, Tatsis G, Toubis M, Vassilakopoulos T, Panagiotis D, Balint B,
Jedlinszki M, Meszaros I, Papp M, Radeczky E, Rajakay K, Schlezák J, Di Maria GU,
Fabbri LM, Foresi A, Fracchia C, Paggiaro PL, Foschino MP, Potena A, Spanevello
A, Papi A, de Munck DR, Pasma HR, Rudolphus A, van Noord JA, Brockway B, Epton M,
Jones S, McWilliams T, Mills G, Quinn D, Walford E, Kelly E, Custodio V,
Fernandez L, de Guia T, Jorge M, Mortera L, Roa C, Santiaguel J, Wang A,
Asankowicz-Bargiel B, Batura-Gabryel H, Chwist-Nowak A, Mieszko Filipczyk G,
Madra-Rogacka D, Pawlukiewicz M, Silber M, Wesolowski S, Astafyeva N, Ilkovich M,
Ivleva A, Khokhlov A, Leshchenko I, Nikishenkova L, Shilkina N, Zhestkov A,
Mishina I, Alekseeva E, Abdool-Gaffar M, Abdullah I, Bateman E, Irusen E, Jansen 
J, Joubert JR, Ras G, Alonso A, Arismendi E, Cejudo P, Echave Sustaeta JM,
Farrero E, Ferrer A, Galdiz Iturri JB, Gutierrez Lara JA, Rodriguez-Roisin R,
Roldan J, Perng WC, Hang LW, Huang MS, Kuo PH, Tsao CY, Wu RG, Abdelkader A,
Benzarti M, Bouacha H, Chabbou A, Megdiche ML, Aktogu S, Altin S, Atis S,
Caglayan B, Cetinkaya E, Cikrikcioglu S, Damar D, Ergun P, Erkan L, Evyapan F,
Guclu SZ, Gulmez I, Ilgazli A, Karakurt S, Sayiner A, Uzaslan EK, Yildiz O,
Dzyublyk O, Krasnokutskiy S, Mostoviy Y, Ostrovskiy M, Sevchuk S, Voeykova L,
Iashyna L, Barnes NC, Calverley P, Chilvers ER, Elborn S, Hadfield JW, Langan J, 
Lawson R, Mahdi H, Mansur A, McKeith D, Morice A, Nordstrum M, Russell R,
Sridharan K, Wilson AM, Winning A.

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2014 Oct 2;371(14):1340-1.
    Evid Based Med. 2015 Apr;20(2):57.
    N Engl J Med. 2015 Jan 1;372(1):93-4.
    Ann Intern Med. 2015 Mar 17;162(6):JC5.
    N Engl J Med. 2015 Jan 1;372(1):92-3.
    N Engl J Med. 2015 Jan 1;372(1):92.
    N Engl J Med. 2015 Jan 1;372(1):93.

BACKGROUND: Treatment with inhaled glucocorticoids in combination with
long-acting bronchodilators is recommended in patients with frequent
exacerbations of severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). However,
the benefit of inhaled glucocorticoids in addition to two long-acting
bronchodilators has not been fully explored.
METHODS: In this 12-month, double-blind, parallel-group study, 2485 patients with
a history of exacerbation of COPD received triple therapy consisting of
tiotropium (at a dose of 18 μg once daily), salmeterol (50 μg twice daily), and
the inhaled glucocorticoid fluticasone propionate (500 μg twice daily) during a
6-week run-in period. Patients were then randomly assigned to continued triple
therapy or withdrawal of fluticasone in three steps over a 12-week period. The
primary end point was the time to the first moderate or severe COPD exacerbation.
Spirometric findings, health status, and dyspnea were also monitored.
RESULTS: As compared with continued glucocorticoid use, glucocorticoid withdrawal
met the prespecified noninferiority criterion of 1.20 for the upper limit of the 
95% confidence interval (CI) with respect to the first moderate or severe COPD
exacerbation (hazard ratio, 1.06; 95% CI, 0.94 to 1.19). At week 18, when
glucocorticoid withdrawal was complete, the adjusted mean reduction from baseline
in the trough forced expiratory volume in 1 second was 38 ml greater in the
glucocorticoid-withdrawal group than in the glucocorticoid-continuation group
(P<0.001); a similar between-group difference (43 ml) was seen at week 52
(P=0.001). No change in dyspnea and minor changes in health status occurred in
the glucocorticoid-withdrawal group.
CONCLUSIONS: In patients with severe COPD receiving tiotropium plus salmeterol,
the risk of moderate or severe exacerbations was similar among those who
discontinued inhaled glucocorticoids and those who continued glucocorticoid
therapy. However, there was a greater decrease in lung function during the final 
step of glucocorticoid withdrawal. (Funded by Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma; WISDOM
ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT00975195.).

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa1407154 
PMID: 25196117  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Eur Respir J. 2014 Nov;44(5):1166-76. doi: 10.1183/09031936.00024314. Epub 2014
Sep 3.

Prospective validation of the endurance shuttle walking test in the context of
bronchodilation in COPD.

Borel B(1), Pepin V(2), Mahler DA(3), Nadreau É(4), Maltais F(5).

Author information: 
(1)Centre de recherche, Institut Universitaire de Cardiologie et de Pneumologie
de Québec - Université Laval, Quebec, Canada Laboratoire HAVAE (EA6310),
Université de Limoges, Limoges, France. (2)Centre de recherche, Hôpital du
Sacré-Coeur de Montréal, Montreal, Canada. (3)Geisel School of Medicine at
Dartmouth, Hanover, NH, USA. (4)Centre de recherche, Institut Universitaire de
Cardiologie et de Pneumologie de Québec - Université Laval, Quebec, Canada.
(5)Centre de recherche, Institut Universitaire de Cardiologie et de Pneumologie
de Québec - Université Laval, Quebec, Canada Francois.Maltais@fmed.ulaval.ca.

This study focused on repeatability data and minimal important difference (MID)
estimates of the endurance shuttle walking test (ESWT). 255 chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease patients (forced expiratory volume in 1 s 54.7±13.2% predicted)
completed four ESWTs at different times during the 8-week study: two under
baseline conditions with tiotropium (1 week apart), one after a single dose and
one after 4 weeks of either fluticasone propionate/salmeterol combination or
placebo in addition to tiotropium. 97 patients performed all the tests with a
portable metabolic system. Reproducibility of test performance and
cardiorespiratory response was investigated with the data obtained on the first
two ESWTs. The mean differences between the first two ESWT performances
(-6.7±72.2 s and -7.3±113.1 m for endurance time and walking distance,
respectively) were not statistically significant. The between-test end-exercise
and isotime values for each cardiorespiratory parameter were not significantly
different from each other. With the exception of arterial oxygen saturation by
pulse oximetry, the repeatability of cardiorespiratory adaptations to ESWT was
also confirmed with strong Pearson and intraclass correlation coefficients.
Finally, changes of 56-61 s and 70-82 m in endurance time and distance walked,
respectively, were perceived by patients. This study provides methodological
information supporting the reliability of the ESWT and suggests MID estimates for
this test.

©ERS 2014.

DOI: 10.1183/09031936.00024314 
PMID: 25186261  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. J Tradit Chin Med. 2014 Aug;34(4):445-9.

Effect of yiqibushenhuoxue decoction on chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
measured by St. George's respiratory disease questionnaire scores and forced
expiratory volume.

Liu J, Gao F, Li Z.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the effects of Yiqibushenhuoxue decoction on stable
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) by observing its influences on
patients' quality of life and airway inflammation.
METHODS: Seventy patients with stable COPD were randomly divided into a treatment
group (n = 35) treated with Yiqibushenhuoxue decoction plus Seretide and a
control group (n = 35) treated with Seretide only. The dosage of Yiqibushenhuoxue
decoction was 100 mL each time, twice a day, and the dosage of Seretide was
salmeterol 50 microg/fluticasone 250 microg twice a day. Both groups were treated
for 12 weeks. Before and after the treatment, St George's respiratory disease
questionnaire (SGRQ) scores, forced expiratory volume, and forced expiratory
volume in 1 second/forced vital capacity (FEV1/ FVC) were measured.
RESULTS: The SGRQ scores in both groups were significantly lower than those
before treatment (P < 0.05). After treatment, the total SGRQ scores and each
subscore in the treatment group were significantly lower than those in the
control group (P < 0.05). The percentage of the predicted FEV1% and FEV1/FVC were
higher in both groups, but no statistical differences were detected from before
to after the treatment or between the two groups (P > 0.05).
CONCLUSION: Yiqibushenhuoxue decoction could significantly decrease the SGRQ
scores in patients with stable COPD, which suggests that it is able to improve
patient symptoms.


PMID: 25185362  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Biochem Pharmacol. 2014 Oct 1;91(3):400-8. doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2014.07.026. Epub
2014 Aug 12.

Extracellular matrix composition is modified by β₂-agonists through cAMP in COPD.

Lambers C(1), Qi Y(2), Eleni P(3), Costa L(2), Zhong J(2), Tamm M(2), Block
LH(4), Roth M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Respiratory Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine II, Medical 
University of Vienna, A-1090 Vienna, Austria. Electronic address:
christopher.lambers@meduniwien.ac.at. (2)Pulmonary Cell Research, Dept
Biomedicine and Pneumology, Department of Internal Medicine, University Hospital 
and University of Basel CH-4031 Basel, Switzerland. (3)Pharmacology, School of
Medicine, University of Thessaloniki, GR-54621 Thessaloniki, Greece. (4)Division 
of Respiratory Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine II, Medical University
of Vienna, A-1090 Vienna, Austria.

Long acting β₂-agonists (LABA) have been reported to modify the extracellular
matrix (ECM) composition in the airway wall. Based on our earlier studies we here
investigated the mechanism underlying the control of ECM modification by LABA in 
primary human airway smooth muscle cells. Cells were treated with formoterol or
salmeterol (30 min) before TGF-β₁ stimulation (2-3 days) Using RT-PCT,
immuno-blotting and ELISA the de novo synthesis and deposition of collagen
type-I, -III, -IV and fibronectin were determined. Matrix metalloproteinases
(MMP)-2 and -9 were analyzed by zymography. Both LABA activated cAMP and its
corresponding transcription factor CREB within 60 min and thus partly reduced
TGF-β₁-induced gene transcription of collagen type-I, -III, fibronectin and
connective tissue growth factor (CTGF). The inhibitory effect of both LABA on
collagen type-I and -III deposition involved a cAMP dependent mechanism, while
the inhibitory effect of the two drugs on TGF-β1-induced fibronectin deposition
and on CTGF secretion was independent of cAMP. Interestingly, none of the two
LABA reduced CTGF-induced synthesis of collagen type-I or type-III deposition. In
addition, none of the two LABA modified collagen type-IV deposition or the
expression and activity of MMP-2 or MMP-9. Our results show that LABA can prevent
de novo deposition of specific ECM components through cAMP dependent and
independent signaling. However, they do not reduce all ECM components by the same
mechanism and they do not reduce existing collagen deposits. This might explain
some of the controversial reports on the anti-remodeling effect of LABA in
chronic inflammatory lung diseases.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bcp.2014.07.026 
PMID: 25107701  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2014 Oct;351(1):190-9. doi: 10.1124/jpet.114.216861. Epub
2014 Aug 6.

Pharmacologic characterization of GSK-961081 (TD-5959), a first-in-class inhaled 
bifunctional bronchodilator possessing muscarinic receptor antagonist and
β2-adrenoceptor agonist properties.

Hegde SS(1), Hughes AD(2), Chen Y(2), Steinfeld T(2), Jasper JR(2), Lee TW(2),
McNamara A(2), Martin WJ(2), Pulido-Rios MT(2), Mammen M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Theravance, Inc., South San Francisco, California shegde@theravance.com.
(2)Theravance, Inc., South San Francisco, California.

The objective of the present studies was to characterize the pharmacologic
properties of GSK-961081 [TD-5959;
(R)-1-(3-((2-chloro-4-(((2-hydroxy-2-(8-hydroxy-2-oxo-1,2-dihydroquinolin-5-yl)et
hyl)amino)methyl)-5-methoxyphenyl)amino)-3-oxopropyl) piperidin-4-yl
[1,1'-biphenyl]-2-ylcarbamate], a novel first-in-class inhaled bifunctional
compound possessing both muscarinic antagonist (MA) and β2-adrenoceptor agonist
(BA) properties (MABA). In competition radioligand binding studies at human
recombinant receptors, GSK-961081 displayed high affinity for hM2 (Ki = 1.4 nM), 
hM3 muscarinic receptors (Ki = 1.3 nM) and hβ2-adrenoceptors (Ki = 3.7 nM).
GSK-961081 behaved as a potent hβ2-adrenoceptor agonist (EC50 = 0.29 nM for
stimulation of cAMP levels) with 440- and 320-fold functional selectivity over
hβ1- and hβ3-adrenoceptors, respectively. In guinea pig isolated tracheal
tissues, GSK-961081 produced smooth muscle relaxation through MA (EC50 = 50.2
nM), BA (EC50=24.6 nM), and MABA (EC50 = 11 nM) mechanisms. In the guinea pig
bronchoprotection assay, inhaled GSK-961081 produced potent, dose-dependent
inhibition of bronchoconstrictor responses via MA (ED50 = 33.9 µg/ml), BA (ED50 =
14.1 µg/ml), and MABA (ED50 = 6.4 µg/ml) mechanisms. Significant
bronchoprotective effects of GSK-961081 were evident in guinea pigs via MA, BA,
and MABA mechanisms for up to 7 days after dosing. The lung selectivity index of 
GSK-961081 in guinea pigs was 55- to 110-fold greater than that of tiotropium
with respect to systemic antimuscarinic antisialagogue effects and was 10-fold
greater than that of salmeterol with respect to systemic β2-adrenoceptor
hypotensive effects. These preclinical findings studies suggest that GSK-961081
has the potential to be a promising next-generation inhaled lung-selective
bronchodilator for the treatment of airway diseases, including chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease.

Copyright © 2014 by The American Society for Pharmacology and Experimental
Therapeutics.

DOI: 10.1124/jpet.114.216861 
PMID: 25100753  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Br J Clin Pharmacol. 2014 Aug;78(2):282-300. doi: 10.1111/bcp.12334.

Inhaled corticosteroids in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: a pro-con
perspective.

Babu KS(1), Kastelik JA, Morjaria JB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Queen Alexandra Hospital, Cosham,
Portsmouth, Hampshire, UK.

Current guidelines limit regular use of inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) to a
specific subgroup of patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)
in whom the forced expiratory volume in 1 s is <60% of predicted and who have
frequent exacerbations. In these patients, there is evidence that ICS reduce the 
frequency of exacerbations and improve lung function and quality of life.
However, a review of the literature suggests that the evidence available may be
interpreted to favour or contradict these observations. It becomes apparent that 
COPD is a heterogeneous condition. Clinicians therefore need to be aware of the
heterogeneity as well as having an understanding of how ICS may be used in the
context of the specific subgroups of patients with COPD. This review argues for
and against the use of ICS in COPD by providing an in-depth analysis of the
currently available evidence.

© 2014 The British Pharmacological Society.

DOI: 10.1111/bcp.12334 
PMCID: PMC4137821
PMID: 25099256  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Drugs. 2014 Sep;74(13):1509-22. doi: 10.1007/s40265-014-0269-6.

Fluticasone furoate/vilanterol: a review of its use in chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease.

McKeage K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Springer, Private Bag 65901, Mairangi Bay 0754, Auckland, New Zealand,
demail@springer.com.

Fluticasone furoate/vilanterol (Relvar(®), Breo(®), Revinty(®)) is a fixed
combination of a corticosteroid and a long-acting β2-adrenergic agonist (LABA)
for once-daily use via a dry powder inhaler (Ellipta(®)). Fluticasone
furoate/vilanterol 100/25 µg is approved for the treatment of chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD) in several countries. This article reviews the clinical 
use of the combination in COPD and summarises pharmacological properties.
Fluticasone furoate has enhanced affinity for the glucocorticoid receptor
compared with other clinically used inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) and longer lung
retention than fluticasone propionate. Vilanterol is highly selective for
β2-adrenoreceptors and provides a rapid and prolonged duration of action. In
phase 3 trials in patients with moderate to very severe COPD, overall, once-daily
fluticasone furoate/vilanterol 100/25 µg improved pulmonary function more than
placebo and fluticasone furoate alone and improved exacerbation rates more than
vilanterol alone. With regard to pulmonary function, once-daily fluticasone
furoate/vilanterol 100/25 μg was more effective than twice-daily fluticasone
propionate/salmeterol 250/50 µg and similarly effective as twice-daily
fluticasone propionate/salmeterol 500/50 μg. In 12-month trials, fluticasone
furoate/vilanterol was generally well tolerated, and in 12- and 24-week trials,
the incidence of adverse events was similar overall to that associated with the
individual components or fluticasone propionate/salmeterol. However, as with the 
long-term use of all ICS agents, 12-month data indicate an increase in the risk
of pneumonia with fluticasone furoate/vilanterol. In conclusion, fluticasone
furoate/vilanterol is an effective and generally well tolerated additional
LABA/ICS agent for the treatment of COPD with the added convenience of once-daily
administration, which may improve treatment adherence in some patients.

DOI: 10.1007/s40265-014-0269-6 
PMID: 25074268  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Respir Physiol Neurobiol. 2014 Oct 1;202:1-5. doi: 10.1016/j.resp.2014.07.008.
Epub 2014 Jul 18.

The application of impulse oscillation system for the evaluation of treatment
effects in patients with COPD.

Mineshita M(1), Shikama Y(2), Nakajima H(3), Nishihira R(4), Komatsu S(5), Kubota
M(6), Kobayashi H(7), Kokubu F(8), Shinkai M(9), Kaneko T(10), Miyazawa T(11);
COPD EXHALATION Investigators.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Respiratory and Infectious Diseases, Department of Internal
Medicine, St. Marianna University School of Medicine, 2-16-1, Sugao, Miyamae-ku, 
Kawasaki 216-8511, Japan. Electronic address: m-mine@marianna-u.ac.jp.
(2)Respiratory Disease Center, Showa University Northern Yokohama Hospital, 35-1 
Chigasaki-chuo, Tuzuki-ku, Yokohama, Japan. Electronic address:
shikamay@med.showa-u.ac.jp. (3)Respiratory Disease Center, Showa University
Northern Yokohama Hospital, 35-1 Chigasaki-chuo, Tuzuki-ku, Yokohama, Japan.
Electronic address: hiroaki@med.showa-u.ac.jp. (4)Department of Respiratory
Medicine, Kanagawa Cardiovascular and Respiratory Center, 6-16-1 Tomiokahigashi, 
Kanazawa-ku, Yokohama 236-0051, Japan. Electronic address:
nishihira@kanagawa-junko.jp. (5)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Kanagawa
Cardiovascular and Respiratory Center, 6-16-1 Tomiokahigashi, Kanazawa-ku,
Yokohama 236-0051, Japan. Electronic address: komatsu-s@kanagawa-junko.jp.
(6)Respiratory Medicine, Kitasato University School of Medicine, 1-15-1 Kitasato,
Sagamihara 228-8555, Japan. Electronic address: mkubota@med.kitasato-u.ac.jp.
(7)Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kitasato University, 1-15-1 Kitasato,
Sagamihara 228-8555, Japan. Electronic address: hiro@kitasato-u.ac.jp.
(8)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Showa University Fujigaoka Hospital, 1-30 
Fujigaoka, Aoba-ku, Yokohama 227-8501, Japan. Electronic address:
fkokubu@med.showa-u.ac.jp. (9)Respiratory Disease Center, Yokohama City
University Medical Center, 4-57 Urafune-cho, Minami-ku, Yokohama 232-0024, Japan.
Electronic address: shinkai@yokohama-cu.ac.jp. (10)Respiratory Disease Center,
Yokohama City University Medical Center, 4-57 Urafune-cho, Minami-ku, Yokohama
232-0024, Japan. Electronic address: takeshi@med.yokohama-cu.ac.jp. (11)Division 
of Respiratory and Infectious Diseases, Department of Internal Medicine, St.
Marianna University School of Medicine, 2-16-1, Sugao, Miyamae-ku, Kawasaki
216-8511, Japan.

There are only a few reports of the use of impulse oscillation system (IOS) for
the evaluation of COPD treatment. In this study, we applied IOS and spirometry to
evaluate the effectiveness of fluticasone propionate and salmeterol (SFC)
combined with tiotropium (TIO) in COPD patients. Following a 4-week run-in period
with TIO (18 μg once daily) treatment, COPD patients were randomized to SFC
(250/50 μg twice daily; SFC+TIO group, n=25), or TIO alone (TIO group, n=31).
Pulmonary functions were recorded by IOS and spirometry before and after the
study period. The SFC+TIO group showed significant improvements in inspiratory
resistance at 5 Hz and resonant frequency, as well as in FVC and FEV1, after the 
12-week treatment (p<0.05). Since there were no significant correlations between 
improvements in IOS measurements and FVC or FEV1, IOS may provide a physiological
point of view that is different from spirometry and seemed to be applicable as an
additional assessment tool targeting COPD patients.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.resp.2014.07.008 
PMID: 25046279  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Respir Med. 2014 Sep;108(9):1355-62. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2014.04.015. Epub 2014
May 2.

Appraisal of lens opacity with mometasone furoate/formoterol fumarate combination
in patients with COPD or asthma.

Maspero J(1), Cherrez I(2), Doherty DE(3), Tashkin DP(4), Kuna P(5), Kuo WL(6),
Gates D(6), Nolte H(6), Chylack LT Jr(7).

Author information: 
(1)Fundacion CIDEA Allergy and Respiratory Research Unit, Buenos Aires,
Argentina. Electronic address: maspero@ciudad.com.ar. (2)Respiralab Allergy and
Respiratory Center, Kennedy Hospital, Guayaquil, Ecuador. (3)University of
Kentucky, Lexington, KY, USA. (4)David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los
Angeles, CA, USA. (5)Medical University of Lodz, Poland. (6)Merck & Co., Inc.,
Whitehouse Station, NJ, USA. (7)Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.

BACKGROUND: Long-term corticosteroid use may increase cataract risk. The Lens
Opacities Classification System (LOCS) III ranked lens opacities as Class 1:
0.5-0.9 unit; Class 2: 1.0-1.4 units; or Class 3: ≥1.5 units in clinical trials
of combined mometasone furoate and formoterol (MF/F) administered by metered-dose
inhaler (MDI). We examined retrospectively shifts in lenticular opacity in
patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) or asthma.
METHODS: We analyzed pooled LOCS III data from two COPD studies and separately
analyzed LOCS III data from an asthma study. COPD subjects were randomized to
twice daily MF/F 200/10 μg, MF/F 400/10 μg, MF 400 μg, F 10 μg, and placebo;
asthma subjects were randomized to MF/F 200/10 μg, MF/F 400/10 μg, fluticasone
propionate/salmeterol (FP/S) 250/50 μg, and FP/S 500/50 μg. Lenticular opacity
changes were analyzed post hoc for proportions of subjects with LOCS III grade
increases ≥0.5, ≥1.0, or ≥1.5 units at weeks 26 and 52.
RESULTS: Proportions of subjects in the COPD studies with Class 1 (≥0.5 unit), 2 
(≥1.0 unit), or 3 (≥1.5 units) increases in LOCS III at week 26 (N = 1675) ranged
from 15.5 to 18.6%, 3.3-6.0%, and 0.9-2.2%, respectively. At week 52 (N = 1085), 
proportions of active-treated subjects with Class 1, 2, or 3 increases in LOCS
III ranged from 26.6 to 28.9%, 6.3-10.7%, and 2.6-5.9%, respectively. Treatment
differences in lenticular shifts were generally small and nonsignificant in the
asthma study.
CONCLUSION: No clinically relevant trends were observed in the LOCS III
assessment of lenticular shifts during treatment of COPD and asthma patients,
although further study may be needed to confirm the findings presented here. In
these trials, MF/F effects on lens opacity were not observed. (Clinicaltrials.gov
numbers: NCT00383435, NCT00383721, and NCT00379288.).

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2014.04.015 
PMID: 25044280  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Respir Med. 2014 Aug;108(8):1171-9. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2014.05.008. Epub 2014
Jun 19.

Efficacy and safety of once-daily fluticasone furoate/vilanterol (100/25 mcg)
versus twice-daily fluticasone propionate/salmeterol (250/50 mcg) in COPD
patients.

Dransfield MT(1), Feldman G(2), Korenblat P(3), LaForce CF(4), Locantore N(5),
Pistolesi M(6), Watkins ML(5), Crim C(5), Martinez FJ(7).

Author information: 
(1)UAB Lung Health Center, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL
35294, USA; Birmingham VA Medical Center, Birmingham, AL 35233, USA. Electronic
address: mdrans99@uab.edu. (2)S. Carolina Pharmaceutical Research, Spartanburg,
SC 29303, USA. (3)Clinical Research Center LLB, St Louis, MO 63141, USA. (4)North
Carolina Clinical Research, Raleigh, NC 27607, USA. (5)GlaxoSmithKline, Research 
Triangle Park, NC 27709, USA. (6)University of Florence, Florence, 50121 Firenze,
Italy. (7)University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.

BACKGROUND: Fluticasone furoate/vilanterol (FF/VI) is an inhaled
corticosteroid/long-acting beta2-agonist (ICS/LABA), recently approved as
once-daily maintenance therapy for COPD. We compared the lung function effects of
FF/VI with those of twice-daily fluticasone propionate/salmeterol (FP/SAL).
METHODS: Three 12 week studies comparing FF/VI and FP/SAL were conducted.
Patients aged ≥40 years with moderate-to-very severe COPD were randomized to
receive double-blind, double-dummy FF/VI 100/25 mcg once-daily, or FP/SAL 250/50 
mcg twice-daily for 12 weeks following a 2 week placebo run-in period. The
primary endpoint of each study was change from baseline trough in 0-24 h weighted
mean FEV(1) (wmFEV(1)) on Day 84. Safety was also assessed.
RESULTS: In Study 1 (HZC113109) (intent-to-treat n: FF/VI = 260; FP/SAL = 259),
the increase from baseline in 0-24 h wmFEV(1) was significantly greater with
FF/VI than FP/SAL (Δ80 mL, P < 0.001). In Study 2 (HZC112352) (intent-to-treat n:
FF/VI = 259; FP/SAL = 252) and Study 3 (RLV116974) (intent-to-treat n: FF/VI =
412; FP/SAL = 416), the increase from baseline in 0-24 h wmFEV(1) was not
significantly greater with FF/VI than FP/SAL (Δ29 mL, P = 0.267; Δ25 mL, P =
0.137). The treatment difference was statistically but not clinically significant
in a pooled analysis (Δ41 mL, P < 0.001). Pooled adverse events (FF/VI 27%;
FP/SAL 28%) and serious adverse events (FF/VI 2%; FP/SAL 3%) were similar between
treatments.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest that once-daily FF/VI 100/25 mcg provides FEV(1)
improvement in COPD that is at least comparable with that conferred by
twice-daily FP/SAL 250/50 mcg, although interpretation is limited by differences 
in individual study outcomes. The safety profiles of FF/VI 100/25 mcg and FP/SAL 
250/50 mcg are similar.
CLINICAL TRIAL REGISTRATION: clinicaltrials.gov: NCT01323634; NCT01323621;
NCT01706328. GlaxoSmithKline study codes: HZC113109; HZC112352; RLV116974.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2014.05.008 
PMID: 24998880  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2014 Jun 5;9:569-76. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S65693.
eCollection 2014.

Outcomes and costs of treating chronic obstructive pulmonary disease with inhaled
fixed combinations: the Italian perspective of the PATHOS study.

Roggeri A(1), Micheletto C(2), Roggeri DP(1).

Author information: 
(1)ProCure Solutions, Bergamo, Italy. (2)Respiratory Unit, Mater Salutis
Hospital, Legnago, Verona, Italy.

PURPOSE: Fixed-dose combinations of inhaled corticosteroids and long-acting
β2-agonists have proven to prevent and reduce chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD) exacerbations. The aim of this analysis was to explore the
clinical consequences and direct health care costs of applying the findings of
the PATHOS (An Investigation of the Past 10 Years Health Care for Primary Care
Patients with Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease) study to the Italian
context.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Effectiveness data from the PATHOS study, a
population-based, retrospective, observational registry study conducted in
Sweden, in terms of reduction in COPD and pneumonia-related hospitalizations,
were considered, in order to estimate the differences in resource consumption
between patients treated with budesonide/formoterol and fluticasone/salmeterol.
The base case considers the average dosages of the two drugs reported in the
PATHOS study and the actual public price in charges to the Italian National
Health Service, while the difference in hospitalization rates reported in the
PATHOS study was costed based on Italian real-world data.
RESULTS: The PATHOS study demonstrated a significant reduction in COPD
hospitalizations and pneumonia-related hospitalizations in patients treated with 
budesonide/formoterol versus fluticasone/salmeterol (-29.1% and -42%,
respectively). In the base case, the treatment of a patient for 1 year with
budesonide/formoterol led to a saving of €499.90 (€195.10 for drugs, €193.10 for 
COPD hospitalizations, and €111.70 for pneumonia hospitalizations) corresponding 
to a -27.6% difference compared with fluticasone/salmeterol treatment.
CONCLUSION: Treatment of COPD with budesonide/formoterol compared with
fluticasone/salmeterol could lead to a reduction in direct health care costs,
with relevant improvement in clinical outcomes.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S65693 
PMCID: PMC4051514
PMID: 24940053  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Drug Des Devel Ther. 2014 May 28;8:601-7. doi: 10.2147/DDDT.S63100. eCollection
2014.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease treated with inhaled medium- or high-dose
corticosteroids: a prospective and randomized study focusing on clinical efficacy
and the risk of pneumonia.

Cheng SL(1), Su KC(2), Wang HC(3), Perng DW(2), Yang PC(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Far Eastern Memorial Hospital, New Taipei
City, Taiwan ; Department of Chemical Engineering and Materials Science, Yuan Ze 
University, Zhongli City, Taoyuan County, Taiwan. (2)Department of Chest
Medicine, Taipei Veterans General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan. (3)Department of
Internal Medicine, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.

PURPOSE: Complications of pneumonia development in patients with chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) receiving inhaled corticosteroid (ICS)
therapy have been documented. The aim of this study was to focus on clinical
efficacy and the incidence of pneumonia between COPD patients receiving medium
and high doses of ICS.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: This prospective, randomized study included COPD patients
identified from three tertiary medical centers from 2010 to 2012. The patients
were randomized into two groups: high dose (HD; fluticasone 1,000 μg + salmeterol
100 μg/day) and medium dose (MD; fluticasone 500 μg + salmeterol 100 μg/day).
Lung function with forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV₁), forced vital
capacity, and COPD-assessment test (CAT) were checked every 2 months. The
frequency of acute exacerbations and number of pneumonia events were measured.
The duration of the study period was 1 year.
RESULTS: In total, 237 COPD patients were randomized into the two treatment arms 
(115 in the HD group, 122 in the MD group). The FEV₁ level was significantly
improved in the patients in the HD group compared with those in the MD group (HD 
103.9±26.6 mL versus MD 51.4±19.7 mL, P<0.01) at the end of the study. CAT scores
were markedly improved in patients using an HD compared to those using an MD (HD 
13±5 versus MD 16±7, P=0.05). There was a significant difference in the
percentage of annual rates in acute exacerbations (HD 0.16 versus MD 0.34,
P<0.01) between the two groups. The incidence of pneumonia was similar in the two
groups (HD 0.08 versus MD 0.10, P=0.38).
CONCLUSION: COPD patients treated with high doses of ICS had more treatment
benefits and no significant increases in the incidence in pneumonia. Higher-dose 
ICS treatment may be suitable for COPD therapy.

DOI: 10.2147/DDDT.S63100 
PMCID: PMC4044992
PMID: 24920884  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Trials. 2014 May 1;15:153. doi: 10.1186/1745-6215-15-153.

Comparison of conventional medicine, TCM treatment, and combination of both
conventional medicine and TCM treatment for patients with chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease: study protocol of a randomized comparative effectiveness
research trial.

Li JS(1), Xie Y, Li SY, Yu XQ.

Author information: 
(1)The Geriatric Department, Henan University of Traditional Chinese Medicine,
Longzihu University Town, Zhengdong New District, Zhengzhou, People's Republic of
China. li_js8@163.com.

BACKGROUND: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) affects millions
worldwide. Although many therapies exist and are being developed to relieve
symptoms and reduce mortality, few data are available to understand which of the 
therapeutic alternatives is the most cost-effective for COPD patients in everyday
clinical practice, especially for traditional Chinese medicine (TCM). Comparative
effectiveness research can help patients, clinicians, and decision-makers make
best informed treatment decisions where such evidence was previously lacking.
This study aims to compare the effectiveness and economic evaluation of three
treatments: (1) conventional Western medicine; (2) TCM treatments, which have
been evaluated and have certain effect; and (3) a combination of both
conventional Western medicine and TCM treatments, and then determine which
treatment is the most suitable for COPD patients.
METHODS/DESIGN: A multicenter, pragmatic, randomized, controlled trial is
adopted. A total of 360 patients will be recruited and randomly assigned to one
of the three treatments group, with 120 in each group. Patients in the
conventional Western medicine group will be given Salbutamol, Formoterol,
Salmeterol/fluticasone, respectively, according to the guidelines. For the TCM
group, patients will be given Bufei granule, Bu-Fei Jian-Pi granule, Bu-Fei
Yi-Shen granule, and Yi-Qi Zi-Shen granule based on their corresponding TCM
syndrome patterns, respectively. For the combination of conventional medicine and
TCM treatments group, patients will be given a combination of conventional
Western medicine and TCM granules. Treatments in each group are recognized as a
whole comprehensive intervention. After the 26-week treatment, another 26 weeks
will be followed up. The outcome measures including the frequency and duration of
acute exacerbations, lung function, dyspnea, exercise capacity, quality of life, 
and economic evaluation will be assessed.
DISCUSSION: It is hypothesized that each of the three treatments will have
beneficial effects in reducing the frequency and duration of acute exacerbations,
improving exercise capacity and psychosocial function of COPD patients. In
addition, the combination of conventional medicine and TCM treatments may be most
suitable for COPD patients with better effectiveness and economic evaluation.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov NCT01836016.

DOI: 10.1186/1745-6215-15-153 
PMCID: PMC4017822
PMID: 24885672  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Rev Recent Clin Trials. 2014;9(2):96-101.

Indacaterol in the Treatment of Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease: From
Clinical Trials to Daily Practice.

Incorvaia C(1), Ridolo E, Riario-Sforza E, Montagni M, Riario-Sforza GG.

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary Rehabilitation Unit, ICP Hospital, Via Bignami 1, Milan, Italy.
cristoforo.incorvaia@gmail.com.

Indacaterol was introduced as an agent of the new generation of very long acting 
beta2-agonists (VLABA) that provides a 24-hour activity of bronchodilation and
allows a once-daily OD dosing. The first trial showed a significantly higher
efficacy of indacaterol vs. placebo in patients with chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD). The following trials were aimed at evaluating its
performance compared with other bronchodilators. The results can be summarized in
a comparable efficacy of indacaterol, mainly assessed by the increase in FEV1
value but also by quality of life and other patient- reported outcomes (PROs),
compared with the OD antimuscarinic tiotropium bromide, and in a slightly higher 
efficacy compared with the LABA formoterol and salmeterol administered
twice-daily. No problems of safety and tolerability were reported in the trials
as well as in specific studies, every kind of adverse event, including
cardiovascular effects, being similarly frequent with indacaterol and with
placebo. Concerning the real-life management, in respect to LABA, the OD dosing
makes indacaterol more convenient for COPD patients and is likely to positively
influence the patient's adherence. Since adherence to medical treatment of
chronic diseases, and particularly COPD is a crucial issue in medicine, such
aspect should confer to indacaterol a valuable role in clinical practice. The
recently approved combination of indacaterol with the antimuscarinic
glycopyrronium [QVA149], based on the demonstration of positive effects on both
lung function and PROs, is likely to be a further option for patients with severe
COPD.


PMID: 24882396  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Drugs. 2014 May;74(7):737-55. doi: 10.1007/s40265-014-0214-8.

Management of asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease with combination
inhaled corticosteroids and long-acting β-agonists: a review of comparative
effectiveness research.

Mapel DW(1), Roberts MH.

Author information: 
(1)Lovelace Clinic Foundation, 2309 Renard Place SE, Albuquerque, NM, 87106, USA,
dmapel@comcast.net.

The value of combination therapy with inhaled corticosteroids and long-acting
β-agonists (ICS/LABA) is well recognized in the management of asthma and chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Despite differences in the pharmacological 
properties between two well-established ICS/LABA products (budesonide/formoterol 
and fluticasone/salmeterol), data from randomized clinical trials (RCTs) and
meta-analyses suggest that these two products perform similarly under RCT
conditions. In contrast, a few recently reported real-world comparative
effectiveness studies have suggested that there are substantial differences
between ICS/LABA combination treatments in terms of clinical and healthcare
outcomes in patients with asthma or COPD. The purpose of this article is to
provide a brief review of the benefits, as well as the limitations, of
comparative effectiveness research (CER) in the therapeutic area of asthma and
COPD. We conducted a structured literature review of the current CER studies on
ICS/LABA combinations in asthma and COPD. These articles were then used to
illustrate the unique challenges of CER studies, providing a summary of study
results and limitations. We focus particularly on difficult biases and
confounding factors that may be introduced before, during, and after the
initiation of therapy. Beyond being a review of these two ICS/LABA combination
treatments, this article is intended to help those who wish to assess the quality
of CER published projects in asthma and COPD, or guide investigators who wish to 
design new CER studies for chronic respiratory disease treatments.

DOI: 10.1007/s40265-014-0214-8 
PMCID: PMC4030099
PMID: 24797158  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Chin Med J (Engl). 2014;127(9):1613-8.

Interleukin-32, not reduced by salmeterol/fluticasone propionate in smokers with 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Du Y(1), Wang W(1), Yang W(1), He B(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Peking University Third Hospital, Beijing 
100191, China. (2)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Peking University Third
Hospital, Beijing 100191, China. Email: puh3_hb@bjmu.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: The interleukin (IL)-32/tumor necrosis factor (TNF) a pathway is
supposed to play a key role in the amplification of the immune response in
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) inflammation. Inhaled
corticosteroids (ICS) in combination with long-acting β2-agonists (LABA) have
shown airway anti-inflammatory effects in recent studies, but the mechanism is
still uncertain.
METHODS: Patients were treated in a randomized, open-labeled, parallel group
clinical trial with either a combination of salmeterol xinafoate/fluticasone
propionate (SF; Seretide, GlaxoSmithKline) Diskus (50/500 µg twice daily) or
ipratropium bromide/salbutamol (IS; Combivent, Boehringer Ingelheim) MDI (42
µg/240 µg quartic daily) for 12 weeks. At the start and the end of treatment,
induced sputum was collected and the concentration of IL-32 and TNF-α, the number
of neutrophils and eosinophils were measured.
RESULTS: Following 12 weeks of treatment, a statistically significant fall from
baseline in the concentration of TNF-α in sputum (P = 0.004) was seen after
treatment with SF but not with IS. However, neither treatment had significant
effects on the concentration of IL-32 in sputum. There was a decrease from
baseline in the number of sputum neutrophils with SF that approached statistical 
significance (P = 0.028) but not with IS, while the number of sputum eosinophils 
did not change significantly from baseline in either treatment group. There was a
statistically significant decline from baseline in the quality of life as
assessed by the St George's respiratory questionnaire in both the SF (P = 0.004) 
and IS (P = 0.030) treatment groups, but no evidence of improvement in lung
function was observed in either group.
CONCLUSION: The sputum TNF-α and neutrophils, but not IL-32 and macrophages,
could be reduced by ICS/LABA treatment, suggesting that IL-32 could be involved
in the corticosteroid resistance of COPD inflammation.


PMID: 24791863  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2014 Apr 1;9:331-8. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S60362.
eCollection 2014.

Clinical benefit of fixed-dose dual bronchodilation with glycopyrronium and
indacaterol once daily in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: a 
systematic review.

Ulrik CS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Hvidovre Hospital and University of
Copenhagen, Hvidovre, Denmark.

BACKGROUND AND AIM: Long-acting bronchodilators are the preferred option for
maintenance therapy of patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD). The aim of this review is to provide an overview of the clinical studies 
evaluating the clinical efficacy of the once-daily fixed-dose dual bronchodilator
combination of indacaterol and glycopyrronium bromide in patients suffering from 
COPD.
METHODS: This study comprised a systematic review of randomized controlled trials
identified through systematic searches of different databases of published
trials.
RESULTS: Nine trials (6,166 participants) were included. Fixed-dose once-daily
indacaterol/glycopyrronium seems to be safe and well tolerated in patients with
COPD. Compared with single therapy with other long-acting bronchodilators
(indacaterol, glycopyrronium, and tiotropium) and fixed-combination long-acting
β2-agonist/inhaled corticosteroid (salmeterol/fluticasone twice daily),
once-daily fixed-dose indacaterol/glycopyrronium has clinically important effects
on symptoms, including dyspnea score, health status, level of lung function, and 
rate of moderate or severe exacerbations in patients with moderate-to-very severe
COPD (Global initiative for chronic Obstructive Lung Disease [GOLD] spirometric
criteria). Furthermore, a very recent study has shown that fixed-dose
indacaterol/glycopyrronium improves exercise endurance time compared with
placebo, although no significant difference was observed between fixed-dose
indacaterol/glycopyrronium and tiotropium.
CONCLUSION: Fixed-dose indacaterol/glycopyrronium has clinically relevant effects
on important COPD outcome measures and is, in general, superior to therapy with a
single long-acting bronchodilator (with or without inhaled corticosteroid)
indicating long-acting dual bronchodilation as a potential important maintenance 
therapeutic option for patients with symptomatic COPD, possibly also for the
treatment of naïve patients.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S60362 
PMCID: PMC3979690
PMID: 24729699  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. BMC Pulm Med. 2014 Apr 2;14:56. doi: 10.1186/1471-2466-14-56.

Real-life use of fluticasone propionate/salmeterol in patients with chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease: a French observational study.

Roche N(1), Pribil C, Van Ganse E, Serrier P, Housset B, Poirier D, Texier N,
Schück S, Boucot I.

Author information: 
(1)Respiratory and Intensive Care Medicine, Cochin Hospital Group, AP-HP,
University Paris Descartes, HIA du Val de Grâce 4e C, Paris, France.
nicolas.roche@htd.aphp.fr.

BACKGROUND: In Europe, administration of an inhaled corticosteroid (ICS) combined
with a long-acting β2 agonist is approved in chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD) patients with a pre-bronchodilator FEV1 < 60% predicted normal, a 
history of repeated exacerbations, and who have significant symptoms despite
regular bronchodilator therapy. Minimal data are available on the use of the
fluticasone propionate/salmeterol xinafoate combination (FSC) in the real-life
COPD setting and prescription compliance with the licensed specifications.
METHODS: A French observational study was performed to describe the COPD
population prescribed with FSC, prescription modalities, and the coherence of
prescription practices with the market authorized population. Data were collected
for patients initiating FSC treatment (500 μg fluticasone propionate, 50 μg
salmeterol, dry powder inhaler) prescribed by a general practitioner (GP) or a
pulmonologist, using physician and patient questionnaires.
RESULTS: A total of 710 patients were included, 352 by GPs and 358 by
pulmonologists. Mean age was over 60 years, and 70% of patients were male. More
than half were retired, and overweight or obese. Approximately half were current 
smokers and one-third had cardiovascular comorbidities. According to both
physician evaluation and GOLD 2006 classification, the majority of patients
(>75%) had moderate to very severe COPD. Strict compliance by prescribing
physicians with the market-approved population for dry powder inhaler SFC in COPD
was low, notably in ICS-naïve patients; all three conditions were fulfilled in
less than a quarter of patients with prior ICS and less than 7% of ICS-naïve
patients.
CONCLUSIONS: Prescription of dry powder inhaler SFC by GPs and pulmonologists has
very low conformity with the three conditions defining the licensed COPD
population. Prescription practices need to be improved and systematic FEV1
evaluation for COPD diagnosis and treatment management should be emphasized.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2466-14-56 
PMCID: PMC3997842
PMID: 24694050  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2014 Mar 26;(3):CD010844. doi:
10.1002/14651858.CD010844.pub2.

Long-acting inhaled therapy (beta-agonists, anticholinergics and steroids) for
COPD: a network meta-analysis.

Kew KM(1), Dias S, Cates CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Population Health Research Institute, St George's, University of London,
Cranmer Terrace, London, UK, SW17 0RE.

BACKGROUND: Pharmacological therapy for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD) is aimed at relieving symptoms, improving quality of life and preventing
or treating exacerbations.Treatment tends to begin with one inhaler, and
additional therapies are introduced as necessary. For persistent or worsening
symptoms, long-acting inhaled therapies taken once or twice daily are preferred
over short-acting inhalers. Several Cochrane reviews have looked at the risks and
benefits of specific long-acting inhaled therapies compared with placebo or other
treatments. However for patients and clinicians, it is important to understand
the merits of these treatments relative to each other, and whether a particular
class of inhaled therapies is more beneficial than the others.
OBJECTIVES: To assess the efficacy of treatment options for patients whose
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease cannot be controlled by short-acting
therapies alone. The review will not look at combination therapies usually
considered later in the course of the disease.As part of this network
meta-analysis, we will address the following issues.1. How does long-term
efficacy compare between different pharmacological treatments for COPD?2. Are
there limitations in the current evidence base that may compromise the
conclusions drawn by this network meta-analysis? If so, what are the implications
for future research?
SEARCH METHODS: We identified randomised controlled trials (RCTs) in existing
Cochrane reviews by searching the Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews (CDSR).
In addition, we ran a comprehensive citation search on the Cochrane Airways Group
Register of trials (CAGR) and checked manufacturer websites and reference lists
of other reviews. The most recent searches were conducted in September 2013.
SELECTION CRITERIA: We included parallel-group RCTs of at least 6 months'
duration recruiting people with COPD. Studies were included if they compared any 
of the following treatments versus any other: long-acting beta2-agonists (LABAs; 
formoterol, indacaterol, salmeterol); long-acting muscarinic antagonists (LAMAs; 
aclidinium, glycopyrronium, tiotropium); inhaled corticosteroids (ICSs;
budesonide, fluticasone, mometasone); combination long-acting beta2-agonist
(LABA) and inhaled corticosteroid (LABA/ICS) (formoterol/budesonide,
formoterol/mometasone, salmeterol/fluticasone); and placebo.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: We conducted a network meta-analysis using Markov
chain Monte Carlo methods for two efficacy outcomes: St George's Respiratory
Questionnaire (SGRQ) total score and trough forced expiratory volume in one
second (FEV1). We modelled the relative effectiveness of any two treatments as a 
function of each treatment relative to the reference treatment (placebo). We
assumed that treatment effects were similar within treatment classes (LAMA, LABA,
ICS, LABA/ICS). We present estimates of class effects, variability between
treatments within each class and individual treatment effects compared with every
other.To justify the analyses, we assessed the trials for clinical and
methodological transitivity across comparisons. We tested the robustness of our
analyses by performing sensitivity analyses for lack of blinding and by
considering six- and 12-month data separately.
MAIN RESULTS: We identified 71 RCTs randomly assigning 73,062 people with COPD to
184 treatment arms of interest. Trials were similar with regards to methodology, 
inclusion and exclusion criteria and key baseline characteristics. Participants
were more often male, aged in their mid sixties, with FEV1 predicted normal
between 40% and 50% and with substantial smoking histories (40+ pack-years). The 
risk of bias was generally low, although missing information made it hard to
judge risk of selection bias and selective outcome reporting. Fixed effects were 
used for SGRQ analyses, and random effects for Trough FEV1 analyses, based on
model fit statistics and deviance information criteria (DIC). SGRQ SGRQ data were
available in 42 studies (n = 54,613). At six months, 39 pairwise comparisons were
made between 18 treatments in 25 studies (n = 27,024). Combination LABA/ICS was
the highest ranked intervention, with a mean improvement over placebo of -3.89
units at six months (95% credible interval (CrI) -4.70 to -2.97) and -3.60 at 12 
months (95% CrI -4.63 to -2.34). LAMAs and LABAs were ranked second and third at 
six months, with mean differences of -2.63 (95% CrI -3.53 to -1.97) and -2.29
(95% CrI -3.18 to -1.53), respectively. Inhaled corticosteroids were ranked
fourth (MD -2.00, 95% CrI -3.06 to -0.87). Class differences between LABA, LAMA
and ICS were less prominent at 12 months. Indacaterol and aclidinium were ranked 
somewhat higher than other members of their classes, and formoterol 12 mcg,
budesonide 400 mcg and formoterol/mometasone combination were ranked lower within
their classes. There was considerable overlap in credible intervals and rankings 
for both classes and individual treatments. Trough FEV1 Trough FEV1 data were
available in 46 studies (n = 47,409). At six months, 41 pairwise comparisons were
made between 20 treatments in 31 studies (n = 29,271). As for SGRQ, combination
LABA/ICS was the highest ranked class, with a mean improvement over placebo of
133.3 mL at six months (95% CrI 100.6 to 164.0) and slightly less at 12 months
(mean difference (MD) 100, 95% CrI 55.5 to 140.1). LAMAs (MD 103.5, 95% CrI 81.8 
to 124.9) and LABAs (MD 99.4, 95% CrI 72.0 to 127.8) showed roughly equivalent
results at six months, and ICSs were the fourth ranked class (MD 65.4, 95% CrI
33.1 to 96.9). As with SGRQ, initial differences between classes were not so
prominent at 12 months. Indacaterol and salmeterol/fluticasone were ranked
slightly better than others in their class, and formoterol 12, aclidinium,
budesonide and formoterol/budesonide combination were ranked lower within their
classes. All credible intervals for individual rankings were wide.
AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: This network meta-analysis compares four different classes 
of long-acting inhalers for people with COPD who need more than short-acting
bronchodilators. Quality of life and lung function were improved most on
combination inhalers (LABA and ICS) and least on ICS alone at 6 and at 12 months.
Overall LAMA and LABA inhalers had similar effects, particularly at 12 months.
The network has demonstrated the benefit of ICS when added to LABA for these
outcomes in participants who largely had an FEV1 that was less than 50%
predicted, but the additional expense of combination inhalers and any potential
for increased adverse events (which has been established by other reviews)
require consideration. Our findings are in keeping with current National
Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) guidelines.

DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD010844.pub2 
PMID: 24671923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Prescrire Int. 2014 Feb;23(146):36-9.

Glycopyrronium for inhalation. COPD: another antimuscarinic with cardiac adverse 
effects that require monitoring.

[No authors listed]

The most effective way of slowing chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)
progression is to eliminate exposure to the inhaled triggering factor, which is
usually tobacco smoke. At best, inhaled bronchodilators have only a limited
impact on the symptoms of COPD. In the absence of a better alternative,
salbutamol, a beta-2 agonist, or ipratropium, an antimuscarinic, are tried first,
despite their adverse effects. "Long-acting" beta-2 agonists are an option for
patients with permanent symptoms, especially dyspnoea that disrupts sleep.
Glycopyrronium, a long-acting antimuscarinic, is authorised in the European Union
for maintenance treatment of adults with COPD. Clinical evaluation does not
include any trials versus salbutamol. It is based on three trials, in a total of 
2051 patients that compared glycopyrronium versus placebo and sometimes versus
tiotropium, another long-acting inhaled antimuscarinic. Mortality rates were
similar in the different arms of these trials. There was no difference in
efficacy between glycopyrronium and tiotropium. In two of these trials, which
lasted at least 26 weeks, "serious" cardiac adverse events were more frequent
with glycopyrronium than with placebo or tiotropium. However, the number of
events was too small to determine the precise cardiac harms associated with
glycopyrronium. The European Medicines Agency has therefore asked for a specific 
registry to be created. The adverse effect profile of glycopyrronium appears
similar to that of inhaled antimuscarinics, including atropinic disorders and
upper respiratory infections. The inhaler is simple to use and does not require
hand-breath coordination. In practice, glycopyrronium does not provide a
therapeutic advantage in the treatment of patients with COPD. When an inhaled
long-acting drug is contemplated, it is best to choose a beta-2 agonist
(formoterol or salmeterol), used either continuously or on demand.


PMID: 24669382  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2014 Mar 10;(3):CD010115. doi:
10.1002/14651858.CD010115.pub2.

Inhaled steroids and risk of pneumonia for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Kew KM(1), Seniukovich A.

Author information: 
(1)Population Health Research Institute, St George's, University of London,
Cranmer Terrace, London, UK, SW17 0RE.

Comment in
    Ann Intern Med. 2014 Aug 19;161(4):JC8.

BACKGROUND: Inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) are anti-inflammatory drugs that have
proven benefits for people with worsening symptoms of chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD) and repeated exacerbations. They are commonly used as
combination inhalers with long-acting beta2-agonists (LABA) to reduce
exacerbation rates and all-cause mortality, and to improve lung function and
quality of life. The most common combinations of ICS and LABA used in combination
inhalers are fluticasone and salmeterol, budesonide and formoterol and a new
formulation of fluticasone in combination with vilanterol, which is now
available. ICS have been associated with increased risk of pneumonia, but the
magnitude of risk and how this compares with different ICS remain unclear. Recent
reviews conducted to address their safety have not compared the relative safety
of these two drugs when used alone or in combination with LABA.
OBJECTIVES: To assess the risk of pneumonia associated with the use of
fluticasone and budesonide for COPD.
SEARCH METHODS: We identified trials from the Cochrane Airways Group Specialised 
Register of trials (CAGR), clinicaltrials.gov, reference lists of existing
systematic reviews and manufacturer websites. The most recent searches were
conducted in September 2013.
SELECTION CRITERIA: We included parallel-group randomised controlled trials
(RCTs) of at least 12 weeks' duration. Studies were included if they compared the
ICS budesonide or fluticasone versus placebo, or either ICS in combination with a
LABA versus the same LABA as monotherapy for people with COPD.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Two review authors independently extracted study
characteristics, numerical data and risk of bias information for each included
study.We looked at direct comparisons of ICS versus placebo separately from
comparisons of ICS/LABA versus LABA for all outcomes, and we combined these with 
subgroups when no important heterogeneity was noted. After assessing for
transitivity, we conducted an indirect comparison to compare budesonide versus
fluticasone monotherapy, but we could not do the same for the combination
therapies because of systematic differences between the budesonide and
fluticasone combination data sets.When appropriate, we explored the effects of
ICS dose, duration of ICS therapy and baseline severity on the primary outcome.
Findings of all outcomes are presented in 'Summary of findings' tables using
GRADEPro.
MAIN RESULTS: We found 43 studies that met the inclusion criteria, and more
evidence was provided for fluticasone (26 studies; n = 21,247) than for
budesonide (17 studies; n = 10,150). Evidence from the budesonide studies was
more inconsistent and less precise, and the studies were shorter. The populations
within studies were more often male with a mean age of around 63, mean pack-years
smoked over 40 and mean predicted forced expiratory volume of one second (FEV1)
less than 50%.High or uneven dropout was considered a high risk of bias in almost
40% of the trials, but conclusions for the primary outcome did not change when
the trials at high risk of bias were removed in a sensitivity
analysis.Fluticasone increased non-fatal serious adverse pneumonia events
(requiring hospital admission) (odds ratio (OR) 1.78, 95% confidence interval
(CI) 1.50 to 2.12; 18 more per 1000 treated over 18 months; high quality), and no
evidence suggested that this outcome was reduced by delivering it in combination 
with salmeterol or vilanterol (subgroup differences: I(2) = 0%, P value 0.51), or
that different doses, trial duration or baseline severity significantly affected 
the estimate. Budesonide also increased non-fatal serious adverse pneumonia
events compared with placebo, but the effect was less precise and was based on
shorter trials (OR 1.62, 95% CI 1.00 to 2.62; six more per 1000 treated over nine
months; moderate quality). Some of the variation in the budesonide data could be 
explained by a significant difference between the two commonly used doses: 640
mcg was associated with a larger effect than 320 mcg relative to placebo
(subgroup differences: I(2) = 74%, P value 0.05).An indirect comparison of
budesonide versus fluticasone monotherapy revealed no significant differences
with respect to serious adverse events (pneumonia-related or all-cause) or
mortality. The risk of any pneumonia event (i.e. less serious cases treated in
the community) was higher with fluticasone than with budesonide (OR 1.86, 95% CI 
1.04 to 3.34); this was the only significant difference reported between the two 
drugs. However, this finding should be interpreted with caution because of
possible differences in the assignment of pneumonia diagnosis, and because no
trials directly compared the two drugs.No significant difference in overall
mortality rates was observed between either of the inhaled steroids and the
control interventions (both high-quality evidence), and pneumonia-related deaths 
were too rare to permit conclusions to be drawn.
AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: Budesonide and fluticasone, delivered alone or in
combination with a LABA, are associated with increased risk of serious adverse
pneumonia events, but neither significantly affected mortality compared with
controls. The safety concerns highlighted in this review should be balanced with 
recent cohort data and established randomised evidence of efficacy regarding
exacerbations and quality of life. Comparison of the two drugs revealed no
statistically significant difference in serious pneumonias, mortality or serious 
adverse events. Fluticasone was associated with higher risk of any pneumonia when
compared with budesonide (i.e. less serious cases dealt with in the community),
but variation in the definitions used by the respective manufacturers is a
potential confounding factor in their comparison.Primary research should
accurately measure pneumonia outcomes and should clarify both the definition and 
the method of diagnosis used, especially for new formulations such as fluticasone
furoate, for which little evidence of the associated pneumonia risk is currently 
available. Similarly, systematic reviews and cohorts should address the
reliability of assigning 'pneumonia' as an adverse event or cause of death and
should determine how this affects the applicability of findings.

DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD010115.pub2 
PMID: 24615270  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Drugs. 2014 Mar;74(4):465-88. doi: 10.1007/s40265-014-0194-8.

QVA149 (indacaterol/glycopyrronium fixed-dose combination): a review of its use
in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Frampton JE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Adis, 41 Centorian Drive, Private Bag 65901, Mairangi Bay, North Shore, 0754, 
Auckland, New Zealand, demail@springer.com.

QVA149 (indacaterol/glycopyrronium) [Xoterna(®) Breezhaler(®), Ultibro(®)
Breezhaler(®)] is an inhaled fixed-dose combination of indacaterol (a long-acting
selective β2-adrenergic receptor agonist [LABA]) and glycopyrronium (a
long-acting muscarinic receptor antagonist [LAMA]) that has been approved in the 
EU and Japan for the symptomatic control of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD) in adults. In phase III studies, QVA149 significantly improved
bronchodilation versus indacaterol, glycopyrronium or tiotropium alone and the
LABA/inhaled corticosteroid fixed-dose combination salmeterol/fluticasone. These 
improvements in lung function, which were rapid in onset and maintained during
long-term treatment, were generally associated with significant improvements in
dyspnoea, health status, COPD exacerbation risk, patient symptoms, and rescue
medication use. The SHINE and ILLUMINATE studies in low (exacerbation) risk
patients with moderate to severe disease suggest that QVA149 may offer more
symptomatic relief than tiotropium and salmeterol/fluticasone. Similarly, the
SPARK study in high (exacerbation) risk patients with severe or very severe
disease showed that QVA149 was more effective than glycopyrronium in preventing
moderate to severe exacerbations, and suggests that QVA149 may offer more
symptomatic relief than LAMA monotherapy. Another phase III study comparing
QVA149 with salmeterol/fluticasone in high-risk patients with moderate to very
severe disease (FLAME) is ongoing. QVA149 is generally well tolerated, with no
new safety signals identified compared with its monocomponents. Bronchodilators
remain central to the symptomatic management of COPD. When dual bronchodilation
is indicated, QVA149 offers the convenience of two bronchodilators in a single
inhaler coupled with a simple, once-daily dosing regimen that may encourage
better treatment adherence. Therefore, it is a valuable option in the treatment
of COPD.

DOI: 10.1007/s40265-014-0194-8 
PMID: 24604791  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Int J Clin Pharmacol Ther. 2014 May;52(5):369-80. doi: 10.5414/CP202034.

Effect of dual bronchodilation with QVA149 on cardiac safety in healthy
volunteers.

Drollmann A, Brown M, Sechaud R, Perry S, Hara H, Jones I, Febbraro S.

OBJECTIVES: QVA149 is a dual bronchodilator, containing a fixed-dose combination 
of the long-acting β2-agonist indacaterol and long-acting muscarinic antagonist
glycopyrronium, for the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD). Here we assess the potential of QVA149 (440/200 μg) at 4-fold the
therapeutic dose for causing cardiac pharmacodynamic (PD) effects.
METHODS: This double-blind, randomized study estimated the time-matched largest
heart rate (HR) change and average HR change (over 24 hours) from baseline for
QVA149 vs. placebo in healthy subjects. Similar analyses were done for QVA149 vs.
indacaterol 600 μg, glycopyrronium 200 μg, and salmeterol 200 μg. The
time-matched and average change from baseline in QT interval corrected for HR
using Fridericia's formula (QTcF), effects on serum potassium and blood glucose, 
pharmacokinetic (PK) parameters, and safety were also assessed.
RESULTS: Of 50 subjects randomized, 43 completed the study. QVA149, when compared
with placebo, showed the time-matched largest mean increase and decrease in HR of
5.69 bpm and -2.51 bpm, respectively, and average HR change from baseline of 0.62
bpm. QVA149 showed no tachycardic potential compared with indacaterol and no
relevant tachycardic effect compared with glycopyrronium. No consistent
differences were seen in the time-matched largest mean change and average change 
from baseline in QTcF for QVA149 vs. other treatments. There were no relevant
effects of QVA149 on serum potassium and blood glucose. There was no apparent
PK/PD relationship between the observed exposures to indacaterol and
glycopyrronium in QVA149 on HR and QTcF. There were no deaths or serious adverse 
events.
CONCLUSION: Overall, short-term administration of QVA149 showed a good
cardiovascular safety and tolerability profile in healthy subjects.

DOI: 10.5414/CP202034 
PMID: 24569129  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2014 Mar 21;445(4):746-56. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2014.02.033. Epub 2014 Feb 19.

CHIP-MYTH: a novel interactive proteomics method for the assessment of
agonist-dependent interactions of the human β₂-adrenergic receptor.

Kittanakom S(1), Barrios-Rodiles M(2), Petschnigg J(1), Arnoldo A(1), Wong V(1), 
Kotlyar M(3), Heisler LE(1), Jurisica I(4), Wrana JL(2), Nislow C(5), Stagljar
I(6).

Author information: 
(1)Donnelly Centre, University of Toronto, Ontario, Canada. (2)Center for Systems
Biology, Lunenfeld-Tanenbaum Research Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto,
Canada. (3)Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, University Health Network, University
of Toronto, Ontario, Canada. (4)Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, University
Health Network, University of Toronto, Ontario, Canada; Department of Medical
Biophysics, University of Toronto, Ontario, Canada; Department of Computer
Science, University of Toronto, Ontario, Canada. (5)Department of Pharmaceutical 
Sciences, 2405 Wesbrook Mall, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada. 
(6)Donnelly Centre, University of Toronto, Ontario, Canada; Department of
Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, Ontario, Canada; Department of
Biochemistry, University of Toronto, Ontario, Canada. Electronic address:
igor.stagljar@utoronto.ca.

G-protein coupled receptors (GPCRs) are involved in a variety of disease
processes and comprise major drug targets. However, the complexity of integral
membrane proteins such as GPCRs makes the identification of their interacting
partners and subsequent drug development challenging. A comprehensive
understanding of GPCR protein interaction networks is needed to design effective 
therapeutic strategies to inhibit these drug targets. Here, we developed a novel 
split-ubiquitin membrane yeast two-hybrid (MYTH) technology called CHIP-MYTH,
which allows the unbiased characterization of interaction partners of full-length
GPCRs in a drug-dependent manner. This was achieved by coupling DNA microarray
technology to the MYTH approach, which allows a quantitative evaluation of
interacting partners of a given integral membrane protein in the presence or
absence of drug. As a proof of principle, we applied the CHIP-MYTH approach to
the human β2-adrenergic receptor (β2AR), a target of interest in the treatment of
asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), neurological disease,
cardiovascular disease, and obesity. A CHIP-MYTH screen was performed in the
presence or absence of salmeterol, a long-acting β2AR-agonist. Our results
suggest that β2AR activation with salmeterol can induce the dissociation of
heterotrimeric G-proteins, Gαβγ, into Gα and Gβγ subunits, which in turn
activates downstream signaling cascades. Using CHIP-MYTH, we confirmed previously
known and identified novel β2AR interactors involved in GPCR-mediated signaling
cascades. Several of these interactions were confirmed in mammalian cells using
LUminescence-based Mammalian IntERactome (LUMIER) and co-immunoprecipitation
assays. In summary, the CHIP-MYTH approach is ideal for conducting comprehensive 
protein-protein interactions (PPI) screenings of full-length GPCRs in the
presence or absence of drugs, thus providing a valuable tool to further our
understanding of GPCR-mediated signaling.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2014.02.033 
PMID: 24561123  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2014 Jan 21;9:107-14. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S56777. 
eCollection 2014.

Efficacy of indacaterol on quality of life and pulmonary function in patients
with COPD and inhaler device preferences.

Ohno T(1), Wada S(1), Hanada S(1), Sawaguchi H(1), Muraki M(1), Tohda Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine and Allergology, Nara Hospital, Kinki
University Faculty of Medicine, Ikoma, Japan. (2)Department of Respiratory
Medicine and Allergology, Kinki University School of Medicine, Osakasayama,
Japan.

BACKGROUND: Indacaterol is a novel, once-daily, inhaled, long-acting b2-agonist
for patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). The study
objective was to evaluate the efficacy of indacaterol on quality of life and
pulmonary function in patients with COPD in a real-world setting, and also to
evaluate its inhaler device (Breezhaler®), which is important for both adherence 
and management.
METHODS: Twenty-eight outpatients with COPD were treated with indacaterol (150 μg
once daily for 8 weeks), and the effects on pulmonary function were evaluated
using a questionnaire survey with the modified Medical Research Council (mMRC)
dyspnea scale and COPD assessment test (CAT) before and after treatment. Similar 
investigations were also performed separately among different baseline
medications. Moreover, original questionnaire surveys for indacaterol and its
device were performed.
RESULTS: Overall, mMRC dyspnea scale and CAT scores significantly improved
(1.96±1.04 to 1.57±1.07 and 17.39±8.23 to 12.82±8.42, respectively; P<0.05).
Significant improvements in forced vital capacity (FVC) and forced expiratory
volume in 1 second (FEV1) were also observed on pulmonary function tests
(2.91±0.66 L to 3.07±0.65 L and 1.46±0.60 L to 1.58±0.59 L, respectively;
P<0.05). Replacement therapy from salmeterol to indacaterol significantly
improved mMRC and FVC values, but did not significantly improve CAT scores or
other pulmonary functions. Add-on therapy with indacaterol significantly improved
mMRC score, CAT score, FVC, and FEV1, regardless of whether tiotropium was used
as a baseline treatment. All subjects in a questionnaire survey found the inhaler
device easy to use. There were no serious adverse events leading to treatment
discontinuation.
CONCLUSION: Indacaterol is thought to be effective and well tolerated as a
bronchodilator for the management of COPD. Treatment with indacaterol in addition
to a long-acting muscarinic antagonist was also useful.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S56777 
PMCID: PMC3904808
PMID: 24489464  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Respir Med. 2014 Apr;108(4):593-9. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2014.01.002. Epub 2014 Jan
15.

Stepwise withdrawal of inhaled corticosteroids in COPD patients receiving dual
bronchodilation: WISDOM study design and rationale.

Magnussen H(1), Watz H(2), Kirsten A(2), Decramer M(3), Dahl R(4), Calverley
PM(5), Towse L(6), Finnigan H(7), Tetzlaff K(8), Disse B(9).

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary Research Institute at Lung Clinic Grosshansdorf, Airway Research
Center North, Member of the German Center for Lung Research, Grosshansdorf,
Germany. Electronic address: magnussen@pulmoresearch.de. (2)Pulmonary Research
Institute at Lung Clinic Grosshansdorf, Airway Research Center North, Member of
the German Center for Lung Research, Grosshansdorf, Germany. (3)Department of
Respiratory Diseases, University of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. (4)Odense University
Hospital, Odense, Denmark. (5)Institute of Ageing and Chronic Disease, University
Hospital Aintree, Liverpool, UK. (6)Clinical Research Department, Boehringer
Ingelheim (UK), Berkshire, UK. (7)Biometry and Data Management Department,
Boehringer Ingelheim (UK), Berkshire, UK. (8)Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma GmbH &
Co. KG, Ingelheim, Germany; Department of Sports Medicine, University of
Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany. (9)Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma GmbH & Co. KG,
Ingelheim, Germany.

Long-acting bronchodilators in combination with inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) are
recommended to decrease the risk of recurrent exacerbations in patients with
Global initiative for chronic Obstructive Lung Disease (GOLD) stage 3-4 chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). There is increasing concern about the
clinical benefit and long-term safety of ICS use in COPD patients. The WISDOM
(Withdrawal of Inhaled Steroids During Optimised bronchodilator Management) study
(NCT00975195) aims to evaluate the need for ICS use via stepwise withdrawal of
ICS in COPD patients (GOLD 3-4 with a history of at least one exacerbation during
the 12-month period prior to screening) receiving dual bronchodilation. During
the 6-week run-in period, 2456 patients receive tiotropium 18 μg once daily,
salmeterol 50 μg twice daily and fluticasone 500 μg twice daily. In a randomized,
double-blind, parallel-group, active-controlled fashion, one group of patients
continues to receive tiotropium, salmeterol and fluticasone, while the second
group initiates stepwise withdrawal of fluticasone. The primary end point is time
to first moderate or severe exacerbation following randomized treatment over 52
weeks. Lung function, symptoms and safety are also assessed. A sub-study aims to 
identify sub-populations and markers of steroid need. This study will determine
the benefit of continued ICS therapy in combination with dual long-acting
bronchodilators in COPD.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2014.01.002 
PMID: 24477080  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Lancet Respir Med. 2014 Jan;2(1):44-53. doi: 10.1016/S2213-2600(13)70248-0. Epub 
2013 Dec 5.

Effect of ADRB2 polymorphisms on the efficacy of salmeterol and tiotropium in
preventing COPD exacerbations: a prespecified substudy of the POET-COPD trial.

Rabe KF(1), Fabbri LM(2), Israel E(3), Kögler H(4), Riemann K(4), Schmidt H(4),
Glaab T(4), Vogelmeier CF(5).

Author information: 
(1)LungenClinic Grosshansdorf, Airway Research Centre North, German Centre for
Lung Research, Christian-Albrechts University, Kiel, Germany-member of the German
Centre for Lung Research (DZL). Electronic address: k.f.rabe@lungenclinic.de.
(2)Section of Respiratory Diseases, Department of Medical and Surgical
Specialties, University of Modena & Reggio Emilia, Modena, Italy. (3)Department
of Medicine, Pulmonary and Critical Care Division, Brigham and Women's Hospital, 
Boston, MA, USA. (4)Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma GmbH & Co KG, Ingelheim, Germany.
(5)Department of Medicine, Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, University
Medical Centre Giessen and Marburg, Philipps-Universität Marburg, Germany.

Comment in
    Lancet Respir Med. 2014 Jan;2(1):3-4.

BACKGROUND: The effect of β2-adrenergic receptor (ADRB2) polymorphisms on the
treatment response to longacting bronchodilators in chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD) is unclear. We aimed to establish whether ADRB2 polymorphisms
differentially affected COPD exacerbation outcomes in response to tiotropium
versus salmeterol.
METHODS: We did a prespecified analysis of the ADRB2 polymorphisms Arg16Gly and
Gln27Glu within the 1 year randomised, double-blind, double-dummy, parallel-group
Prevention Of Exacerbations with Tiotropium in COPD (POET-COPD) trial, comparing 
the effects of treatment with tiotropium or salmeterol on exacerbations in 7376
patients with COPD. One blood sample was collected for pharmacogenetic testing
from each patient who elected to participate in the substudy. Random assignment
of patients to treatment groups was not stratified according to genotypes.
Genomic DNA was extracted from whole-blood specimens and samples were genotyped
for the two SNPs, rs1042713 (Arg16Gly) and rs1042714 (Gln27Glu). All assays were 
done in technical duplicates and 10% of samples that were randomly chosen were
repeated as technical duplicates in a second independent genotyping process. Our 
primary endpoint was the risk of a first exacerbation of COPD based on time to
first exacerbation data. An exacerbation of COPD was defined as the increase or
new onset of more than one symptom of COPD (cough, sputum, wheezing, dyspnoea, or
chest tightness), with at least one of the symptoms lasting for 3 days or more
and needing treatment with antibiotics or systemic glucocorticoids (moderate
exacerbations), or admission to hospital (severe exacerbations). POET-COPD is
registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, number NCT00563381.
FINDINGS: 5125 patients gave informed consent for genotyping. The distributions
of ADRB2 genotypes were well matched among groups. Polymorphisms at aminoacid 27 
did not affect exacerbation outcomes. In the salmeterol group, patients with
Arg16Arg genotype had a significantly reduced exacerbation risk compared with
patients with Arg16Gly (p=0·0130) and Gly16Gly (p=0·0018) genotypes (proportion
of patients with at least one exacerbation was 32·3% in Arg16Arg, 39·8% in
Arg16Gly, and 42·1% in Gly16Gly). By contrast, exacerbation risk was not modified
by polymorphisms at aminoacid 16 in the tiotropium group. The effect of the
Arg16Gly polymorphism on treatment response to salmeterol was dependent on the
use of inhaled corticosteroids (ICS). In patients untreated with ICS at baseline,
Arg16Gly and Arg16Arg genotypes were associated with significantly prolonged time
to first exacerbation compared with Gly16Gly (vs Arg16Gly p=0·0164; Arg16Arg
p=0·0316; proportion of patients with at least one exacerbation was 28·3% in
Arg16Arg, 31·6% in Arg16Gly, and 39·2% in Gly16Gly), whereas in patients on ICS
at baseline, only the Arg16Arg genotype was associated with significantly
prolonged time to first exacerbation compared with Gly16Gly (p=0·0198; not
Arg16Gly p=0·64; proportion of patients with at least one exacerbation was 35·9% 
in Arg16Arg, 46·7% in Arg16Gly, and 44·8% in Gly16Gly). The respiratory
disorders, in particular worsening of COPD, were the most common serious adverse 
events.
INTERPRETATION: Patients with the Arg16Arg genotype had better exacerbation
outcomes in response to salmeterol than Gly16Gly and Arg16Gly genotypes,
suggesting a potential differential Arg16Gly genotype effect on treatment
response to longacting β-agonists (LABAs). However, the use of ADRB2
polymorphisms for predicting LABA treatment response is still limited and further
prospective validation will be needed to advance the mechanistic understanding of
β-adrenergic polymorphisms and their association with clinical features of COPD.
FUNDING: Boehringer Ingelheim and Pfizer.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S2213-2600(13)70248-0 
PMID: 24461901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. J Thorac Dis. 2013 Dec;5(6):806-14. doi: 10.3978/j.issn.2072-1439.2013.10.11.

Role of indacaterol, a once-daily bronchodilator, in chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease.

Seth HD(1), Sultan S(1), Gotfried MH(2).

Author information: 
(1)Banner Good Samaritan Medical Center, Phoenix, AZ, USA. (2)Pulmonary
Associates PA, Phoenix, AZ, USA ; University of Arizona, Phoenix, AZ, USA.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is characterized by progressive
airflow obstruction that can lead to lung destruction and dyspnea. Although there
has been a slight reduction in mortality in recent decades, COPD is still a
serious health problem that has enormous costs and utilizes significant medical
resources. There have been a number of pharmacologic interventions that have been
developed for the treatment of COPD. Current guidelines recommend the use of
long-acting bronchodilators for the treatment of moderate and severe stage COPD, 
since they have been shown to improve lung function, respiratory symptoms, and
quality of life. Indacaterol is a once-daily beta2-agonist (β2-agonist) delivered
by a single-dose dry powder inhaler used for the treatment of COPD. It is
currently approved at a dose of 75 μg in the United States and a dose of 150 μg
with a maximal dose of 300 μg in Europe and other countries. Several studies show
that indacaterol was statistically superior to both long-acting β2-agonist,
formoterol and salmeterol, as well as, noninferior to tiotropium. Indacaterol is 
generally well tolerated and has a good safety profile. Other studies show that
there is an additive bronchodilator response with the addition of indacaterol to 
tiotropium, which would provide a once-daily treatment option for patient with
moderate to severe COPD. This review discusses the pharmacokinetic, comparative
efficacy and safety data for indacaterol.

DOI: 10.3978/j.issn.2072-1439.2013.10.11 
PMCID: PMC3886694
PMID: 24409359  [PubMed]


106. Lancet Respir Med. 2013 Mar;1(1):51-60. doi: 10.1016/S2213-2600(12)70052-8. Epub 
2012 Dec 6.

Efficacy and safety of once-daily QVA149 compared with twice-daily
salmeterol-fluticasone in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(ILLUMINATE): a randomised, double-blind, parallel group study.

Vogelmeier CF(1), Bateman ED, Pallante J, Alagappan VK, D'Andrea P, Chen H,
Banerji D.

Author information: 
(1)Universitätsklinikum Gießen und Marburg, Marburg, Germany. Electronic address:
claus.vogelmeier@med.uni-marburg.de.

Erratum in
    Lancet Respir Med. 2013 Apr;1(2):101.

Comment in
    Lancet Respir Med. 2013 Mar;1(1):6-7.

BACKGROUND: QVA149 is an inhaled fixed-dose combination therapy under development
for the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). It combines
indacaterol (a longacting β2-agonist) with glycopyrronium (a longacting
muscarinic antagonist) as a dual bronchodilator. We aimed to compare the
efficacy, safety, and tolerability of QVA149 versus salmeterol-fluticasone (SFC) 
over 26 weeks in patients with moderate-to-severe COPD.
METHODS: In this multicentre double-blind, double-dummy, parallel-group study,
523 patients (age 40 years or older, Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive
Lung Disease [GOLD] stages II-III, without exacerbations in the previous year)
were randomly assigned (1:1; via automated, interactive response technology and
stratified for smoking status) to once-daily QVA149 110/50 μg or twice-daily SFC 
50/500 μg for 26 weeks. Efficacy was assessed in the full analysis set
(randomised patients who received at least one dose of study drug); safety was
assessed in all patients who received at least one dose of study drug. The
primary endpoint was to demonstrate the superiority of QVA149 compared with SFC
for the standardised area under the curve from 0 to 12 h post dose for forced
expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1 AUC0-12h) after 26 weeks of treatment. This
trial was registered at ClinicalTrial.gov, NCT01315249.
FINDINGS: Between March 25, 2011, and March 12, 2012, 259 patients were randomly 
assigned to receive QVA149 and 264 to receive SFC. At week 26, FEV1 AUC0-12h was 
significantly higher with QVA149 than with SFC (treatment difference 0·138 L; 95%
CI 0·100-0·176; p<0·0001). Overall incidence of adverse events (including COPD
exacerbations) was 55·4% (143 of 258) for the QVA149 group and 60·2% (159 of 264)
for the SFC group. Incidence of serious adverse events was similar between
treatment groups (QVA149, 13 of 258 [5·0%]; SFC 14 of 264 [5·3%]); COPD worsening
was the most frequent serious adverse event (one of 13 [0·4%] and three of 14
[1·1%], respectively).
INTERPRETATION: Once-daily QVA149 provides significant, sustained, and clinically
meaningful improvements in lung function versus twice-daily SFC, with significant
symptomatic benefit. These results indicate the potential of dual bronchodilation
as a treatment option for non-exacerbating symptomatic COPD patients.
FUNDING: Novartis Pharma AG.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S2213-2600(12)70052-8 
PMID: 24321804  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2013 Nov 10;(11):CD003794. doi:
10.1002/14651858.CD003794.pub4.

Combined corticosteroid and long-acting beta₂-agonist in one inhaler versus
placebo for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Nannini LJ(1), Poole P, Milan SJ, Holmes R, Normansell R.

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary Section, Hospital E Peron, Ruta 11 Y Jm Estrada, G. Baigorria, Santa
Fe - Rosario, Argentina, 2152.

Update of
    Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2007;(4):CD003794.

BACKGROUND: Both long-acting beta2-agonists (LABA) and inhaled corticosteroids
(ICS) have been recommended in guidelines for the treatment of chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Their coadministration in a combination
inhaler may facilitate adherence to medication regimens and improve efficacy.
OBJECTIVES: To determine the efficacy and safety of combined ICS and LABA for
stable COPD in comparison with placebo.
SEARCH METHODS: We searched the Cochrane Airways Group Specialised Register of
trials, reference lists of included studies and manufacturers' trial registries. 
The date of the most recent search was June 2013.
SELECTION CRITERIA: We included randomised and double-blind studies of at least
four weeks' duration. Eligible studies compared combined ICS and LABA
preparations with placebo.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Two review authors independently assessed study
risk of bias and extracted data. Dichotomous data were analysed as fixed-effect
odds ratios (OR) or rate ratios (RR) with 95% confidence intervals (95% CI), and 
continuous data as mean differences with 95% confidence intervals.
MAIN RESULTS: Nineteen studies met the inclusion criteria (with 10,400
participants randomly assigned, lasting between 4 and 156 weeks, mean 42 weeks). 
Studies used three different combined preparations (fluticasone/salmeterol,
budesonide/formoterol or mometasone/formoterol). The studies were generally at
low risk of bias for blinding but at unclear or high risk for attrition bias
because of participant dropouts. Compared with placebo, both
fluticasone/salmeterol and budesonide/formoterol reduced the rate of
exacerbations. Mometasone/formoterol reduced the number of participants
experiencing one or more exacerbation. Pooled analysis of the combined therapies 
indicated that exacerbations were less frequent when compared with placebo (Rate 
Ratio 0.73; 95% CI 0.69 to 0.78, 7 studies, 7495 participants); the quality of
this evidence when GRADE criteria were applied was rated as moderate.
Participants included in these trials had on average one or two exacerbations per
year, which means that treatment with combined therapy would lead to a reduction 
of one exacerbation every two to four years in these individuals. An overall
reduction in mortality was seen, but this outcome was dominated by the results of
one study (TORCH) of fluticasone/salmeterol. Generally, deaths in the smaller,
shorter studies were too few to contribute to the overall estimate. Further
longer studies on budesonide/formoterol and mometasone/formoterol are required to
clarify whether this is seen more widely. When a baseline risk of death of 15.2% 
from the placebo arm of TORCH was used, the three-year number needed to treat for
an additional beneficial outcome (NNTB) with fluticasone/salmeterol to prevent
one extra death was 42 (95% CI 24 to 775). All three combined treatments led to
statistically significant improvement in health status measurements, although the
mean differences observed are relatively small in relation to the minimum
clinically important difference. Furthermore, symptoms and lung function
assessments favoured combined treatments. An increase in the risk of pneumonia
was noted with combined inhalers compared with placebo treatment (OR 1.62, 95% CI
1.36 to 1.94), and the quality of this evidence was rated as moderate, but no
dose effect was seen. The three-year NNTH for one extra case of pneumonia was 17,
based on a 12.3% risk of pneumonia in the placebo arm of TORCH. Fewer
participants withdrew from the combined treatment arms for adverse events or lack
of efficacy.
AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: Combined inhaler therapy led to around a quarter fewer COPD
exacerbations than were seen with placebo. A significant reduction in all-cause
mortality was noted, but this outcome was dominated by one trial (TORCH),
emphasising the need for further trials of longer duration. Increased risk of
pneumonia is a concern; however, this did not translate into increased
exacerbations, hospitalisations or deaths. Current evidence does not suggest any 
major differences between inhalers in terms of effects, but nor is the evidence
strong enough to demonstrate that all are equivalent. To permit firmer
conclusions about the effects of combined therapy, more data are needed,
particularly in relation to the profile of adverse events and benefits in
relation to different formulations and doses of inhaled ICS. Head-to-head
comparisons are necessary to determine whether one combined inhaler is better
than the others.

DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD003794.pub4 
PMID: 24214176  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2014 Jan;348(1):12-24. doi: 10.1124/jpet.113.204586. Epub
2013 Oct 25.

Induction of regulator of G-protein signaling 2 expression by long-acting
β2-adrenoceptor agonists and glucocorticoids in human airway epithelial cells.

Holden NS(1), George T, Rider CF, Chandrasekhar A, Shah S, Kaur M, Johnson M,
Siderovski DP, Leigh R, Giembycz MA, Newton R.

Author information: 
(1)Airways Inflammation Research Group, Snyder Institute for Chronic Diseases,
Faculty of Medicine, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada (N.S.H.,
T.G., C.F.R., A.C., S.S., M.K., R.L., M.A.G., R.N.); GlaxoSmithKline Research and
Development, Uxbridge, Middlesex, United Kingdom (M.J.); and Department of
Physiology and Pharmacology, School of Medicine, West Virginia University,
Morgantown, West Virginia (D.P.S.).

In asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) multiple mediators act
on Gαq-linked G-protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) to cause bronchoconstriction.
However, acting on the airway epithelium, such mediators may also elicit
inflammatory responses. In human bronchial epithelial BEAS-2B cells (bronchial
epithelium + adenovirus 12-SV40 hybrid), regulator of G-protein signaling (RGS) 2
mRNA and protein were synergistically induced in response to combinations of
long-acting β2-adrenoceptor agonist (LABA) (salmeterol, formoterol) plus
glucocorticoid (dexamethasone, fluticasone propionate, budesonide). Equivalent
responses occurred in primary human bronchial epithelial cells. Concentrations of
glucocorticoid plus LABA required to induce RGS2 expression in BEAS-2B cells were
consistent with the levels achieved therapeutically in the lungs. As RGS2 is a
GTPase-activating protein that switches off Gαq, intracellular free calcium
([Ca(2+)]i) flux was used as a surrogate of responses induced by histamine,
methacholine, and the thromboxane receptor agonist U46619
[(Z)-7-[(1S,4R,5R,6S)-5-[(E,3S)-3-hydroxyoct-1-enyl]-3-oxabicyclo[2.2.1]heptan-6-
yl]hept-5-enoic acid]. This was significantly attenuated by salmeterol plus
dexamethasone pretreatment, or RGS2 overexpression, and the protective effect of 
salmeterol plus dexamethasone was abolished by RGS2 RNA silencing. Although
methacholine and U46619 induced interleukin-8 (IL-8) release and this was
inhibited by RGS2 overexpression, the repression of U46619-induced IL-8 release
by salmeterol plus dexamethasone was unaffected by RGS2 knockdown. Given a role
for Gαq-mediated pathways in inducing IL-8 release, we propose that RGS2 acts
redundantly with other effector processes to repress IL-8 expression. Thus, RGS2 
expression is a novel effector mechanism in the airway epithelium that is induced
by glucocorticoid/LABA combinations. This could contribute to the efficacy of
glucocorticoid/LABA combinations in asthma and COPD.

DOI: 10.1124/jpet.113.204586 
PMID: 24163441  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. BMJ Open. 2013 Oct 22;3(10):e003048. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2013-003048.

Shortness of Breath with Daily Activities questionnaire: validation and responder
thresholds in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Watkins ML(1), Wilcox TK, Tabberer M, Brooks JM, Donohue JF, Anzueto A, Chen WH, 
Crim C.

Author information: 
(1)Respiratory Medicines Development Center, GlaxoSmithKline, Research Triangle
Park, North Carolina, USA.

OBJECTIVES: To test the reliability, validity and responsiveness of the 13-item
Shortness of Breath with Daily Activities (SOBDA) questionnaire, and determine
the threshold for response and minimal important difference (MID).
DESIGN: 6 week, randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled study.
SETTING: 40 centres in the USA between 29 October 2009 and 1 July 2010.
PRIMARY AND SECONDARY OUTCOME MEASURES: 547 patients with chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD) were enrolled and 418 entered the 2-week run-in period. 
Data from the run-in period were collected to test internal consistency,
test-retest reliability, convergent validity and known-groups validity of the
SOBDA. Three hundred and sixty six patients were randomised 2:2:1 to fluticasone 
propionate/salmeterol 250/50 µg, salmeterol 50 µg or placebo, twice daily.
Results from the SOBDA questionnaire, Patient Global Assessment of Change
Question, modified Medical Research Council Dyspnoea Scale (mMRC), Clinician
Global Impression of Dysponea Severity (CGI-S), Clinician Global Impression of
Change Question and Chronic Respiratory Disease Questionnaire self-administered
standardised version (CRQ-SAS) were evaluated; spirometry and safety parameters
were measured. Study endpoints were selected to investigate the cross-sectional
and longitudinal validity of the SOBDA questionnaire in relation to the clinical 
criteria.
RESULTS: Internal consistency of the SOBDA questionnaire (Cronbach α) was 0.89.
Test-retest reliability (intraclass correlation) was 0.94. The SOBDA weekly
scores correlated with the patient-reported and clinician-reported mMRC, CGI-S
and CRQ-SAS dyspnoea domain scores (0.29, 0.24, 0.24 and -0.68, respectively).
The SOBDA weekly scores differentiated between the responders and the
non-responders as rated by the patients and the clinicians. Anchor-based and
supportive distribution-based analyses produced a range of the potential values
for the threshold for the responders and MID.
CONCLUSIONS: The 13-item SOBDA questionnaire is reliable, valid and responsive to
change in patients with COPD. On using anchor-based methods, the proposed
responder threshold shows a -0.1 to -0.2 score change. A specific threshold value
will be identified as more data are generated from future clinical trials.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: NCT00984659; GlaxoSmithKline study number: ASQ112989.

DOI: 10.1136/bmjopen-2013-003048 
PMCID: PMC3808824
PMID: 24154513  [PubMed]


110. Exp Ther Med. 2013 Sep;6(3):747-752. Epub 2013 Jul 1.

Expression levels of induced sputum IL-8 and IL-10 and drug intervention effects 
in patients with acute exacerbated COPD complicated with chronic cor pulmonale at
high altitude.

Feng E(1), Wan R, Yang S, Yan Z, Wang S, He W, Zhang Y, Yin H, Chen Z, Liu R.

Author information: 
(1)Center of Respiratory Medicine, The Fourth Hospital of PLA, Lanzhou Command,
Xining, Qinghai 810007, P.R. China.

The aim of this study was to assess the expression levels of induced sputum
interleukin (IL)-8 and IL-10 levels in patients with acute exacerbated chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (AECOPD) complicated with chronic cor pulmonale
(CCP) at high altitude, and to evaluate the intervention effects of an inhaled
corticosteroid (ICS) and a β2-adrenoceptor agonist in this disease. A total of
186 patients with AECOPD complicated with CCP were randomly divided into three
groups, with 62 cases in each. With regard to the two treatment groups, group A
was treated with salmeterol/fluticasone (50 μg/250 μg, respectively) by airway
inhalation twice daily, while group B received budesonide (1 mg) as a spray
inhalation, twice daily. The routine treatment group (group C) received only
routine treatment. The levels of IL-8 and IL-10 in the induced sputum and the
predicted percentage of forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV1%pred),
partial pressure of oxygen in arterial blood (PaO2) and partial pressure of
carbon dioxide in arterial blood (PaCO2) were examined on admission and at a
stable stage two weeks following treatment. Forty healthy volunteers served as a 
control group (group D). Compared with group D values, the IL-8 induced sputum
level and the PaCO2 were significantly increased, while the level of IL-10,
FEV1%pred and the PaO2 were markedly decreased in the three COPD groups prior to 
treatment. Following treatment, the induced sputum IL-8 level and the PaCO2 were 
significantly decreased, while the induced sputum IL-10 level, FEV1%pred and the 
PaO2 were markedly increased in the three treatment groups compared with the
values pre-therapy (all P<0.01). The post-treatment parameters were significantly
different among the three groups (P<0.01). The results indicate that IL-8 and
IL-10 are involved in the airway inflammation of AECOPD complicated by CCP.
Treatment with an ICS was demonstrated to be a successful method of reducing the 
local expression of IL-8 and increasing the local expression of IL-10; however,
ICS combined with a long-acting β2-adrenoceptor agonist (LABA) was more effective
than the sole administration of ICS in patients with AECOPD complicated by CCP at
high altitude.

DOI: 10.3892/etm.2013.1192 
PMCID: PMC3786877
PMID: 24137259  [PubMed]


111. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2013 Oct 15;(10):CD010177. doi:
10.1002/14651858.CD010177.pub2.

Long-acting beta2-agonists for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Kew KM(1), Mavergames C, Walters JA.

Author information: 
(1)Population Health Sciences and Education, St George's, University of London,
Cranmer Terrace, London, UK, SW17 0RE.

BACKGROUND: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a respiratory disease
that causes progressive symptoms of breathlessness, cough and mucus build-up. It 
is the fourth or fifth most common cause of death worldwide and is associated
with significant healthcare costs.Inhaled long-acting beta2-agonists (LABAs) are 
widely prescribed to manage the symptoms of COPD when short-acting agents alone
are no longer sufficient. Twice-daily treatment with an inhaled LABA is aimed at 
relieving symptoms, improving exercise tolerance and quality of life, slowing
decline and even improving lung function and preventing and treating
exacerbations.
OBJECTIVES: To assess the effects of twice-daily long-acting beta2-agonists
compared with placebo for patients with COPD on the basis of clinically
important endpoints, primarily quality of life and COPD exacerbations.
SEARCH METHODS: We searched the Cochrane Airways Group trials register,
ClinicalTrials.gov and manufacturers' websites in June 2013.
SELECTION CRITERIA: Parallel, randomised controlled trials (RCTs) recruiting
populations of patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Studies were 
required to be at least 12 weeks in duration and designed to assess the safety
and efficacy of a long-acting beta2-agonist against placebo.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Data and characteristics were extracted
independently by two review authors, and each study was assessed for potential
sources of bias. Data for all outcomes were pooled and subgrouped by LABA agent
(formoterol 12 μg, formoterol 24 μg and salmeterol 50 μg) and then were
separately analysed by LABA agent and subgrouped by trial duration. Sensitivity
analyses were conducted for the proportion of participants taking inhaled
corticosteroids and for studies with high or uneven rates of attrition.
MAIN RESULTS: Twenty-six RCTs met the inclusion criteria, randomly assigning
14,939 people with COPD to receive twice-daily LABA or placebo. Study duration
ranged from three months to three years; the median duration was six months.
Participants were more often male with moderate to severe symptoms at
randomisation; mean forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1) was between 33%
and 55% predicted normal in the studies, and mean St George's Respiratory
Questionnaire score (SGRQ) ranged from 44 to 55 when reported.Moderate-quality
evidence showed that LABA treatment improved quality of life on the SGRQ (mean
difference (MD) -2.32, 95% confidence interval (CI) -3.09 to -1.54; I(2) = 50%;
17 trials including 11,397 people) and reduced the number of exacerbations
requiring hospitalisation (odds ratio (OR) 0.73, 95% CI 0.56 to 0.95; I(2) = 10%;
seven trials including 3804 people). In absolute terms, 18 fewer people per 1000 
were hospitalised as the result of an exacerbation while receiving LABA therapy
over a weighted mean of 7 months (95% CI 3 to 31 fewer). Scores were also
improved on the Chronic Respiratory Disease Questionnaire (CRQ), and more people 
receiving LABA treatment showed clinically important improvement of at least four
points on the SGRQ.The number of people who had exacerbations requiring a course 
of oral steroids or antibiotics was also lower among those taking LABA (52 fewer 
per 1000 treated over 8 months; 95% CI 24 to 78 fewer, moderate quality
evidence).Mortality was low, and combined findings of all studies showed that
LABA therapy did not significantly affect mortality (OR 0.90, 95% CI 0.75 to
1.08; I(2) = 21%; 23 trials including 14,079 people, moderate quality evidence). 
LABA therapy did not affect the rate of serious adverse events (OR 0.97, 95% CI
0.83 to 1.14; I(2) = 34%, moderate quality evidence), although there was
significant unexplained heterogeneity, especially between the two formoterol
doses.LABA therapy improved predose FEV1 by 73 mL more than placebo (95% CI 48 to
98; I(2) = 71%, low quality evidence), and people were more likely to withdraw
from placebo than from LABA therapy (OR 0.74, 95% CI 0.69 to 0.80; I(2) = 0%).
Higher rates of withdrawal in the placebo arm may reduce our confidence in some
results, but the disparity is more likely to reduce the magnitude of difference
between LABA and placebo than inflate the true effect; removing studies at
highest risk of bias on the basis of high and unbalanced attrition did not change
conclusions for the primary outcomes.
AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: Moderate-quality evidence from 26 studies showed that
inhaled long-acting beta2-agonists are effective over the medium and long term
for patients with moderate to severe COPD. Their use is associated with improved 
quality of life and reduced exacerbations, including those requiring
hospitalisation. Overall, findings showed that inhaled LABAs did not
significantly reduce mortality or serious adverse events.

DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD010177.pub2 
PMID: 24127118  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2013;8:453-9. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S48298. Epub
2013 Oct 3.

A study to assess COPD Symptom-based Management and to Optimise treatment
Strategy in Japan (COSMOS-J) based on GOLD 2011.

Betsuyaku T(1), Kato M, Fujimoto K, Hagan G, Kobayashi A, Hitosugi H, James M,
Jones PW.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary Medicine, Department of Medicine, Keio University,
Tokyo, Japan.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: The Global initiative for chronic Obstructive Lung
Disease (GOLD) Committee has proposed a chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD) assessment framework focused on symptoms and on exacerbation risk. This
study will evaluate a symptom and exacerbation risk-based treatment strategy
based on GOLD in a real-world setting in Japan. Optimal management of COPD will
be determined by assessing symptoms using the COPD Assessment Test (CAT) and by
assessing the frequency of exacerbations.
METHODS: This study (ClinicalTrials.gov identifier: NCT01762800) is a 24-week,
multicenter, randomized, double-blind, double-dummy, parallel-group study. It
aims to recruit 400 patients with moderate-to-severe COPD. Patients will be
randomized to receive treatment with either salmeterol/fluticasone propionate
(SFC) 50/250 μg twice daily or with tiotropium bromide 18 μg once daily. Optimal 
management of patients will be assessed at four-weekly intervals and, if patients
remain symptomatic, as measured using the CAT, or experience an exacerbation,
they have the option to step up to treatment with both drugs, ie, SFC twice daily
and tiotropium once daily (TRIPLE therapy). The primary endpoint of the study
will be the proportion of patients who are able to remain on the randomized
therapy.
RESULTS: No data are available. This paper summarizes the methodology of the
study in advance of the study starting.
CONCLUSION: The results of this study will help physicians to understand whether 
TRIPLE therapy is more effective than either treatment strategy alone in
controlling symptoms and exacerbations in patients with moderate-to-severe COPD. 
It will also help physicians to understand the GOLD recommendation work in Japan.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S48298 
PMCID: PMC3795054
PMID: 24124358  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Eur Respir J. 2014 Mar;43(3):763-72. doi: 10.1183/09031936.00054213. Epub 2013
Oct 10.

A comparison of the efficacy and safety of once-daily fluticasone
furoate/vilanterol with twice-daily fluticasone propionate/salmeterol in moderate
to very severe COPD.

Agustí A(1), de Teresa L, De Backer W, Zvarich MT, Locantore N, Barnes N,
Bourbeau J, Crim C.

Author information: 
(1)Hospital Clinic, IDIBAPS, University of Barcelona, Barcelona.

Fluticasone furoate/vilanterol trifenatate (FF/VI) is a once-daily inhaled
corticosteroid/long-acting β₂-agonist combination in development for chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) treatment. We compared the efficacy and
safety of FF/VI versus fluticasone propionate/salmeterol (FP/SAL) twice daily
over 12 weeks. Moderate to very severe COPD patients received FF/VI 100/25 μg
once daily in the morning (n=266) or FP/SAL 500/50 μg twice daily (n=262). The
primary end-point was a change from baseline in 0-24 h weighted mean forced
expiratory volume in 1 s (wmFEV₁) at 12 weeks. Additional end-points included
time to 100 mL improvement from baseline on day 1 and a change from baseline in
St George's Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ). Safety was also assessed. wmFEV₁
(mean 130 mL) was greater and time to 100 mL improvement shorter (median 16 min) 
with FF/VI than FP/SAL (weighted mean 108 mL, median 28 min). Health status (SGRQ
total score) improved in both groups (FF/VI -4.3 units, FP/SAL -3.0 units).
Differences between treatments were not statistically significant. Six patients
in the FF/VI (2%) and three in the FP/SAL (1%) arm experienced serious adverse
events, none of which were considered to be drug related. Improvements in lung
function and health status were not significantly different between FF/VI 100/25 
μg once daily and FP/SAL 500/50 μg twice daily; there was no apparent difference 
between the safety profiles of either therapy.

DOI: 10.1183/09031936.00054213 
PMID: 24114969  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Respir Res. 2013 Oct 7;14:100. doi: 10.1186/1465-9921-14-100.

Comparative efficacy of long-acting bronchodilators for COPD: a network
meta-analysis.

Cope S(1), Donohue JF, Jansen JP, Kraemer M, Capkun-Niggli G, Baldwin M, Buckley 
F, Ellis A, Jones P.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical Science, St George's University of London, London SW17
0RE, UK. pjones@sgul.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: Clinicians are faced with an increasingly difficult choice regarding 
the optimal bronchodilator for patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD) given the number of new treatments. The objective of this study is
to evaluate the comparative efficacy of indacaterol 75/150/300 μg once daily
(OD), glycopyrronium bromide 50 μg OD, tiotropium bromide 18 μg/5 μg OD,
salmeterol 50 μg twice daily (BID), formoterol 12 μg BID, and placebo for
moderate to severe COPD.
METHODS: Forty randomized controlled trials were combined in a Bayesian network
meta-analysis. Outcomes of interest were trough and post-dose forced expiratory
volume in 1 second (FEV1), St. George's Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ) score
and responders (≥4 points), and Transition Dyspnea Index (TDI) score and
responders (≥1 point) at 6 months.
RESULTS: Indacaterol was associated with a higher trough FEV1 than other active
treatments (difference for indacaterol 150 μg and 300 μg versus placebo: 152 mL
(95% credible interval (CrI): 126, 179); 160 mL (95% CrI: 133, 187)) and the
greatest improvement in SGRQ score (difference for indacaterol 150 μg and 300 μg 
versus placebo: -3.9 (95% CrI -5.2, -2.6); -3.6 (95% CrI -4.8, -2.3)).
Glycopyrronium and tiotropium 18 μg resulted in the next best estimates for both 
outcomes with minor differences (difference for glycopyrronium versus tiotropium 
for trough FEV1 and SGRQ: 18 mL (95% CrI: -16, 51); -0.55 (95% CrI: -2.04, 0.92).
CONCLUSION: In terms of trough FEV1 and SGRQ score indacaterol, glycopyrronium,
and tiotropium are expected to be the most effective bronchodilators.

DOI: 10.1186/1465-9921-14-100 
PMCID: PMC4014806
PMID: 24093477  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2013;8:425-32. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S49179. Epub
2013 Sep 18.

Role of indacaterol and the newer very long-acting β2-agonists in patients with
stable COPD: a review.

Ridolo E(1), Montagni M, Olivieri E, Riario-Sforza GG, Incorvaia C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of Parma, Parma. 
erminia.ridolo@unipr.it

Bronchodilators are central drugs in the management of patients with chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Indacaterol was the first agent of the
novel family of very long-acting β2-agonists to be used as an inhaled
bronchodilator for COPD and provides 24-hour therapeutic action, thus allowing
once-daily administration. Data from clinical trials show that indacaterol has a 
bronchodilator effect similar to that of the anticholinergic tiotropium bromide
and slightly higher efficacy compared with the long-acting β2-agonists,
salmeterol and formoterol. Moreover, the safety profile is excellent and
comparable with that of placebo. Concerning adherence with drug treatment and
real-life management in respect to long-acting β2-agonists, once-daily dosing
makes indacaterol more convenient for COPD patients and is likely to enhance
patient adherence. Other very long-acting β2-agonists currently in development
include vilanterol, olodaterol, and carmoterol, and these have shown good
characteristics for clinical use in the studies reported thus far.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S49179 
PMCID: PMC3785397
PMID: 24082783  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Pulm Pharmacol Ther. 2014 Aug;28(2):158-64. doi: 10.1016/j.pupt.2013.09.002. Epub
2013 Sep 25.

Effects of long-acting bronchodilators and prednisolone on inspiratory lung
function parameters in stable COPD.

Ramlal SK(1), Visser FJ(2), Hop WC(3), Dekhuijzen PN(4), Heijdra YF(4).

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Pulmonology, IJsselland Ziekenhuis, Capelle a/d IJssel, The
Netherlands. Electronic address: SRamlal@ysl.nl. (2)Dept. of Pulmonology,
Canisius Wilhelmina Ziekenhuis, Nijmegen, The Netherlands. (3)Dept. of
Biostatistics, Erasmus Medical Centre, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. (4)Dept. of
Pulmonology, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, The
Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: In chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), there is a poor
correlation between forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1) and dyspnea following 
bronchodilator use. Better correlations have been observed between inspiratory
lung function parameters (ILPs) and dyspnea, which drives our interest in ILPs.
However, the acute and prolonged effects of long-acting bronchodilators and oral 
corticosteroids on ILPs have not been well investigated. Therefore, the aim of
this study was to investigate the effects of these treatments on the ILPs, FEV1, 
dyspnea (visual analog scale (VAS)) and clinical COPD questionnaire (CCQ).
METHODS: Twenty-eight stable COPD patients had their ILPs and FEV1 measured both 
before and 2 h after the use of a single dose of 18 mcg bronchodilator tiotropium
and 50 mcg salmeterol. Thereafter, the patients were randomized to 2 weeks of
treatment with 30 mg oral prednisolone once daily or oral placebo in combination 
with daily treatment with these two bronchodilators. Four weeks after the
cessation of the randomized treatment, the ILPs and FEV1 were again measured.
After each intervention, any change in the VAS score was assessed.
RESULTS: With both bronchodilators, significant improvements in ILPs were
demonstrated (p < 0.005), with the exception of changes in ILPs inspiratory
capacity (IC) and forced inspiratory flow at 50% of the vital capacity (FIF50)
after tiotropium inhalation. After 2 weeks of treatment with prednisolone,
significant differences were found for ILP forced inspiratory volume in 1 s
(FIV1) and FEV1 compared with placebo. These differences were no longer present 4
weeks after the cessation of prednisolone. Significant relationships between ILPs
and VAS scores were only found after 2 weeks of treatment with prednisolone or
placebo.
CONCLUSIONS: After a single dose of long-acting bronchodilator salmeterol,
significant improvements are observed in all ILPs and in FIV1 and PIF after
tiotropium. Two weeks of oral corticosteroid treatment improved the FIV1 and
FEV1. The dyspnea VAS score was only significantly correlated with the ILPs after
2 weeks of oral corticosteroid treatment.

Crown Copyright © 2013. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pupt.2013.09.002 
PMID: 24076367  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. J Aerosol Med Pulm Drug Deliv. 2014 Aug;27(4):279-89. doi:
10.1089/jamp.2013.1040. Epub 2013 Sep 28.

Pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of fluticasone propionate and salmeterol
delivered as a combination dry powder from a capsule-based inhaler and a
multidose inhaler in asthma and COPD patients.

Daley-Yates PT(1), Mehta R, Chan RH, Despa SX, Louey MD.

Author information: 
(1)1 GlaxoSmithKline , Stockley Park, Uxbridge, UK .

BACKGROUND: The object of this study was to assess whether a capsule-based and
multidose dry powder inhaler containing salmeterol (as xinafoate salt) 50 μg plus
fluticasone propionate (FP) 250 μg [combination (SFC 50/250)] could be equivalent
in terms of in vivo drug delivery and systemic exposure.
METHODS: This was a randomized, double-blind, double-dummy, replicate treatment
design comparative bioavailability study of SFC 50/250 delivered in a
capsule-based inhaler (Rotahaler®) and a multidose dry powder inhaler (Diskus®). 
Subjects with asthma or chronic obstructive pulmonary (COPD) disease (n=60) were 
randomized to receive twice-daily SFC 50/250 via a Rotahaler and via Diskus each 
for two 10-day treatment periods (GlaxoSmithKline Protocol ASR114334).
RESULTS: For FP and salmeterol, the in vitro aerodynamic particle size profiles
were within±15% of Diskus for the fine particle mass (FPM) and emitted dose (ED) 
using the Andersen Cascade Impactor, and ED, mass median aerodynamic diameter,
and geometric standard deviation using the New Generation Impactor (NGI). This
was also the case for FP but not salmeterol for FPM and fine particle dose using 
the NGI. For the combined asthma and COPD subjects, the plasma AUC and Cmax for
FP and salmeterol were higher for Rotahaler:Rotahaler/Diskus geometric mean
ratios (90% confidence intervals) for FP AUC0-τ of 1.52 (1.37-1.67) and Cmax of
1.94 (1.75-2.10) and salmeterol AUC0-τ of 1.15 (1.09-1.21) and Cmax of 1.56
(1.42-1.67). Corresponding values for the primary pharmacodynamic endpoint,
weighted mean (0-12 hr) serum cortisol, were 0.928 (0.886-0.971). Inhaled
FP/salmeterol via both inhalers was well-tolerated. One serious adverse event,
considered possibly related to study medication, resulted in subject withdrawal
from the study.
CONCLUSIONS: The in vitro tests and systemic pharmacodynamic endpoints revealed
no major differences between the two inhalers, but lacked predictive power and
sensitivity to guide in vivo drug delivery performance and systemic exposure.
Based on pharmacokinetic endpoints, the inhalers were not considered
bioequivalent in terms of systemic exposure. Further studies to refine the
Rotahaler performance are ongoing.

DOI: 10.1089/jamp.2013.1040 
PMID: 24074143  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2013 Nov;132(5):1166-73. doi: 10.1016/j.jaci.2013.07.038.
Epub 2013 Sep 23.

Inhaled long-acting β2 agonists enhance glucocorticoid receptor nuclear
translocation and efficacy in sputum macrophages in COPD.

Haque R(1), Hakim A, Moodley T, Torrego A, Essilfie-Quaye S, Jazrawi E, Johnson
M, Barnes PJ, Adcock IM, Usmani OS.

Author information: 
(1)Airway Disease Section, National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College
London and Royal Brompton Hospital, London, United Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: Combination inhaled therapy with long-acting β2 agonists (LABAs) and 
corticosteroids is beneficial in treating asthma and chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD).
OBJECTIVE: In asthma, LABAs enhance glucocorticoid receptor (GR) nuclear
translocation in the presence of corticosteroids. Whether this biological
mechanism occurs in COPD, a relatively corticosteroid-resistant disease, is
uncertain.
METHODS: Eight patients with mild/moderate COPD participated in a double-blind,
placebo-controlled, crossover study and inhaled single doses of fluticasone
propionate (FP) 100 μg, FP 500 μg, salmeterol xinafoate (SLM) 50 μg, and
combination FP 100 μg + SLM 50 μg. One hour postinhalation, sputum was induced,
nuclear proteins isolated from purified macrophages, and levels of activated
nuclear GR quantified by using a GR-glucocorticoid response element ELISA-based
assay.
RESULTS: Nuclear GR significantly increased after the inhalation of FP 500 μg (P 
< .01), but not after the inhalation of FP 100 μg or SLM 50 μg, compared with
placebo. Interestingly, SLM in combination with FP 100 μg increased nuclear GR
levels equivalent to those of FP 500 μg alone. This was significantly greater
than either FP 100 μg (P < .05) or SLM 50 μg (P < .01) alone. In vitro in a human
macrophage cell line, SLM (10(-8) mol/L) enhanced FP (10(-9) mol/L)-induced
mitogen-activated protein kinase phosphatase-1 mRNA (5.8 ± 0.6 vs 8.4 ± 1.1 ×
10(-6) copies, P < .05) and 2 × glucocorticoid response element-luciferase
reporter gene activity (250.1 ± 15.6 vs 103.1 ± 23.6-fold induction, P < .001).
Addition of SLM (10(-9) mol/L) to FP (10(-11) mol/L) significantly enhanced
FP-mediated suppression of IL-1β-induced CXCL8 (P < .05).
CONCLUSIONS: Addition of SLM 50 μg to FP 100 μg enhanced GR nuclear translocation
equivalent to that seen with a 5-fold higher dose of FP in sputum macrophages
from patients with COPD. This may account for the superior clinical effects of
combination LABA/corticosteroid treatment compared with either as monotherapy
observed in COPD.

Copyright © 2013 American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. Published by
Mosby, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaci.2013.07.038 
PMID: 24070494  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. J Thorac Dis. 2013 Aug;5(4):559-66. doi: 10.3978/j.issn.2072-1439.2013.07.35.

The role of indacaterol for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).

Cazzola M(1), Bardaro F, Stirpe E.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Respiratory Clinical Pharmacology, Department of System Medicine,
University of Rome "Tor Vergata", Rome, Italy.

Indacaterol is the first long-acting β2-agonist (LABAs) approved for the
treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) that allows for
once-daily (OD) administration. It is rapidly acting, with an onset of action in 
5 minutes, like salbutamol and formoterol but with a sustained bronchodilator
effect, that last for 24 hours, like tiotropium. In long-term clinical studies
(12 weeks to 1 year) in patients with moderate to severe COPD, OD indacaterol 150
or 300 μg improved lung function (primary endpoint) significantly more than
placebo, and improvements were significantly greater than twice-daily formoterol 
12 μg or salmeterol 50 μg, and noninferior to OD tiotropium bromide 18 μg.
Indacaterol was well tolerated at all doses and with a good overall safety
profile. Cost-utility analyses show that indacaterol 150 μg has lower total costs
and better outcomes than tiotropium and salmeterol. These findings suggest that
indacaterol can be considered a first choice drug in the treatment of the patient
with mild/moderate stable COPD. However, in people with COPD who remain
symptomatic on treatment with indacaterol, adding a long-acting muscarinic
antagonist (LAMA) is the preferable option. In any case, it is advisable to
combine indacaterol with a OD inhaled corticosteroid (ICS), such as mometasone
furoate or ciclesonide, in patients with low FEV1, and, in those patients who
have many symptoms and a high risk of exacerbations, to combine it with a LAMA
and a OD ICS.

DOI: 10.3978/j.issn.2072-1439.2013.07.35 
PMCID: PMC3755680
PMID: 23991316  [PubMed]


120. J Thorac Dis. 2013 Aug;5(4):549-58. doi: 10.3978/j.issn.2072-1439.2013.08.04.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease in China: the potential role of
indacaterol.

Gao J(1), Prasad N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Diseases, Peking Union Medical College Hospital,
Peking Union Medical College and Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing,
China;

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is becoming a leading cause of
morbidity and mortality in China, with tobacco smoking, biomass fuel use and
genetic susceptibility being the major risk factors. COPD poses a high economic
burden with the total expenditure per patient costing 40% and nearly one-third of
an average family income in urban and rural areas of China, respectively. Despite
the use of the Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease strategy
document being recommended for the diagnosis and management of COPD, the majority
of patients with COPD go undiagnosed or are not managed appropriately by
physicians. Long-acting β2-agonists (LABAs) have long been used for symptomatic
management of COPD, with salmeterol and formoterol being the commonly used
twice-daily treatments. Indacaterol is the first once-daily LABA, approved at a
dose of 150 µg once daily in China. Several phase III studies have shown that
indacaterol 150 µg improves lung function, breathlessness, health status,
exacerbations, rescue medication use and symptoms, as compared with placebo and
other bronchodilators, in patients with COPD, with a rapid onset of action
following first dose and a good safety and tolerability profile. In this review
we elaborate on the efficacy and safety results from several such studies.

DOI: 10.3978/j.issn.2072-1439.2013.08.04 
PMCID: PMC3755687
PMID: 23991315  [PubMed]


121. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2013 Aug 30;(8):CD006826. doi:
10.1002/14651858.CD006826.pub2.

Combined corticosteroid and long-acting beta(2)-agonist in one inhaler versus
inhaled corticosteroids alone for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Nannini LJ(1), Poole P, Milan SJ, Kesterton A.

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary Section, Hospital E Peron, Ruta 11 Y Jm Estrada, G. Baigorria, Santa
Fe - Rosario, Argentina, 2152.

Update of
    Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2007;(4):CD006826.

BACKGROUND: Both long-acting beta(2)-agonists and inhaled corticosteroids have
been recommended in guidelines for the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD). Their co-administration in a combined inhaler is intended to
facilitate adherence to medication regimens and to improve efficacy. Three
preparations are currently available: fluticasone propionate/salmeterol (FPS).
budesonide/formoterol (BDF) and mometasone furoate/formoterol (MF/F).
OBJECTIVES: To assess the efficacy and safety of combined long-acting
beta2-agonist and inhaled corticosteroid (LABA/ICS) preparations, as measured by 
clinical endpoints and pulmonary function testing, compared with inhaled
corticosteroids (ICS) alone, in the treatment of adults with chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD).
SEARCH METHODS: We searched the Cochrane Airways Group Specialised Register of
trials, which is compiled from systematic searches of multiple literature
databases. The search was conducted in June 2013. In addition, we checked the
reference lists of included studies and contacted the relevant manufacturers.
SELECTION CRITERIA: Studies were included if they were randomised and
double-blind. Compared studies combined LABA/ICS with the ICS component.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Two review authors independently assessed trial
quality and extracted data. The primary outcomes were exacerbations, mortality
and pneumonia. Health-related quality of life (as measured by validated scales), 
lung function and side effects were secondary outcomes. Dichotomous data were
analysed as fixed-effect odds ratios with 95% confidence intervals (CIs), and
continuous data as mean differences or rate ratios and 95% CIs.
MAIN RESULTS: A total of 15 studies of good methodological quality met the
inclusion criteria by randomly assigning 7814 participants with predominantly
poorly reversible, severe COPD. Data were most plentiful for the FPS combination.
Exacerbation rates were significantly reduced with combination therapies (rate
ratio 0.87, 95% CI 0.80 to 0.94, 6 studies, N = 5601) compared with ICS alone.
The mean exacerbation rate in the control (ICS) arms of the six included studies 
was 1.21 exacerbations per participant per year (range 0.88 to 1.60), and we
would expect this to be reduced to a rate of 1.05 (95% CI 0.97 to 1.14) among
those given combination therapy. Mortality was also lower with the combination
(odds ratio (OR) 0.78, 95% CI 0.64 to 0.94, 12 studies, N = 7518) than with ICS
alone, but this was heavily weighted by a three-year study of FPS. When this
study was removed, no significant mortality difference was noted. The reduction
in exacerbations did not translate into significantly reduced rates of
hospitalisation due to COPD exacerbation (OR 0.93, 95% CI 0.80 to 1.07, 10
studies, N = 7060). Lung function data favoured combination treatment in the FPS,
BDF and MF/F trials, but the improvement was small. Small improvements in
health-related quality of life were measured on the St George's Respiratory
Questionnaire (SGRQ) with FPS or BDF compared with ICS, but this was well below
the minimum clinically important difference. Adverse event profiles were similar 
between the two treatments arms, and rates of pneumonia when it was diagnosed by 
chest x-ray (CXR) were lower than those reported in earlier trials.
AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: Combination ICS and LABA offer some clinical benefits in
COPD compared with ICS alone, especially for reduction in exacerbations. This
review does not support the use of ICS alone when LABAs are available. Adverse
events were not significantly different between treatments. Further long-term
assessments using practical outcomes of current and new 24-hour LABAs will help
determine their efficacy and safety. For robust comparisons as to their relative 
effects, long-term head-to-head comparisons are needed.

DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD006826.pub2 
PMID: 23990350  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Expert Rev Clin Pharmacol. 2013 Sep;6(5):503-17. doi:
10.1586/17512433.2013.828419. Epub 2013 Aug 24.

Once-daily glycopyrronium via the Breezhaler® device for the treatment of COPD:
pharmacological and clinical profile.

Molimard M(1), D'Andrea P.

Author information: 
(1)Département de Pharmacologie, CHU de Bordeaux-Univ. Bordeaux Ségalen-INSERM,
U657, 33076 Bordeaux Cedex, France.

In the management of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), there is an
unmet medical need for effective bronchodilator treatments that not only have a
fast onset of action, but also a long duration of action and are delivered using 
a simple, easy-to-use device. Long-acting muscarinic antagonists such as
glycopyrronium and tiotropium, along with long-acting beta-2 agonists such as
indacaterol, formoterol and salmeterol are the pillars of pharmacological therapy
for the long-term management of patients with COPD. Glycopyrronium, the
quaternary ammonium ion of glycopyrronium bromide, acts as a competitive
antagonist by selectively binding to the muscarinic receptors in the bronchial
smooth musculature, thus inhibiting acetylcholine-mediated bronchoconstriction.
Glycopyrronium is an inhaled once-daily long-acting muscarinic antagonist
recently approved for the maintenance treatment of patients with COPD.
Glycopyrronium is administered by a single-dose, dry-powder inhaler, the
Breezhaler® device, designed specifically to have a low internal resistance, be
easy to use and confirm efficient drug delivery in patients with a wide range of 
COPD severities, irrespective of the age. Glycopyrronium has been shown to
provide rapid and sustained improvements in lung function, dyspnea, health
status, exercise endurance and exacerbation risk and an acceptable safety and
tolerability profile.

DOI: 10.1586/17512433.2013.828419 
PMID: 23971870  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. PLoS One. 2013 Aug 14;8(8):e70784. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0070784. eCollection
2013.

Indacaterol for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: systematic review and
meta-analysis.

Chung VC(1), Ma PH, Hui DS, Tam WW, Tang JL.

Author information: 
(1)Jockey Club School of Public Health and Primary Care, The Chinese University
of Hong Kong, Hong Kong.

BACKGROUND: Inhaled bronchodilators are the first-line therapy for COPD.
Indacaterol is a novel addition to existing long-acting bronchodilators.
OBJECTIVES: Systematic review of randomized controlled trials (RCT) ON efficacy
and safety of indacaterol as compared: 1) with placebo at different dosages, 2)
with existing bronchodilators; (3) as add-on treatment to tiotropium.
METHODS: We searched 13 electronic databases, including MEDLINE, EMBASE and
CENTRAL, and contacted the manufacturer for unpublished data. Primary outcome was
mean FEV1 change at 12(th) week, secondary outcomes included changes in SGRQ, TDI
and BODE index at 6 months, exacerbation at 1 year, and worsening of symptoms.
RESULTS: Twelve eligible RCTs of moderate risk of bias included data from 10,977 
patients. Compared to placebo, indacaterol improved FEV1 by a weighted mean
difference (WMD) of 0.16 L (95%CI: 0.15, 0.18 L, p<0.001), homogeneously above
the minimally important difference of 0.10 L. It offered clinically relevant
improvement in all secondary outcomes except exacerbation. Magnitude of benefit
did not differ significantly by dosage, but one treatment related death was
reported at 300 ug. Efficacy of Indacaterol was similar to formoterol and
salmeterol (FEV1 WMD = 0.04 L, 95%CI: 0.01 L, 0.07 L, p = 0.02); and tiotropium
(FEV1 WMD = 0.01 L, 95%CI: -0.01, 0.03 L, p = 0.61). The use of indacaterol on
top of tiotropium yielded additional improvement on FEV1 (WMD = 0.07 L, 95%CI:
0.05 L, 0.10 L, p<0.001).
CONCLUSION: Indacaterol is safe and beneficial for patients with COPD at dosage
≤150 ug. It may serve as a good alternative to existing bronchodilators, or as an
add-on to tiotropium for unresponsive patients. Use of higher dosage requires
further justification.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0070784 
PMCID: PMC3743831
PMID: 23967106  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Thorax. 2014 Jan;69(1):14-23. doi: 10.1136/thoraxjnl-2012-202878. Epub 2013 Aug
7.

Airway gene expression in COPD is dynamic with inhaled corticosteroid treatment
and reflects biological pathways associated with disease activity.

van den Berge M(1), Steiling K, Timens W, Hiemstra PS, Sterk PJ, Heijink IH, Liu 
G, Alekseyev YO, Lenburg ME, Spira A, Postma DS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonary Diseases, University of Groningen, University Medical 
Center Groningen, , Groningen, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: A core feature of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is the
accelerated decline in forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV1). The recent 
Groningen and Leiden Universities study of Corticosteroids in Obstructive Lung
Disease (GLUCOLD) study suggested that particular phenotypes of COPD benefit from
fluticasone±salmeterol by reducing the rate of FEV1 decline, yet the underlying
mechanisms are unknown.
METHODS: Whole-genome gene expression profiling using the Affymetrix Gene ST
array (V.1.0) was performed on 221 bronchial biopsies available from 89 COPD
patients at baseline and after 6 and 30 months of fluticasone±salmeterol and
placebo treatment in GLUCOLD.
RESULTS: Linear mixed effects modelling revealed that the expression of 138 genes
decreased, whereas the expression of 140 genes significantly upregulated after
both 6 and 30 months of treatment with fluticasone±salmeterol versus placebo. A
more pronounced treatment-induced change in the expression of 50 and 55 of these 
278 genes was associated with a lower rate of decline in FEV1 and Saint George
Respiratory Questionnaire, respectively. Genes decreasing with treatment were
involved in pathways related to cell cycle, oxidative phosphorylation, epithelial
cell signalling, p53 signalling and T cell signalling. Genes increasing with
treatment were involved in pathways related to focal adhesion, gap junction and
extracellular matrix deposition. Finally, the fluticasone-induced gene expression
changes were enriched among genes that change in the airway epithelium in smokers
with versus without COPD in an independent data set.
CONCLUSIONS: The present study suggests that gene expression in biological
pathways of COPD is dynamic with treatment and reflects disease activity. This
study opens the gate to targeted and molecular phenotype-driven therapy of COPD.

DOI: 10.1136/thoraxjnl-2012-202878 
PMCID: PMC3888587
PMID: 23925644  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2013;8:353-63. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S21625. Epub
2013 Jul 25.

Indacaterol: a comprehensive review.

Rossi A(1), Polese G.

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary Unit, Cardiovascular and Thoracic Department, University and General
Hospital, Verona, Italy. andrea.rossi2@ospedaleuniverona.it

At present there is no cure for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
However, some nonpharmacologic treatments, such as rehabilitation and lung volume
reduction surgery, as well as pharmacologic intervention, can relieve some of the
patient's symptoms and improve quality of life, while also reducing the rate of
exacerbations and hospitalizations. There needs to be a paradigm shift away from 
the unjustified nihilistic approach to COPD towards considering it a preventable 
and treatable disease. After patients quit smoking and start to lead healthier
lifestyles, long-acting bronchodilators, such as long-acting beta-adrenergic
agents (LABA) and long-acting antimuscarinic agents (LAMA), are recommended as
the cornerstone of treatment for COPD, either as monotherapy or in combination.
COPD is characterized by a reduced maximum expiratory flow and slow forced
emptying of the lungs, which progress over time and are not completely
reversible. In this condition, gas gets trapped in the lungs and pulmonary
hyperinflation occurs. LABA and LAMA improve airway patency and deflate the
lungs. Indacaterol is the first once-daily LABA approved for treatment of COPD,
and is administered by inhalation through the Breezhaler® device. The speed of
bronchodilation is similar to that with salbutamol (ie, about five minutes) and
longer (ie, 24 hours) than that with traditional LABA, with the same 12-hour
effect as salmeterol and formoterol, both of which require twice-daily
administration. This is why indacaterol has been called the "ultra-LABA". On the 
one hand, the fast onset of action provides immediate relief of symptoms, and on 
the other, its constant 24-hour bronchodilation provides "pharmacologic stenting"
which facilitates lung emptying, thereby decreasing trapped gas and pulmonary
hyperinflation. Once-daily administration of a fast and long-acting
bronchodilator can improve patient adherence with therapy, which is known to be a
major problem for many medical treatments. Dose-finding trials have shown that 75
μg is the minimum dose needed to achieve clinically important improvement.
However, indacaterol 150 μg and 300 μg achieve an even greater improvement in
lung function and patient-oriented outcomes. Further, these two doses of
indacaterol significantly reduce pulmonary hyperinflation, thereby improving
exercise tolerance and ability to perform day-to-day activities. It is more
effective on lung volumes at the 300 μg dose than formoterol, and better than
salmeterol and tiotropium at the 150 μg dose, at least in the acute setting. It
is noteworthy that few studies document these results in patients with COPD and
moderate airflow obstruction. These are exactly the kind of patients our research
should be concentrating on, in view of the accelerated decay in forced expiratory
volume in one second at this stage of the disease. Finally, all the relevant
studies show that indacaterol is consistently well tolerated by patients with
COPD at every stage, and that it has a high safety profile.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S21625 
PMCID: PMC3728154
PMID: 23922496  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Expert Opin Pharmacother. 2013 Oct;14(14):1993-2002. doi:
10.1517/14656566.2013.823949. Epub 2013 Jul 31.

Evaluation of salmeterol xinafoate plus fluticasone propionate for the treatment 
of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Restrepo RD(1), Tate A, Coquat J.

Author information: 
(1)The University of Texas Health Science Center, Department of Respiratory Care 
, MSC 6248, San Antonio TX 78229 , USA restrepor@uthscsa.edu.

INTRODUCTION: Current clinical guidelines recommend long-acting bronchodilators
as the mainstay of the pharmacotherapy of patients with chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD). Inhaled corticosteroids (ICS), in conjunction with
long-acting beta-agonists (LABA), are routinely considered at severe and very
severe stages of COPD when patients lack adequate response to single-therapy with
LABAs. Although the study methodologies evaluating the clinical effectiveness of 
the combination therapy using salmeterol and fluticasone (SAL/FLU) for patients
with COPD have been questioned, a number of studies have suggested that using
ICS, in combination with a LABA agent, may improve survival of patients with
COPD.
AREAS COVERED: This article attempts to review the most current evidence for
using SAL/FLU in the management of COPD and summarizes the results of outcome
measures reported in randomized controlled trials.
EXPERT OPINION: Until new forms of drug combinations are made available, the use 
of dual-therapy containing a LABA and ICS remain as the most logical and
appropriate approach for the treatment of patients suffering from severe and very
severe COPD with repeated exacerbations.

DOI: 10.1517/14656566.2013.823949 
PMID: 23898819  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Am J Rhinol Allergy. 2013 Jul-Aug;27(4):273-7. doi: 10.2500/ajra.2013.27.3887.

Effect of nasal anti-inflammatory treatment in chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease.

Callebaut I(1), Hox V, Bobic S, Bullens DM, Janssens W, Dupont L, Hellings PW.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Immunology, Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Catholic
University of Leuven, Belgium.

BACKGROUND: Sinonasal inflammation and symptoms are often underdiagnosed in
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) patients. So far, it is not known to
what extent anti-inflammatory nasal treatment may reduce sinonasal symptoms in
COPD patients. This study was designed to examine the effects of nasal
anti-inflammatory treatment on sinonasal symptoms and cough in COPD patients.
METHODS: Thirty-three COPD patients on stable bronchial therapy
(salmeterol/fluticasone propionate 50/500 mg b.i.d. for >6 weeks) were randomized
to receive fluticasone furoate (FF) or placebo nasal spray at 110 μg once daily
for 12 weeks. Sinonasal symptoms and cough were monitored at baseline, at 6 and12
weeks of treatment, and at 4 weeks after cessation of the treatment using a
visual analog scale. Levels of cytokines were measured in nasal secretions.
RESULTS: In contrast to the placebo group (n = 13), FF patients (n = 14) reported
less nasal blockage (10.62 ± 4.21 mm versus 36.57 ± 8.01 mm; p = 0.0026),
postnasal drip (1.46 ± 0.29 score versus 2.83 ± 0.38 score; p = 0.03), and nasal 
discharge (0.23 ± 0.12 score versus 1.77 ± 0.43 score; p = 0.01) after 6 weeks of
treatment compared with baseline, which was still present at 12 weeks. FF
patients reported less cough compared with baseline (25.54 ± 4.46 mm versus 36.79
± 5.75 mm; p = 0.04), which was not the case in the placebo group (49.58 ± 10.44 
mm versus 42.00 ± 8.05 mm; p = 0.38). Nine of 14 patients in the FF group (64%)
reported slight to total relief of nasal symptoms, and this subgroup had a
significant decrease in IL-8 levels in nasal secretions after 6 weeks of
treatment (850.7 ± 207.2 pg/mL versus 1608 ± 696.5 pg/mL; p = 0.03) compared with
baseline.
CONCLUSION: Nasal FF treatment in COPD patients significantly reduced sinonasal
symptoms, in parallel with reduced IL-8 in nasal secretion levels and cough.

DOI: 10.2500/ajra.2013.27.3887 
PMID: 23883807  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Respiration. 2013;86(4):280-7. doi: 10.1159/000351116. Epub 2013 Jul 20.

Effects of tiotropium and salmeterol/fluticasone propionate on airway wall
thickness in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Hoshino M(1), Ohtawa J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Atami Hospital, International University
of Health and Welfare, Atami, Japan.

Comment in
    Respiration. 2013;86(4):275-6.

BACKGROUND: Triple inhalation therapy with tiotropium (Tio) and
salmeterol/fluticasone propionate combination (SFC) is widely used in the
treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). However, the effects
of triple therapy on airway structural changes remain unknown.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of the study was to assess the effects of Tio, salmeterol
(SM), SFC and Tio plus SFC on airway dimensions in COPD.
METHODS: A randomized, open-label, 4-way study (n = 60) was conducted comparing
16-week treatment periods of Tio (18 μg once daily), SM (50 μg twice daily), SFC 
(50/250 μg twice daily) and Tio (18 μg once daily) plus SFC (50/250 μg twice
daily). Airway dimensions were assessed by a validated CT technique, and airway
wall area (WA) corrected for body surface area (BSA), percentage WA (WA%), wall
thickness/√BSA and luminal area (Ai)/BSA at the right apical segmental bronchus
were measured. Pulmonary function and the St. George's Respiratory Questionnaire 
(SGRQ) were evaluated.
RESULTS: Tio plus SFC resulted in a significant decrease in WA corrected for BSA 
and WA% compared with Tio, SM and SFC (p < 0.05 for all). The changes in WA% and 
Ai/BSA were significantly correlated with changes in forced expiratory volume in 
1 s (r = -0.86, p < 0.001, and r = 0.48, p < 0.05, respectively). There were more
significant improvements in SGRQ scores after treatment with triple therapy than 
after the 3 other treatments.
CONCLUSIONS: Tio plus SFC therapy is more effective than Tio, SM and SFC for
reducing airway wall thickness in COPD.

Copyright © 2013 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000351116 
PMID: 23880883  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. J Aerosol Med Pulm Drug Deliv. 2014 Apr;27(2):103-9. doi: 10.1089/jamp.2013.1038.
Epub 2013 Jun 8.

Comparison of dry powder versus nebulized beta-agonist in patients with COPD who 
have suboptimal peak inspiratory flow rate.

Mahler DA(1), Waterman LA, Ward J, Gifford AH.

Author information: 
(1)Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth , Hanover, NH; and Section of Pulmonary
& Critical Care Medicine, Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical Center, Lebanon, NH.

BACKGROUND: A peak inspiratory flow rate (PIFR) of <60 L/min against the internal
resistance (resist) of a dry powder inhaler (DPI) may limit the ability of a
patient with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) to achieve
bronchodilation. The hypothesis was that lung function would be higher with a
beta-agonist inhaled via nebulization compared with dry powder in patients with
COPD who exhibit a PIFRresist of <60 L/min against the Diskus(®).
METHODS: This study was randomized, single-blind, and crossover with spirometry
and inspiratory capacity (IC) measured at 15, 30, and 120 min post treatment. The
efficacy of arformoterol aerosol solution (15 μg/2 mL) via nebulizer was compared
with salmeterol dry powder (50 μg) via Diskus. The primary outcome was the change
in lung function from baseline at 2 hr as these two inhaled beta-agonists have
the similar peak bronchodilator effect as measured by forced expiratory volume in
1 sec (FEV1).
RESULTS: Twenty patients (15 females/5 males) with postalbuterol FEV1 of
0.83±0.31 L (38±12% predicted) and PIFRresist of 53±5 L/min completed the study. 
At 15 min, improvements in FEV1, forced vital capacity (FVC), and IC were
significantly higher with arformoterol than with salmeterol. At 2 hr, changes in 
FVC and IC, but not FEV1, were significantly higher with arformoterol. At visit
3, patient preference was similar for salmeterol Diskus (n=8) and arformoterol
solution (n=7), whereas five patients reported no preference.
CONCLUSIONS: At peak effect (2 hr), volume responses were greater with
arfomoterol via nebulizer compared with dry powder salmeterol in patients with
COPD who had a PIFRresist of <60 L/min. Bronchodilator therapy via nebulization
should be considered in patients with COPD who have a suboptimal PIFRresist
against a particular DPI.

DOI: 10.1089/jamp.2013.1038 
PMID: 23745526  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2013 May 31;(5):CD007891. doi:
10.1002/14651858.CD007891.pub3.

Combination inhaled steroid and long-acting beta2-agonist versus tiotropium for
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Welsh EJ(1), Cates CJ, Poole P.

Author information: 
(1)Population Health Sciences and Education, St George’s University of London,
London, UK. ewelsh@sgul.ac.uk.

Update of
    Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2010;(5):CD007891.

BACKGROUND: Combination therapy (inhaled corticosteroids and long-acting
beta2-agonists) and tiotropium are both used in the treatment of chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). There is uncertainty about the relative
benefits and harms of these treatments.
OBJECTIVES: To compare the relative effects of inhaled combination therapy and
tiotropium on markers of exacerbations, symptoms, quality of life, lung function,
pneumonia and serious adverse events in patients with chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease.
SEARCH METHODS: We searched the Cochrane Airways Group Specialised Register of
trials (November 2012) and reference lists of articles. We also contacted authors
of the studies.
SELECTION CRITERIA: We included only parallel, randomised controlled trials
comparing inhaled combination corticosteroid and long-acting beta2-agonist
against inhaled tiotropium bromide.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Two authors independently assessed trials for
inclusion and then extracted data on trial quality and outcome results. We
contacted study authors for additional information. We resolved discrepancies
through discussion.
MAIN RESULTS: One large, two-year trial (INSPIRE) and two smaller, shorter trials
on a total of 1528 participants were found. The results from these trials were
not pooled. The number of withdrawals from each arm of the INSPIRE trial was
large and imbalanced and outcome data were not collected for patients who
withdrew, raising concerns about the reliability of data from this study.In
INSPIRE, there were more deaths on tiotropium than on fluticasone/salmeterol
(Peto odds ratio (OR) 0.55; 95% confidence interval (CI) 0.33 to 0.93). This was 
a statistically significant difference, however the number of withdrawals from
each of the arms was 11 times larger than the observed number of deaths for
participants on fluticasone/salmeterol and seven times larger for participants on
tiotropium. There were more all-cause hospital admissions in patients on
fluticasone/salmeterol than those on tiotropium in INSPIRE (Peto OR 1.32; 95% CI 
1.04 to 1.67). There was no statistically significant difference in hospital
admissions due to exacerbations, the primary outcome of INSPIRE. There was no
significant difference in exacerbations in patients on fluticasone/salmeterol
compared to tiotropium when compared as either an odds ratio or a rate ratio
(mean number of exacerbations per patient per year). Exacerbations requiring
treatment with oral corticosteroids were less frequent in patients on
fluticasone/salmeterol (rate ratio 0.81; 95% CI 0.67 to 0.99). Conversely
exacerbations requiring treatment with antibiotics were more frequent in patients
treated with fluticasone/salmeterol (rate ratio 1.19; 95% CI 1.02 to 1.38). There
were more cases of pneumonia in patients on fluticasone/salmeterol than in those 
on tiotropium (Peto OR 2.13; 95% CI 1.33 to 3.40). Confidence intervals for these
outcomes do not reflect the additional uncertainty arising from unknown outcome
data for patients who withdrew.
AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: Since the proportion of missing outcome data compared to
the observed outcome data is enough to induce a clinically relevant bias in the
intervention effect, the relative efficacy and safety of combined inhalers and
tiotropium remains uncertain. Further large, long-term randomised controlled
trials comparing combination therapy to tiotropium are required, including
adequate follow-up of all participants randomised (similar to the procedures
undertaken in TORCH and UPLIFT). Additional studies comparing alternative inhaled
long-acting beta2-agonist/steroid combination therapies with tiotropium are also 
required.

DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD007891.pub3 
PMID: 23728670  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. BMJ. 2013 May 29;346:f3306. doi: 10.1136/bmj.f3306.

Pneumonia and pneumonia related mortality in patients with COPD treated with
fixed combinations of inhaled corticosteroid and long acting β2 agonist:
observational matched cohort study (PATHOS).

Janson C(1), Larsson K, Lisspers KH, Ställberg B, Stratelis G, Goike H, Jörgensen
L, Johansson G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Sciences, Respiratory Medicine, Uppsala University,
Uppsala, Sweden. christer.janson@medsci.uu.se

Erratum in
    BMJ. 2013;346:f4375.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the occurrence of pneumonia and pneumonia related
events in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) treated with
two different fixed combinations of inhaled corticosteroid/long acting β2
agonist.
DESIGN: Observational retrospective pairwise cohort study matched (1:1) for
propensity score.
SETTING: Primary care medical records data linked to Swedish hospital, drug, and 
cause of death registry data for years 1999-2009.
PARTICIPANTS: Patients with COPD diagnosed by a physician and prescriptions of
either budesonide/formoterol or fluticasone/salmeterol.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Yearly pneumonia event rates, admission to hospital
related to pneumonia, and mortality.
RESULTS: 9893 patients were eligible for matching (2738 in the
fluticasone/salmeterol group; 7155 in the budesonide/formoterol group), yielding 
two matched cohorts of 2734 patients each. In these patients, 2115 (39%) had at
least one recorded episode of pneumonia during the study period, with 2746
episodes recorded during 19,170 patient years of follow up. Compared with
budesonide/formoterol, rate of pneumonia and admission to hospital were higher in
patients treated with fluticasone/salmeterol: rate ratio 1.73 (95% confidence
interval 1.57 to 1.90; P<0.001) and 1.74 (1.56 to 1.94; P<0.001), respectively.
The pneumonia event rate per 100 patient years for fluticasone/salmeterol versus 
budesonide/formoterol was 11.0 (10.4 to 11.8) versus 6.4 (6.0 to 6.9) and the
rate of admission to hospital was 7.4 (6.9 to 8.0) versus 4.3 (3.9 to 4.6). The
mean duration of admissions related to pneumonia was similar for both groups, but
mortality related to pneumonia was higher in the fluticasone/salmeterol group (97
deaths) than in the budesonide/formoterol group (52 deaths) (hazard ratio 1.76,
1.22 to 2.53; P=0.003). All cause mortality did not differ between the treatments
(1.08, 0.93 to 1.14; P=0.59).
CONCLUSIONS: There is an intra-class difference between fixed combinations of
inhaled corticosteroid/long acting β2 agonist with regard to the risk of
pneumonia and pneumonia related events in the treatment of patients with COPD.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: Clinical Trials.gov NCT01146392.


PMCID: PMC3666306
PMID: 23719639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Respir Res. 2013 May 8;14:49. doi: 10.1186/1465-9921-14-49.

Combination bronchodilator therapy in the management of chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease.

Tashkin DP(1), Ferguson GT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, 405 Hilgard
Avenue, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA. DTashkin@mednet.ucla.edu

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) represents a significant cause of
global morbidity and mortality, with a substantial economic impact. Recent
changes in the Global initiative for chronic Obstructive Lung Disease (GOLD)
guidance refined the classification of patients for treatment using a combination
of spirometry, assessment of symptoms, and/or frequency of exacerbations. The aim
of treatment remains to reduce existing symptoms while decreasing the risk of
future adverse health events. Long-acting bronchodilators are the mainstay of
therapy due to their proven efficacy. GOLD guidelines recommend combining
long-acting bronchodilators with differing mechanisms of action if the control of
COPD is insufficient with monotherapy, and recent years have seen growing
interest in the additional benefits that combination of long-acting muscarinic
antagonists (LAMAs), typified by tiotropium, with long-acting β(2)-agonists
(LABAs), such as formoterol and salmeterol. Most studies have examined free
combinations of currently available LAMAs and LABAs, broadly showing a benefit in
terms of lung function and other patient-reported outcomes, although evidence is 
limited at present. Several once- or twice-daily fixed-dose LAMA/LABA
combinations are under development, most involving newly developed monotherapy
components. This review outlines the existing data for LAMA/LABA combinations in 
the treatment of COPD, summarizes the ongoing trials, and considers the evidence 
required to inform the role of LAMA/LABA combinations in treatment of this
disease.

DOI: 10.1186/1465-9921-14-49 
PMCID: PMC3651866
PMID: 23651244  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. BMJ Open. 2013 Apr 22;3(4). pii: e001838. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2012-001838. Print
2013.

Which patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease benefit from the
addition of an inhaled corticosteroid to their bronchodilator? A cluster
analysis.

Disantostefano RL(1), Li H, Rubin DB, Stempel DA.

Author information: 
(1)GlaxoSmithKline, Research Triangle Park, Durham, North Carolina, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To identify subsets of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)
patients who are more protected from exacerbations with the use of an inhaled
corticosteroid/long-acting β2 agonist (ICS/LABA) combination, compared with the
use of LABA monotherapy.
DESIGN: Post hoc cluster analysis of patients from two randomised clinical trials
of salmeterol/fluticasone propionate (SFC) and salmeterol (SAL) that had primary 
endpoints of moderate/severe exacerbation rates.
SETTING: Centres in North America.
PARTICIPANTS: 1543 COPD patients were studied.
INTERVENTIONS: SFC 50/250 µg or SAL 50 µg, twice daily.
PRIMARY AND SECONDARY OUTCOME MEASURES: The analysis identified clusters of COPD 
patients more responsive to SFC versus SAL with respect to the annual rate of
moderate/severe exacerbations and compared their baseline clinical
characteristics.
RESULTS: Overall, SFC significantly reduced the annual rate of moderate/severe
exacerbations as compared with SAL alone (rate ratio (RR)=0.701, p<0.001).
Three-patient clusters were identified: COPD patients receiving diuretics
(RR=0.56, p<0.001); patients not receiving diuretics but with forced expiratory
volume in 1 s (FEV1) reversibility ≥12% (RR=0.67, p<0.001) exhibited a
substantial reduction in the annual rate of moderate/severe exacerbations
relative to SAL. A third cluster, consisting of patients not receiving diuretics 
and without FEV1 reversibility, demonstrated no difference for SFC versus SAL.
Patients receiving diuretics had a significantly higher prevalence of comorbid
cardiovascular disease.
CONCLUSIONS: COPD patients receiving diuretics and those not receiving diuretics 
but with FEV1 reversibility >12% at baseline were significantly more likely to
experience a reduction in COPD-associated exacerbations with SFC versus SAL
alone.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: NCT00115492, NCT00144911.

DOI: 10.1136/bmjopen-2012-001838 
PMCID: PMC3641457
PMID: 23613569  [PubMed]


134. Appl Health Econ Health Policy. 2013 Jun;11(3):259-74. doi:
10.1007/s40258-013-0021-5.

A UK-based cost-utility analysis of indacaterol, a once-daily maintenance
bronchodilator for patients with COPD, using real world evidence on resource use.

Price D(1), Asukai Y, Ananthapavan J, Malcolm B, Radwan A, Keyzor I.

Author information: 
(1)Centre of Academic Primary Care, University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen, UK.

INTRODUCTION: Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD) is a chronic,
progressive disease that is not curable. However, there are effective treatments 
available. In the UK, long-acting bronchodilators are first-line treatments for
COPD patients requiring maintenance therapy, and there are several options
available. The aim of this study is to establish, from the UK National Health
Service (NHS) perspective, the cost-effectiveness profile of indacaterol, the
first once-daily long-acting beta2-agonist (LABA), compared with tiotropium and
salmeterol, in patients with moderate to severe COPD. In assessing the
cost-effectiveness of COPD therapies, this study has the advantage of using real 
world evidence on the resource use associated with COPD management across the
spectrum of the disease.
METHODS: A Markov model was developed with four health states following the GOLD 
classification for severity of airflow limitation. The model time horizon was 3
years, and the cycle length was 3 months. From each state, patients could
experience a severe or non-severe exacerbation, move to a different COPD state,
remain in the current state or die. Transition probabilities were based on data
from the indacaterol clinical trials. The majority of the resource use data was
taken from the Optimum Patient Care Research Database (OPCRD), which contains
data from over 20,000 COPD patients in England and Scotland. Cost data were taken
from UK-based sources and published literature and presented for the cost year
2011. Health-related quality of life was the main outcome of interest and utility
data for the COPD states were based on data from the indacaterol clinical trials 
and disutility due to exacerbations were taken from the literature. Both one way 
and probabilistic sensitivity analyses were performed to test the robustness of
the results.
RESULTS: Indacaterol dominated in the comparison with salmeterol producing an
incremental QALY gain of 0.008 and cost savings of £110 per patient over a 3-year
time horizon. In the comparison with tiotropium over the same time horizon,
indacaterol remained the dominant strategy, producing an incremental QALY gain of
0.008 and cost savings of £248 per patient. The one-way sensitivity analysis
indicates that the proportion of patients in each of the COPD stages and the
mortality rate associated with Very Severe COPD are the variables with the
largest impact on the results. The probabilistic sensitivity analyses showed that
over 72 % and 89 % of the iterations when compared with salmeterol and
tiotropium, respectively, produced dominant results for indacaterol.
CONCLUSION: The analyses demonstrate that indacaterol dominates both tiotropium
and salmeterol in the base case and is likely to remain cost-effective under a
range of assumptions.

DOI: 10.1007/s40258-013-0021-5 
PMCID: PMC3663982
PMID: 23529714  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2013;8:117-25. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S28576. Epub
2013 Mar 15.

Ten years of tiotropium: clinical impact and patient perspectives.

Yohannes AM(1), Connolly MJ, Hanania NA.

Author information: 
(1)Manchester Metropolitan University, Department of Health Professions, UK.
a.yohannes@mmu.ac.uk

Tiotropium bromide is an anticholinergic agent that has gained worldwide
acceptance as a first-line, once daily maintenance therapy for patients with
moderate-to-severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. The purpose of this
review is to synthesize the evidence base in the past 10 years on the development
of tiotropium and its efficacy compared to other able interventions such as
long-acting beta agonists (LABAs), as well as to assess its safety profile and
its effects on health-related outcomes in patients with COPD. Treatment with
tiotropium bromide has generally improved patients' health-related quality of
life, reduced the number of patients suffering from acute exacerbations,
decreased the number of hospitalizations, improved dyspnea, and reduced adverse
events compared to placebo. In the past decade, several studies have examined the
safety and efficacy of tiotropium in comparison to placebo and to LABAs
(salmeterol, formoterol, and indacaterol) over periods ranging from 3 months to
48 months of follow-up. Head-to-head comparisons of tiotropium 18μg (once daily) 
with salmeterol 50μg (twice daily) in well-controlled trials demonstrated that
tiotropium was superior in reducing acute exacerbation events and in improving
quality of life. In a few short-term studies, indacaterol was comparable to
tiotropium in its efficacy in improving health-related outcomes. Although the
safety record of tiotropium has been exemplary in comparison to placebo,
anticholinergic events such as dry mouth can be encountered in some patients.
While the long-term safety of tiotropium when delivered in the HandiHaler® has
been well documented, its delivery using the Respimat® Soft Mist Inhaler™ was
associated with an elevated risk of cardiovascular complications, including
increased mortality when compared to placebo. The exact mechanism for this is not
known but is being investigated in a large multinational study that will evaluate
the long-term safety of different doses of tiotropium delivered by the Respimat® 
soft mist inhaler versus the HandiHaler®. Further studies are required to
investigate the efficacy and safety of tiotropium in comparison with novel LABAs 
such as indacaterol and vilanterol, and with other emerging novel anticholinergic
agents such as aclidinium bromide and NVA237 (glycopyrronium bromide).

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S28576 
PMCID: PMC3600941
PMID: 23515335  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. J Intern Med. 2013 Jun;273(6):584-94. doi: 10.1111/joim.12067. Epub 2013 Apr 1.

Combination of budesonide/formoterol more effective than fluticasone/salmeterol
in preventing exacerbations in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: the PATHOS 
study.

Larsson K(1), Janson C, Lisspers K, Jørgensen L, Stratelis G, Telg G, Ställberg
B, Johansson G.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Lung and Allergy Research, National Institute of Environmental
Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. kjell.larsson@ki.se

OBJECTIVES: Combinations of inhaled corticosteroids (ICSs) and long-acting β2
-agonists (LABAs) are recommended for patients with moderate and severe chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). However, it is not known whether different 
fixed combinations are equally effective. The aim of this study was to
investigate exacerbation rates in primary care patients with COPD treated with
budesonide/formoterol compared with fluticasone/salmeterol.
METHODS: Patients with physician-diagnosed COPD and a record of postdiagnosis
treatment with a fixed combination of budesonide/formoterol or
fluticasone/salmeterol were included. Data from primary care medical records were
linked to those from Swedish national hospital, drug and cause of death
registers. Pairwise (1 : 1) propensity score matching was carried out at the
index date (first prescription) by prescribed fixed ICS/LABA combination.
Exacerbations were defined as hospitalizations, emergency visits and collection
of oral steroids or antibiotics for COPD. Yearly event rates were compared using 
Poisson regression.
RESULTS: Matching of 9893 patients (7155 budesonide/formoterol and 2738
fluticasone/salmeterol) yielded two cohorts of 2734 patients, comprising 19 170
patient-years. The exacerbation rates were 0.80 and 1.09 per patient-year in the 
budesonide/formoterol and fluticasone/salmeterol groups, respectively (difference
of 26.6%; P < 0.0001); yearly rates for COPD-related hospitalizations were 0.15
and 0.21, respectively (difference of 29.1%; P < 0.0001). All other healthcare
outcomes were also significantly reduced with budesonide/formoterol versus
fluticasone/salmeterol.
CONCLUSIONS: Long-term treatment with fixed combination budesonide/formoterol was
associated with fewer healthcare utilization-defined exacerbations than
fluticasone/salmeterol in patients with moderate and severe COPD.

© 2013 The Association for the Publication of the Journal of Internal Medicine.

DOI: 10.1111/joim.12067 
PMID: 23495860  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Eur Respir J. 2013 Oct;42(4):972-81. doi: 10.1183/09031936.00165712. Epub 2013
Feb 21.

A new class of bronchodilator improves lung function in COPD: a trial with
GSK961081.

Wielders PL(1), Ludwig-Sengpiel A, Locantore N, Baggen S, Chan R, Riley JH.

Author information: 
(1)Catharina Hospital, Eindhoven.

Comment in
    Eur Respir J. 2013 Oct;42(4):885-7.

GSK961081 is a bifunctional molecule demonstrating both muscarinic antagonist and
β-agonist activities. This was a 4-week, multicentre, randomised, double-blind,
double-dummy, placebo and salmeterol controlled parallel group study. Doses
ranging across three twice-daily doses and three once-daily doses were assessed
in moderate and severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) patients.
Trough forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1) at day 29 was the primary
end-point. At days 1 and 28, 12-h FEV1 spirometry was performed in all patients. 
A subset of patients underwent complete 24-h spirometry at day 28. The study
recruited 436 patients. GSK961081 showed statistically and clinically significant
differences from placebo in all doses and regimens for trough FEV1 on day 29
(155-277 mL). The optimal total daily dose was 400 μg, either as 400 μg once
daily or as 200 μg twice daily, with an improvement in day 29 trough FEV1 of 215 
mL and 249 mL, respectively. Other efficacy end-points also showed improvement.
No effects were observed on glucose, potassium, heart rate, blood pressure and no
dose-response effect was seen on corrected QT elongation. This study showed that 
GSK961081 is an effective bronchodilator in COPD and appeared to be safe and well
tolerated.

DOI: 10.1183/09031936.00165712 
PMCID: PMC3787816
PMID: 23429913  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Curr Med Chem. 2013;20(12):1477-95.

Long-acting beta-agonists and their association with inhaled corticosteroids in
COPD.

Fuso L(1), Mores N, Valente S, Malerba M, Montuschi P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Geriatrics, Faculty of Medicine, Catholic 
University of the Sacred Heart, Rome, Italy.

Inhaled bronchodilators, including beta(2)-agonists and antimuscaric receptor
antagonists, are the mainstay of pharmacotherapy in chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD). The short-acting beta(2)-agonists, including salbutamol, and
fenoterol, have a rapid onset of action, a bronchodilating effect for 3-6 h and
are used on demand. The long-acting beta(2)-agonists (LABAs), including
salmeterol and formoterol, have 12-hour duration of action and are used with a
twice-daily dosing regimen for long-term COPD treatment. Unlike salmeterol,
formoterol has a rapid onset of action. Pharmacological characteristics required 
by novel inhaled LABAs include 24 h bronchodilator effect in vivo which would
make them suitable for once daily administration (ultra-LABA), high potency and
selectivity for beta(2)-adrenoceptors, rapid onset of action, low oral
bioavailability (< 5%) after inhalation, and high systemic clearance.
Indacaterol, which has been approved for long-term treatment of COPD in Europe
and in the USA, has a 24-h duration of action and a once-daily dosing regimen.
Newer ultra-LABAs, including olodaterol, vilanterol, milveterol, carmoterol, and 
abediterol, are in development. Combination with ICS (fluticasone/salmeterol,
budesonide/formoterol, beclomethasone/formoterol) appears to provide an
additional benefit over the monocomponent therapy, although the extent of this
benefit is variable and often not clinically significant in all the endpoints
assessed. In patients with COPD, treatment with ICS is associated with increased 
risk of pneumonia which should be carefully considered when assessing the
risk/benefit ratio of ICS/LABA combinations. Subphenotyping of patients with COPD
(e.g., frequent exacerbations, sputum eosinophilia, mixed asthma/COPD phenotype) 
might help identify those patients who are most likely to benefit from addition
of ICS to bronchodilating treatment. Ultra-LABA/ long-acting muscarinic receptor 
antagonist (LAMA) combination treatment is under development and is likely to
become a standard pharmacological strategy for COPD. Dual-pharmacology inhaled
muscarinic antagonist-beta(2) agonist (MABA) molecules provide a new approach to 
the treatment of COPD.


PMID: 23409722  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2013;8:53-64. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S39018. Epub
2013 Jan 25.

The safety of long-acting β2-agonists in the treatment of stable chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease.

Decramer ML(1), Hanania NA, Lötvall JO, Yawn BP.

Author information: 
(1)Respiratory Division, UZ Leuven, Campus Gasthuisberg, Herestraat 49, Leuven,
Belgium. marc.decramer@uzleuven.be

BACKGROUND: Inhaled long-acting bronchodilators are the mainstay of
pharmacotherapy for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Both the
twice-daily long-acting β(2)-adrenoceptor agonists (LABAs) salmeterol and
formoterol and the once-daily LABA indacaterol are indicated for use in COPD.
This review examines current evidence for the safety of LABAs in COPD, focusing
on their effect on exacerbations and deaths.
METHODS: We searched PubMed for placebo-controlled studies evaluating long-term
(≥24 weeks) use of formoterol, salmeterol, or indacaterol in patients with stable
COPD, published between January 1990 and September 2012. We summarized data
relating to exacerbations and adverse events, particularly events related to
COPD.
RESULTS: From 20 studies examined (8774 LABA-treated patients), there was no
evidence of an association between LABA treatment and increased exacerbations,
COPD-related adverse events, or deaths. Where analyzed as an efficacy outcome,
LABA treatment was generally associated with significant or numerical reductions 
in COPD exacerbations compared with placebo. Incidences of COPD-related adverse
events were similar for active and placebo treatments. The incidence of adverse
events typically associated with the β(2)-agonist drug class such as skeletal
muscle tremors and palpitations was low (often <1% of patients), and there were
no reports of increased incidence of cardiac arrhythmias. The systemic effects of
β(2)-adrenoceptor stimulation, such as high glucose and potassium levels, were
considered minor.
CONCLUSION: Current evidence from clinical studies of the safety and tolerability
profile of LABAs supports their long-term use in COPD.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S39018 
PMCID: PMC3558319
PMID: 23378756  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Respir Med. 2013 Apr;107(4):542-9. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2012.12.020. Epub 2013 Jan
20.

Influence of salmeterol/fluticasone via single versus separate inhalers on
exacerbations in severe/very severe COPD.

Hagedorn C(1), Kässner F, Banik N, Ntampakas P, Fielder K.

Author information: 
(1)Respiratory Centre of Excellence, GlaxoSmithKline, Stockley Park West,
Uxbridge, Middlesex UB11 1BT, United Kingdom. cordula.c.hagedorn@gsk.com

BACKGROUND: Patients with severe or very severe chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD) frequently suffer repeated exacerbations generating high health
care utilization costs. Combined corticosteroid and bronchodilator treatment
using a single inhaler might - via improved compliance - reduce exacerbation
rates.
OBJECTIVES: Our aim was to obtain descriptive data on exacerbation rates in
patients with severe or very severe COPD (GOLD Stages III and IV as per GOLD 2009
classification) receiving salmeterol xinafoate/fluticasone propionate via a
single inhaler (SFC) or via separate inhalers (Sal/FP) in addition to individual 
existing therapy in order to investigate the potential benefit of a fixed
combination device as compared with two separate devices due to potentially
improved patients' compliance.
METHODS: This prospective, randomized, open-label, parallel-group, multi-center, 
exploratory study was conducted in Germany in 2007-2009. Patients were required
to have suffered ≥ 2 moderate/severe exacerbations in the preceding year.
RESULTS: 213 patients (SFC: 108 patients, Sal/FP: 105 patients) from 23 centers
were evaluated. Approximately 25% of patients showed COPD Stage IV. On average
patients had suffered 2.3 ± 0.6 moderate/severe exacerbations in the preceding
year. The annual rate of moderate/severe exacerbations observed in the study was 
similar in both treatment groups (SFC: 0.86 ± 0.13; Sal/FP: 0.86 ± 0.14;
exacerbation rate ratio SFC/Sal/FP: 1.00; p = 0.73; negative binomial model).
Compliance was high and comparable in both groups. Besides COPD exacerbations,
pneumonia (5.6%) and nasopharyngitis (5.2%) were the most common adverse events.
CONCLUSION: Observed exacerbation rates were lower than those reported at
baseline. No substantial difference was observed between administration of
salmeterol xinafoate/fluticasone propionate via a single inhaler and separate
inhalers. Treatment was safe and well tolerated. ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier:
NCT00527826.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2012.12.020 
PMID: 23337300  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Br J Clin Pharmacol. 2013 Nov;76(5):752-62. doi: 10.1111/bcp.12080.

Predicted heart rate effect of inhaled PF-00610355, a long acting β-adrenoceptor 
agonist, in volunteers and patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Diderichsen PM(1), Cox E, Martin SW, Cleton A, Ribbing J.

Author information: 
(1)Quantitative Solutions BV, Breda, the Netherlands.

AIM: To assess the cardiovascular effects of a new inhaled long-acting
β-adrenoceptor agonist PF-00610355 in COPD patients.
METHODS: Thirteen thousand and sixty-two heart rate measurements collected in 10 
clinical studies from 579 healthy volunteers, asthma and COPD patients were
analyzed. The relationship between heart rate profiles and predicted plasma
concentration profiles, patient status, demographics and concomitant medication
was evaluated using non-linear mixed-effects models. The median heart rate
increase in COPD patients for doses of PF-00610355 up to 280 μg once daily was
simulated with the final pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic (PKPD) model.
RESULTS: An Emax model accounting for delayed on-and off-set of the
PF-00610355-induced change in heart rate was developed. The predicted potency in 
COPD patients was three-fold lower compared with healthy volunteers, while no
difference in maximum drug effect was identified. Simulations suggested a maximum
placebo-corrected increase of 2.7 (0.90-4.82) beats min(-1) in COPD patients for 
a PF-00610355 dose of 280 μg once daily, with 19% subjects experiencing a heart
rate increase of more than 20 beats min(-1) compared with 8% in the placebo
group.
CONCLUSIONS: This PKPD analysis supports the clinical observation that no
relevant effects of PF-00610355 on heart rate in COPD patients should be expected
for doses up to 280 μg once daily.

© 2013 The Authors. British Journal of Clinical Pharmacology © 2013 The British
Pharmacological Society.

DOI: 10.1111/bcp.12080 
PMCID: PMC3853534
PMID: 23323609  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Lung. 2013 Apr;191(2):135-46. doi: 10.1007/s00408-012-9444-2. Epub 2013 Jan 10.

Safety and efficacy of 12-week or longer indacaterol treatment in
moderate-to-severe COPD patients: a systematic review.

Jiang FM(1), Liang ZA, Zheng QL, Wang RC, Luo J, Li CT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, West China Medical School and West China
Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu, 610000, Sichuan, China.

BACKGROUND: This is a meta-analysis of the safety and efficacy of indacaterol in 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) with treatment duration of
≥12 weeks.
METHODS: Randomized controlled trials (RCTs) reported in English (to September
30, 2012) were identified from PubMed, the Cochrane Library, Embase, websites,
reference lists, and manual searches. Two reviewers independently assessed the
quality of the trials and extracted information.
RESULTS: Five RCTs were eligible. Five involved indacaterol, two salmeterol, one 
formoterol, and one tiotropium. Four studies had placebos. Using trough forced
expiratory volume in 1 s as a measure of therapeutic effect, indacaterol was
superior to the other β2-agonists, tiotropium, and placebo at weeks 12, 26, and
52. Indacaterol had a greater effect on the transition dyspnoea index compared
with placebo, formoterol, and salmeterol, but not open-label tiotropium. In
reducing the as-needed use of salbutamol, indacaterol were superior to placebo,
tiotropium, and formoterol, but not salmeterol (5, 95 % confidence interval (CI),
-2.15, 12.15). Indacaterol improved St George's Respiratory Questionnaire scores 
more than placebo and open-label tiotropium, but not formoterol. Indacaterol
seemed to cause more adverse events than placebo only at a dose of 600 μg daily
and a duration of 52 weeks (risk ratio 1.15; 95 % CI, 1.04, 1.26). The total and 
serious adverse events and adverse events leading to discontinuation were
comparable with open-label tiotropium and the β2-agonists.
CONCLUSIONS: Indacaterol is effective and well-tolerated as a bronchodilator for 
the maintenance of moderate to severe COPD.

DOI: 10.1007/s00408-012-9444-2 
PMID: 23306410  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. World Allergy Organ J. 2012 Jun;5(6):66-72. doi: 10.1097/WOX.0b013e31825eff8b.

In vitro effects of Beta-2 agonists on skeletal muscle differentiation,
hypertrophy, and atrophy.

Wannenes F(1), Magni L, Bonini M, Dimauro I, Caporossi D, Moretti C, Bonini S.

Author information: 
(1)1Institute of Translational Pharmacology, National Research Council, Rome,
Italy 2Department of Medicine, "Sapienza" University, Rome, Italy 3Department of 
Health Science, University of Rome 'Foro Italico', Rome, Italy 4Department of
Internal Medicine, Endocrinology Unit, University of Tor Vergata, Rome, Italy
5Department of Internal Medicine, Second University of Naples, Naples, Italy.

BACKGROUND: : Beta-2 agonists are widely used in the treatment of asthma and
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease for their effect on airway smooth muscle
relaxation. They also act on skeletal muscle, although their reported ergogenic
effect is controversial.
AIM: : To evaluate the in vitro effects of short-acting and long-acting beta-2
agonists on adrenergic receptor (ADR) expression, hypertrophy, and atrophy
markers, in a skeletal muscle cell line.
METHODS: : The C2C12 cell line was used as a model of skeletal muscle
differentiation. ADR messenger RNA expression was evaluated in proliferating
myoblasts, committed cells, and differentiated myotubes, in basal conditions and 
after treatment with 10 M clenbuterol, salbutamol, salmeterol, and formoterol.
Effect of beta-2 agonists on gene and protein expression of hypertrophy and
atrophy markers was assessed in differentiated myotubes.
RESULTS: : Our study shows that beta-2 ADR messenger RNA was expressed and
progressively increased during cell differentiation. Beta-2 agonist treatment did
not affect its expression. Skeletal muscle hypertrophy markers (fast and slow
myosin, myogenin) were not modulated by any of the beta-2 agonists evaluated.
However, clenbuterol induced a significant, dose-dependent downregulation of
skeletal muscle atrophy genes (atrogin-1, MuRF-1, and cathepsin L).
CONCLUSIONS: : The reported ergogenic effect of beta-2 agonists, if any, should
be considered as drug-specific and not class-specific and that of clenbuterol is 
mediated by the inhibition of the atrophic pathway.

DOI: 10.1097/WOX.0b013e31825eff8b 
PMCID: PMC3651181
PMID: 23283108  [PubMed]


144. Ther Adv Chronic Dis. 2012 Jan;3(1):25-36. doi: 10.1177/2040622311426204.

Indacaterol in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: an update for clinicians.

Yorgancioglu A.

Bronchodilation is the cornerstone of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD) management and is based on regular treatment with one or more long-acting 
β(2) agonists (LABAs). A novel bronchodilator, indacaterol, satisfies the
requirements of an efficacious LABA: it has a relatively longer duration of
action compared with existing LABAs and a fast onset of action. This review is a 
presentation of data on indacaterol with respect to its molecular characteristics
as well as comparisons with other long-acting bronchodilators. Data from 12
relevant trials show that once-daily indacaterol provides significant, consistent
and clinically important improvements in lung function (forced expiratory volume 
in 1 second), significant improvements in breathlessness and health status at
least as good as or better than tiotropium, salmeterol and formoterol, and
reduction in requirement for relief medication compared with tiotropium,
salmeterol and formoterol.

DOI: 10.1177/2040622311426204 
PMCID: PMC3513896
PMID: 23251766  [PubMed]


145. Daru. 2012;20(1):6. doi: 10.1186/2008-2231-20-6. Epub 2012 Aug 28.

Combination therapy for airflow limitation in COPD.

Ghanei M(1), Nezhad LH, Harandi AA, Alaeddini F, Shohrati M, Aslani J.

Author information: 
(1)Research Center of Chemical Injuries, Baqiyatallah Medical Sciences
University, Tehran, Iran.

Background and the purpose of the study Existing evidence confirms that no
pharmacologic agent ameliorates the decline in the lung function or changes the
prognosis of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). We tried a critical
combination therapy for management of COPD.METHODS: Current or past smoker
(passive or active) COPD patients with moderate to severe COPD who did not
respond to primitive therapy (i.e., oral prednisolone (50 mg in the morning) for 
5 days; with Beclomethasone Fort (3 puff q12h, totally 1500 micrograms/day),
Salmeterol (2 puffs q12h, 50 micrograms/puff) and ipratropium bromide (4 puffs
q8h) for two months, enrolled to study. Furthermore they were received
N-Acetylcysteine (1200 mg/daily), Azithromycin (tablet 250 mg/every other day)
and Theophylline (100 mg BD).
RESULTS: The study group consisted of 44 men and 4 women, with a mean age and
standard deviation of 63.6 ± 12.7 years (range 22-86 years). Thirteen of 48
patients (27.0%) was responder based on 15% increasing in FEV 1 (27.7 ± 7.9)
after 6.7 ± 6.1 months (57.9 ± 12.9 year old). There were statistically
significant differences in age and smoking between responders and non-responders 
(P value was 0.05 and 0.04 respectively). There was no difference in emphysema
and air trapping between two groups (p = 0.13).
CONCLUSION: Interestingly considerable proportion of patients with COPD can be
reversible using combination drug therapy and patients will greatly benefit from 
different and synergic action of the drugs. The treatment was more effective in
younger patients who smoke less.

DOI: 10.1186/2008-2231-20-6 
PMCID: PMC3514536
PMID: 23226113  [PubMed]


146. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2013 Jan;344(1):218-30. doi: 10.1124/jpet.112.198481. Epub 
2012 Nov 6.

In vitro pharmacological characterization of vilanterol, a novel long-acting
β2-adrenoceptor agonist with 24-hour duration of action.

Slack RJ(1), Barrett VJ, Morrison VS, Sturton RG, Emmons AJ, Ford AJ, Knowles RG.

Author information: 
(1)Respiratory TAU, GlaxoSmithKline, Gunnels Wood Road, Stevenage, Hertfordshire 
SG1 2NY, UK. Robert.X.Slack@gsk.com

Vilanterol trifenatate (vilanterol) is a novel, long-acting β(2)-adrenoceptor
(β(2)-AR) agonist with 24 h activity. In this study, we describe the preclinical 
pharmacological profile of vilanterol using radioligand binding and cAMP studies 
in recombinant assays as well as human and guinea pig tissue systems to
characterize β(2)-AR binding and functional properties. Vilanterol displayed a
subnanomolar affinity for the β(2)-AR that was comparable with that of salmeterol
but higher than olodaterol, formoterol, and indacaterol. In cAMP functional
activity studies, vilanterol demonstrated similar selectivity as salmeterol for
β(2)- over β(1)-AR and β(3)-AR, but a significantly improved selectivity profile 
than formoterol and indacaterol. Vilanterol also showed a level of intrinsic
efficacy that was comparable to indacaterol but significantly greater than that
of salmeterol. In cellular cAMP production and tissue-based studies measuring
persistence and reassertion, vilanterol had a persistence of action comparable
with indacaterol and longer than formoterol. In addition, vilanterol demonstrated
reassertion activity in both cell and tissue systems that was comparable with
salmeterol and indacaterol but longer than formoterol. In human airways,
vilanterol was shown to have a faster onset and longer duration of action than
salmeterol, exhibiting a significant level of bronchodilation 22 h after
treatment. From these investigations, the data for vilanterol are consistent,
showing that it is a novel, potent, and selective β(2)-AR receptor agonist with a
long duration of action. This pharmacological profile combined with clinical data
is consistent with once a day dosing of vilanterol in the treatment of both
asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).

DOI: 10.1124/jpet.112.198481 
PMID: 23131596  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. CJEM. 2012 Nov;14(6):378-81.

Lactic acidosis following intentional overdose by inhalation of salmeterol and
fluticasone.

Manara A(1), Hantson P, Vanpee D, Thys F.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Emergency Medicine and 3Intensive Care, Universite´ Catholique 
de Louvain, Cliniques Universitaires St-Luc, Brussels, Belgium.
alessandro.manara@uclouvain.be

Comment in
    CJEM. 2014 Jan;16(1):11.

Salmeterol, a long-acting β2-adrenergic receptor agonist used for the treatment
of asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, has an adverse effects
profile that is similar to that of salbutamol and other β2-agonists. We report a 
sympathomimetic syndrome with metabolic acidosis and hyperlactatemia after
intentional inhalation of salmeterol in a suicide attempt. A 16-year-old female
patient was admitted to the emergency department approximately 2 hours after
having inhaled 60 puffs of a combination of salmeterol xinafoate 25 μg and
fluticasone propionate 50 μg. She presented in an anxious state with complaints
of palpitations and chest pain. The electrocardiogram demonstrated sinus
tachycardia and ST-segment depression in the inferior and anterolateral leads.
Laboratory findings showed hypokalemia, hypophosphatemia, and lactic acidosis.
Cardiac troponin I and creatine kinase MB remained within the normal range.
Treatment was supportive and included intravenous fluids and cautious potassium
supplementation. The next day, electrocardiographic and laboratory findings
returned to normal. We hypothesize that stimulation of β2-adrenergic receptors by
inhalation of salmeterol caused this patient's lactic acidosis. This observation 
is consistent with the hypothesis that the hyperlactatemia observed during asthma
attacks is due in part to the administration of high doses of β2-agonists.
Salmeterol overdose by inhalation appears to be sufficient to cause lactic
acidosis.


PMID: 23131487  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Chang Gung Med J. 2012 Sep-Oct;35(5):373-81.

Comparison of respiratory parameters and plasma cytokine levels between treatment
with Salmeterol/fluticasone and ipratropium/terbutaline/budesonide in
mechanically ventilated COPD patients.

Wu HP(1), Liu YC, Lin SC, Chien MY, Liao FC, Chang SC, Shieh WB.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care and Sleep Medicine, Chang Gung Memorial
Hospital at Keelung, Chang Gung University College of Medicine, Taoyuan, Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: It is unknown whether the bronchodilation and anti-inflammatory
effects of inhaled salmeterol and fluticasone (SF) are better than those of
traditionally inhaled ipratropium, terbutaline and budesonide (ITB) in
mechanically ventilated patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD).
METHODS: Nineteen stable COPD patients with respiratory failure were randomly
enrolled into two groups. Patients were treated with inhaled SF delivered by a
metered-dose inhaler with a spacer or with inhaled nebulized ITB. Respiratory
parameters were measured for 7 days and plasma cytokine levels were measured on
days 1 and 7.
RESULTS: The kinetic curve of the rapid shallow index (RSI) from day 1 to day 7
was significant lower in the SF group than that in the ITB group. There were no
significant differences in minute ventilation, intrinsic positive end expiratory 
pressure, and airway resistance between the ITB and SF groups from day 1 to day
7. There were no differences in plasma interleukin (IL)-6, IL-10, IL- 12, and
transforming growth factor-beta1 levels between day 1 and day 7 in the ITB or SF 
group.
CONCLUSIONS: Patients with inhaled SF treatment had a lower RSI. The effects of
bronchodilators and anti-inflammation were similar between inhaled SF and ITB in 
COPD patients with ventilator support.


PMID: 23127342  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Thorax. 2013 Jun;68(6):540-3. doi: 10.1136/thoraxjnl-2012-202709. Epub 2012 Nov
2.

Number needed to treat in COPD: exacerbations versus pneumonias.

Suissa S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Clinical Epidemiology, Lady Davis Institute-Jewish General
Hospital, Montreal,Quebec, Canada.

Comment in
    Thorax. 2013 Sep;68(9):882-3.
    Thorax. 2013 Sep;68(9):882.

BACKGROUND: Several recent trials in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)
have assessed the effectiveness of the fluticasone-salmeterol combination inhaler
in preventing COPD exacerbations, while finding an increased risk of pneumonia.
The number needed to treat (NNT) is a simple measure to perform the comparative
benefit-risk impact, but its calculation involving repeated outcome events such
as COPD exacerbations has been incorrect. We describe the proper methods to
calculate the NNT and, using data from published trials, apply them to evaluate
the relative impact of fluticasone-salmeterol treatment on exacerbations and
pneumonias in patients with COPD.
METHODS: We review the fundamental definition of NNT and quantify it for
situations with varying follow-up times. We review the 'event-based' NNT,
proposed and used for repeated event outcomes, show its inaccuracy, describe its 
proper use and provide an approximate formula for its application.
RESULTS: We show that a 1-year trial of the fluticasone-salmeterol combination
versus salmeterol used the incorrect event-based approach to calculate the NNT as
two patients that need to be treated for 1 year to prevent one COPD exacerbation,
when the proper calculation results in a NNT of 14. In contrast, 20 patients need
to be treated to induce one pneumonia case. For the TORCH trial, the NNT is 44
patients treated for 3 years with fluticasone-salmeterol versus salmeterol to
prevent one exacerbation compared with 16 patients to induce one pneumonia case.
CONCLUSIONS: The NNT is a useful measure of the effect of drugs, but its proper
calculation is essential to prevent misleading clinical practice guidelines.

DOI: 10.1136/thoraxjnl-2012-202709 
PMID: 23125170  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Respir Med. 2013 Jan;107(1):75-83. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2012.09.015. Epub 2012 Oct
26.

Effect of tiotropium vs. salmeterol on exacerbations: GOLD II and maintenance
therapy naïve patients.

Vogelmeier C(1), Fabbri LM, Rabe KF, Beeh KM, Schmidt H, Metzdorf N, Glaab T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division for Pulmonary Diseases, Hospital of 
the University of Marburg, Philipps-Universtat Marburg, Baldingerstrasse 1, 35043
Marburg, Germany. Claus.Vogelmeier@med.uni-marburg.de

The objective of this study was to investigate the effect of tiotropium compared 
with salmeterol on exacerbations in patients with moderate (Global Initiative for
Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease [GOLD] stage II) chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD) and those naïve to maintenance respiratory therapy in the 1-year
Prevention Of Exacerbations with Tiotropium in COPD (POET-COPD(®)) trial
(NCT00563381). Time to first exacerbation (primary endpoint) and rates of
exacerbations were analyzed using exploratory Cox and Poisson regression
(adjusting for time on treatment). Of 7376 randomized patients, 3614 were GOLD
stage II (tiotropium n = 1781; salmeterol n = 1833) and 1343 were maintenance
therapy naïve (tiotropium n = 672; salmeterol n = 671). Tiotropium significantly 
increased time to first exacerbation vs. salmeterol in GOLD stage II patients
(hazard ratio [HR], 0.88; 95% confidence interval [CI]: 0.79-0.99; p = 0.028) and
maintenance therapy naïve patients (HR, 0.79; 95% CI, 0.65-0.97; p = 0.028).
Annual exacerbation rates were also significantly lower with tiotropium in the
maintenance naïve subgroup compared with salmeterol (rate ratio [RR], 0.77; 95%
CI, 0.63-0.94; p = 0.012). In the GOLD stage II subgroup, the rate of
hospitalized exacerbations per year was significantly lower with tiotropium than 
with salmeterol (RR, 0.70; 95% CI, 0.57-0.85; p < 0.001); tiotropium also
significantly prolonged time to first hospitalized exacerbation versus salmeterol
in this subgroup (HR, 0.66; 95% CI, 0.48-0.91; p = 0.012). In conclusion, results
from this prespecified subgroup analysis support the selection of tiotropium as
first-choice maintenance therapy for patients with GOLD stage II COPD.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2012.09.015 
PMID: 23102611  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Am J Geriatr Pharmacother. 2012 Dec;10(6):343-51. doi:
10.1016/j.amjopharm.2012.09.005. Epub 2012 Oct 17.

Effect of combination fluticasone propionate and salmeterol or inhaled
corticosteroids on asthma-related outcomes in a Medicare-eligible population.

Stanford RH(1), Blanchette CM, Roberts MH, Petersen H, Fuhlbrigge AL.

Author information: 
(1)GlaxoSmithKline, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709, USA.
richard.h.stanford@gsk.com

BACKGROUND: National asthma treatment guidelines recommend either the use of
inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) or ICS in combination with a long-acting
bronchodilator for the treatment of moderate to severe asthma. Even though asthma
is common among older adults, few studies have assessed the differences in
effectiveness between these two recommended therapies in patients over 65 years
of age.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to assess the association of the
fluticasone-salmeterol combination (FSC) or ICS initiation on asthma-related
events in Medicare-eligible asthma patients.
METHODS: This was a retrospective observational study using a large health claims
database (July 1, 2001 to June 30, 2008). Subjects 65 to 79 years of age with
12-month preindex and 3- to 12-month postindex eligibility, an asthma diagnosis
(ICD-493.xx), and with 1 or more FSC or ICS claims at index were included.
Subjects with an FSC or ICS claim in the preindex and any claim for chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease were excluded. Subjects were observed until they
had an event (emergency department [ED] inpatient hospitalization [IP], combined 
IP/ED or oral corticosteroid [OCS] use) or were no longer eligible in the
database, whichever came first. Cox proportional hazards regression was used to
assess risk of an asthma-related event (IP, ED, or IP/ED). Baseline
characteristics (age, sex, region, index season, comorbidities, preindex use of
short-acting β-agonists, OCS, other asthma controllers, and asthma-related ED/IP 
visits) were independent covariates in the model.
RESULTS: A total of 10,837 met the criteria (4843 ICS and 5994 FSC). Age (70.4
and 70.5 years, respectively) and the percentage of female subjects (65.5% and
64.8%, respectively) were similar. Asthma-related events were also similar at
baseline. Postindex unadjusted rates occurring after >30 days were ED (1.8% vs
1.5%, P = 0.18), IP (2.7% vs 1.7%, P < 0.001), and ED/IP (4.1% vs 2.8%, P <
0.001) for ICS and FSC, respectively. Subjects who received FSC were associated
with a 32% (adjusted HR = 0.68; 95% CI, 0.51-0.91) lower risk of experiencing an 
IP visit and a 22% (HR = 0.78; 95% CI, 0.62-0.98) lower risk of experiencing an
ED/IP visit. No differences were observed for ED visits (HR = 0.94; 95% CI,
0.68-1.29).
CONCLUSIONS: In Medicare-eligible asthma patients, FSC use was associated with
lower rates of asthma-related serious exacerbations compared with ICS.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier HS Journals, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.amjopharm.2012.09.005 
PMID: 23083688  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. J Pharmacokinet Pharmacodyn. 2012 Dec;39(6):619-34. doi:
10.1007/s10928-012-9274-0. Epub 2012 Sep 23.

Longitudinal FEV1 dose-response model for inhaled PF-00610355 and salmeterol in
patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Nielsen JC(1), Hutmacher MM, Cleton A, Martin SW, Ribbing J.

Author information: 
(1)Ann Arbor Pharmacometrics Group (A2PG), Ann Arbor, MI, USA.

The objective of this work was to characterize the dose-response relationship
between two inhaled long-acting beta agonists (PF-00610355 and salmeterol) and
the forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV1) in order to inform dosing
recommendations for future clinical trials in patients with chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD). This meta-analysis of four studies included 8,513 FEV1 
measurements from 690 patients with moderate COPD. A longitudinal
kinetic-pharmacodynamic (K-PD) model was developed and adequately described
changes in FEV1 measurements over time, including circadian patterns within a
day, as well as changes in FEV1 measurements elicited from administration of
PF-00610355 or salmeterol. The fine-particle dose, the amount of drug present in 
particles small enough for lung delivery, was used as the exposure measure for
PF-00610355. Greater reversibility following administration of a short-acting
beta agonist during run-in was associated with increased FEV1 response to
long-acting beta agonists (through an increased maximal response, E(max)).
Simulations were conducted to better understand the response to PF-00610355
relative to placebo and salmeterol. The results of the simulations show that once
daily fine-particle doses of 28.1 μg versus placebo have a moderate probability
of providing an average improvement above 100 mL at trough. The 50 μg
fine-particle dose, on the other hand, has a greater than 0.78 probability of
achieving a 120 mL improvement versus placebo at trough. From an efficacy
perspective and assuming a fine-particle fraction of 25 % for the Phase 3
formulation; 100 and 200 μg once daily nominal doses would be of interest to
investigate in future Phase 3 trials.

DOI: 10.1007/s10928-012-9274-0 
PMID: 23001588  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2012 Sep 12;(9):CD009157. doi:
10.1002/14651858.CD009157.pub2.

Tiotropium versus long-acting beta-agonists for stable chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease.

Chong J(1), Karner C, Poole P.

Author information: 
(1)University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand. jimmy_chong@xtra.co.nz

BACKGROUND: Tiotropium and long-acting beta(2)-agonists (LABAs) are both accepted
in the routine management for people with stable chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD). There are new studies which have compared tiotropium with LABAs, 
including some that have evaluated recently introduced LABAs.
OBJECTIVES: To compare the relative clinical effects of tiotropium bromide alone 
versus LABA alone, upon measures of quality of life, exacerbations, lung function
and serious adverse events, in people with stable COPD.To critically appraise and
summarise current evidence on the costs and cost-effectiveness associated with
tiotropium compared to LABA in people with COPD.
SEARCH METHODS: We identified randomised controlled trials (RCTs) from the
Cochrane Airways Group Specialised Register of trials and economic evaluations
from searching NHS EED and HEED (date of last search February 2012). We found
additional trials from web-based clinical trial registers.
SELECTION CRITERIA: We included RCTs and full economic evaluations if they
compared effects of tiotropium alone with LABAs alone in people with COPD. We
allowed co-administration of standard COPD therapy.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Two review authors independently assessed studies
for inclusion, then extracted data on study quality and outcomes. We contacted
study authors and trial sponsors for additional information. We analysed data
using the Cochrane Review Manager(RevMan 5.1) software.
MAIN RESULTS: Seven clinical studies totalling 12,223 participants with COPD were
included in the review. The studies used similar designs and were generally of
good methodological quality. Inclusion criteria for RCTs were similar across the 
included studies, although studies varied in terms of smoking history and COPD
severity of participants. They compared tiotropium (which was delivered by
HandiHaler in all studies) with salmeterol (four studies, 8936 participants),
formoterol (one study, 431 participants) and indacaterol (two studies, 2856
participants). All participants were instructed to discontinue anticholinergic or
long-acting beta(2)-agonist bronchodilators during treatment, but could receive
inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) at a stable dose. Study duration ranged from 3 to
12 months. We extracted data for 11,223 participants. In general, the treatment
groups were well matched at baseline. Overall, the risk of bias across the
included RCTs was low.In the analysis of the primary outcomes in this review, a
high level of heterogeneity amongst studies meant that we did not pool data for
St George's Respiratory Questionnaire quality of life score. Subgroup analyses
based on the type of LABA found statistically significant differences among
effects on quality of life depending on whether tiotropium was compared with
salmeterol, formoterol or indacaterol. Tiotropium reduced the number of
participants experiencing one or more exacerbations compared with LABA (odds
ratio (OR) 0.86; 95% confidence interval (CI) 0.79 to 0.93). For this outcome,
there was no difference seen among the different types of LABA. There was no
statistical difference in mortality observed between the treatment groups.For
secondary outcomes, tiotropium was associated with a reduction in the number of
COPD exacerbations leading to hospitalisation compared with LABA treatment (OR
0.87; 95% 0.77 to 0.99), but not in the overall rate of all-cause
hospitalisations. There was no statistically significant difference in forced
expiratory volume in one second (FEV(1)) or symptom score between tiotropium and 
LABA-treated participants. There was a lower rate of non-fatal serious adverse
events recorded with tiotropium compared with LABA (OR 0.88; 95% CI 0.78 to
0.99). The tiotropium group was also associated with a lower rate of study
withdrawals (OR 0.89; 95% CI 0.81 to 0.99).We identified six full economic
evaluations assessing the cost and cost-effectiveness of tiotropium and
salmeterol. The studies were based on an economic model or empirical analysis of 
clinical data from RCTs. They all looked at maintenance costs and the costs for
COPD exacerbations, including respiratory medications and hospitalisations. The
setting for the evaluations was primary and secondary care in the UK, Greece,
Netherlands, Spain and USA. All the studies estimated tiotropium to be superior
to salmeterol based on better clinical outcomes (exacerbations or quality of
life) and/or lower total costs. However, the authors of all evaluations reported 
there was substantial uncertainty around the results.
AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: In people with COPD, the evidence is equivocal as to
whether or not tiotropium offers greater benefit than LABAs in improving quality 
of life; however, this is complicated by differences in effect among the LABA
types. Tiotropium was more effective than LABAs as a group in preventing COPD
exacerbations and disease-related hospitalisations, although there were no
statistical differences between groups in overall hospitalisation rates or
mortality during the study periods. There were fewer serious adverse events and
study withdrawals recorded with tiotropium compared with LABAs. Symptom
improvement and changes in lung function were similar between the treatment
groups. Given the small number of studies to date, with high levels of
heterogeneity among them, one approach may be to give a COPD patient a
substantial trial of tiotropium, followed by a LABA (or vice versa), then to
continue prescribing the long-acting bronchodilator that the patient prefers.
Further studies are needed to compare tiotropium with different LABAs, which are 
currently ongoing. The available economic evidence indicates that tiotropium may 
be cost-effective compared with salmeterol in several specific settings, but
there is considerable uncertainty around this finding.

DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD009157.pub2 
PMID: 22972134  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2012 Sep 12;(9):CD006829. doi:
10.1002/14651858.CD006829.pub2.

Combined corticosteroid and long-acting beta(2)-agonist in one inhaler versus
long-acting beta(2)-agonists for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Nannini LJ(1), Lasserson TJ, Poole P.

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary Section, Hospital E Peron, G. Baigorria, Argentina.
nanninilj@cimero.org.ar.

Comment in
    Ann Intern Med. 2013 Feb 19;158(4):JC9.

Update of
    Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2007;(4):CD006829.

BACKGROUND: Both inhaled steroids (ICS) and long-acting beta(2)-agonists (LABA)
are used in the management of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). This 
updated review compared compound LABA plus ICS therapy (LABA/ICS) with the LABA
component drug given alone.
OBJECTIVES: To assess the efficacy of ICS and LABA in a single inhaler with
mono-component LABA alone in adults with COPD.
SEARCH METHODS: We searched the Cochrane Airways Group Specialised Register of
trials. The date of the most recent search was November 2011.
SELECTION CRITERIA: We included randomised, double-blind controlled trials. We
included trials comparing compound ICS and LABA preparations with their component
LABA preparations in people with COPD.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Two authors independently assessed study risk of
bias and extracted data. The primary outcomes were exacerbations, mortality and
pneumonia, while secondary outcomes were health-related quality of life (measured
by validated scales), lung function, withdrawals due to lack of efficacy,
withdrawals due to adverse events and side-effects. Dichotomous data were
analysed as random-effects model odds ratios or rate ratios with 95% confidence
intervals (CIs), and continuous data as mean differences and 95% CIs. We rated
the quality of evidence for exacerbations, mortality and pneumonia according to
recommendations made by the GRADE working group.
MAIN RESULTS: Fourteen studies met the inclusion criteria, randomising 11,794
people with severe COPD. We looked at any LABA plus ICS inhaler (LABA/ICS) versus
the same LABA component alone, and then we looked at the 10 studies which
assessed fluticasone plus salmeterol (FPS) and the four studies assessing
budesonide plus formoterol (BDF) separately. The studies were well-designed with 
low risk of bias for randomisation and blinding but they had high rates of
attrition, which reduced our confidence in the results for outcomes other than
mortality.Primary outcomes There was low quality evidence that exacerbation rates
in people using LABA/ICS inhalers were lower in comparison to those with LABA
alone, from nine studies which randomised 9921 participants (rate ratio 0.76; 95%
CI 0.68 to 0.84). This corresponds to one exacerbation per person per year on
LABA and 0.76 exacerbations per person per year on ICS/LABA. Our confidence in
this effect was limited by statistical heterogeneity between the results of the
studies (I(2) = 68%) and a risk of bias from the high withdrawal rates across the
studies. When analysed as the number of people experiencing one or more
exacerbations over the course of the study, FPS lowered the odds of an
exacerbation with an odds ratio (OR) of 0.83 (95% CI 0.70 to 0.98, 6 studies,
3357 participants). With a risk of an exacerbation of 47% in the LABA group over 
one year, 42% of people treated with LABA/ICS would be expected to experience an 
exacerbation. Concerns over the effect of reporting biases led us to downgrade
the quality of evidence for this effect from high to moderate.There was no
significant difference in the rate of hospitalisations (rate ratio 0.79; 95% CI
0.55 to 1.13, very low quality evidence due to risk of bias, statistical
imprecision and inconsistency). There was no significant difference in mortality 
between people on combined inhalers and those on LABA, from 10 studies on 10,680 
participants (OR 0.92; 95% CI 0.76 to 1.11, downgraded to moderate quality
evidence due to statistical imprecision). Pneumonia occurred more commonly in
people randomised to combined inhalers, from 12 studies with 11,076 participants 
(OR 1.55; 95% CI 1.20 to 2.01, moderate quality evidence due to risk of bias in
relation to attrition) with an annual risk of around 3% on LABA alone compared to
4% on combination treatment. There were no significant differences between the
results for either exacerbations or pneumonia from trials adding different doses 
or types of inhaled corticosteroid.Secondary outcomes ICS/LABA was more effective
than LABA alone in improving health-related quality of life measured by the St
George's Respiratory Questionnaire (1.58 units lower with FPS; 2.69 units lower
with BDF), dyspnoea (0.09 units lower with FPS), symptoms (0.07 units lower with 
BDF), rescue medication (0.38 puffs per day fewer with FPS, 0.33 puffs per day
fewer with BDF), and forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV(1)) (70 mL
higher with FPS, 50 mL higher with BDF). Candidiasis (OR 3.75) and upper
respiratory infection (OR 1.32) occurred more frequently with FPS than SAL. We
did not combine adverse event data relating to candidiasis for BDF studies as the
results were very inconsistent.
AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: Concerns over the analysis and availability of data from
the studies bring into question the superiority of ICS/LABA over LABA alone in
preventing exacerbations. The effects on hospitalisations were inconsistent and
require further exploration. There was moderate quality evidence of an increased 
risk of pneumonia with ICS/LABA. There was moderate quality evidence that
treatments had similar effects on mortality. Quality of life, symptoms score,
rescue medication use and FEV(1) improved more on ICS/LABA than on LABA, but the 
average differences were probably not clinically significant for these outcomes. 
To an individual patient the increased risk of pneumonia needs to be balanced
against the possible reduction in exacerbations.More information would be useful 
on the relative benefits and adverse event rates with combination inhalers using 
different doses of inhaled corticosteroids. Evidence from head-to-head
comparisons is needed to assess the comparative risks and benefits of the
different combination inhalers.

DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD006829.pub2 
PMCID: PMC4170910
PMID: 22972099  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Int Arch Allergy Immunol. 2013;160(1):27-36. doi: 10.1159/000338430. Epub 2012
Aug 31.

Corticosteroids plus long-acting β2-agonists prevent double-stranded RNA-induced 
upregulation of B7-H1 on airway epithelium.

Kan-O K(1), Matsumoto K, Inoue H, Fukuyama S, Asai Y, Watanabe W, Kurokawa M,
Araya J, Kuwano K, Nakanishi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute for Diseases of the Chest, Graduate School of Medical
Sciences, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Airway viral infections provoke exacerbations of asthma and chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease. B7-H1 is a costimulatory molecule that is
implicated in an escape mechanism of viruses from host immune systems. This
escape may be associated with the persistence of viral infection and lead to
exacerbation of underlying diseases. We have shown that an analog of viral
double-stranded RNA, polyinosinic-polycytidylic acid (poly IC), upregulated the
expression of B7-H1 on airway epithelial cells, an effect which was
corticosteroid-resistant. We investigated the effects of corticosteroids plus
long-acting β(2)-agonists (LABAs; fluticasone/salmeterol or
budesonide/formoterol) on the expression of B7-H1.
METHODS: BEAS-2B cells and primary airway epithelial cells were stimulated with
poly IC or respiratory syncytial virus. The expression of B7-H1 was assessed by
flow cytometry.
RESULTS: Poly IC upregulated the expression of B7-H1, which was suppressed by
high-concentration corticosteroids but not by LABAs. The upregulation was
suppressed by very low-concentration corticosteroids when used in combination
with LABAs. Their combination also suppressed the virus-induced upregulation of
B7-H1. Poly IC stimulation induced the nuclear translocation of nuclear factor ĸB
(NF-ĸB). Inhibitors of NF-ĸB activation prevented the poly IC-induced
upregulation of B7-H1. Low-concentration corticosteroids in combination with
LABAs enhanced the de novo induction of IĸBα, the endogenous inhibitor of NF-ĸB
activation.
CONCLUSIONS: Fluticasone/salmeterol or budesonide/formoterol attenuate the
virus-associated upregulation of B7-H1 on airway epithelial cells via suppression
of NF-ĸB activation.

Copyright © 2012 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000338430 
PMID: 22948082  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Ann Thorac Med. 2012 Jul;7(3):140-4. doi: 10.4103/1817-1737.98846.

Comparison of the effect of high-dose inhaled budesonide and fluticasone on
adrenal function in patients with severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Fahim A(1), Faruqi S, Wright CE, Kastelik JA, Morice AH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiovascular and Respiratory Studies, Department of Respiratory 
Medicine,Castle Hill Hospital, Cottingham, HU16 5JQ, UK.

INTRODUCTION: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a leading cause of 
respiratory-related morbidity and mortality. Inhaled steroids are frequently used
in patients with moderate to severe disease and may lead to adrenal suppression.
OBJECTIVES: The aim of this study was to compare the effect of inhaled
budesonide/formoterol with inhaled fluticasone/salmeterol in severe COPD.
METHODS: It was a prospective open-label crossover study of 22 patients. Adrenal 
suppression was measured by overnight urinary cortisol/creatinine ratio. The
measurements were taken while patients were on either combination for at least 4 
weeks.
RESULTS: A total of 12 patients completed the study. The mean age was 64 years (8
males, 4 females). The mean FEV1 was 1 L (range, 0.5-1.8). There was no
significant difference in adrenal suppression measured by overnight urinary
cortisol/creatinine ratio (budesonide 5.2 ± 4.3, fluticasone 4.7 ± 3.1; 95% CI
-2.2 to 1.2; P = 0.52) and urinary cortisol concentration (budesonide 51 ± 53,
fluticasone 43 ± 31 [nmol/l]; 95% CI -35 to 20; P = 0.56).
CONCLUSION: Inhaled budesonide and fluticasone have no significantly different
effect on adrenal function in moderate to severe COPD. The adverse event profile 
of high-dose inhaled steroids should not influence the choice of medication.

DOI: 10.4103/1817-1737.98846 
PMCID: PMC3425045
PMID: 22924071  [PubMed]


157. J Investig Med. 2012 Oct;60(7):1048-53. doi: 10.2310/JIM.0b013e3182673ff9.

Long-acting beta 2 agonists suppress IP-10 expression in human bronchial
epithelial cells.

Chien JW(1), Chu YT, Yang SN, Kuo CH, Wang WL, Kuo PL, Jong YJ, Hung CH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Changhua Christian Hospital, Changhua City, Changhua
County, Taiwan, ROC.

BACKGROUND: Interferon-γ-inducible protein (IP)-10 (CXCL10) is an important
chemokine secreted by the airway epithelium that functions as a biomarker for
virus-induced asthma. Long-acting beta 2 (β2) agonists (LABAs) are frequently
used as inhaled medication for asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. 
However, previous research failed to investigate the effects of LABAs on IP-10 in
bronchial epithelial cells.
OBJECTIVE: To study the effects and signaling pathways of formoterol and
salmeterol on polyriboinosinic polyribocytidylic acid (poly I:C)-induced IP-10
expression in BEAS-2B cells.
METHODS: BEAS-2B cells were pretreated with formoterol and salmeterol for 2 hours
before poly I:C stimulation. ICI 118551 (β2 adrenoreceptor antagonist) or
mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) inhibitors were added 30 minutes before
LABAs were added. Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay and real-time polymerase
chain reaction were used to measure IP-10 protein and messenger RNA levels.
Mitogen-activated protein kinase inhibitors and Western blotting were used to
identify MAPK pathways, whereas bioassay revealed the MAPK functions.
RESULTS: Long-acting β2 agonists significantly down-regulated the poly
I:C-induced IP-10 protein and messenger RNA expression in BEAS-2B cells. ICI
118551 reversed this effect. Forskolin, a cyclic adenosine monophosphate
activator, produced a similar inhibitory effect. Western blotting showed that
formoterol suppressed poly I:C-induced IP-10 expression via the c-Jun N-terminal 
kinase-c-Jun pathway.
CONCLUSION: Long-acting β2 agonists down-regulate poly I:C-induced IP-10
expression in BEAS-2B cells via the β2 adrenoreceptor-cyclic adenosine
monophosphate and c-Jun N-terminal kinase/c-Jun pathways. Long-acting β2 agonists
also inhibit IP-10 production in bronchial epithelial cells and may prolong viral
elimination.

DOI: 10.2310/JIM.0b013e3182673ff9 
PMID: 22914602  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2012;7:415-20. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S31526. Epub
2012 Jul 5.

Efficacy of indacaterol 75 μg versus fixed-dose combinations of
formoterol-budesonide or salmeterol-fluticasone for COPD: a network
meta-analysis.

Cope S(1), Kraemer M, Zhang J, Capkun-Niggli G, Jansen JP.

Author information: 
(1)MAPI Consultancy, Boston, MA 02114, USA.

BACKGROUND: The purpose of this study was to update our network meta-analysis in 
order to compare the efficacy of indacaterol 75 μg with that of a fixed-dose
combination of formoterol and budesonide (FOR/BUD) and a fixed-dose combination
salmeterol and fluticasone (SAL/FP) for the treatment of chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD) based on evidence identified previously in addition to
two new randomized clinical trials.
METHODS: Fifteen randomized, placebo-controlled clinical trials including COPD
patients were evaluated: indacaterol 75 μg once daily (n = 2 studies),
indacaterol 150 μg once daily (n = 5), indacaterol 300 μg once daily (n = 4),
FOR/BUD 9/160 μg twice daily (n = 2), FOR/BUD 9/320 μg twice daily (n = 2),
SAL/FP 50/500 μg twice daily (n = 4), and SAL/FP 50/250 μg twice daily (n = 1).
All trials were analyzed simultaneously using a Bayesian network meta-analysis
and relative treatment effects between all regimens were obtained.
Treatment-by-covariate interactions were included where possible to improve the
similarity of the trials. Outcomes of interest were trough forced expiratory
volume in 1 second (FEV(1)) and transitional dyspnea index at 12 weeks.
RESULTS: Based on the results without adjustment for covariates, indacaterol 75
μg resulted in a greater improvement in FEV(1) at 12 weeks compared with FOR/BUD 
9/160 μg (difference in change from baseline 0.09 L [95% credible interval
0.04-0.13]) and FOR/BUD 9/320 μg (0.07 L [0.03-0.11]) and was comparable with
SAL/FP 50/250 μg (0.00 L [-0.07-0.07]) and SAL/FP 50/500 μg (0.01 L
[-0.04-0.05]). For transitional dyspnea index, data was available only for
indacaterol 75 μg versus SAL/FP 50/500 μg (-0.49 points [-1.87-0.89]).
CONCLUSION: Based on results of a network meta-analysis with and without
covariates, indacaterol 75 μg is expected to be at least as efficacious as
FOR/BUD (9/320 μg and 9/160 μg) and comparable with SAL/FP (50/250 μg and 50/500 
μg) in terms of lung function. In terms of breathlessness (transitional dyspnea
index) at 12 weeks, the results are inconclusive given the limited data.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S31526 
PMCID: PMC3402062
PMID: 22848154  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Geriatr Gerontol Int. 2013 Apr;13(2):398-404. doi:
10.1111/j.1447-0594.2012.00916.x. Epub 2012 Jul 23.

Better adherence to a transdermal tulobuterol patch than inhaled salmeterol in
elderly chronic obstructive pulmonary disease patients.

Mochizuki H(1), Nanjo Y, Takahashi H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Respiratory Medicine, Tokyo Metropolitan Geriatric Hospital,
Tokyo, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Inhaled long-acting β2-agonists (LABA) are often poorly adhered to by
elderly patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). We
hypothesized that older age and compromised cognitive function might contribute
to poor adherence to inhaled medications among COPD patients, and that
transdermally delivered medications could improve adherence, exercise tolerance
and quality of life (QOL).
OBJECTIVE: To compare adherence and effects on health outcomes between
transdermal and inhaled LABA.
METHODS: A total of 44 treatment-naïve, elderly Japanese patients with
moderate-to-severe COPD were treated with a transdermal tulobuterol patch (TP; 2 
mg, once a day) or inhaled salmeterol (50 µg, twice a day) in a randomized
crossover manner. The primary outcomes were adherence to the LABA medications and
changes in QOL measured by the St George's Respiratory Questionnaire. Secondary
outcomes were changes in 6-min walk distance (6MWD) and spirometric values.
RESULTS: The overall adherence rate was 90.3 ± 1.6% for TP and 75.5 ± 2.9% for
salmeterol (P < 0.001). Adherence to salmeterol was correlated with age and
Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) score (P < 0.05 and P < 0.01, respectively),
although that to TP was relatively constant regardless of age and MMSE score.
6MWD and QOL were significantly improved from baseline after TP, but not after
salmeterol treatment (P < 0.05). Similar degrees of increase in spirometric
values occurred after treatment with TP and salmeterol.
CONCLUSIONS: Adherence levels were higher overall with TP than with inhaled
salmeterol, and more stable across age groups and MMSE levels. TP might be a
favorable treatment option for COPD patients with poor adherence to an inhaled
LABA.

© 2012 Japan Geriatrics Society.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1447-0594.2012.00916.x 
PMID: 22817699  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Expert Rev Respir Med. 2012 Jun;6(3):309-19. doi: 10.1586/ers.12.27.

Efficacy of anticholinergic drugs in asthma.

Novelli F(1), Malagrinò L, Dente FL, Paggiaro P.

Author information: 
(1)Cardio-Thoracic and Vascular Department, University of Pisa, Via Paradisa 2,
56124 Pisa, Italy.

Although bronchial hyperresponsiveness to cholinergic agents is a main feature of
asthma, the role of anticholinergic drugs in chronic asthma management has been
largely underestimated. Several single-dose studies comparing acute
bronchodilation induced by ipratropium bromide with salbutamol have shown that
salbutamol was more effective than ipratropium in asthma treatment. Recently,
tiotropium has been studied in asthma, when added to low-dose inhaled
corticosteroids in unselected moderate asthmatics or in patients with
uncontrolled asthma, or patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and
history of asthma. Later, studies on patients with Arg/Arg β(2)-receptor
polymorphism demonstrated a similar efficacy of tiotropium in comparison with
salmeterol when both were added to low-dose inhaled corticosteroids. Further
long-term studies are currently in progress, for the evaluation of the efficacy
of tiotropium on clinical asthma control, and on the rate and severity of asthma 
exacerbations, as well as the potential modification of inflammatory mechanisms
and varying efficacy in specific asthma phenotypes (such as smoking asthmatics).

DOI: 10.1586/ers.12.27 
PMID: 22788945  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Respir Med. 2012 Oct;106(10):1413-20. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2012.05.011. Epub 2012 
Jun 28.

Effect of combination treatment on lung volumes and exercise endurance time in
COPD.

Magnussen H(1), Paggiaro P, Schmidt H, Kesten S, Metzdorf N, Maltais F.

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary Research Institute at Hospital Grosshansdorf, Center for Pneumology 
and Thoracic Surgery, Woehrendamm 80, D-22927 Grosshansdorf, Germany.
magnussen@pulmoresearch.de

BACKGROUND: Data comparing two bronchodilators vs. one bronchodilator plus
inhaled corticosteroid (ICS) on hyperinflation and exercise endurance in chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) are scarce, though these therapeutic
strategies are widely used in clinical practice.
METHODS: We performed a randomized, crossover clinical trial of two × 8 weeks
comparing tiotropium (18 μg once daily) + salmeterol (50 μg twice daily) (T + S) 
to salmeterol + fluticasone (50/500 μg twice daily) (S + F) in COPD (forced
expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV(1)) ≤65% predicted, and thoracic gas volume (TGV)
≥120% predicted). Coprimary endpoints were postbronchodilator TGV and exercise
endurance time (EET).
RESULTS: In 309 patients, at baseline, prebronchodilator FEV(1) was 1.36 L (46%
predicted), TGV was 5.42 L (165% predicted), and EET = 458 s. Relative to S + F, 
T + S lowered postdose TGV by 182 ± 44 ml after 4 weeks (p < 0.0001) and
87 ± 44 ml after 8 weeks (p < 0.05). EET was nonsignificantly increased following
T + S treatment (20 ± 15 s at 4 weeks, 15 ± 13 s at 8 weeks) vs. S + F. BORG
dyspnea score at exercise isotime was reduced in favor of T + S.
CONCLUSION: The two bronchodilators decreased hyperinflation significantly more
than one bronchodilator and ICS. This difference was not reflected in EET.
(ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT00530842).

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2012.05.011 
PMID: 22749044  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. BMC Pulm Med. 2012 Jun 25;12:29. doi: 10.1186/1471-2466-12-29.

Efficacy of once-daily indacaterol 75 μg relative to alternative bronchodilators 
in COPD: a study level and a patient level network meta-analysis.

Cope S(1), Zhang J, Williams J, Jansen JP.

Author information: 
(1)Mapi Consultancy, Boston, MA, USA.

BACKGROUND: The objective of this study was to evaluate the comparative efficacy 
of indacaterol 75 μg once daily (OD), tiotropium 18 μg OD, salmeterol 50 μg twice
daily (BID), formoterol 12 μg BID, and placebo for the treatment of chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) based on individual patient data (IPD) from 
randomized controlled trials (RCTs) from the indacaterol trial program and
aggregate data (AD) identified from a systematic review of RCTs.
METHODS: 22 RCTs were included in the AD analysis that evaluated: indacaterol 75 
μg (n = 2 studies), indacaterol 150 μg n = 5 (i.e. salmeterol 50 μg) (n = 5),
indacaterol 300 μg (n = 2), tiotropium 18 μg (n = 10), salmeterol 50 μg (n = 7), 
and formoterol 12 μg (n = 4). All of the studies except for one head-to-head
comparison (tiotropium vs. salmeterol) were placebo controlled. Outcomes of
interest were trough forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1) and St. George's
Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ) total score at week 12. The AD from all trials
was analysed simultaneously using a Bayesian network meta-analysis (NMA) and
relative treatment effects between all regimens were obtained. In a separate
analysis, the IPD available from the 6 indacaterol RCTs was analysed in a NMA.
Treatment-by-covariate interactions were included in both analyses to improve
similarity of the trials.
RESULTS: All interventions compared were more efficacious than placebo regarding 
FEV1 at 12 weeks. Indacaterol 75 μg is expected to result in a comparable FEV1 at
12 weeks to tiotropium and salmeterol based on both IPD and AD analyses. In
comparison to formoterol, the IPD and AD results indicate indacaterol 75 μg is
more efficacious (IPD = 0.07 L difference; 95%Credible Interval (CrI) 0.02 to
0.11; AD = 0.05 L difference; 95%CrI 0.01; 0.09). In terms of SGRQ total score at
12 weeks, indacaterol 75 μg and formoterol were more efficacious than placebo,
whereas for tiotropium and salmeterol the credible intervals included zero for
the AD results only (tiotropium: -2.99 points improvement versus placebo; 95%CrI 
-6.48 to 0.43; salmeterol:-2.52; 95%CrI: -5.34; 0.44). Both IPD and AD results
suggest that indacaterol 75 μg is expected to be comparable to all active
treatments.
CONCLUSIONS: Based on a synthesis of currently available AD RCT evidence as well 
as an IPD network meta-analysis of six RCTs, indacaterol 75 μg is expected to be 
at least as efficacious as formoterol and comparable to tiotropium and salmeterol
regarding FEV1. Furthermore, indacaterol 75 μg shows comparable level of
improvement in health-related quality of life to tiotropium, salmeterol, and
formoterol, as measured by the SGRQ.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2466-12-29 
PMCID: PMC3512498
PMID: 22732017  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Eur Respir J. 2013 Mar;41(3):556-64. doi: 10.1183/09031936.00027212. Epub 2012
Jun 14.

Cost-effectiveness of tiotropium versus salmeterol: the POET-COPD trial.

Hoogendoorn M(1), Al MJ, Beeh KM, Bowles D, Graf von der Schulenburg JM,
Lungershausen J, Monz BU, Schmidt H, Vogelmeier C, Rutten-van Mölken MP.

Author information: 
(1)Erasmus University, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

The aim of this study was to perform a 1-yr trial-based cost-effectiveness
analysis (CEA) of tiotropium versus salmeterol followed by a 5-yr model-based
CEA. The within-trial CEA, including 7,250 patients with moderate to very severe 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), was performed alongside the 1-yr
international randomised controlled Prevention of Exacerbations with Tiotropium
(POET)-COPD trial comparing tiotropium with salmeterol regarding the effect on
exacerbations. Main end-points of the trial-based analysis were costs, number of 
exacerbations and exacerbation days. The model-based analysis was conducted to
extrapolate results to 5 yrs and to calculate quality-adjusted life years
(QALYs). 1-yr costs per patient from the German statutory health insurance (SHI) 
perspective and the societal perspective were €126 (95% uncertainty interval (UI)
€55-195) and €170 (95% UI €77-260) higher for tiotropium, respectively. The
annual number of exacerbations was 0.064 (95% UI 0.010-0.118) lower for
tiotropium, leading to a reduction in exacerbation-related costs of €87 (95% UI
€19-157). The incremental cost-effectiveness ratio was €1,961 per exacerbation
avoided from the SHI perspective and €2,647 from the societal perspective. In the
model-based analyses, the 5-yr costs per QALY were €3,488 from the SHI
perspective and €8,141 from the societal perspective. Tiotropium reduced
exacerbations and exacerbation-related costs, but increased total costs.
Tiotropium can be considered cost-effective as the resulting cost-effectiveness
ratios were below commonly accepted willingness-to-pay thresholds.

DOI: 10.1183/09031936.00027212 
PMID: 22700844  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Respir Res. 2012 Jun 6;13:44. doi: 10.1186/1465-9921-13-44.

Prediction and course of symptoms and lung function around an exacerbation in
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

van den Berge M(1), Hop WC, van der Molen T, van Noord JA, Creemers JP, Schreurs 
AJ, Wouters EF, Postma DS; COSMIC (COPD and Seretide: a Multi-Center Intervention
and Characterization) study group.

Collaborators: Aalbers R, Beaumont F, Boersma W, Bogaard J, Bunnik M, Creemers J,
Dalinghaus W, de Graaff C, de Jong J, de Jong P, de Munck D, de Vries D, de
Vries, Hertog W, Dik H, Dubois E, Eland M, Evers W, Gans S, Geraedts W, Heijerman
H, Hendriks A, Hol B, Kersbergen J, Los H, Luursema P, Pannekoek B, Pieters W,
Quanjel R, Quanjel-Wisselo E, Rammeloo R, Retera J, Roldaan A, Rudolphus A, Sala 
L, Schlösser N, Schols A, Schreurs A, Simons J, Sips A, Smeenk F, Strankinga W,
Utama I, van Beek F, van de Woude H, van den Berg P, van den Bosch J, van den
Bosch J, van der Brink W, van den Elshout F, van der Bruggen- Bogaarts B, van der
Zeijden J, van Harreveld A, van Keimpema A, van Noord J, van Pagée H, van
Snippenburg R, van Spiegel P, Verbraecken J, Westbroek J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, University Medical Center Groningen, GRIAC
Research Institute, University of Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.
m.van.den.berge@umcg.nl

BACKGROUND: Frequent exacerbations induce a high burden to Chronic Obstructive
Pulmonary Disease (COPD). We investigated the course of exacerbations in the
published COSMIC study that investigated the effects of 1-year withdrawal of
fluticasone after a 3-month run-in treatment period with salmeterol/fluticasone
in patients with COPD.
METHODS: In 373 patients, we evaluated diary cards for symptoms, Peak Expiratory 
Flow (PEF), and salbutamol use and assessed their course during exacerbations.
RESULTS: There were 492 exacerbations in 224 patients. The level of symptoms of
cough, sputum, dyspnea and nocturnal awakening steadily increased from 2 weeks
prior to exacerbation, with a sharp rise during the last week. Symptoms of cough,
sputum, and dyspnea reverted to baseline values at different rates (after 4, 4,
and 7 weeks respectively), whereas symptoms of nocturnal awakening were still
increased after eight weeks. The course of symptoms was similar around a first
and second exacerbation. Increases in symptoms and salbutamol use and decreases
in PEF were associated with a higher risk to develop an exacerbation, but with
moderate predictive values, the areas under the receiver operating curves ranging
from 0.63 to 0.70.
CONCLUSIONS: Exacerbations of COPD are associated with increased symptoms that
persist for weeks and the course is very similar between a first and second
exacerbation. COPD exacerbations are preceded by increased symptoms and
salbutamol use and lower PEF, yet predictive values are too low to warrant daily 
use in clinical practice.

DOI: 10.1186/1465-9921-13-44 
PMCID: PMC3494574
PMID: 22672621  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Pulm Pharmacol Ther. 2012 Aug;25(4):293-302. doi: 10.1016/j.pupt.2012.05.008.
Epub 2012 May 29.

Characteristics of AZD9708, a novel, selective β2-adrenoceptor agonist with rapid
onset and long duration of action.

Nicholls DJ(1), Jordan S, Cadogan E, Lawson M, Austin RP, Paine SW, Gardiner P,
Bonnert R, Connolly S, Young A.

Author information: 
(1)AstraZeneca R&D Charnwood, Loughborough LE11 5RH, UK.
david.nicholls@astrazeneca.com

Here we describe the pre-clinical pharmacological profile of AZD9708, a novel
long-acting β(2)-adrenoceptor agonist that has potential as a once-daily therapy 
for asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). AZD9708 is a potent 
and selective agonist at the human β(2)-adrenoceptor, with selectivity over human
β(1)- and β(3)-adrenoceptors of >500 and >24 fold, respectively. AZD9708 relaxes 
carbachol-induced contraction of human bronchial rings with a time to 90% of
maximal relaxation of 13-20 min, similar to that seen with formoterol and quicker
than salmeterol. In anesthetized guinea pigs, AZD9708 provides significant
protection against histamine-induced airway constriction at 24 h after
intratracheal and nebulized doses. This is longer than with intratracheal
salmeterol, which is bronchoprotective for approximately 8 h, and formoterol,
which is bronchoprotective for 8 and 12 h following nebulized and intratracheal
dosing, respectively. AZD9708 also shows the potential for a greater therapeutic 
margin than widely used β(2)-adrenoceptor agonists such as formoterol. At a
defined efficacy dose that provides 80% bronchoprotection (ED(80)), formoterol
leads to a decrease in blood potassium levels in guinea pigs, whilst AZD9708 is
not associated with significant reductions in potassium levels at doses up to 7
times the ED(80). [(14)C]AZD9708 is associated with extensive protein binding in 
both human (mean 1.0% free) and rat (mean 2.6% free) plasma. This pharmacological
profile indicates the potential of AZD9708 to become an important addition to the
range of bronchodilators available for the treatment of patients with obstructive
airways disease.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pupt.2012.05.008 
PMID: 22659538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Respir Med. 2012 Aug;106(8):1139-47. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2012.04.001. Epub 2012
May 17.

Ciliary beating is depressed in nasal cilia from chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease subjects.

Yaghi A(1), Zaman A, Cox G, Dolovich MB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, McMaster University, Hamilton, ON, Canada.

COPD is characterized by increased cough, mucus production, and airway
inflammation. Beating epithelial cell cilia contribute to mucociliary clearance
with ciliary beat frequency (CBF) an important measure of cilia function.
However, whether CBF varies with COPD severity is unknown.AIMS: 1) to compare
nasal cilia samples and their CBF from healthy non-smokers (Control), COPD and At
Risk (cough and sputum production) subjects. 2) to determine the effect of
pharmacologic agents that modulate mediators implicated in the pathogenesis of
COPD on nasal CBF. Nasal brushings of ciliated cells were obtained from Control, 
At Risk and COPD subjects. Using high speed digital imaging, we measured baseline
CBF ex vivo. Then, CBF was re-measured after 30 min perfusion with pharmacologic 
agents that modulate mediators implicated in COPD (salmeterol xinafoate,
tiotropium bromide, licofelone, luteolin, YM976, Defensin HNP-1) and again after 
30 min washout. CBF was significantly depressed in moderate and severe COPD
compared to At Risk and Control subjects. There was an evident and persistent
rise in CBF with all agents tested in COPD cilia except that YM976 effects
persisted only in severe COPD. Only YM976 and tiotropium caused a persistent
increase in CBF in At Risk cilia. The reduction of nasal CBF in moderate and
severe COPD implies that impaired ciliary function may impact mucociliary
clearance in COPD, potentially contributing to retention of secretions and
infection. Pharmacologic agents with different mechanisms of action can increase 
CBF of COPD cilia. Further investigation of the signalling pathways influencing
CBF of COPD cilia is needed.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2012.04.001 
PMID: 22608352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2012 Aug;342(2):497-509. doi: 10.1124/jpet.112.193284. Epub
2012 May 15.

Pharmacological characterization of abediterol, a novel inhaled β(2)-adrenoceptor
agonist with long duration of action and a favorable safety profile in
preclinical models.

Aparici M(1), Gómez-Angelats M, Vilella D, Otal R, Carcasona C, Viñals M, Ramos
I, Gavaldà A, De Alba J, Gras J, Cortijo J, Morcillo E, Puig C, Ryder H, Beleta
J, Miralpeix M.

Author information: 
(1)Almirall R&D Center, Sant Feliu de Llobregat, Barcelona, Spain.
monica.aparici@almirall.com

Abediterol is a novel potent, long-acting inhaled β(2)-adrenoceptor agonist in
development for the treatment of asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease. Abediterol shows subnanomolar affinity for the human β(2)-adrenoceptor
and a functional selectivity over β(1)-adrenoceptors higher than that of
formoterol and indacaterol in both a cellular model with overexpressed human
receptors and isolated guinea pig tissue. Abediterol is a full agonist at the
human β(2)-adrenoceptor (E(max) = 91 ± 5% of the maximal effect of isoprenaline).
The potency and onset of action that abediterol shows in isolated human bronchi
(EC(50) = 1.9 ± 0.4 nM; t½ onset = 7-10 min) is not significantly different from 
that of formoterol, but its duration of action (t½ ∼ 690 min) is similar to that 
of indacaterol. Nebulized abediterol inhibits acetylcholine-induced
bronchoconstriction in guinea pigs in a concentration-dependent manner, with
higher potency and longer duration of action (t½ = 36 h) than salmeterol (t½ = 6 
h) and formoterol (t½ = 4 h) and similar duration of action to indacaterol up to 
48 h. In dogs, the bronchoprotective effect of abediterol is more sustained than 
that of salmeterol and indacaterol at doses without effects on heart rate, thus
showing a greater safety margin (defined as the ratio of dose increasing heart
rate by 5% and dose inhibiting bronchospasm by 50%) than salmeterol, formoterol, 
and indacaterol (5.6 versus 3.3, 2.2, and 0.3, respectively). In conclusion, our 
results suggest that abediterol has a preclinical profile for once-daily dosing
in humans together with a fast onset of action and a favorable cardiovascular
safety profile.

DOI: 10.1124/jpet.112.193284 
PMID: 22588259  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Pneumonol Alergol Pol. 2012;80(3):255-62.

[The influence of treatment with formoterol, formoterol with tiotropium,
formoterol with inhaled glucocorticosteroid and tiotropium on lung functions,
tolerance of exercise and simple, morning everyday activities in patients with
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)].

[Article in Polish]

Szmidt M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Oddział Kliniczny Chorób Wewnętrznych i Alergologii, Katedra Nauk Klinicznych,
Wydział Nauk Biomedycznych i Kształcenia Podyplomowego Uniwersytetu Medycznego w 
Łodzi. mirszmidt@wp.pl

Bronchodilators - long-acting b2-adrenergic agonists (formoterol and salmeterol) 
and a long-acting antimuscarinic drug (tiotropium), are the main drugs applied in
symptomatic treatment of COPD. In patients with COPD, dyspnea is frequently
associated with simple everyday activities. Two questionnaires have been
published recently as a means of assessing the patients' ability to perform
morning activities and symptoms. Dynamic hyperinflation is the pathophysiological
disorder responsible for dyspnea and decreased exercise tolerance in COPD.
Formoterol is faster than salmeterol in diminishing air-trapping. It has been
shown that treatment with formoterol and tiotropium in COPD patients improves
FEV(1), FVC, IC, symptoms score and quality of life in comparison with tiotropium
applied alone. Among LABA and inhaled glucocorticosteroids combinations, those
containing formoterol have a more beneficial effect on the ability to perform
simple morning activities (budesonide/formoterol was better than
fluticasone/salmeterol). Beclomethasone/formoterol - 400/24 mcg/die, in
comparison with fluticasone/salmeterol - 500/100 mcg/die significantly reduced
air-trapping and dyspnea in COPD patients. The comparison of
budesonide/formoterol - 400/12 mcg 2 x die with beclomethasone/ /formoterol -
200/12 mcg 2 x die has shown similar influence of both combinations on FEV(1),
dyspnea, 6-minute walk test, symptoms score and quality of life. The addition of 
budesonide and formoterol combination to tiotropium gives further benefits:
reduces number of exacerbations, improves FEV1, symptoms score and performance of
simple morning routines. Doctors should pay more attention to symptoms and
limitations in simple activities in the morning and adequately adjust the
treatment.


PMID: 22562275  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Lung. 2012 Aug;190(4):411-7. doi: 10.1007/s00408-012-9387-7. Epub 2012 Apr 13.

β2-adrenergic receptor haplotype may be associated with susceptibility to
desensitization to long-acting β2-agonists in COPD patients.

Mochizuki H(1), Nanjo Y, Kawate E, Yamazaki M, Tsuda Y, Takahashi H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Respiratory Medicine, Tokyo Metropolitan Geriatric Hospital, 35-2 
Sakae-cho, Itabashi-ku, Tokyo 173-0015, Japan.

PURPOSE: Τhat β2-adrenergic receptor (β2AR) haplotypes may play a key role in
clinical response to β2-agonists and haplotype Cys-19Gly16Gln27 (CysGlyGln) is
reported to be associated with desensitization of β2AR to β-agonists in
lymphocytes isolated from patients with asthma and septic shock. We sought to
determine whether haplotypic variation of the β2AR affects the functional
outcomes of long-acting β2-agonist (LABA) treatment for chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD) when used as monotherapy.
METHODS: Treatment-naïve patients with COPD (n = 36) were prospectively treated
with two kinds of LABA--inhaled salmeterol and transdermal tulobuterol patch--for
12 weeks in crossover study, and changes in pulmonary function data and 6-minute 
walk distance (6 MWD) were compared between groups stratified by the CysGlyGln.
RESULTS: Frequencies of haplotype and diplotype for the CysGlyGln were 0.51 and
0.36, respectively. The individuals homozygous for CysGlyGln showed less
improvement in FEV(1), %FEF(25-75 %), and IC/TLC than those with 0 or 1 copy of
CysGlyGln after treatment with both LABAs despite initial bronchodilator
responses to albuterol being similar in these groups. The response in these
parameters was not significantly different between two types of LABA. Overall
changes in 6 MWD in individuals with 2 copies of CysGlyGln versus 0 or 1 copy for
salmeterol were 2.8 and 11 m, and for tulobuterol were -1.3 and 16 m,
respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: Homozygous haplotype for the CysGlyGln of β2AR may be associated
with susceptibility to desensitization to LABA in patients with COPD.

DOI: 10.1007/s00408-012-9387-7 
PMID: 22526864  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Eur Respir J. 2012 Nov;40(5):1098-105. doi: 10.1183/09031936.00169711. Epub 2012 
Apr 20.

Clinical and inflammatory determinants of bronchial hyperresponsiveness in COPD.

van den Berge M(1), Vonk JM, Gosman M, Lapperre TS, Snoeck-Stroband JB, Sterk PJ,
Kunz LI, Hiemstra PS, Timens W, Ten Hacken NH, Kerstjens HA, Postma DS.

Author information: 
(1)Dept of Pulmonary Diseases, University Medical Center Groningen, University of
Groningen, Hanzeplein 1, 9713 GZ, Groningen, The Netherlands.
m.van.den.berge@long.umcg.nl

Comment in
    Eur Respir J. 2012 Nov;40(5):1067-9.

Bronchial hyperresponsiveness (BHR) is regarded as a hallmark of asthma, yet it
is also present in a considerable number of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD) patients. Epidemiological studies have shown that BHR provides
complementary information to forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV(1)) for
development and progression of COPD. We hypothesised that the severity of BHR and
its longitudinal changes associate with both clinical and airway inflammation
measures in COPD. Our hypothesis was tested in 114 COPD patients (median age 62.9
years, smoking exposure 45.9 pack-yrs) participating in the GLUCOLD (Groningen
Leiden Universities Corticosteroids in Obstructive Lung Disease) study, which
previously showed an improvement in BHR with fluticasone and
fluticasone/salmeterol. At baseline, and 6 and 30 months after treatment, we
investigated lung function, including body plethysmography, provocative
concentration of methacholine causing a 20% fall in FEV(1), sputum induction, and
bronchial biopsies. By performing both cross-sectional and longitudinal analyses,
we show that BHR in COPD is predominantly associated with residual volume/total
lung capacity (a measure of air trapping) and airway inflammation reflected by
the number of neutrophils, macrophages and lymphocytes in sputum and bronchial
biopsies. Our findings indicate that BHR is an independent trait in COPD and
provides important information on phenotype heterogeneity and disease activity.

DOI: 10.1183/09031936.00169711 
PMID: 22523354  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2012 Apr 18;(4):CD008989. doi:
10.1002/14651858.CD008989.pub2.

Long-acting beta(2)-agonist in addition to tiotropium versus either tiotropium or
long-acting beta(2)-agonist alone for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Karner C(1), Cates CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Population Health Sciences and Education, St George’s, University of London,
London, UK. ckarner@sgul.ac.uk.

Update in
    Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2015;(10):CD008989.

BACKGROUND: Long-acting bronchodilators comprising long-acting beta(2)-agonists
and the anticholinergic agent tiotropium are commonly used for managing
persistent symptoms of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Combining these
treatments, which have different mechanisms of action, may be more effective than
the individual components. However, the benefits and risks of combining
tiotropium and long-acting beta(2)-agonists for the treatment of chronic
obstructive pulmonary (COPD) disease are unclear.
OBJECTIVES: To assess the relative effects of treatment with tiotropium in
addition to long-acting beta(2)-agonist compared to tiotropium or long-acting
beta(2)-agonist alone in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
SEARCH METHODS: We searched the Cochrane Airways Group Specialised Register of
trials and clinicaltrials.gov up to January 2012.
SELECTION CRITERIA: We included parallel group, randomised controlled trials of
three months or longer comparing treatment with tiotropium in addition to
long-acting beta(2)-agonist against tiotropium or long-acting beta(2)-agonist
alone for patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Two review authors independently assessed trials
for inclusion and then extracted data on trial quality and the outcome results.
We contacted study authors for additional information. We collected information
on adverse effects from the trials.
MAIN RESULTS: Five trials were included in this review, mostly recruiting
participants with moderate or severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. All
of them compared tiotropium in addition to long-acting beta(2)-agonist to
tiotropium alone, but only one trial additionally compared a combination of the
two types of bronchodilator with long-acting beta(2)-agonist (formoterol) alone. 
Two studies used the long-acting beta(2)-agonist indacaterol, two used formoterol
and one used salmeterol.Compared to tiotropium alone (3263 patients), treatment
with tiotropium plus long-acting beta(2)-agonist resulted in a slightly larger
improvement in the mean health-related quality of life (St George's Respiratory
Questionnaire (SGRQ) MD -1.61; 95% CI -2.93 to -0.29). In the control arm,
tiotropium alone, the SGRQ improved by falling 4.5 units from baseline and with
both treatments the improvement was a fall of 6.1 units from baseline (on
average). High withdrawal rates in the trials increased the uncertainty in this
result, and the GRADE assessment for this outcome was therefore moderate. There
were no significant differences in the other primary outcomes (hospital admission
or mortality).The secondary outcome of pre-bronchodilator FEV(1) showed a small
mean increase with the addition of long-acting beta(2)-agonist (MD 0.07 L; 95% CI
0.05 to 0.09) over the control arm, which showed a change from baseline ranging
from 0.03 L to 0.13 L on tiotropium alone. None of the other secondary outcomes
(exacerbations, symptom scores, serious adverse events, and withdrawals) showed
any statistically significant differences between the groups. There were wide
confidence intervals around these outcomes and moderate heterogeneity for both
exacerbations and withdrawals.The results from the one trial comparing the
combination of tiotropium and long-acting beta(2)-agonist to long-acting
beta(2)-agonist alone (417 participants) were insufficient to draw firm
conclusions for this comparison.
AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: The results from this review indicate a small mean
improvement in health-related quality of life for patients on a combination of
tiotropium and long-acting beta(2)-agonist compared to tiotropium alone, but it
is not clear how clinically important this mean difference may be. Hospital
admission and mortality have not been shown to be altered by adding long-acting
beta(2)-agonists to tiotropium. There were not enough data to determine the
relative efficacy and safety of tiotropium plus long-acting beta(2)-agonist
compared to long-acting beta(2)-agonist alone. There were insufficient data to
make comparisons between the different long-acting beta(2)-agonists when used in 
addition to tiotropium.

DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD008989.pub2 
PMCID: PMC4164463
PMID: 22513969  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2012;7:221-33. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S27569. Epub
2012 Mar 22.

Clinical and economic outcomes in an observational study of COPD maintenance
therapies: multivariable regression versus propensity score matching.

Roberts MH(1), Dalal AA.

Author information: 
(1)Lovelace Respiratory Research Institute, Albuquerque, NM, USA.
melissa.roberts@lcfresearch.org

PURPOSE: To investigate equivalency of results from multivariable regression (MR)
and propensity score matching (PSM) models, observational research methods used
to mitigate bias stemming from non-randomization (and consequently unbalanced
groups at baseline), using, as an example, a large study of chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD) initial maintenance therapy.
METHODS: Patients were 32,338 health plan members, age ≥40 years, with COPD
initially treated with fluticasone propionate/salmeterol combination (FSC),
tiotropium (TIO), or ipratropium (IPR) alone or in combination with albuterol.
Using MR and PSM methods, the proportion of patients with COPD-related health
care utilization, mean costs, odds ratios (ORs), and incidence rate ratios (IRRs)
for utilization events were calculated for the 12 months following therapy
initiation.
RESULTS: Of 12,595 FSC, 9126 TIO, and 10,617 IPR patients meeting MR inclusion
criteria, 89.1% (8135) of TIO and 80.2% (8514) of IPR patients were matched to
FSC patients for the PSM analysis. Methods produced substantially similar
findings for mean cost comparisons, ORs, and IRRs for most utilization events. In
contrast to MR, for TIO compared to FSC, PSM did not produce statistically
significant ORs for hospitalization or outpatient visit with antibiotic or
significant IRRs for hospitalization or outpatient visit with oral
corticosteroid. As in the MR analysis, compared to FSC, ORs and IRRs for all
other utilization events, as well as mean costs, were less favorable for IPR and 
TIO.
CONCLUSION: In this example of an observational study of maintenance therapy for 
COPD, more than 80% of the original treatment groups used in the MR analysis were
matched to comparison treatment groups for the PSM analysis. While some sample
size was lost in the PSM analysis, results from both methods were similar in
direction and statistical significance, suggesting that MR and PSM were
equivalent methods for mitigating bias.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S27569 
PMCID: PMC3324998
PMID: 22500122  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2012;7:153-64. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S26100. Epub
2012 Mar 5.

Safety and efficacy of dual therapy with GSK233705 and salmeterol versus
monotherapy with salmeterol, tiotropium, or placebo in a crossover pilot study in
partially reversible COPD patients.

Beier J(1), van Noord J, Deans A, Brooks J, Maden C, Baggen S, Mehta R, Cahn A.

Author information: 
(1)INSAF Respiratory Research Institute, Germany. j.beier@insaf-wi.de

BACKGROUND: GSK233705 is an inhaled, long-acting muscarinic antagonist in
development for the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
This study was performed to see if the addition of GSK233705 to salmeterol would 
provide greater bronchodilation than salmeterol or tiotropium alone in COPD.
METHODS: In an incomplete-block, three-period, crossover design, dually
responsive patients received three of the following five treatments: GSK233705 20
μg plus salmeterol 50 μg twice-daily; GSK233705 50 μg plus salmeterol 50 μg
twice-daily; salmeterol 50 μg or placebo, each twice-daily; and tiotropium 18 μg 
or placebo once-daily for 7 days. Each treatment period was separated by a 14-day
washout. The primary efficacy endpoint was morning (trough) forced expiratory
volume in 1 second (FEV(1)) on Day 8, following 7 days of treatment. Secondary
endpoints included pulmonary function, plethysmography, pharmacokinetics of
GSK233705 and salmeterol, adverse events (AEs), electrocardiograms (ECGs), vital 
signs, and laboratory parameters.
RESULTS: A total of 47 patients were randomized. The mean % predicted normal
postbronchodilator FEV(1) was 55% at screening. Compared with placebo (n = 24),
the adjusted mean change from baseline in trough FEV(1) on Day 8 was 215 mL
higher with GSK233705 20 μg + salmeterol (n = 23) and 203 mL higher with
GSK233705 50 μg + salmeterol (n = 27), whereas with salmeterol (n = 27) and
tiotropium (n = 28) the changes were 101 mL and 118 mL higher, respectively. The 
primary efficacy results were supported by the results from the other secondary
lung function assessments. AEs were reported by similar proportions of patients
across the treatment groups, with headache the most frequently reported
treatment-related AE reported by one subject receiving each of GSK233705 20 μg + 
salmeterol, tiotropium, and placebo. No significant differences were seen in
vital signs, ECGs, or laboratory parameters between the groups.
CONCLUSION: The addition of GSK233705 to salmeterol in partially reversible COPD 
patients resulted in greater bronchodilation than salmeterol or tiotropium alone 
and was well tolerated.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S26100 
PMCID: PMC3299545
PMID: 22419863  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Pharmacoeconomics. 2012 Apr;30(4):271-302. doi: 10.2165/11589270-000000000-00000.

Cost effectiveness of pharmacological maintenance treatment for chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease: a review of the evidence and methodological
issues.

Rutten-van Mölken MP(1), Goossens LM.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Medical Technology Assessment/Institute for Healthcare Policy
and Management, Erasmus University Rotterdam, Rotterdam, the Netherlands.
M.Rutten@bmg.eur.nl

BACKGROUND: Over 200 million people have chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD) worldwide. The number of disease-year equivalents and deaths attributable 
to COPD are high. Guidelines for the pharmacological treatment of the disease
recommend an individualized step-up approach in which treatment is intensified
when results are unsatisfactory.
OBJECTIVE: Our objective was to present a systematic review of the cost
effectiveness of pharmacological maintenance treatment for COPD and to discuss
the methodological strengths and weaknesses of the studies.
METHODS: A systematic literature search for economic evaluations of drug therapy 
in COPD was performed in MEDLINE, EMBASE, the Economic Evaluation Database of the
UK NHS (NHS-EED) and the European Network of Health Economic Evaluation Databases
(EURONHEED). Full economic evaluations presenting both costs and health outcomes 
were included.
RESULTS: A total of 40 studies were included in the review. Of these, 16 were
linked to a clinical trial, 14 used Markov models, eight were based on
observational data and two used a different approach. The few studies on
combining short-acting bronchodilators were consistent in finding net cost
savings compared with monotherapy. Studies comparing inhaled corticosteroids
(ICS) with placebo or no maintenance treatment reported inconsistent results.
Studies comparing fluticasone with salmeterol consistently found salmeterol to be
more cost effective. The cost-effectiveness studies of tiotropium versus placebo,
ipratropium or salmeterol pointed towards a reduction in total COPD-related
healthcare costs for tiotropium in many but not all studies. All of these studies
reported additional health benefits of tiotropium. The cost-effectiveness studies
of the combination of inhaled long-acting β₂-agonists and ICS all report
additional health benefits at an increase in total COPD-related costs in most
studies. The cost-per-QALY estimates of this combination treatment vary widely
and are very sensitive to the assumptions on mortality benefit and time horizon.
CONCLUSIONS: The currently available economic evaluations indicate differences in
cost effectiveness between COPD maintenance therapies, but for a more meaningful 
comparison of results it is important to improve the consistency with respect to 
study methodology and choice of comparator.

DOI: 10.2165/11589270-000000000-00000 
PMID: 22409290  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Drugs. 2012 Mar 5;72(4):543-63. doi: 10.2165/11208490-000000000-00000.

Indacaterol: a review of its use as maintenance therapy in patients with chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease.

McKeage K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Adis, Auckland, New Zealand. demail@adis.co.nz

Indacaterol inhalation powder (Onbrez® Breezhaler®) is a long-acting, selective
β(2)-adrenoceptor agonist that is indicated for the maintenance bronchodilator
treatment of airflow obstruction in adults with chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD). This article reviews the clinical efficacy and tolerability of
indacaterol 150 and 300 μg once daily in adults with moderate to severe COPD, as 
well as reviewing indacaterol's pharmacological properties and results of a
cost-utility analysis. Indacaterol has a fast onset of action after the first
dose and is effective over 24 hours, allowing for once-daily administration. In
short-term trials (≤21 days) in patients with COPD, once-daily indacaterol 150 or
300 μg significantly improved lung function, exercise endurance and lung
hyperinflation relative to placebo. In large, longer-term clinical studies (12
weeks to 1 year) in patients with moderate to severe COPD, once-daily indacaterol
150 or 300 μg improved lung function (primary endpoint) significantly more than
placebo, and improvements were significantly greater than twice-daily formoterol 
12 μg or salmeterol 50 μg, and noninferior to once-daily tiotropium bromide 18 μg
(all agents were administered via inhalation). Overall, indacaterol improved
dyspnoea, use of rescue medication and general health status significantly more
than placebo, salmeterol or tiotropium bromide, and the degree of improvement in 
these endpoints was similar to or greater than that achieved with formoterol.
Improvements were sustained over the long term (1 year), with no evidence of
tolerance. Combination therapy with indacaterol plus tiotropium bromide improved 
lung function, dyspnoea, rescue medication use and general health status
significantly more than tiotropium bromide alone in patients with moderate to
severe COPD. Indacaterol is generally well tolerated when used alone or in
combination with tiotropium bromide in patients with COPD and has not been
associated with any safety issues. The most common adverse event in clinical
trials was COPD worsening, which occurred more commonly with placebo than
indacaterol. Indacaterol was not associated with an increased risk of
cardiovascular adverse events. In a cost-utility analysis from a German
healthcare payer perspective, once-daily indacaterol 150 μg was dominant (i.e.
more effective with lower total costs) to once-daily tiotropium bromide 18 μg and
twice-daily salmeterol 50 μg in the treatment of patients with COPD. In
conclusion, indacaterol provides a valuable option for the maintenance treatment 
of adults with COPD.

DOI: 10.2165/11208490-000000000-00000 
PMID: 22356291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Respir Res. 2012 Feb 17;13:15. doi: 10.1186/1465-9921-13-15.

Observational study on the impact of initiating tiotropium alone versus
tiotropium with fluticasone propionate/salmeterol combination therapy on outcomes
and costs in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Chatterjee A(1), Shah M, D'Souza AO, Bechtel B, Crater G, Dalal AA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Wake Forest University School of Medicine,
Medical Center Blvd, Winston-Salem, NC 27157, USA. achatter@wfubmc.edu

BACKGROUND: This retrospective cohort study compared the risks of exacerbations
and COPD-related healthcare costs between patients with chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD) initiating tiotropium (TIO) alone and patients
initiating triple therapy with fluticasone-salmeterol combination (FSC) added to 
TIO.
METHODS: Managed-care enrollees who had an index event of ≥ 1 pharmacy claim for 
TIO during the study period (January 1, 2003-April 30, 2008) and met other
eligibility criteria were categorized into one of two cohorts depending on their 
medication use. Patients in the TIO+FSC cohort had combination therapy with TIO
and FSC, defined as having an FSC claim on the same date as the TIO claim.
Patients in the TIO cohort had no such FSC use. The risks of COPD exacerbations
and healthcare costs were compared between cohorts during 1 year of follow-up.
RESULTS: The sample comprised 3333 patients (n = 852 TIO+FSC cohort, n = 2481 TIO
cohort). Triple therapy with FSC added to TIO compared with TIO monotherapy was
associated with significant reductions in the adjusted risks of moderate
exacerbation (hazard ratio 0.772; 95% confidence interval [CI] 0.641, 0.930) and 
any exacerbation (hazard ratio 0.763; 95% CI 0.646, 0.949) and a nonsignificant
reduction in COPD-related adjusted monthly medical costs.
CONCLUSIONS: Triple therapy with FSC added to TIO compared with TIO monotherapy
was associated with significant reductions in the adjusted risks of moderate
exacerbation and any exacerbation over a follow-up period of up to 1 year. These 
improvements were gained with triple therapy at roughly equal cost of that of TIO
alone.

DOI: 10.1186/1465-9921-13-15 
PMCID: PMC3305562
PMID: 22340019  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Drugs. 2012 Feb 12;72(3):395-414. doi: 10.2165/11208460-000000000-00000.

Budesonide/formoterol Turbuhaler®: a review of its use in chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease.

Scott LJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Adis, Auckland, New Zealand. demail@adis.co.nz

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a highly heterogeneous,
progressive inflammatory disease that imposes considerable economic and
healthcare burdens on society, with the disease predicted to remain a leading
cause of morbidity and mortality worldwide in the future. Current pharmacological
treatment can improve symptoms of the disease, but not progression. Global
Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease guidelines recommend that
patients with moderate COPD should use one or more long-acting bronchodilators
(e.g. a long-acting β(2)-agonist) as required and, for those with severe and very
severe disease who are experiencing repeated COPD exacerbations, an inhaled
corticosteroid should be added as required. Budesonide/formoterol Turbuhaler®
(Symbicort® Turbuhaler®) is a dry powder inhaler (DPI) that combines these two
classes of drugs in a single inhaler, thereby making administration easier and
more convenient. Budesonide/formoterol Turbuhaler® (delivered dose 320 μg/9 μg)
is recommended for the symptomatic treatment of adult patients with severe COPD
(forced expiratory volume in 1 second <50% of predicted value) and a history of
repeated exacerbations, who have significant symptoms despite regular therapy
with long-acting bronchodilators. This article reviews the pharmacological
properties and clinical use of budesonide/formoterol Turbuhaler® in adult
patients with moderate to severe COPD. Budesonide/formoterol Turbuhaler®
(320 μg/9 μg twice daily) was effective and well tolerated in adult patients with
moderate to severe COPD participating in large, multicentre trials of up to 12
months' duration. Budesonide/formoterol Turbuhaler® improved lung function,
exacerbation rates, COPD symptom scores and health status from baseline to a
significantly greater extent than placebo and, in general, than the individual
monotherapies in these trials. Moreover, as reflected in the faster onset of
action of formoterol than salmeterol, budesonide/formoterol Turbuhaler® was more 
effective than salmeterol/fluticasone propionate DPI at improving the patient's
ability to perform morning activities in a short-term study. In the 12-week CLIMB
trial, adding budesonide/formoterol Turbuhaler® to inhaled tiotropium bromide
therapy was significantly more effective than adding placebo to tiotropium
bromide therapy. Thus, inhaled budesonide/formoterol, either alone or as add-on
therapy to other medications, continues to be a useful option for the management 
of COPD.

DOI: 10.2165/11208460-000000000-00000 
PMID: 22316354  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2012;7:11-9. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S27846. Epub 2012
Jan 18.

Clinical and economic outcomes for patients initiating fluticasone
propionate/salmeterol combination therapy (250/50 mcg) versus anticholinergics in
a comorbid COPD/depression population.

Dalal AA(1), Shah M, D'Souza AO, Chaudhari S, Crater G.

Author information: 
(1)GlaxoSmithKline, Research Triangle Park, NC, USA. anand.a.dalal@gsk.com

BACKGROUND: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is frequently associated
with comorbid depression and anxiety. Managing COPD symptoms and exacerbations
through use of appropriate and adequate pharmacotherapy in this population may
result in better COPD-related outcomes.
METHODS: This retrospective, observational study used administrative claims of
patients aged 40 years and older with COPD and comorbid depression/anxiety
identified from January 1, 2004 through June 30, 2008. Patients were assigned to 
fluticasone propionate/salmeterol 250/50 mcg combination (FSC) or
anticholinergics (AC) based on their first (index) prescription. The risks of
COPD exacerbations and healthcare utilization and costs were compared between
cohorts during 1 year of follow-up.
RESULTS: The adjusted risk of a COPD-related exacerbation during the 1-year
follow-up period was 30% higher in the AC cohort (n = 2923) relative to the FSC
cohort (n = 1078) (odds ratio [OR]: 1.30, 95% confidence interval [CI]:
1.08-1.56) after controlling for baseline differences in covariates. The risks of
COPD-related hospitalizations and emergency department visits were 56% and 65%
higher, respectively, in the AC cohort compared with the FSC cohort. The average 
number of COPD-related hospitalizations during the follow-up period was 46%
higher for the AC cohort compared with the FSC cohort (incidence rate ratio
[IRR]: 1.46, 95% CI: 1.01-2.09, P = 0.041). The savings from lower COPD-related
medical costs ($692 vs $1042, P < 0.050) kept the COPD-related total costs during
the follow-up period comparable to those in the AC cohort ($1659 vs $1677, P >
0.050) although the pharmacy costs were higher in the FSC cohort.
CONCLUSIONS: FSC compared with AC was associated with more favorable COPD-related
outcomes and lower COPD-related utilization and medical costs among patients with
COPD and comorbid anxiety/depression.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S27846 
PMCID: PMC3273366
PMID: 22315518  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Pulm Pharmacol Ther. 2012 Apr;25(2):178-84. doi: 10.1016/j.pupt.2012.01.003. Epub
2012 Jan 28.

Additive anti-inflammatory effects of beta 2 adrenoceptor agonists or
glucocorticosteroid with roflumilast in human peripheral blood mononuclear cells.

Tannheimer SL(1), Sorensen EA, Haran AC, Mansfield CN, Wright CD, Salmon M.

Author information: 
(1)Respiratory Research, Gilead Sciences Inc., 199 East Blaine St., Seattle, WA
98102, USA. Stacey.Tannheimer@gilead.com

The phosphodiesterase 4 inhibitor (PDE4i) roflumilast has been approved in the US
and EU for treatment of GOLD stage 3 and 4 chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
(COPD). Inhaled β2 adrenoceptor agonist bronchodilators and anti-inflammatory
glucocorticosteroids are also used as standard of care in COPD. We investigated
the anti-inflammatory interaction of roflumilast in combination with long-acting 
β2 agonists (LABA), salmeterol or formoterol, or a glucocorticosteroid,
dexamethasone, on cytokine production from LPS-stimulated human primary
peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC). Salmeterol or formoterol caused a
concentration-dependent inhibition of tumor necrosis factor-α (TNFα) secretion
with an IC50 of 0.33 pM (C.I. 0.006-19) and 34 pM (C.I. 13-87), respectively.
When roflumilast was evaluated, the addition of salmeterol (1 nM) to roflumilast 
caused the IC50 for roflumilast to shift from 1.8 nM (C.I. 0.8-4) to 4.1 pM
(C.I.0.3-69) (p < 0.01), and maximal inhibition increased from 72.5 ± 3.2% to
90.9 ± 3.1%. Addition of formoterol to roflumilast also produced an increased
TNFα inhibition more than either drug alone (p < 0.05). The inhibition of TNFα
production with salmeterol was both β2 adrenoceptor- and protein kinase
A-dependent. Addition of roflumilast (10 nM) in the presence of dexamethasone
increased the inhibition of LPS-induced TNFα and CCL3. Roflumilast in combination
with salmeterol, formoterol, or dexamethasone increased the inhibition of
LPS-induced TNFα from human PBMC, in an additive manner. Addition of roflumilast 
to either a β2 adrenoceptor agonist or a glucocorticosteroid may provide superior
anti-inflammatory activity and greater efficacy in COPD patients and be dose
sparing.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pupt.2012.01.003 
PMID: 22306235  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Pol Merkur Lekarski. 2011 Nov;31(185):292-8.

[Theoretical and clinical aspects of tiotropium application as a first line
therapy in stable state of all stages of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease].

[Article in Polish]

Chazan R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Warszawski Uniwersytet Medyczny, Klinika Chorób Wewnetrznych, Pneumonologii i 
Alergologii.

Current guidelines ERS, ATS, GOLD recommend use of one or more inhaler
long-acting bronchodilators to alleviate symptoms and reduce risk of
exacerbations for the symptomatic patients with moderate to severe in stabile
COPD. Since parasympathetic activity is the dominant reversible component of
airway obstruction in COPD, anticholinergic agent became first-line treatment.
Exacerbations of COPD are associated with progression of disease. Clinical trials
have confirmed that tiotropium is superior to salmeterol in preventing COPD
exacerbations in patients with moderate to very severe COPD with history of
exacerbations. Tiotropium also resulted in a significant reduction in the decline
in post-bronchodilator FEV1, suggesting possible disease modification in younger 
patients with COPD. The safety data review does not indicate an increased risk
for death or cardiovascular morbidity during tiotropium treatment in patients
with COPD. Tiotropium was associated with a reduction in the risk of all-cause
mortality.


PMID: 22299532  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Br J Pharmacol. 2012 Oct;167(4):775-86. doi: 10.1111/j.1476-5381.2012.01864.x.

Corticosteroid insensitivity is reversed by formoterol via
phosphoinositide-3-kinase inhibition.

Rossios C(1), To Y, Osoata G, Ito M, Barnes PJ, Ito K.

Author information: 
(1)Airway Disease Section, NHLI, Imperial College, London, UK.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD) show a poor response to corticosteroids, which has been linked to
oxidative stress. Here we show that the long-acting β(2) -agonist formoterol (FM)
reversed corticosteroid insensitivity under oxidative stress via inhibition of
phosphoinositide-3-kinase (PI3K) signalling.
EXPERIMENTAL APPROACH: Responsiveness to corticosteroids dexamethasone (Dex),
budesonide (Bud) and fluticasone propionate (FP) was determined, as IC(50) values
on TNF-α-induced interleukin 8 release, in U937 monocytic cell line treated with 
hydrogen peroxide (H(2) O(2) ) or peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) from
patients with COPD or severe asthma.
KEY RESULTS: PBMCs from severe asthma and COPD were less sensitive to Dex
compared with those from healthy subjects. Both FM (10(-9)  M) and salmeterol
(SM, 10(-8)  M) reversed Dex insensitivity in severe asthma, but only FM restored
Dex sensitivity in COPD. Although H(2) O(2) exposure decreased steroid
sensitivity in U937 cells, FM restored responsiveness to Bud and FP while the
effects of SM were weaker. Additionally, FM, but not SM, partially inhibited H(2)
O(2) -induced PI3Kδ-dependent (PKB) phosphorylation. H(2) O(2) decreased
SM-induced cAMP production in U937 cells, but did not significantly affect the
response to FM. The reduction of SM effects by H(2) O(2) was reversed by
pretreatment with LY294002, a PI3K inhibitor, or IC87114, a PI3Kδ inhibitor.
CONCLUSION AND IMPLICATIONS: FM reversed oxidative stress-induced corticosteroid 
insensitivity and decreased β(2) adrenoceptor-dependent cAMP production via
inhibition of PI3Kδ signalling. FM will be more effective than SM, when combined 
with corticosteroids, for the treatment of respiratory diseases under conditions 
of high oxidative stress, such as in COPD.

© 2012 The Authors. British Journal of Pharmacology © 2012 The British
Pharmacological Society.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1476-5381.2012.01864.x 
PMCID: PMC3575778
PMID: 22251095  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Pulm Pharmacol Ther. 2012 Feb;25(1):119-23. doi: 10.1016/j.pupt.2011.12.010. Epub
2012 Jan 6.

Salmeterol improves fluid clearance from alveolar-capillary membrane in COPD
patients: a pilot study.

Di Marco F(1), Guazzi M, Sferrazza Papa GF, Vicenzi M, Santus P, Busatto P,
Piffer F, Blasi F, Centanni S.

Author information: 
(1)Respiratory Medicine Section, Dipartimento Toraco-Polmonare e
Cardiocircolatorio, Università degli Studi di Milano, Ospedale San Paolo, Via
Antonio Di Rudini 8, 20142 Milan, Italy. fabiano.dimarco@unimi.it

The cardiovascular component associated with chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD) plays a major role in disease prognosis, accounting for 25% of the
deaths. Experimental and initial clinical data suggest that beta-adrenergic
agonists accelerate fluid clearance from the alveolar airspace, with potentially 
positive effects on cardiogenic and noncardiogenic pulmonary oedema. This pilot
study investigated the acute effects of the long-acting beta-2 agonist,
salmeterol, on alveolar fluid clearance after rapid saline intravenous infusion
by evaluating diffusive and mechanical lung properties. Ten COPD and 10 healthy
subjects were treated with salmeterol or placebo 4 h before the patient's
mechanical and diffusive lung properties were measured during four non
consecutive days, just before and after a rapid saline infusion, or during a
similar period without an infusion.RESULTS: In both COPD and healthy subjects,
rapid saline infusion with placebo or salmeterol premedication lead to a
significant decrease in diffusion capacity for carbon monoxide (DLCO) and forced 
expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1). Nonetheless, salmeterol pretreatment lead to a
significantly reduced gas exchange impairment caused by saline infusion (-64% of 
DLCO reduction compared with placebo), whereas it did not affect changes in FEV1.
In the control setting with no infusion, we found no significant change in either
DLCO or mechanical properties of the lung.
CONCLUSIONS: Salmeterol appears to provide a protective effect, not related to
bronchodilation, against an acute alveolar fluid clearance challenge secondary to
lung fluid overload in COPD patients.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pupt.2011.12.010 
PMID: 22245487  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Clin Drug Investig. 2012 Mar 1;32(3):147-55. doi:
10.2165/11630880-000000000-00000.

Onset of action of formoterol versus salmeterol via dry powder inhalers in
moderate chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: a randomized, placebo-controlled,
double-blind, crossover study.

Cazzola M(1), Paggiaro P, Palange P, Bjermer L, Ausin P, Carlsson LG, Ekelund J, 
Lotvall J.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Respiratory Clinical Pharmacology, Department of Internal Medicine,
University of Rome Tor Vergata, Rome, Italy. Mario.cazzola@uniroma2.it

BACKGROUND: Bronchodilator therapy is central to the symptomatic management of
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), and treatment with short-acting
bronchodilators is recommended in patients with mild COPD.
OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to evaluate the onset of effect of single-dose
formoterol 9 μg versus single-dose salmeterol 50 μg in patients with moderate
COPD.
METHODS: In this multicentre, double-blind, double-dummy, placebo-controlled,
three-way single-dose crossover study, patients ≥40 years of age with moderate
COPD were randomized to single-dose formoterol 9 μg via Turbuhaler® plus placebo 
via Diskus®, single-dose salmeterol 50 μg via Diskus® plus placebo via
Turbuhaler® or placebo via Turbuhaler® and Diskus® (washout period 2-7 days).
Terbutaline 0.5 mg/actuation via Turbuhaler® was used as reliever medication
throughout. The primary endpoint was forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV₁) 
at 5 minutes post-dose. Secondary endpoints included proportion of patients
achieving ≥12% increase in FEV₁ at 5 minutes post-dose.
RESULTS: 109 patients were randomized, and 108 completed the study. The increase 
in FEV₁ 5 minutes post-dose versus pre-dose was 7.2% for formoterol, 4.1% for
salmeterol and 0.7% for placebo, and significantly greater for formoterol versus 
salmeterol (ratio of treatment effects: 1.030; 95% CI 1.008, 1.052; p = 0.009),
for formoterol versus placebo (1.064, 95% CI 1.041, 1.087; p < 0.001) and for
salmeterol versus placebo (1.033, 95% CI 1.011, 1.056; p = 0.003). The
proportions of patients with ≥12% increase in FEV₁ 5 minutes post-dose were
23.1%, 9.2% and 6.4% for formoterol, salmeterol and placebo, respectively; this
was statistically significantly larger after formoterol than salmeterol
(p = 0.008) or placebo (p < 0.001). All treatments were well tolerated.
CONCLUSION: In COPD patients, formoterol 9 μg has an onset of bronchodilatory
effect that is more rapid than salmeterol 50 μg based on FEV₁ at 5 minutes
post-dose.
CLINICAL TRIAL REGISTRATION: Clinicaltrials.gov identifier: NCT01048333;
AstraZeneca study code: D5127C00001.

DOI: 10.2165/11630880-000000000-00000 
PMID: 22235841  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Drugs. 2012 Jan 22;72(2):273-300. doi: 10.2165/11208620-000000000-00000.

Tiotropium bromide inhalation powder: a review of its use in the management of
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Keating GM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Adis, a Wolters Kluwer Business, Auckland, New Zealand. demail@adis.co.nz

The anticholinergic agent tiotropium bromide (Spiriva®) is a long-acting
bronchodilator that is indicated for the treatment of chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD). This article reviews the clinical efficacy and
tolerability of tiotropium bromide inhalation powder, administered using the
HandiHaler® device, in patients with COPD, as well as reviewing its
pharmacological properties and the results of pharmacoeconomic analyses.
Shorter-term placebo-controlled trials in patients with COPD demonstrated
significantly higher trough forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV(1))
responses with tiotropium bromide than with placebo, confirming it has a duration
of action of ≥24 hours and is suitable for once-daily administration. Lung
function improved to a greater extent with tiotropium bromide than with
ipratropium bromide or, in most instances, salmeterol. Indacaterol was shown to
be noninferior to tiotropium bromide in terms of the trough FEV(1) response. The 
large, 4-year UPLIFT® trial did not show a significant reduction in the annual
rate of decline in FEV(1) with tiotropium bromide versus placebo in patients with
COPD, although subgroup analyses demonstrated a significantly lower rate of
decline with tiotropium bromide than with placebo in some patient groups (e.g.
patients with moderate COPD, patients aged ≥50 years, patients not receiving
maintenance therapy at baseline). Tiotropium bromide prevented exacerbations in
patients with COPD, with a significantly lower exacerbation rate and a
significantly longer time to first exacerbation seen with tiotropium bromide than
with placebo or salmeterol. Exacerbation rates did not significantly differ
between patients receiving tiotropium bromide and those receiving
salmeterol/fluticasone propionate. Tiotropium bromide also had beneficial effects
on health-related quality of life (HR-QOL) and other endpoints, such as dyspnoea 
and rescue medication use. Combination therapy with tiotropium bromide plus
formoterol with or without budesonide improved lung function to a significantly
greater extent than tiotropium bromide alone in patients with COPD. In addition, 
exacerbation rates were lower and HR-QOL was improved with tiotropium bromide
plus budesonide/formoterol versus tiotropium bromide alone. Although the addition
of salmeterol/fluticasone propionate to tiotropium bromide did not reduce the
COPD exacerbation rate, it did improve lung function and HR-QOL. Tiotropium
bromide inhalation powder is generally well tolerated in patients with COPD, with
anticholinergic adverse events (e.g. dry mouth, constipation, gastrointestinal
obstruction, dysuria) among the most commonly reported adverse events. The
UPLIFT® trial showed no significant difference between tiotropium bromide and
placebo recipients in the risk of stroke, and the risk of serious cardiac adverse
events (including congestive heart failure and myocardial infarction) was
significantly lower with tiotropium bromide than with placebo. The absence of a
detrimental effect on cardiovascular outcomes was supported by the results of a
meta-analysis and pooled analyses. In addition, on-treatment mortality was lower 
with tiotropium bromide than with placebo in the UPLIFT® trial. Pooled analyses
showed significantly lower cardiovascular mortality with tiotropium bromide than 
with placebo, with a meta-analysis demonstrating no significant difference
between patients receiving tiotropium bromide and controls in cardiovascular
mortality. Results of modelled pharmacoeconomic analyses conducted from a
healthcare payer perspective in several developed countries suggest that
tiotropium bromide is a cost-effective option in patients with COPD. In
conclusion, tiotropium bromide inhalation powder is a useful option for the
maintenance treatment of patients with COPD.

DOI: 10.2165/11208620-000000000-00000 
PMID: 22217233  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Tanaffos. 2012;11(1):26-31.

Short Term Effects of Tiotropium on COPD Patients Treated with Long Acting
Bronchodilators.

Nicolini A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Respiratory Diseases, Hospital of Sestri Levante, Genoa-ITALY.

BACKGROUND: The results of bronchodilator therapy in chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD) are not satisfactory and because of this, many drugs are
administered for treatment of disease. We examined the short-term additive
bronchodilator effects of tiotropium in patients with stable COPD already treated
with salmeterol twice daily.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: In a double-blind, double-dummy randomized study we
evaluated the acute bronchodilator efficacy of a single 18 µg dose of tiotropium 
in patients with COPD under chronic treatment with a long acting beta-adrenergic 
(salmeterol 50µg twice a day). Measurements of forced vital capacity (FVC),
forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1) and six-minute walking test (6 MWT)
as indicator of daily activities were made before and after giving the drug. A
total of 129 outpatients with stable COPD (Gold level 2 -3- 4) were enrolled and 
92 completed the study.
RESULTS: Tiotropium elicited a significantly greater bronchodilation than the
placebo. The action of the drug was elicited as increase in FEV1 (p ≤ 0.001) and 
FVC (p ≤ 0.001); 6-MWT increased 35 meters in patients treated with tiotropium
compared to 2.5 meters in those receiving placebo (p ≤ 0.001).
CONCLUSION: Addition of tiotropium to chronic administration of a beta-adrenergic
drug such as salmeterol induced an increase in pulmonary function parameters and 
in exercise capacity suggesting that association of the two drugs can be more
efficient for treatment of disease and improvement of daily living activities
than beta-adrenergics alone.


PMCID: PMC4153178
PMID: 25191397  [PubMed]


186. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2011 Dec 7;(12):CD007033. doi:
10.1002/14651858.CD007033.pub3.

Inhaled corticosteroids versus long-acting beta(2)-agonists for chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease.

Spencer S(1), Karner C, Cates CJ, Evans DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Health and Medicine, Lancaster University, Bailrigg, Lancaster,
Lancashire, UK, LA1 4YD.

Update of
    Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2011;(10):CD007033.

BACKGROUND: Long-acting beta(2)-agonists and inhaled corticosteroids can be used 
as maintenance therapy by patients with moderate to severe chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease. These interventions are often taken together in a combination 
inhaler. However, the relative added value of the two individual components is
unclear.
OBJECTIVES: To determine the relative effects of inhaled corticosteroids (ICS)
compared to long-acting beta(2)-agonists (LABA) on clinical outcomes in patients 
with stable chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
SEARCH METHODS: We searched the Cochrane Airways Group Specialised Register of
trials (latest search August 2011) and reference lists of articles.
SELECTION CRITERIA: We included randomised controlled trials comparing inhaled
corticosteroids and long-acting beta(2)-agonists in the treatment of patients
with stable chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Three authors independently assessed trials for
inclusion and then extracted data on trial quality, study outcomes and adverse
events. We also contacted study authors for additional information.
MAIN RESULTS: We identified seven randomised trials (5997 participants) of good
quality with a duration of six months to three years. All of the trials compared 
ICS/LABA combination inhalers with LABA and ICS as individual components. Four of
these trials included fluticasone and salmeterol monocomponents and the remaining
three included budesonide and formoterol monocomponents. There was no
statistically significant difference in our primary outcome, the number of
patients experiencing exacerbations (odds ratio (OR) 1.22; 95% CI 0.89 to 1.67), 
or the rate of exacerbations per patient year (rate ratio (RR) 0.96; 95% CI 0.89 
to 1.02) between inhaled corticosteroids and long-acting beta(2)-agonists. The
incidence of pneumonia, our co-primary outcome, was significantly higher among
patients on inhaled corticosteroids than on long-acting beta(2)-agonists whether 
classified as an adverse event (OR 1.38; 95% CI 1.10 to 1.73) or serious adverse 
event (Peto OR 1.48; 95% CI 1.13 to 1.93). Results of the secondary outcomes
analysis were as follows. Mortality was higher in patients on inhaled
corticosteroids compared to patients on long-acting beta(2)-agonists (Peto OR
1.17; 95% CI 0.97 to 1.42), although the difference was not statistically
significant. Patients treated with beta(2)-agonists showed greater improvements
in pre-bronchodilator FEV(1) compared to those treated with inhaled
corticosteroids (mean difference (MD) 18.99 mL; 95% CI 0.52 to 37.46), whilst
greater improvements in health-related quality of life were observed in patients 
receiving inhaled corticosteroids compared to those receiving long-acting
beta(2)-agonists (St George's Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ) MD -0.74; 95% CI
-1.42 to -0.06). In both cases the differences were statistically significant but
rather small in magnitude. There were no statistically significant differences
between ICS and LABA in the number of hospitalisations due to exacerbations,
number of mild exacerbations, peak expiratory flow, dyspnoea, symptoms scores,
use of rescue medication, adverse events, all cause hospitalisations, or
withdrawals from studies.
AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: Placebo-controlled trials have established the benefits of 
both long-acting beta-agonist and inhaled corticosteroid therapy for COPD
patients as individual therapies. This review, which included trials allowing
comparisons between LABA and ICS, has shown that the two therapies confer similar
benefits across the majority of outcomes, including the frequency of
exacerbations and mortality. Use of long-acting beta-agonists appears to confer a
small additional benefit in terms of improvements in lung function compared to
inhaled corticosteroids. On the other hand, inhaled corticosteroid therapy shows 
a small advantage over long-acting beta-agonist therapy in terms of
health-related quality of life, but inhaled corticosteroids also increase the
risk of pneumonia. This review supports current guidelines advocating long-acting
beta-agonists as frontline therapy for COPD, with regular inhaled corticosteroid 
therapy as an adjunct in patients experiencing frequent exacerbations.

DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD007033.pub3 
PMID: 22161409  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Int Immunopharmacol. 2012 Jan;12(1):217-25. doi: 10.1016/j.intimp.2011.11.014.
Epub 2011 Dec 7.

Fluticasone propionate and Salmeterol combination induces SOCS-3 expression in
airway epithelial cells.

Nasreen N(1), Khodayari N, Sukka-Ganesh B, Peruvemba S, Mohammed KA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary Critical Care & Sleep Medicine, College of Medicine,
University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, United States.

Fluticasone propionate (FP) and Salmeterol (SAL) are commonly used in combination
therapy for patients with Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Clinical 
studies show that FP/SAL used in combination therapy was found to inhibit airway 
inflammation in COPD patients. However, the mechanisms associated with FP/SAL
induced anti-inflammatory effects were not clear. We have evaluated the effect of
FP/SAL and tobacco smoke (TS) on SOCS-3 and interleukine-6 expression in
bronchial airway epithelial cells (BAEpCs). Human BAEpCs were exposed to TS and
subsequently treated with FP or SAL alone or in combinations in the presence and 
absence of mitogen activated protein kinase (MAPK) inhibitors for either
Erk1/Erk2, or p38 or PI3 kinase. In BAEpCs, TS induced IL-6 expression via
ERK1/ERK2 MAPK pathway and FP/SAL inhibited TS mediated IL-6 expression. TS down 
regulated the SOCS-3 expression via activation of Erk1/Erk2, and p38 MAPK
signaling. When TS exposed BAEpCs were treated with FP/SAL SOCS-3 expression was 
restored. FP/SAL combinations induced significantly higher expression of SOCS-3
in BAEpCs when compared to individual drug. Pretreatment with Ly294002 a PI3 MAPK
inhibitor significantly attenuated FP/SAL induced SOCS-3 expression in BAEpCs.
Furthermore, FP/SAL blunted TS induced phosphorylation of Erk1/Erk2 and p38 MAPK 
in BAEpCs. Our study suggests that TS inhibits SOCS-3, combination of FP/SAL has 
a profound synergistic effect on SOCS-3 induction in BAEpCs and it is dependent
on PI3 kinase signaling pathway. SOCS-3 may represent a potential biomarker for
understanding the efficacy and a novel anti-inflammatory mechanism of FP/SAL
combination therapy in the treatment of COPD.

Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.intimp.2011.11.014 
PMID: 22155101  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. J Clin Pharmacol. 2012 Mar;52(3):416-24. doi: 10.1177/0091270010397050. Epub 2011
Nov 16.

An oral inhibitor of p38 MAP kinase reduces plasma fibrinogen in patients with
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Lomas DA(1), Lipson DA, Miller BE, Willits L, Keene O, Barnacle H, Barnes NC,
Tal-Singer R; Losmapimod Study Investigators.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Cambridge, Cambridge Institute for
Medical Research, Wellcome Trust/MRC Building, Hills Road, Cambridge, CB2 0XY,
UK. dal16@cam.ac.uk

The aims were to determine the effect of an oral inhibitor of the signaling
mediator p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (GW856553, losmapimod) on sputum
neutrophils, pulmonary function, and blood biomarkers of inflammation in chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Three hundred and two individuals with GOLD
stage II COPD were randomized to oral losmapimod 7.5 mg twice daily, inhaled
salmeterol/fluticasone propionate 50 µg/500 µg combination (SFC), or placebo in a
12-week, randomized, double-blind, double-dummy study (MKI102428/NCT00642148).
Neither losmapimod nor SFC had an effect on the primary end point of sputum
neutrophils. Losmapimod was well tolerated and reduced plasma fibrinogen by 11%
(-0.4 g/L, ratio of effect of losmapimod/placebo 0.89; 95% confidence interval,
0.83-0.96; P = .002) with nonsignificant reductions in interleukin-6,
interleukin-8, and C-reactive protein. There was evidence of improvement in
hyperinflation with losmapimod compared with placebo (overall P = .02). Inhaled
SFC significantly improved lung function and reduced serum CC-16 (ratio of effect
of SFC/placebo 0.87; 95% confidence interval, 0.82-0.93; P < .001). It was
concluded that oral losmapimod significantly reduced plasma fibrinogen in
patients with COPD.

DOI: 10.1177/0091270010397050 
PMID: 22090363  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2011;6:503-9. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S23746. Epub
2011 Oct 4.

Effects of beclomethasone/formoterol fixed combination on lung hyperinflation and
dyspnea in COPD patients.

Tzani P(1), Crisafulli E, Nicolini G, Aiello M, Chetta A, Clini EM, Olivieri D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences, University of Parma, Parma, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a common disease
characterized by airflow obstruction and lung hyperinflation leading to dyspnea
and exercise capacity limitation.
OBJECTIVES: The present study was designed to evaluate whether an extra-fine
combination of beclomethasone and formoterol (BDP/F) was effective in reducing
air trapping in COPD patients with hyperinflation. Fluticasone salmeterol (FP/S) 
combination treatment was the active control.
METHODS: COPD patients with forced expiratory volume in one second <65% and
plethysmographic functional residual capacity ≥120% of predicted were randomized 
to a double-blind, double-dummy, 12-week, parallel group, treatment with either
BDP/F 400/24 μg/day or FP/S 500/100 μg/day. Lung volumes were measured with full 
body plethysmography, and dyspnea was measured with transition dyspnea index.
RESULTS: Eighteen patients were evaluable for intention to treat. A significant
reduction in air trapping and clinically meaningful improvement in transition
dyspnea index total score was detected in the BDP/F group but not in the FP/S
group. Functional residual capacity, residual volume (RV) and total lung capacity
significantly improved from baseline in the BDP/F group only. With regard to
group comparison, a significantly greater reduction in RV was observed with BDP/F
versus FP/S.
CONCLUSION: BDP/F extra-fine combination is effective in reducing air trapping
and dyspnea in COPD patients with lung hyperinflation.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S23746 
PMCID: PMC3206766
PMID: 22069361  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Respir Res. 2011 Oct 28;12:142. doi: 10.1186/1465-9921-12-142.

Relationship between the anti-inflammatory properties of salmeterol/fluticasone
and the expression of CD4⁺CD25⁺Foxp3⁺ regulatory T cells in COPD.

Yang L(1), Ma QL, Yao W, Zhang Q, Chen HP, Wang GS, Wang CZ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Respiratory Diseases, the Second Hospital of the Third Military
Medical University of China, 183 Xinqiao Street, Chongqing 400037, P. R. China.

BACKGROUND: Salmeterol and fluticasone combination (SFC) has anti-inflammatory
effects and improves clinical symptoms in patients with chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD). However, the anti-inflammatory mechanism of SFC remains
unclear. In this study, we investigated the inflammatory responses of COPD, as
well as the relationship of the inflammatory factors with the levels of
CD4+CD25+Foxp3+ regulatory T cells (Foxp3+Tregs) after SFC therapy.
METHODS: Twenty-one patients with moderate or severe COPD received treatment with
50/500 μg of SFC twice a day for 12 weeks. Before and after treatment, the
patients were evaluated using the Modified Medical Research Council (MMRC)
dyspnea scale and by conducting a 6-min walk test. The number of neutrophils,
monocytes and lymphocytes in induced sputum were counted. Levels of cytokines,
including pre-inflammatory IL-8, TNF-α, IL-17A and cytokine IL-10, in the sputum 
supernatant and peripheral blood were measured by ELISA. The proportion of
Foxp3+Tregs in the total CD4+ T cell of the peripheral blood was determined by
flow cytometry. The relationship between IL-17A levels and the percentage of
Foxp3+Tregs was analyzed by statistical analysis.
RESULTS: After treatment with SFC, the forced expiratory volume in 1 s as a
percentage of predicted values (FEV1%) and the 6-min walk distance in the COPD
patients significantly increased, while dyspnea scores decreased. The total
number of cells, neutrophils, and the percentage of neutrophils in induced sputum
reduced notably, while the proportion of monocytes was significantly increased.
Levels of the inflammatory cytokines IL-8, TNF-α, and IL-17A in the sputum
supernatant and in the blood were markedly lowered, while IL-10 levels were
unchanged. The proportion of Foxp3+Tregs in the total CD4+T cell population in
the peripheral blood was drastically higher than that before treatment. The level
of IL-17A was negatively correlated with the proportion of Foxp3+Tregs in CD4+T
cells.
CONCLUSION: SFC can reduce the levels of inflammatory factors and improve
symptoms of COPD. The levels of inflammatory factors are associated with the
variation of Foxp3+Tregs in COPD.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: This study was registered with http://www.chictr.org (Chinese
Clinical Trial Register) as follows: ChiCTR-TNC-10001270.

DOI: 10.1186/1465-9921-12-142 
PMCID: PMC3234191
PMID: 22032685  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2011;6:477-92. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S23816. Epub
2011 Sep 22.

Safety of indacaterol in the treatment of patients with COPD.

Donohue JF(1), Singh D, Kornmann O, Lawrence D, Lassen C, Kramer B.

Author information: 
(1)University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA.
james_donohue@med.unc.edu

PURPOSE: Pooled data were analyzed to evaluate the safety and tolerability of
indacaterol, a once-daily inhaled long-acting β(2)-agonist for chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Data were pooled from clinical studies of 3-12 months'
duration in patients with moderate-to-severe COPD receiving double-blind
indacaterol 75 μg (n = 449), 150 μg (n = 2611), 300 μg (n = 1157), or 600 μg once
daily (n = 547); formoterol 12 μg twice daily (n = 556); salmeterol 50 μg twice
daily (n = 895); placebo (n = 2012); or tiotropium 18 μg once daily, given open
label or blinded (n = 1214). Outcomes were adverse events, serious adverse events
and deaths, plasma potassium, blood glucose, and QTc interval and vital signs.
RESULTS: The commonest adverse events with indacaterol were COPD worsening,
nasopharyngitis, and headache; most cases were mild or moderate and incidence was
generally similar to placebo and other active treatments. The risk of acute
respiratory serious adverse events (leading to hospitalization, intubation, or
death) was not significantly increased with any of the active treatments compared
with placebo. COPD exacerbation rates (analyzed in the intent-to-treat
population) were significantly reduced with all active treatments versus placebo.
Hazard ratios versus placebo for major cardiovascular adverse events were < 1 for
all indacaterol doses. Notable values for vital signs and measures of systemic
β(2)-adrenoceptor activity were rare with indacaterol. The number of deaths
adjusted per patient-year was lower with indacaterol (all doses combined) than
with placebo (relative risk 0.21 [95% confidence interval 0.07-0.660], P =
0.008).
CONCLUSION: Indacaterol has a good profile of safety and tolerability that is
appropriate for the maintenance treatment of patients with COPD.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S23816 
PMCID: PMC3186746
PMID: 22003293  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2011;6:467-76. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S14247. Epub
2011 Sep 16.

Long-term use of fluticasone propionate/salmeterol fixed-dose combination and
incidence of cataracts and glaucoma among chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
patients in the UK General Practice Research Database.

Miller DP(1), Watkins SE, Sampson T, Davis KJ.

Author information: 
(1)WorldWide Epidemiology, GlaxoSmithKline, Research Triangle Park, Durham, NC
27709-3398, USA.

OBJECTIVES: Some large population-based studies have reported a dose-related
increased risk of cataracts and glaucoma associated with use of inhaled
corticosteroids (ICS) in patients with asthma or chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD). We evaluated the association between use of ICS-containing
products, specifically fluticasone propionate/salmeterol fixed-dose combination
(FSC), and incidence of cataracts and glaucoma among patients with COPD in a
large electronic medical record database in the United Kingdom.
METHODS: We identified a cohort of patients aged 45 years and over with COPD in
the General Practice Research Database (GPRD) between 2003 and 2006. Cases of
incident cataracts or glaucoma were defined based on diagnosis and procedure
codes and matched to controls from the risk set to estimate odds ratios (OR) and 
95% confidence intervals (CI). The association with FSC or ICS exposure was
modeled using conditional logistic regression. Medication exposure was assessed
with respect to recency, duration, and number of prescriptions prior to the index
date. Average daily dose was defined as none, low (1-250 mcg), medium (251-500
mcg), high (501-1000 mcg), or very high (1001+ mcg) using fluticasone propionate 
(FP) equivalents.
RESULTS: We identified 2941 incident cataract cases and 327 incident glaucoma
cases in the COPD cohort (n = 53,191). FSC or ICS prescriptions were not
associated with risk of incident cataracts or glaucoma for any exposure category,
after adjusting for confounders. We observed a lack of a dose response in all
analyses, where low dose was the reference group. The odds of cataracts
associated with FSC dose were medium OR: 1.1 (95% CI: 0.9-1.4); high OR: 1.2 (95%
CI: 0.9-1.5); and very high OR: 1.2 (95% CI: 0.9-1.7). The odds of glaucoma
associated with FSC dose: medium OR: 1.0 (95% CI: 0.5-2.1); high OR: 1.0 (95% CI:
0.5-2.0); and very high OR: 1.0 (95% CI: 0.4-2.8).
CONCLUSIONS: FSC or other ICS exposure was not associated with an increased odds 
of cataracts or glaucoma, nor was a dose-response relationship observed in this
population-based nested case-control study of COPD patients in the United
Kingdom.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S14247 
PMCID: PMC3186745
PMID: 22003292  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2011 Oct 5;(10):CD007033. doi:
10.1002/14651858.CD007033.pub2.

Inhaled corticosteroids versus long-acting beta(2)-agonists for chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease.

Spencer S(1), Evans DJ, Karner C, Cates CJ.

Author information: 
(1)School of Health and Medicine, Lancaster University, Bailrigg, Lancaster,
Lancashire, UK, LA1 4YD.

Update in
    Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2011;(12):CD007033.

BACKGROUND: Long-acting beta(2)-agonists and inhaled corticosteroids can be used 
as maintenance therapy by patients with moderate to severe chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease. These interventions are often taken together in a combination 
inhaler. However, the relative added value of the two individual components is
unclear.
OBJECTIVES: To determine the relative effects of inhaled corticosteroids (ICS)
compared to long-acting beta(2)-agonists (LABA) on clinical outcomes in patients 
with stable chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
SEARCH STRATEGY: We searched the Cochrane Airways Group Specialised Register of
trials (latest search August 2011) and reference lists of articles.
SELECTION CRITERIA: We included randomised controlled trials comparing inhaled
corticosteroids and long-acting beta(2)-agonists in the treatment of patients
with stable chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Three authors independently assessed trials for
inclusion and then extracted data on trial quality, study outcomes and adverse
events. We also contacted study authors for additional information.
MAIN RESULTS: We identified seven randomised trials (5997 participants) of good
quality with a duration of six months to three years. All of the trials compared 
ICS/LABA combination inhalers with LABA and ICS as individual components. Four of
these trials included fluticasone and salmeterol monocomponents and the remaining
three included budesonide and formoterol monocomponents. There was no
statistically significant difference in our primary outcome, the number of
patients experiencing exacerbations (odds ratio (OR) 1.22; 95% CI 0.89 to 1.67), 
or the rate of exacerbations per patient year (rate ratio (RR) 0.96; 95% CI 0.89 
to 1.02) between inhaled corticosteroids and long-acting beta(2)-agonists. The
incidence of pneumonia, our co-primary outcome, was significantly higher among
patients on inhaled corticosteroids than on long-acting beta(2)-agonists whether 
classified as an adverse event (OR 1.38; 95% CI 1.10 to 1.73) or serious adverse 
event (Peto OR 1.48; 95% CI 1.13 to 1.93). Results of the secondary outcomes
analysis were as follows. Mortality was higher in patients on inhaled
corticosteroids compared to patients on long-acting beta(2)-agonists (Peto OR
1.17; 95% CI 0.97 to 1.42), although the difference was not statistically
significant. Patients treated with beta(2)-agonists showed greater improvements
in pre-bronchodilator FEV(1) compared to those treated with inhaled
corticosteroids (mean difference (MD) 18.99 mL; 95% CI 0.52 to 37.46), whilst
greater improvements in health-related quality of life were observed in patients 
receiving inhaled corticosteroids compared to those receiving long-acting
beta(2)-agonists (St George's Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ) MD -0.74; 95% CI
-1.42 to -0.06). In both cases the differences were statistically significant but
rather small in magnitude. There were no statistically significant differences
between ICS and LABA in the number of hospitalisations due to exacerbations,
number of mild exacerbations, peak expiratory flow, dyspnoea, symptoms scores,
use of rescue medication, adverse events, all cause hospitalisations, or
withdrawals from studies.
AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: Placebo-controlled trials have established the benefits of 
both long-acting beta-agonist and inhaled corticosteroid therapy for COPD
patients as individual therapies. This review, which included trials allowing
comparisons between LABA and ICS, has shown that the two therapies confer similar
benefits across the majority of outcomes, including the frequency of
exacerbations and mortality. Use of long-acting beta-agonists appears to confer a
small additional benefit in terms of improvements in lung function compared to
inhaled corticosteroids. On the other hand, inhaled corticosteroid therapy shows 
a small advantage over long-acting beta-agonist therapy in terms of
health-related quality of life, but inhaled corticosteroids also increase the
risk of pneumonia. This review supports current guidelines advocating long-acting
beta-agonists as frontline therapy for COPD, with regular inhaled corticosteroid 
therapy as an adjunct in patients experiencing frequent exacerbations.

DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD007033.pub2 
PMID: 21975759  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Respir Med. 2012 Mar;106(3):382-9. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2011.09.004. Epub 2011 Oct
4.

Comparison of tiotropium plus fluticasone propionate/salmeterol with tiotropium
in COPD: a randomized controlled study.

Jung KS(1), Park HY, Park SY, Kim SK, Kim YK, Shim JJ, Moon HS, Lee KH, Yoo JH,
Lee SD; Korean Academy of Tuberculosis and Respiratory Diseases study group;
Korea Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease study group.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary, Allergy and Critical Care Medicine, Department of
Medicine, Hallym University Sacred Heart Hospital, Hallym University Medical
School, Pyeongchon-dong, Dongan-gu, Anyang-si, Gyeonggido, Republic of Korea.

BACKGROUND: The combination of tiotropium and fluticasone propionate/salmeterol
(FSC) is commonly used to treat chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), but
no study had evaluated the effectiveness of tiotropium plus FSC with 250 μg of
fluticasone propionate. Our aim was to assess whether tiotropium (18 μg once
daily) plus FSC (250/50 μg twice daily) provides better clinical outcomes
compared to tiotropium monotherapy.
METHODS: In this 24-week, randomized, open label, multicenter two-arm parallel
study, 479 patients received tiotropium plus FSC (n = 237) or tiotropium alone
(n = 242).
RESULTS: After 24 weeks of treatment, the triple-inhaled treatment group had a
significant improvement in pre-bronchodilator FEV(1) (L) compared to the
tiotropium-only group (0.090 L vs. 0.038 L; P = 0.005). Regarding health-related 
quality of life, the mean change in total score on the St. George's Respiratory
Questionnaire for COPD patients (SGRQ-C) was -6.6 points in the tiotropium plus
FSC group, but -1.5 points in the tiotropium-only group (P = 0.001). In the
subgroup of GOLD stage II patients with COPD, treatment with tiotropium plus FSC 
also improved FEV(1) compared to tiotropium alone (0.088 L vs. 0.030 L;
P = 0.011) and improved the total SGRQ-C score than tiotropium alone (-4.5 points
vs. -1.0 points, respectively). This triple-inhaled treatment approach did not
induce more adverse events, such as pneumonia.
CONCLUSION: Over the course of 24 weeks, FSC (250/50 μg twice daily) added to
tiotropium provided greater improvement in lung function and quality of life in
patients with COPD (FEV(1) ≤ 65%) than tiotropium alone.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2011.09.004 
PMID: 21975275  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Prescrire Int. 2011 Sep;20(119):201-5.

Indacaterol. A long-acting beta-2 agonist, no advantages in COPD.

[No authors listed]

In patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), bronchodilator
drugs have only modest symptomatic efficacy. There is no evidence that they slow 
disease progression. A short-acting beta-2 agonist such as salbutamol is the
first-choice treatment, used either on demand or on a regular basis. Long-acting 
beta2 agonists are an option for patients with nocturnal symptoms. Indacaterol is
a long-acting beta-2 agonist that is inhaled once a day. Indacaterol has not been
compared with a short-acting beta-2 agonist. Clinical evaluation is based on 4
double-blind randomised placebo-controlled trials, 3 of which also included a
group treated with another long-acting bronchodilator (formoterol, salmeterol or 
tiotropium. The symptomatic efficacy of indacaterol was only modest, and similar 
to that of other long-acting bronchodilators. Indacaterol has the known adverse
effect profile of beta-2 agonists. Some adverse effects seem to be more frequent 
than with other long-acting bronchodilators, including post-inhalation cough,
hyperglycaemia, respiratory tract infections, and possibly cardiac disorders.
There is no evidence that once-daily inhalation has any advantages over
twice-daily inhalation, even in terms of convenience. In addition, as efficacy is
limited, there is a risk that patients will use the drug more frequently,
resulting in additional adverse effects. The nebulizer used to inhale the powder 
in the capsules is similar to the one provided with Foradil (formoterol. In
practice, indacaterol offers no therapeutic advantage over existing treatments
for patients with COPD. It is better to use the best-documented drugs and, if
necessary, to add non-drug measures. Eliminating exposure to toxic agents,
especially tobacco smoke, remains the only treatment with a proven benefit on the
course of COPD.


PMID: 21954512  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. J Med Econ. 2011;14(6):769-76. doi: 10.3111/13696998.2011.622817. Epub 2011 Sep
27.

Comparative effectiveness of budesonide/formoterol and fluticasone/salmeterol for
COPD management.

Roberts M(1), Mapel D, Petersen H, Blanchette C, Ramachandran S.

Author information: 
(1)Lovelace Clinic Foundation, Albuquerque, NM, USA. mroberts@lcfresearch.org

OBJECTIVE: To compare the effectiveness of budesonide/formoterol fumarate
dihydrate (BFC) and fluticasone propionate/salmeterol (FSC), two combination
inhaled corticosteroid/long-acting beta-agonist (ICS/LABA) products approved for 
the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) in the US with
respect to cost, therapy adherence, and related healthcare utilization. The
effectiveness of these two treatments has not previously been compared in a US
COPD population.
METHODS: A retrospective cohort study assessed COPD-related outcomes using
administrative claims data among ICS/LABA-naïve patients. Patients initiating BFC
were propensity matched to FSC patients. Cost and effectiveness were measured as 
total healthcare expenditures, exacerbation events (hospitalizations, emergency
department visits, or outpatient visits associated with oral corticosteroid or
antibiotic prescription fills), and treatment medication adherence. Differences
in COPD symptom control were assessed via proxy measure through claims for rescue
medications and outpatient encounters.
RESULTS: Of the 6770 patients (3385 BFC and 3385 FSC), fewer BFC patients had
claims for short-acting beta agonists (SABA) (34.7% vs 39.5%; p<0.001) and
ipratropium (7.8% vs 9.8%, p<0.005) than FSC patients, but no substantial
differences were seen in other clinical outcomes including tiotropium or
nebulized SABA claims, COPD-related outpatient visits, or exacerbation events.
There were no significant differences in total COPD-related medical costs in the 
6-month period after initiation of combination therapy.
LIMITATIONS: This was a retrospective observational study using claims data and
accuracy of COPD diagnoses could not be verified, nor was information available
on severity of disease. The results and conclusions of this study are limited to 
the population observed and the operational definitions of the study variables.
CONCLUSIONS: For most outcomes of interest, BFC and FSC showed comparable
real-world effectiveness.

DOI: 10.3111/13696998.2011.622817 
PMID: 21942463  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Future Med Chem. 2011 Oct;3(13):1607-22. doi: 10.4155/fmc.11.116.

Third-generation long-acting β₂-adrenoceptor agonists: medicinal chemistry
strategies employed in the identification of once-daily inhaled β₂-adrenoceptor
agonists.

Jacobsen JR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Theravance, Inc., 901 Gateway Blvd, South San Francisco, CA 94080, USA.
jjacobsen@theravance.com

Inhaled long-acting β(2)-adrenoceptor agonists (LABAs) are highly effective
bronchodilators in the treatment of asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease. There is significant interest in the development of third-generation
compounds that improve upon the marketed twice-daily LABAs salmeterol and
formoterol. A principal advantage sought from the next generation is duration of 
action that supports once-daily dosing, although improved efficacy, faster onset,
and increased therapeutic index are also frequently cited as objectives. Recent
publications detailing medicinal chemistry programs directed at the discovery of 
third-generation LABAs illustrate a wide variety of strategies that have been
successfully employed towards these goals. Some recent scientific advances in the
understanding of inhaled bronchodilators are discussed and the reported medicinal
chemistry strategies are reviewed in the context of these advances.

DOI: 10.4155/fmc.11.116 
PMID: 21942251  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2011 Jun 14;91(22):1533-7.

[Relationship between SGRQ score and pulmonary function and its influencing
factors in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease].

[Article in Chinese]

Liu R(1), DU YP, He B.

Author information: 
(1)Respiratory Department, Peking University Third Hospital, Beijing 100191,
China.

OBJECTIVE: To study the correlation and influencing factors between the St.
George respiratory questionnaire (SGRQ) and lung functions in chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD) patients.
METHODS: Sixty-three stable COPD patients received pulmonary function tests and
SGRQ. A correlation analysis of the results was performed. They were divided into
two groups according to GOLD (global initiative for chronic obstructive lung
disease) classification scheme, 32 patients were in stage II (moderate) and 31 in
stages III and IV (severe & very severe). And the inter-group SGRQ scores were
compared. According to age, they were divided into < 70 years group (n = 31) and 
≥ 70 years group (n = 32). The correlations between the SGRQ score and pulmonary 
functions were analyzed in different age groups. Thirty-six patients willing to
participate in treatment and a 3-month follow-up were randomly divided into two
groups of treatment with either salmeterol/fluticasone (50 µg/500 µg) (n = 18) or
salbutamol/ipratropium bromide (120 µg/21 µg) (n = 18). The post-therapeutic
changes of SGRQ score and pulmonary functions were analyzed.
RESULTS: There were no significant differences in SGRQ total score and all
section score between two groups according to GOLD classification scheme. There
were mild to moderate correlations in the < 70 years group between lung functions
including FVC%, FEV(1)%, FEFMAX%, SVC% and the SGRQ score including total score, 
symptoms section score and activity section score. The range of correlation
coefficients was -0.341 to -0.534. However, the score only had some correlation
with IC% in the ≥ 70 years group. Compared with the salbutamol/ipratropium
bromide treatment group, the SGRQ score of the salmeterol/fluticasone treatment
group decreased significantly after therapy (P = 0.001).
CONCLUSION: Influenced by age, the SGRQ score can be used to evaluate the
clinical efficacy of medications in COPD patients.


PMID: 21914365  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Manag Care. 2011 Aug;20(8):46-50, 53-5.

Outcomes and costs associated with initial maintenance therapy with fluticasone
propionate-salmeterol xinafoate 250 microg/50 microg combination versus
tiotropium in commercially insured patients with COPD.

Dalal AA(1), Candrilli SD, Davis KL.

Author information: 
(1)U.S. Health Outcomes, GlaxoSmithKline, Research Triangle Park, 5 Moore Drive, 
Mail Stop B.3153, Durham, NC 27709, USA. anand.a.dalal@gsk.com

PURPOSE: To compare, in commercially-insured individuals 240 years old, the risk 
of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) exacerbations and COPD-related
health care utilization and costs in patients initiating maintenance treatment
with fluticasone propionate/salmeterol xinafoate 250 microg/50 microg (FSC) with 
those in patients initiating treatment with tiotropium bromide (TIO).
DESIGN: Retrospective observational cohort study.
METHODOLOGY: The risk of COPD exacerbation (moderate, severe, and any),
COPD-related health care utilization, and COPD-related costs (overall and by
service setting) were assessed over 12 months after the initiation of treatment
with FSC or TIO in commercially-insured patients > or =40 years old diagnosed
with COPD.
PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: After adjusting for covariates, treatment with FSC compared
with treatment with TIO was associated with a 14% reduction in risk of severe
exacerbation (p = 0.0406), defined as the occurrence of a COPD-related
hospitalization; with less health care utilization across several categories of
care; with 25% lower COPD-related medical costs ($1814 versus $2258 per patient, 
p < 0.0001); and with 10% lower COPD-related total costs ($2991 versus $3304 per 
patient, p < 0.0001) over a 12-month follow-up period. Pharmacy costs were
equivalent between FSC and TIO.
CONCLUSION: Initiation of maintenance therapy with FSC compared with TIO was
associated with significant reductions in the risk of severe exacerbations,
health care utilization, and COPD-related medical and total costs. Considered in 
the context of other findings, these data suggest that earlier maintenance
treatment with FSC offers clinical and economic benefits over maintenance
treatment with TIO.


PMID: 21887993  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Br J Pharmacol. 2012 Apr;165(8):2672-83. doi: 10.1111/j.1476-5381.2011.01639.x.

Slow receptor dissociation is not a key factor in the duration of action of
inhaled long-acting β2-adrenoceptor agonists.

Sykes DA(1), Charlton SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Novartis Institutes for Biomedical Research, West Sussex, UK.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: β(2) -Adrenoceptor agonists are important bronchodilators
used for the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and asthma.
Clinical data on β(2) -adrenoceptor agonists show a range of onset and duration
of action. We have investigated whether the receptor binding kinetics of β(2)
-adrenoceptor agonists can explain their observed onset of action and duration of
effect in the clinic.
EXPERIMENTAL APPROACH: [(3) H]-DHA was used to label β(2) -adrenoceptors
expressed in CHO-cell membranes (K(d) of 0.084 nM). Competition kinetic
experiments were performed in the presence of unlabelled β(2) agonists at 37°C in
HBSS containing GTP. To determine the kinetic parameters, three concentrations
(10, 3 and 1 ×K(i) ) of the unlabelled compound were employed against a fixed
concentration of [(3) H]-DHA (0.6 nM).
KEY RESULTS: The clinically used β(2) -adrenoceptor agonists exhibited a range of
association and dissociation rates. The kinetic K(d) and the competition K(i)
values of the eight β(2) -adrenoceptor agonists examined were strongly
correlated, suggesting that the method had produced accurate k(off) and k(on)
rates. The kinetic on-rate was highly correlated with equilibrium binding
affinity.
CONCLUSIONS AND IMPLICATIONS: Although the β(2) -adrenoceptor agonists displayed 
a range of kinetic rate parameters, simulations at relevant drug concentrations
suggest that receptor kinetics do not play an important role in determining onset
of action in the clinic. In addition, it is unlikely that receptor kinetics exert
an important influence on the duration of action of these agonists, as
indacaterol (once daily dosing) had a shorter residency time at the receptor than
salmeterol (twice daily dosing).

© 2011 The Authors. British Journal of Pharmacology © 2011 The British
Pharmacological Society.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1476-5381.2011.01639.x 
PMCID: PMC3423252
PMID: 21883146  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Patient Prefer Adherence. 2011;5:375-88. doi: 10.2147/PPA.S19991. Epub 2011 Jul
26.

Outcomes associated with initiation of tiotropium or fluticasone/salmeterol in
patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Halpern R(1), Baker CL, Su J, Woodruff KB, Paulose-Ram R, Porter V, Shah H.

Author information: 
(1)Health Economics and Outcomes Research, OptumInsight, Eden Prairie, MN, USA;

INTRODUCTION: Adherence to long-acting bronchodilator therapy for management of
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a critical clinical and cost
issue. Low adherence is associated with relatively higher exacerbation rates and 
illness burden.
PURPOSE: To compare adherence between patients with COPD initiating therapy on
tiotropium or fluticasone/salmeterol and examine the association between
adherence and respiratory-related costs.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: This retrospective claims data analysis evaluated patients 
initiating tiotropium or combination fluticasone/salmeterol from December 1, 2004
to December 31, 2005. Patients had ≥1 COPD diagnosis (International
Classification of Diseases, 9th Revision, Clinical Modification [ICD-9-CM]
491.xx, 492.x, 496) and were observed during 6-month pre-index and variable
(12-18-month) post-index periods. Outcomes were adherence to and discontinuation 
of therapy, and respiratory-related inpatient, medical, and total health care
costs. Adherence was medication possession ratio ≥0.80. Discontinuation,
adherence, and costs were analyzed with Cox proportional hazards regression,
logistic regression, and generalized linear model regressions, respectively.
Regressions controlled for demographic, sociodemographic, and health status
factors.
RESULTS: The study population comprised 1561 tiotropium and 2976
fluticasone/salmeterol patients. In unadjusted comparisons: 19.5% and 8.5% of
tiotropium and fluticasone/salmeterol patients, respectively, were adherent (P < 
0.001); tiotropium patients versus fluticasone/salmeterol patients had higher
mean respiratory-related pharmacy costs (US$1080 versus US$974, P = 0.002) and
health care costs (US$3751 versus US$2932, P = 0.031). Regression analysis showed
tiotropium patients were 31.6% less likely to discontinue therapy (95% confidence
interval [CI]: 0.64-0.73) and had 2.25 times higher odds of adherence (CI:
1.85-2.73) versus fluticasone/salmeterol patients. The associations between index
therapy and costs were not significant. Adherence versus nonadherence was
associated with: 46.9% higher health care costs (CI: 1.13-1.91); 37.1% lower
medical costs (CI: 0.43-0.91); and 53.4% lower inpatient costs (CI: 0.30-0.72).
CONCLUSION: Patients with COPD initiating long-acting bronchodilator therapy were
more likely to be adherent to tiotropium than to fluticasone/salmeterol.
Adherence to either tiotropium or to fluticasone/salmeterol was associated with
lower respiratory-related medical and inpatient costs, and with higher
respiratory-related total health care costs.

DOI: 10.2147/PPA.S19991 
PMCID: PMC3150166
PMID: 21845037  [PubMed]


202. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2011;6:237-43. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S7371. Epub
2011 Apr 12.

Long-acting β-adrenoceptor agonists in the management of COPD: focus on
indacaterol.

Beier J(1), Beeh KM.

Author information: 
(1)insaf Respiratory Research Institute, Wiesbaden, Germany.

Bronchodilators are the cornerstone of severe chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD) treatment to improve airflow, symptoms, exercise tolerance, and
exacerbations. There is convincing evidence that regular treatment with
long-acting bronchodilators is more effective and convenient than treatment with 
short-acting bronchodilators. Long-acting β-2-agonists include the twice-daily
drugs formoterol and salmeterol and, more recently, once-daily indacaterol.
Studies with head-to-head comparisons of long-acting bronchodilators are scant,
but novel data from controlled trials with the once-daily β(2)-agonist
indacaterol indicate superior bronchodilation and clinical efficacy of
indacaterol at recommended doses over twice-daily long-acting β(2)-agonists, and 
at least equipotent bronchodilation compared with once-daily tiotropium. The
recent therapeutic developments in COPD underscore a shift from short-acting
bronchodilators with multiple dosings per day to reduced dosing frequency and
prolonged duration of action, including once-daily treatment, with more
consistent effects on various clinical outcomes. This review summarizes relevant 
clinical data for twice-daily β-2-agonists in COPD, and further focuses on novel 
data for once-daily indacaterol, including head-to-head comparison trials.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S7371 
PMCID: PMC3144843
PMID: 21814459  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Front Pharmacol. 2011 Jul 18;2:36. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2011.00036. eCollection
2011.

Improvement of Airflow Limitation by Fluticasone Propionate/Salmeterol in Chronic
Obstructive Pulmonary Disease: What is the Specific Marker?

Akamatsu K(1), Matsunaga K, Sugiura H, Koarai A, Hirano T, Minakata Y, Ichinose
M.

Author information: 
(1)Third Department of Internal Medicine, School of Medicine, Wakayama Medical
University Wakayama, Japan.

BACKGROUNDS: Inhaled corticosteroids (ICS)/inhaled long-acting beta(2)-agonists
(LABA) combination drugs are widely used for the long-term management of chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). However, COPD is a heterogeneous condition 
and treatment with ICS is associated with a higher risk of pneumonia. The
identification of a specific marker for predicting the efficacy of ICS/LABA on
pulmonary function would be useful in the treatment of COPD.
METHODS: Fourteen COPD patients receiving tiotropium therapy participated
consecutively. The relationship between the baseline exhaled nitric oxide
(FE(NO)) levels as well as serum markers and changes in pulmonary function by
fluticasone propionate (FP)/salmeterol (SAL) were analyzed.
RESULTS: FP/SAL therapy significantly improved forced vital capacity, forced
expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV(1)), and the third phase slope of the single
nitrogen washout curve (ΔN(2)) as well as the FE(NO) level. The baseline FE(NO)
levels and positive specific IgE (atopy+) were significantly associated with
airway obstructive changes assessed by FEV(1) and ΔN(2). A baseline FE(NO) level 
>35 ppb yielded 80.0% sensitivity and 66.7% specificity for identifying the
subjects with significant improvement in FEV(1) (greater than 200 mL). An atopy+ 
yielded 60.0% sensitivity and 88.9% specificity for an improvement in FEV(1).
When combined with FE(NO) > 35 ppb and atopy+, it showed 40% sensitivity and
100.0% specificity for FEV(1) improvement. Alternatively, COPD subjects with
FE(NO) ≤ 35 ppb and atopy- did not show significant improvement in FEV(1).
CONCLUSION: Combining FE(NO) and specific IgE may be a useful marker for
predicting the response to ICS/LABA on airflow limitation in COPD.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2011.00036 
PMCID: PMC3140651
PMID: 21811461  [PubMed]


204. Prim Care Respir J. 2011 Dec;20(4):380-8. doi: 10.4104/pcrj.2011.00066.

Efficacy of indacaterol in the treatment of patients with COPD.

Jones PW(1), Barnes N, Vogelmeier C, Lawrence D, Kramer B.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical Sciences, St. George's University of London, London, UK. 
pjones@sgul.ac.uk

Effective bronchodilation is an important part of the management of patients with
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and can improve breathlessness and
ability to undertake physical activities. Indacaterol is a new once-daily,
long-acting inhaled bronchodilator for COPD. We review here the efficacy of
indacaterol as a bronchodilator, including its impact upon symptoms and health
status. The evidence reviewed comprises four placebo-controlled clinical studies 
of indacaterol treatment, three of which included treatment arms with one of the 
other long-acting inhaled bronchodilators (once-daily tiotropium or twice-daily
salmeterol or formoterol), in 4,833 patients with moderate-to-severe COPD.
Indacaterol had a bronchodilator effect significantly greater than formoterol and
salmeterol, and similar to tiotropium. Its effect on symptoms and health status
was similar or significantly greater than the other bronchodilators. The safety
profile was similar to placebo. Once-daily indacaterol is an effective and
beneficial maintenance bronchodilator treatment for patients with
moderate-to-severe COPD.

DOI: 10.4104/pcrj.2011.00066 
PMID: 21785813  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. J Clin Pharm Ther. 2012 Apr;37(2):204-11. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2710.2011.01285.x. 
Epub 2011 Jul 11.

Effect of long-acting beta-agonists on the frequency of COPD exacerbations: a
meta-analysis.

Wang J(1), Nie B, Xiong W, Xu Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China.
wangjianmiao2010@126.com

WHAT IS KNOWN AND OBJECTIVE:   Inhaled long-acting beta-agonists have been
licensed for the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) since 
the late 1990s, and they improve lung function and symptoms of dyspnoea. However,
the evidence that long-acting beta-agonists alone can reduce the rate of COPD
exacerbations is not conclusive. This meta-analysis was performed to evaluate
their effect on the frequency of exacerbations.
METHODS: MEDLINE, EMBASE, CINAHL and the Cochrane trials database were searched
for the review. Randomized controlled trials of greater than or equal to 24weeks'
treatment duration comparing long-acting beta-agonists (LABAs) with placebo were 
reviewed. Studies were pooled to yield odds ratios (ORs) with 95% confidence
intervals (CIs).
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION: Seventeen randomized controlled trials (11871 randomized 
subjects) met the inclusion criteria and were selected for analysis. Salmeterol, 
formoterol and indacaterol significantly reduced COPD exacerbations compared with
placebo. Salmeterol significantly reduced COPD exacerbations with both study arms
exposed or not exposed to inhaled corticosteroids (ICS). The summary ORs were
0·79 (95% CI: 0·67-0·92; P<0·01) and 0·80 (95% CI: 0·65-0·99; P=0·04),
respectively. However, when both arms were not exposed to ICS, there was no
significant reduction in exacerbations with formoterol compared with placebo. The
'summary OR was 0·93 (95% CI: 0·75-1·15; P=0·50).
WHAT IS NEW AND CONCLUSION: Long-acting beta-agonists reduce the frequency of
COPD exacerbations. Salmeterol, formoterol and indacaterol significantly reduced 
COPD exacerbations compared with placebo. Salmeterol but not formoterol decreased
exacerbations significantly in the absence of ICS.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2710.2011.01285.x 
PMID: 21740451  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Ther Adv Respir Dis. 2011 Oct;5(5):345-57. doi: 10.1177/1753465811410100. Epub
2011 Jun 30.

Profiling the bronchodilator effects of the novel ultra-long-acting β2-agonist
indacaterol against established treatments in chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease.

Vogelmeier C(1), Magnussen H, LaForce C, Owen R, Kramer B.

Author information: 
(1)University Hospital Giessen und Marburg, Standort Marburg, Baldingerstrasse,
D-35043 Marburg, Germany. claus.vogelmeier@med.uni-marburg.de

Indacaterol is a novel, inhaled, ultra-long-acting β(2)-agonist providing 24-h
bronchodilation with once-daily (od) dosing for maintenance use in patients with 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). This article reviews the
bronchodilator properties of indacaterol compared with other treatments used in
COPD. Data from five published placebo-controlled studies were reviewed. Two
14-day crossover studies, the first comparing indacaterol 300 µg od with
salmeterol 50 µg twice daily (bid), the second comparing indacaterol 150 µg and
300 µg od with tiotropium 18 µg od, assessed forced expiratory volume in 1 s
(FEV(1)) at 24 h postdose (trough). Third, a 14-day crossover study evaluated
trough FEV(1) following indacaterol 300 µg dosed morning or evening compared with
salmeterol 50 µg bid. Fourth, a single-dose study of indacaterol 150 and 300 µg
measured FEV(1) at 5 min postdose compared with salmeterol/fluticasone 50/500 µg 
and salbutamol 200 µg. Finally, data from a 1-year study with indacaterol 300 µg 
and formoterol 12 µg bid were examined to determine whether bronchodilation was
maintained long term. In the first two studies, indacaterol increased trough
FEV(1) after 14 days by a statistically significant and clinically relevant
margin over placebo; indacaterol had a greater effect than salmeterol and a
similar effect to tiotropium. In the third study, indacaterol had the same effect
on trough FEV(1) whether dosed in the morning or evening. In the fourth study,
the onset of the bronchodilator effect of indacaterol was similar to that of
salbutamol. In the fifth study, the bronchodilator effect of indacaterol on
trough FEV(1) was maintained at a significant and clinically relevant level over 
52 weeks, whereas the bronchodilator effect of formoterol diminished over time.
To conclude, indacaterol is a highly effective bronchodilator that is superior to
or at least as effective as other available long-acting bronchodilators for COPD.

DOI: 10.1177/1753465811410100 
PMID: 21719531  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2011;6:329-44. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S18759. Epub
2011 Jun 8.

Comparative efficacy of indacaterol 150 μg and 300 μg versus fixed-dose
combinations of formoterol + budesonide or salmeterol + fluticasone for the
treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease--a network meta-analysis.

Cope S(1), Capkun-Niggli G, Gale R, Jardim JR, Jansen JP.

Author information: 
(1)Mapi Values, Boston, MA, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To compare efficacy of indacaterol to that of fixed-dose combination
(FDC) formoterol and budesonide (FOR/BUD) and FDC salmeterol and fluticasone
(SAL/FP) for the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) based 
on the available randomized clinical trials (RCTs).
METHODS: Fifteen placebo-controlled RCTs were included that evaluated:
indacaterol 150 μg (n = 5 studies), indacaterol 300 μg (n = 4), FOR/BUD 9/160 μg 
(n = 2), FOR/BUD 9/320 μg (n = 3), SAL/FP 50/500 μg (n = 5), and SAL/FP 50/250 μg
(n = 1). Outcomes of interest were trough forced expiratory volume in 1 second
(FEV(1)), total scores for St. George's Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ), and
transition dyspnea index (TDI). All trials were analyzed simultaneously using a
Bayesian network meta-analysis and relative treatment effects between all
regimens were obtained. Treatment-by-covariate interactions were included where
possible to improve the similarity of the trials.
RESULTS: Indacaterol 150 μg resulted in a higher change from baseline (CFB) in
FEV(1) at 12 weeks compared to FOR/BUD 9/160 μg (difference in CFB 0.11 L [95%
credible intervals: 0.08, 0.13]) and FOR/BUD 9/320 μg (0.09 L [0.06, 0.11]) and
was comparable to SAL/FP 50/250 μg (0.02 L [-0.04, 0.08]) and SAL/FP 50/500 μg
(0.03 L [0.00, 0.06]). Similar results were observed for indacaterol 300 μg at 12
weeks and indacaterol 150/300 μg at 6 months. Indacaterol 150 μg demonstrated
comparable improvement in SGRQ total score at 6 months versus FOR/BUD (both
doses), and SAL/FP 50/500 μg (-2.16 point improvement [-4.96, 0.95]). Indacaterol
150 and 300 μg demonstrated comparable TDI scores versus SAL/FP 50/250 μg (0.21
points (-0.57, 0.99); 0.39 [-0.39, 1.17], respectively) and SAL/FP 50/500 μg at 6
months.
CONCLUSION: Indacaterol monotherapy is expected to be at least as good as FOR/BUD
(9/320 and 9/160 μg) and comparable to SAL/FP (50/250 and 50/500 μg) in terms of 
lung function. Indacaterol is also expected to be comparable to FOR/BUD (9/320
and 9/160 μg) and SAL/FP 50/500 μg in terms of health status and to SAL/FP
(50/250 and 50/500 μg) in terms of breathlessness.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S18759 
PMCID: PMC3119108
PMID: 21697997  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Int J Clin Pract. 2011 Jul;65(7):764-74. doi: 10.1111/j.1742-1241.2011.02685.x.

Budesonide/formoterol vs. salmeterol/fluticasone in COPD: a systematic review and
adjusted indirect comparison of pneumonia in randomised controlled trials.

Halpin DM(1), Gray J, Edwards SJ, Morais J, Singh D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Royal Devon & Exeter Hospital, Exeter, UK.

AIMS: This analysis was designed to provide a comparison between
budesonide/formoterol and salmeterol/fluticasone for the relative incidence of
pneumonia adverse events, pneumonia serious adverse events and pneumonia-related 
mortality in patients being treated for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
METHODS: An initial literature search revealed no suitable head-to-head trials
between budesonide/formoterol and salmeterol/fluticasone and therefore a
systematic review was conducted to find randomised controlled trials providing
data for input into an adjusted indirect comparison of the two combination
treatments using placebo as a common comparator. The Bucher adjusted indirect
comparison method was used to calculate odds ratios and 95% confidence intervals.
RESULTS: Eight salmeterol/fluticasone trials and four budesonide/formoterol
trials were identified as being relevant for the analyses. The proportion of
patients experiencing a pneumonia adverse event was significantly lower with
budesonide/formoterol than salmeterol/fluticasone (odds ratio, 0.47; 95%
confidence interval, 0.28-0.80). The proportion of patients experiencing a
pneumonia serious adverse event was also significantly lower with
budesonide/formoterol than salmeterol/fluticasone (odds ratio, 0.41; 95%
confidence interval, 0.19-0.86). However, there were too few events to draw any
firm conclusions on pneumonia-related mortality.
CONCLUSIONS: The results of the indirect comparison support the hypothesis that
budesonide/formoterol is associated with fewer pneumonia events than
salmeterol/fluticasone in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. The limitations 
of the analysis are that the results from a single study, TORCH, have a large
bearing on the overall findings of the analysis, and that there is heterogeneity 
in the length and the dosing of the included studies, although it does not appear
that heterogeneity affected the reported results. Another important limitation is
the lack of predefined diagnostic standards for pneumonia in these studies.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1742-1241.2011.02685.x 
PMID: 21676119  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2011;6:229-35. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S17482. Epub
2011 Apr 8.

Bronchodilation improves endurance but not muscular efficiency in chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease.

van der Vaart H(1), Postma DS, Grevink R, Roemer W, ten Hacken N.

Author information: 
(1)University Medical Center, Groningen, The Netherlands.
h.van.der.vaart@long.umcg.nl

We hypothesized that bronchodilator treatment not only improves hyperinflation
and endurance capacity but also muscular efficiency in stable chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD). We aimed to demonstrate that tiotropium and salmeterol 
improve muscular efficiency compared with placebo. Twenty-five COPD patients were
studied, including 20 males of mean (standard deviation) age 62 years (7 years)
with baseline forced expiratory volume in 1 second of 41% (10%) predicted, and
maximal workload of 101 Watt (36 Watt). Subjects were randomized for 6-week
treatment with tiotropium 18 μg once daily, salmeterol 50 μg twice daily, or
placebo using a double-blind, crossover design. Muscular efficiency and endurance
time were measured during cycling at 50% of maximal work load. Resting energy
expenditure was measured using a ventilated hood. Muscular efficiency after
tiotropium, salmeterol, and placebo treatment was 14.6%, 14.4%, and 14.4%,
respectively (P > 0.05), and resting energy expenditure was 1485 kcal/24 hours,
1709 kcal/24 hours, and 1472 kcal/24 hours (P > 0.05), respectively. Endurance
time after tiotropium treatment was significantly higher than that after placebo 
(27.0 minutes versus 19.3 minutes [P = 0.02]), whereas endurance time after
salmeterol treatment was not higher than that after placebo (23.3 minutes [P =
0.22]). In this small study, we were not able to demonstrate that bronchodilator 
therapy improved muscular efficiency. Apparently, reduced costs of breathing
relative to total energy expenditure were too small to be detected.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S17482 
PMCID: PMC3107699
PMID: 21660300  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2011;6:219-27. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S18461. Epub
2011 Apr 1.

Comparison of efficacy of long-acting bronchodilators in emphysema dominant and
emphysema nondominant chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Fujimoto K(1), Kitaguchi Y, Kanda S, Urushihata K, Hanaoka M, Kubo K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Laboratory Sciences, Shinshu University School of
Medicine, Matsumoto, Nagano, Japan. keisaku@shinshu-u.ac.jp

BACKGROUND: The purpose of this study was to clarify the association between
morphological phenotypes according to the predominance of emphysema and efficacy 
of long-acting muscarinic antagonist and β(2) agonist bronchodilators in patients
with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
METHODS: Seventy-two patients with stable COPD treated with tiotropium (n = 41)
or salmeterol (n = 31) were evaluated for pulmonary function, dynamic
hyperinflation following metronome-paced incremental hyperventilation, six-minute
walking distance, and St George's Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ) before and 2-3
months following treatment with tiotropium or salmeterol. They were then visually
divided into an emphysema dominant phenotype (n = 25 in the tiotropium-treated
group and n = 22 in the salmeterol-treated group) and an emphysema nondominant
phenotype on high-resolution computed tomography, and the efficacy of the two
drugs in each phenotype was retrospectively analyzed.
RESULTS: Tiotropium significantly improved airflow limitation, oxygenation, and
respiratory impedance in both the emphysema dominant and emphysema nondominant
phenotypes, and improved dynamic hyperinflation, exercise capacity, and SGRQ in
the emphysema dominant phenotype but not in the emphysema nondominant phenotype. 
Salmeterol significantly improved total score for SGRQ in the emphysema
phenotype, but no significant effects on other parameters were found for either
of the phenotypes.
CONCLUSION: These findings suggest that tiotropium is more effective than
salmeterol for airflow limitation regardless of emphysema dominance, and also can
improve dynamic hyperinflation in the emphysema dominant phenotype, which results
in further improvement of exercise capacity and health-related quality of life.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S18461 
PMCID: PMC3107698
PMID: 21660299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2011 Sep;338(3):860-9. doi: 10.1124/jpet.111.181016. Epub
2011 May 27.

Inflammatory stimuli inhibit glucocorticoid-dependent transactivation in human
pulmonary epithelial cells: rescue by long-acting beta2-adrenoceptor agonists.

Rider CF(1), King EM, Holden NS, Giembycz MA, Newton R.

Author information: 
(1)Airways Inflammation Research Group, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada.

By repressing inflammatory gene expression, glucocorticoids are the most
effective treatment for chronic inflammatory diseases such as asthma. However, in
some patients with severe disease, or who smoke or suffer from chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease, glucocorticoids are poorly effective. Although
many investigators focus on defects in the repression of inflammatory gene
expression, glucocorticoids also induce (transactivate) the expression of
numerous genes to elicit anti-inflammatory effects. Using human bronchial
epithelial (BEAS-2B) and pulmonary (A549) cells, we show that cytokines [tumor
necrosis factor α (TNFα) and interleukin 1β], mitogens [fetal calf serum (FCS)
and phorbol ester], cigarette smoke, and a G(q)-linked G protein-coupled receptor
agonist attenuate simple glucocorticoid response element (GRE)-dependent
transcription. With TNFα and FCS, this effect was not overcome by increasing
concentrations of dexamethasone, budesonide, or fluticasone propionate. Thus, the
maximal ability of the glucocorticoid to promote GRE-dependent transcription was 
reduced, and this was shown additionally for the glucocorticoid-induced gene
p57(KIP2). The long-acting β(2)-adrenoceptor agonists (LABAs) formoterol fumarate
and salmeterol xinafoate enhanced simple GRE-dependent transcription to a level
that could not be achieved by glucocorticoid alone. In the presence of TNFα or
FCS, which repressed glucocorticoid responsiveness, these LABAs restored
glucocorticoid-dependent transcription to levels that were achieved by
glucocorticoid alone. Given the existence of genes, such as p57(KIP2), which may 
mediate anti-inflammatory actions of glucocorticoids, we propose that repression 
of transactivation represents a mechanism for glucocorticoid resistance and for
understanding the clinical benefit of LABAs as an add-on therapy in asthma and
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

DOI: 10.1124/jpet.111.181016 
PMID: 21622733  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2011 Dec;43(12):2259-73. doi: 10.1249/MSS.0b013e3182223094.

Effects of salmeterol on skeletal muscle cells: metabolic and proapoptotic
features.

Duranti G(1), La Rosa P, Dimauro I, Wannenes F, Bonini S, Sabatini S, Parisi P,
Caporossi D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health Sciences, University of Rome Foro Italico, Rome, Italy.
guglielmo.duranti@uniroma4.it

PURPOSE: Salmeterol is a β2-adrenergic receptor agonist widely used for the
treatment of asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. It has been shown 
that salmeterol is also used at supratherapeutic doses as performance-enhancing
substance in sport practice. Although the abuse of β-agonists might determine
some adverse effects, the molecular effects of salmeterol on skeletal muscle
cells remain unclear.
METHODS: We evaluated the effects of salmeterol (0.1-10 μM) on both proliferative
and differentiated rat L6C5 and mouse C2C12 skeletal muscle cell lines. The
metabolic effects were evaluated by glyceraldehyde phosphate dehydrogenase,
lactate dehydrogenase, citrate synthase, 3-OH acyl-CoA dehydrogenase, and alanine
transglutaminase activities. Cytotoxic and apoptotic effects were analyzed by
3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-1)-5-(3-carboxymeth-oxyphenyl)-2H-tetrazolium, trypan blue
exclusion assay, terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase dUTP nick end labeling
assay, Western blot analysis, and immunofluorescence staining.
RESULTS: We showed that salmeterol reduced the growth rate of proliferating cells
in a dose- and time-dependent manner (6-48 h). An increase in oxidative
metabolism was found after 6 h in C2C12 and L6C5 myoblasts and in C2C12 myotubes 
with respect to control cells, while in L6C5 myotubes, anaerobic metabolism
prevailed. Exposure of myoblasts and myotubes for 48 and 72 h at high salmeterol 
concentrations induced apoptosis by the activation of the intrinsic apoptotic
pathway, as confirmed by the modulation of the apoptotic proteins Bcl-xL,
caspase-9, and poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase and by the cytoplasmic release of
Smac/DIABLO.
CONCLUSIONS: Altogether, our results demonstrate that short-term supratherapeutic
salmeterol exposure increased oxidative metabolic pathways on skeletal muscle
cells, whereas prolonged treatment inhibits cell growth and exerts either a
cytostatic or a proapoptotic effect in a time- and dose-dependent way.

DOI: 10.1249/MSS.0b013e3182223094 
PMID: 21552152  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Am J Med Sci. 2011 Aug;342(2):160-7. doi: 10.1097/MAJ.0b013e31820879ae.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease megatrials: taking the results into office 
practice.

Stoloff SW(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Family and Community Medicine, University of Nevada-Reno, Carson
City, Nevada, USA. drstoloff@sbcglobal.net

Primary care specialists provide first-line care of chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD), characterized by progressive, partially reversible airflow
limitation induced mainly by smoking. Spirometry and questionnaires are important
for COPD diagnosis, staging and prognosis. Smoking cessation, immunizations,
pulmonary rehabilitation and self-management action plans comprise
nonpharmacologic COPD management. The Understanding Potential Long-term Impacts
on Function with Tiotropium (UPLIFT®) and Towards a Revolution in COPD Health
(TORCH) megatrials provide evidence for maintenance pharmacotherapy to reduce
exacerbations and improve patient symptoms and health-related quality of life.
Although the primary outcomes--lung function decline (UPLIFT®) and mortality
(TORCH)--were negative, long-acting bronchodilators in both trials reduced
exacerbation rates and improved health status. Tiotropium added to usual care (in
UPLIFT®) and salmeterol/fluticasone therapy (in TORCH) improved key
patient-centered outcomes with no significant mortality risk or excess in serious
cardiac adverse events associated with the study drugs. These results provide
strong evidence of efficacy and acceptable safety profiles of maintenance
pharmacotherapies in patient-centered outcomes and support combination drug
regimens in patients with moderate to very severe COPD.

DOI: 10.1097/MAJ.0b013e31820879ae 
PMID: 21512392  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Am J Manag Care. 2011 Mar 1;17(3):e55-65.

COPD-related healthcare utilization and costs after discharge from a
hospitalization or emergency department visit on a regimen of fluticasone
propionate-salmeterol combination versus other maintenance therapies.

Dalal AA(1), Shah M, D'Souza AO, Mapel DW.

Author information: 
(1)GlaxoSmith-Kline, Research Triangle Park, Durham, NC 27709, USA.
anand.a.dalal@gsk.com

OBJECTIVES: To quantify healthcare use and costs associated with chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) among patients discharged from a
COPD-related hospitalization or emergency department (ED) visit on a regimen of
fluticasone propionate-salmeterol combination versus other inhaled maintenance
therapies.
STUDY DESIGN: Retrospective cohort study.
METHODS: Managed care enrollees with an index hospitalization (with a primary or 
secondary [ie, in the second position] diagnosis of COPD) or ED visit (with a
primary diagnosis of COPD) were identified for placement into study cohorts
during a 60-day period following the index date. Time to COPD-related events and 
healthcare costs were compared during up to 1 year of follow-up between the 2
cohorts.
RESULTS: The sample comprised 5677 patients (1291 in the fluticasone
propionate-salmeterol cohort and 4386 in the other maintenance therapies cohort).
The adjusted rate of COPD-related hospitalizations or ED visits was 35% lower in 
the fluticasone propionate-salmeterol cohort (P <.05). Adjusted COPD-related
total (medical plus pharmacy) costs were lower in the fluticasone
propionate-salmeterol cohort ($240 vs $279 per patient per month, P <.05), mostly
because of lower medical costs ($113 vs $160 per patient per month, P <.05).
Pharmacy costs did not differ between fluticasone propionate-salmeterol and other
maintenance therapies. Results were similar in the subset of patients 65 years or
older.
CONCLUSIONS: Initiation of fluticasone propionate-salmeterol after discharge from
a COPD-related hospitalization or ED visit significantly reduced the risk of a
recurrent event during the ensuing months and decreased COPD-related medical
costs, without an increase in COPD-related pharmacy costs, in a real-world
setting.


PMID: 21504260  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. N Engl J Med. 2011 Mar 24;364(12):1093-1103. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1008378.

Tiotropium versus salmeterol for the prevention of exacerbations of COPD.

Vogelmeier C(1), Hederer B, Glaab T, Schmidt H, Rutten-van Mölken MP, Beeh KM,
Rabe KF, Fabbri LM; POET-COPD Investigators.

Collaborators: Sommersgutter M, Block LH, Pohl W, Sweilem M, Zehetner E, Köberl
GH, Kühteubl G, Wild M, Moder G, Popovic R, Wallner G, Voves R, Wanke T, Holub G,
Würtz J, Würtz P, Studnicka M, Kaik G, Capiau L, Martinot JB, Bombled P, Bous JP,
De Meulemeester M, Feys P, Henry G, Teheux J, Van Stee J, Balthazar Y, Descamps
F, Dimitrova R, Youroukova V, Dimova D, Ivanov S, Dimitrov V, Stefanova B, Noleva
K, Radkov Y, Terziev C, Hodzhev V, Machkovska M, Metev H, Ali M, Burdova E,
Buresova M, Bursova J, Dindos J, Frátrik J, Hartman P, Havlik M, Havlikova A,
Havlova E, Hojka I, Jensovsky V, Jirmanova I, Kalandrova K, Kalina P, Klenerova
E, Kolman P, Krenarova J, Mares J, Matulova A, Pekarek Z, Povysilova L,
Presperinova J, Vondra V, Zajicova O, Zakova L, Zoula J, Veverka J, Kolarikova R,
Evald T, Høegholm A, Meyer CN, Enk B, Sørensen T, Madsen F, Døssing M, Jakobsen
KS, Wessels J, Hansen M, Hakulinen A, Kotaniemi J, Elo J, Pietiläinen M, Venho K,
Torkko M, Niemelä I, Backman R, Järvinen P, Kauppinen R, Blanc FX, Pinet C, Lebas
FX, Dupouy J, Krai D, Kessler R, Milhe F, Mounier D, Faraut C, Bellon-Serre B,
Taieb S, Ducolone A, Smolis A, Bouchaert E, Bettendorf A, Verdier S, Dussart L,
de Lafond TG, Kafe H, Devouassoux G, Maurisset O, Maurer C, Perche A, Perelroizen
H, Boyer GR, Rochefort-Morel C, Monchatre M, Marangoni E, Castelli B, Rabaud D,
Ravier C, Bourgeois O, Boyes JP, Devenyns F, Garrigue L, Kressmann E, Lafaurie B,
Amblard P, Charrier B, Churet JB, Flosi M, Gabrielli JL, Navarre V, Rousset A,
Amate M, Bourdrel L, Simon V, Jasnot JY, Kampschulte J, Schaupp R, Hector H,
Ritter L, Thomas C, Dersidan A, Bründermann HW, Hauk J, Horstmeier U,
Schulte-Braucks R, Jacubasch T, Möwius A, Zimny H, Gebhardt W, Weyland K,
Deutscher HW, Klemm G, Kellner BT, Schneebauer T, Piroth J, Pohl V, Pustelnik A, 
Bindig HW, Grosskopf W, Dentler R, Hossbach E, Koch T, Lehmann G, Peters O,
Riegel P, Theis GK, Weber D, Abdul-Malak P, Barth D, Becker C, Eyck M, Erdle W,
Kessel J, Lohmann A, Henning V, Stenzel H, Stuff K, Wasner P, Schmidtmann S,
Benedix A, Micke L, Hofmann S, Engelhard R, Udosic J, Luttermann M, Merke J,
Molitor S, Jander R, Ziegner A, Petig G, Besser O, Böhm R, Dorsch W, Triebel A,
Asten S, Babyesiza A, Baumann E, Beck E, Lehnert J, Radermacher E, Götze M, Heinz
GU, Vorderstrasse W, Bieler T, Lässig T, Overlack A, Dünzel M, Gröschel W,
Riffelmann F, Eisel E, Deckelmann R, Kroemer B, Auge D, Saur J, Hoheisel G,
Hennig R, Huber RM, Wiemer S, Junggeburth J, Petermann W, Pettenkofer J, Prehn U,
Bezler A, Brüggen H, Grimm-Sachs V, Eilers A, Linnhoff A, Mitlehner W, Thomas J, 
Trümper BG, Vogelmeier C, von Versen LH, Weber H, Schönen J, Schürmann W, Pumpe
K, Seiz V, Tross H, Becker J, Luther R, Schroers M, Rabe U, Rau W, Remppis R,
Heschel U, Hellmann A, Kässner F, Koch A, Gessner C, Jasch B, Kühne P, Mueller H,
Peslis N, Selbitschka M, Steffen H, Sudhoff H, Ohmer M, Gebhardt T, Winkler J,
Behler G, Polke K, Botzen U, Unland M, Raack BW, Aries S, Hissnauer KG, Trauth
HA, Husmann R, Korduan M, Petri M, Lenk U, Savaser C, Preiss G, Welss C, Martin
H, Angerer M, Berg P, Bettig U, Böhm K, Fleck H, Groth J, Liefring E, Winkels W, 
Müller J, Sebert M, Havasi-Jost G, Westphal A, Kleinecke-Pohl U, Korth-Wiemann B,
Schmorell B, Lindemann L, Trainer C, Gehling U, Eichler M, Lienert T, Schaefer A,
Eller J, Arievich H, Babinszky E, Balikó Z, Bartha A, Bauknecht É, Csollák M,
Csontos Z, Györi Z, Huszár T, Jedlinszki M, Kelen G, Kónya Melinda M, Kiss B,
Lantos J, Major K, Mészáros I, Mitrovics K, Nagy E, Naményi M, Pánczél G,
Radeczky E, Rakvács M, Schlezák J, Szalai Z, Szentesi M, Sztancsik Z, Tolnay E,
Varga A, Vinkler I, Somfay A, Ariel A, Kramer MR, Ben-Dov I, Breuer R, Fink G,
Lieberman D, Yigla M, Raz M, Vilayi-Weiler Z, Weiler-Ravell D, Beckerman M, Cahan
C, Goldstein N, Stav D, Ronco M, Fracchia C, Giuseppe LM, Giovanni PL, Potena A, 
Pirina P, Gian FT, Brusasco V, Pisati G, Cremona GI, Di Maria G, Fabbri L,
Micallef E, Paggiaro PL, Pistelli R, Pozzi E, Sanduzzi Zamparelli A, Santelli G, 
Babjoniseva A, Borsa L, Bukovskis M, Harasimjukas D, Iesalniece R, Petersone A,
Smiltena I, Krams A, Lapkovska Z, Eglite R, Santa A, Petrova I, Puzule S, Kiziela
A, Naudziunas A, Gumbrevicius G, Visokinskas A, Zebiene E, Valius L, Mikutiene R,
Naudziunas S, Leisyte P, Griskeviciene V, Matukiene V, Venceviciene L, Juskiene
Z, Vaicius D, van Kempen WW, Agous I, Tan T, de Schipper L, Elle S, Hoivik HO,
Tandberg A, Henrichsen S, Kjelsberg F, Gronert JO, Weisser LK, Rødølen T, Helberg
S, Zafran GN, Kjaernli T, Pal N, Antczak A, Asankowicz-Bargiel B, Batura-Gabryel 
H, Bozek A, Bukowczan Z, Chazan R, Chyczewska E, Cieslak M, Cieslicki J, Sikora
B, Gawlik R, Gorecka D, Gross-Tyrkin E, Grzelewska-Rzymowska I, Herbowska J,
Hofman T, Jankowska R, Jasieniak-Pinis G, Jassem E, Kaczmarek B, Kania G,
Karpinski J, Kliks K, Mierzejewska MJ, Korzeniak R, Kot A, Kowalczyk HK, Kus J,
Laczynska-Kozerska E, Liebhart J, Madra-Rogacka D, Majorek-Olechowska B, Malosek 
D, Milanowski J, Mincewicz G, Mroz RM, Nowak D, Obtulowicz K, Pajor A, Pierzchala
W, Piotrowicz P, Piotrowski W, Pisarczyk-Bogacka E, Pulka G, Rajtar I, Roslan A, 
Rozycka-Grudniewicz M, Rybacki C, Sankowski Z, Sciborski R, Sidorowicz-Bialynicka
A, Siergiejko Z, Skucha W, Slominski JM, Labij V, Springer E, Stepka M,
Szafranski W, Szelerska-Twardosz H, Szmidt M, Szotrowski J, Tarnowska-Matusiak M,
Kachel T, Mierzwa W, Trawinska E, Trebas-Pietras E, Witkiewicz I, Wojnowski P,
Wytrychowski K, Zalc-Budziszewska E, Ziolo G, Ziora D, Niezgoda K, Szumlanska Z, 
Smalera E, Napora P, Leszczynski W, Pasternak D, Zurowska-Gebala M, Przysiecki T,
Dobryniewska M, Kabata W, Rosinska-Migda J, Lupinska H, Bortkiewicz J, Brzecki K,
Andrzejewski W, Doboszynska A, Porawska W, Regula J, Maciejewska K, Krupa-Borek
I, Lubinski W, Domingos A, Brito U, Goes L, Pereira J, Coelho L, Antunes A, Alves
C, Lino A, Gasparinho C, Reis J, Freitas G, Tatar VA, Stoicescu PI, Savu A, Marta
M, Voiculescu M, Gainaru D, Mihalache LV, Stroescu S, Fierbinteanu-Braticevici
CG, Bruckner I, Ungureanu G, Ioncica L, Voinea F, Jimborean G, Tint D, Arghir OC,
Tudoran M, Nistor S, Cioban TD, Boisteanu D, Tanasescu C, Lenskaya L, Ogorodova
L, Ivleva A, Fassakhov R, Volkova E, Libov I, Shostak N, Chuchalin AG, Reshetko
O, Barbarash O, Logvinenko N, Martynenko T, Shpagina L, Smolenskaya O, Sherenkov 
A, Khokhlov A, Ilkovich M, Nemtsov B, Simanenkov V, Trofimov V, Mazurov V,
Gorenkov R, Bugrova O, Martynov A, Stryuk R, Yarokhno N, Shmelev EI, Martynenko
V, Cherkashina I, Bukreeva E, Tebloev K, Ballyzek M, Dvornikov V, Gorelov A,
Leshchenko I, Tereschenko S, Bokarev I, Belenkiy D, Alexeeva L, Idrisova E,
Pavlysh E, Berkovich O, Boyarkin M, Arkhipov M, Storozhakov G, Zadionchenko V,
Treshkur T, Krivosheev A, Shilkina N, Tokmalaev A, Bezlepko A, Tkachev A, Gamal
E, Vasilyeva N, Vyortkin A, Arutyunov G, Popova V, Izmozherova N, Podzolkov V,
Sidorenko I, Shestakova G, Pavlishchuk S, Antonovsky Y, Arkhipovsky V, Osipenko
M, Esina A, Shutyak T, Yablonsky P, Ragozina N, Polkanova E, Esip V, Kuzin A,
Ignatova G, Komar S, Koziolova N, Galvas N, Berezina N, Butko D, Pistraya T,
Zagorodsky A, Zilber E, Polevtsova G, Soloviev K, Andreevsky S, Raspopina N,
Yakushin S, Agafina A, Khurukhurova N, Stitsenko IA, Agapov V, Surovov A,
Horvathova H, Hrebenar S, Jurco P, Kubikova Y, Michalickova M, Mihalecova Y,
Pribulova E, Ruziakova V, Flezar M, Ulcar-Kostic S, Cafuta AM, Letonja S, Smonkar
T, Vulkelic K, Roca J, Gea J, Monso E, de Lucas P, Barbe F, Alvarez-Sala JL,
Barreiro B, Cabrera PL, Cordero P, Sanchez F, Merino J, Agüero R, Corral J, del
Campo F, Soler JJ, Signes-Costa J, Salgueiro M, Martinez E, Kongsun-Shum C,
Blanquer R, Vennera Mdel C, Luengo Planas M, Berlinches P, Baloira Villar A,
Cirak AK, Sahin A, Acican T, Ozkan M, Kiyan E, Yildiz F, Ege E, Gorguner AM,
Koksal N, Kocabas A, Gunen H, Basoglu O, Dzyublyk O, Gavrysiuk V, Kostromina V,
Palamar B, Grishyna O, Korzh OM, Amer LG, Pertseva T, Rodionova V, Kuriata O,
Vdovychenko V, Telyatnikova ZE, Monogarova N, Vizir V, Chernyak V, Koshukova G,
Gospodarskyy I, Popik G, Rudyk Y, Biloglazov V, Blazhko V, Panina S, Ignatenko G,
Girina O, Kashtelyan O, Voloshyna O, Svintsitskyy A, Mostovoiy Y, Abrahamovych
OO, Skrypnyk I, Pasiyeshvily LM, Ostrovskiy M, Netiazhenko V, Dudar L, Romaniuk
L, Sakharchuk I, Semidotska Z, Bazylevych A, Vlasenko M, Smolyanyy O, Khodosh E, 
Putintsev V, Syvolap VV, Fushtey IM, Plesh IA, Diachenko A, Tsokalo V, Feshchenko
Y, Iashyna L, Chopyak V, Yabluchanskyy M, Sergiy N, Orpen IM, McCinnon C, George 
A, Ashe P, Bodalia B, Burge P, Caldwell I, Duffy NC, Ellery A, Higgins BG, Gravil
J, Jones N, Jones P, Keaney N, McCaughey M, Mohr SO, Sharma R, Russell R, Simpson
H, Smithers A, Takhar AP, Maxwell TG, Adler M, Cahill T, Turner W, Blagden MD,
Corris P, Van de Werf F, Senn S, Rudolf M, Krug N, Meyer FJ, John M, Vogelmeier
C, Beeh KM, Rutten-van Mölken M.

Comment in
    Rev Clin Esp. 2011 Nov;211(10):532-3.
    Evid Based Med. 2012 Jun;17(3):93-5.
    Ann Intern Med. 2011 Jul 19;155(2):JC1-3.
    N Engl J Med. 2011 Mar 24;364(12):1167-8.
    N Engl J Med. 2011 Jun 30;364(26):2552; author reply 2553-4.
    N Engl J Med. 2011 Jun 30;364(26):2553; author reply 2553-4.
    N Engl J Med. 2011 Jun 30;364(26):2553; author reply 2553-4.
    N Engl J Med. 2011 Jun 30;364(26):2552-3; author reply 2553-4.

BACKGROUND: Treatment guidelines recommend the use of inhaled long-acting
bronchodilators to alleviate symptoms and reduce the risk of exacerbations in
patients with moderate-to-very-severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD) but do not specify whether a long-acting anticholinergic drug or a
β(2)-agonist is the preferred agent. We investigated whether the anticholinergic 
drug tiotropium is superior to the β(2)-agonist salmeterol in preventing
exacerbations of COPD.
METHODS: In a 1-year, randomized, double-blind, double-dummy, parallel-group
trial, we compared the effect of treatment with 18 μg of tiotropium once daily
with that of 50 μg of salmeterol twice daily on the incidence of moderate or
severe exacerbations in patients with moderate-to-very-severe COPD and a history 
of exacerbations in the preceding year.
RESULTS: A total of 7376 patients were randomly assigned to and treated with
tiotropium (3707 patients) or salmeterol (3669 patients). Tiotropium, as compared
with salmeterol, increased the time to the first exacerbation (187 days vs. 145
days), with a 17% reduction in risk (hazard ratio, 0.83; 95% confidence interval 
[CI], 0.77 to 0.90; P<0.001). Tiotropium also increased the time to the first
severe exacerbation (hazard ratio, 0.72; 95% CI, 0.61 to 0.85; P<0.001), reduced 
the annual number of moderate or severe exacerbations (0.64 vs. 0.72; rate ratio,
0.89; 95% CI, 0.83 to 0.96; P=0.002), and reduced the annual number of severe
exacerbations (0.09 vs. 0.13; rate ratio, 0.73; 95% CI, 0.66 to 0.82; P<0.001).
Overall, the incidence of serious adverse events and of adverse events leading to
the discontinuation of treatment was similar in the two study groups. There were 
64 deaths (1.7%) in the tiotropium group and 78 (2.1%) in the salmeterol group.
CONCLUSIONS: These results show that, in patients with moderate-to-very-severe
COPD, tiotropium is more effective than salmeterol in preventing exacerbations.
(Funded by Boehringer Ingelheim and Pfizer; ClinicalTrials.gov number,
NCT00563381.).

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa1008378 
PMID: 21428765  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. J Korean Med Sci. 2011 Mar;26(3):379-85. doi: 10.3346/jkms.2011.26.3.379. Epub
2011 Feb 25.

Predictors of pulmonary function response to treatment with
salmeterol/fluticasone in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Lee JS(1), Huh JW, Chae EJ, Seo JB, Ra SW, Lee JH, Kim EK, Lee YK, Kim TH, Kim
WJ, Lee JH, Lee SM, Lee S, Lim SY, Shin TR, Yoon HI, Sheen SS, Oh YM, Lee SD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Asthma Center, and
Clinical Research Center for Chronic Obstructive Airway Diseases, University of
Ulsan College of Medicine, 86 Asanbyeongwon-gil,Seoul, Korea.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a heterogeneous disease and
responses to therapies are highly variable. The aim of this study was to identify
the predictors of pulmonary function response to 3 months of treatment with
salmeterol/fluticasone in patients with COPD. A total of 127 patients with stable
COPD from the Korean Obstructive Lung Disease (KOLD) Cohort, which were
prospectively recruited from June 2005 to September 2009, were analyzed
retrospectively. The prediction models for the FEV(1), FVC and IC/TLC changes
after 3 months of treatment with salmeterol/fluticasone were constructed by using
multiple, stepwise, linear regression analysis. The prediction model for the
FEV(1) change after 3 months of treatment included wheezing history,
pre-bronchodilator FEV(1), post-bronchodilator FEV(1) change and emphysema extent
on CT (R = 0.578). The prediction models for the FVC change after 3 months of
treatment included pre-bronchodilator FVC, post-bronchodilator FVC change (R =
0.533), and those of IC/ TLC change after 3 months of treatment did
pre-bronchodilator IC/TLC and post-bronchodilator FEV(1) change (R = 0.401).
Wheezing history, pre-bronchodilator pulmonary function, bronchodilator
responsiveness, and emphysema extent may be used for predicting the pulmonary
function response to 3 months of treatment with salmeterol/fluticasone in
patients with COPD.

DOI: 10.3346/jkms.2011.26.3.379 
PMCID: PMC3051085
PMID: 21394306  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2011 Jun;337(3):600-9. doi: 10.1124/jpet.111.179259. Epub
2011 Feb 28.

Functional and biochemical rationales for the 24-hour-long duration of action of 
olodaterol.

Casarosa P(1), Kollak I, Kiechle T, Ostermann A, Schnapp A, Kiesling R, Pieper M,
Sieger P, Gantner F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Diseases Research, Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma GmbH 
& Co. KG, Birkendorferstrasse 65, Biberach an der Riss, Germany.
paola.casarosa@boehringer-ingelheim.com

β(2)-Adrenoceptor (β(2)-AR) agonists are powerful bronchodilators and play a
pivotal role in the management of pulmonary obstructive diseases, such as asthma 
and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Although these agents first were used 
many years ago, progress in drug development has resulted in better tolerated,
long-acting β(2)-AR agonists (LABAs), such as formoterol and salmeterol. Although
LABAs have been on the market for several years, relatively little is known on
the rationale(s) behind their long duration of action. In this study, we focused 
on olodaterol (previously known as BI1744CL), a novel inhaled LABA, which
provides a bronchodilating effect lasting 24 h and is currently in Phase III
clinical trials. To understand the rationale behind its long duration of action, 
different aspects of olodaterol were analyzed (i.e., its lipophilicity and
propensity to accumulate in the lipid bilayer as well as its tight binding to the
β(2)-AR). In line with its physicochemical properties, olodaterol associated
moderately with lipid bilayers. Instead, kinetic as well as equilibrium binding
studies indicated the presence of a stable [(3)H]olodaterol/β(2)-AR complex with 
a dissociation half-life of 17.8 h due to ternary complex formation. The tight
binding of olodaterol to the human β(2)-AR and stabilization of the ternary
complex were confirmed in functional experiments monitoring adenylyl cyclase
activity after extensive washout. Taken together, binding, kinetic, and
functional data support the existence of a stable complex with the β(2)-AR that, 
with a dissociation half-life >17 h, might indeed be a rationale for the 24-h
duration of action of olodaterol.

DOI: 10.1124/jpet.111.179259 
PMID: 21357659  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2010 Dec 31;6:13-22. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S15455.

Comparative cost-effectiveness of a fluticasone-propionate/salmeterol combination
versus anticholinergics as initial maintenance therapy for chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease.

Dalal AA(1), Roberts MH, Petersen HV, Blanchette CM, Mapel DW.

Author information: 
(1)US Health Outcomes, GlaxoSmithKline, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709, USA.
anand.a.dalal@gsk.com

PURPOSE: Relative costs and utilization-related outcomes of a fluticasone
propionate 250 μg + salmeterol 50 μg combination (FSC), tiotropium bromide, and
ipratropium as initial maintenance therapy in COPD have not been compared in a
commercially-insured population.
METHODS: This retrospective, observational cohort study used health care claims
data from January 2004 to June 2009 from a large administrative database for
patients aged ≥40 years with COPD. Time-to-first COPD-related health care event
beginning 30 days following therapy initiation with FSC (n = 16,684), ipratropium
alone or in fixed dose combination with albuterol (n = 14,449), or tiotropium (n 
= 12,659) was estimated using Cox proportional hazard models that controlled for 
differences in patient demographic characteristics, health care utilization, and 
comorbidities at baseline. Mean adjusted costs and numbers of COPD-related health
care encounters and prescription medication fills were compared among patients
with 12 months of follow-up (FSC, n = 12,595; ipratropium, n = 10,617;
tiotropium, n = 9126).
RESULTS: With FSC as the reference, risk for a COPD-related hospitalization
and/or emergency department visit was significantly higher for ipratropium
(hazard ratio [HR] 1.64, 95% confidence interval [CI] 1.50-1.79) and tiotropium
(HR 1.29, CI 1.17-1.41). Mean adjusted 12-month COPD-related total health care
costs were lower for FSC ($2068, standard deviation [SD] $1190) than for
ipratropium ($2841, SD $1858) and tiotropium ($2408, SD $1511, both P <0.05).
Mean number of COPD-related hospitalizations, emergency department visits, and
outpatient visits associated with an oral corticosteroid or antibiotic were also 
lower for FSC than for ipratropium and tiotropium (all P <0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: In this retrospective "real-world" observational sample of COPD
patients, initiating treatment with FSC was associated with significantly better 
clinical and economic outcomes compared with short- and long-acting
anticholinergic therapy. Consistent with the goal of preventing and reducing
exacerbations advocated by global guidelines, the findings suggest that
initiation of maintenance treatment with FSC may afford clinical benefits at a
lower cost than anticholinergic treatment.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S15455 
PMCID: PMC3034283
PMID: 21311689  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. J Med Econ. 2011;14(2):147-58. doi: 10.3111/13696998.2011.552582. Epub 2011 Feb
2.

Respiratory-related medical expenditure and inpatient utilisation among COPD
patients receiving long-acting bronchodilator therapy.

Cao Z(1), Zou KH, Baker CL, Su J, Paulose-Ram R, Durden E, Shi N, Shah H.

Author information: 
(1)Thomson Reuters, Cambridge, MA, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)-related
expenditure and hospitalisation in COPD patients treated with tiotropium versus
alternative long-acting bronchodilators (LABDs).
METHODS: Data were from the Thomson Reuters MarketScan Research Databases. COPD
patients ≥ 35 years with at least one LABD claim between July 1, 2004 and June
30, 2006 were classified into five cohorts based on index LABD: monotherapy with 
tiotropium, salmeterol/fluticasone propionate, formoterol fumarate, or salmeterol
or combination therapy. Demographic and clinical characteristics were evaluated
for a 6-month pre-period and COPD-related utilisation and total costs were
evaluated for a 12-month follow-up period. LABD relationship to COPD-related
costs and hospitalisations were estimated by multivariate generalised linear
modelling (GLM) and multivariate logistic regression, respectively.
RESULTS: Of 52,274 patients, 53% (n = 27,457) were male, 71% (n = 37,271) were ≥ 
65 years, and three LABD cohorts accounted for over 90% of the sample [53% (n =
27,654) salmeterol/fluticasone propionate, 23% (n = 11,762) tiotropium, and 15%
(n = 7755) combination therapy]. Patients treated with salmeterol/fluticasone
propionate (p < 0.001), formoterol fumarate (p = 0.032), salmeterol (p = 0.004), 
or with combination therapy (p < 0.001) had higher COPD-related costs and a
greater risk of inpatient admission (p < 0.01 for all) versus tiotropium.
LIMITATIONS: These data are based on administrative claims and as such do not
include clinical information or information on risk factors, like smoking status,
that are relevant to this population.
CONCLUSIONS: Patients treated with tiotropim had lower COPD-related expenditures 
and risk of hospitalisation than patients treated with other LABDs.

DOI: 10.3111/13696998.2011.552582 
PMID: 21288057  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Pharmacol Ther. 2011 May;130(2):114-43. doi: 10.1016/j.pharmthera.2010.12.008.
Epub 2011 Jan 27.

The use of long acting β₂-agonists, alone or in combination with inhaled
corticosteroids, in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD): a risk-benefit 
analysis.

Cave AC(1), Hurst MM.

Author information: 
(1)Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency, 151 Buckingham Palace
Road, London SW1W9SZ , United Kingdom. Alison.Cave@mhra.gsi.gov.uk

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a slowly progressive, largely
non-reversible pulmonary disease which is characterised by airflow limitation. It
is one of the few diseases with an increasing mortality rate and by 2020 it is
predicted to be the third leading cause of death. The mainstays of current
treatment are long acting β₂ agonists (LABAs) coupled with an increasing reliance
on inhaled corticosteroids (ICS). Two LABAs (salmeterol and formoterol) are
currently licensed for COPD both as monotherapy and in combination with ICS
(fluticasone propionate (FP) and budesonide respectively). A comprehensive review
of the risk-benefit of these medicines in COPD is provided here which concludes
that there is limited efficacy for LABAs in COPD either alone or in combination
with ICS and no overall modification of the disease process. However, where
directly compared, combination therapy usually provides an advantage over
monotherapy. Importantly the apparent effectiveness of treatment may
significantly depend upon the outcome measure chosen with some measures possibly 
underestimating the extent of benefit. ICS benefit may also be greater in those
patients who respond to treatment. Set against this benefit are recent concerns
that a number of issues related to the clinical trial design such as prior use of
ICS and different withdrawal rates between groups may be significantly
influencing results. Furthermore there is no evidence of a dose response
relationship with regard to ICS dose. A key issue with combination therapy is the
excess risk of pneumonia conferred by the use of an ICS in this patient
population. This risk does not appear to be proportional to the ICS dose but may 
differ between FP and budesonide. We conclude that further studies are required
to identify the optimal dose of ICS, in terms of both risk and benefit, and to
confirm their benefit in steroid naïve patients. Furthermore it will be important
to determine whether the risk of pneumonia is apparent with both FP and
budesonide and to identify factors which may predict steroid responsiveness in
COPD.

Crown Copyright © 2011. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pharmthera.2010.12.008 
PMID: 21276815  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Open Respir Med J. 2010 Oct 21;4:86-91. doi: 10.2174/1874306401004010086.

Safety and efficacy of fluticasone propionate/salmeterol hydrofluoroalkane 134a
metered-dose-inhaler compared with fluticasone propionate/salmeterol diskus in
patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Koser A(1), Westerman J, Sharma S, Emmett A, Crater GD.

Author information: 
(1)Greenville Pharmaceutical Research, Greenville, SC 864-770-0890, USA.

PURPOSE: To provide information on the efficacy and safety of Fluticasone
Propionate/Salmeterol Hydrofluoroalkane 134a Metered-Dose-Inhaler 230/42mcg (FSC 
MDI) and its comparable dose of Fluticasone Propionate/Salmeterol DISKUS
250/50mcg (FSC DISKUS) in patients with COPD.
METHODS: This multicenter, randomized, double-blind, 12 week study was designed
to evaluate FSC MDI treatment responses as compared with FSC DISKUS. The primary 
comparison of interest was non-inferiority between the FSC MDI treatment group
and the FSC DISKUS treatment group assessed in terms of 2-hour post-dose FEV(1)
change from baseline at endpoint. The non-inferiority criterion bound was 75mL
(lower confidence limit of -75mL).
INCLUSION CRITERIA: Male or female aged ≥ 40, post-bronchodilator FEV(1) ≤ 70%
predicted normal, FEV(1)/FVC ≤ 70% and ≥ 10 pack years smoking history. Adverse
events were recorded by patients throughout the study on daily diary cards.
Adverse events were collected in eCRFs at all clinic visits and during a final
follow-up phone call.
RESULTS: Patients (N=247) were randomized to FSC MDI (FEV(1)% 49.3 ± 12.3,
FEV(1)/FVC 50.5 ± 10.0) and FSC DISKUS (FEV(1)% 48.4 ± 11.0, FEV(1)/FVC 50.3 ±
10.3). From an ANCOVA model the least squares (LS) mean difference (FSC MDI- FSC 
DISKUS) for the 2-hour post dose FEV(1) at endpoint was -2.0mL (95% CI -64mL,
59mL). Pre-dose FEV(1), FVC, PEF, and albuterol use were also similar between the
two formulations. The most common adverse events (AE) during treatment were
headache (8% and 6% of patients), nasopharyngitis (4% and 6%), cough (3% and 4%),
and sinusitis (2% and 5%) for FSC MDI and FSC DISKUS, respectively. Pneumonia was
recorded as an AE for 2 (2%) patients in the FSC DISKUS arm.
CONCLUSION: This is the first study to demonstrate that FSC MDI has a similar
efficacy and safety profile to FSC DISKUS in COPD patients.

DOI: 10.2174/1874306401004010086 
PMCID: PMC3023060
PMID: 21253451  [PubMed]


222. Curr Clin Pharmacol. 2011 Feb;6(1):48-61.

Bronchodilator combination therapy for the treatment of chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease.

Sethi S(1), Cote C.

Author information: 
(1)University at Buffalo, State University of New York, V.A. Western New York
Health Care System, Buffalo, NY 14215, USA. ssethi@buffalo.edu

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a major cause of morbidity and
mortality, and its prevalence is rising worldwide. Bronchodilators remain the
cornerstone of COPD treatment, especially inhaled β2-adrenergic receptor agonists
and inhaled anticholinergics. Long-acting bronchodilators are considered more
effective and convenient than short-acting bronchodilators for the maintenance
treatment in patients with moderate to very severe COPD. There are currently 3
long-acting inhaled bronchodilators available in the United States: the
β2-adrenergic receptor agonists formoterol and salmeterol, and the
anticholinergic, tiotropium. All 3 long-acting bronchodilators have been shown to
be effective and well tolerated for the management of patients with stable COPD
in clinical studies. The combination of β2-adrenergic receptor agonists and
anticholinergics has been shown to provide superior bronchodilatory effect than
either agent alone, possibly because of different mechanisms of action of these
agents. The current treatment guidelines recommend the use of one or more
long-acting bronchodilators for patients with moderate to severe stable COPD who 
remain symptomatic with single-agent bronchodilator therapy. The objective of
this article is to review clinical data on combined bronchodilator therapy with
β2-adrenergic receptor agonists and anticholinergics in patients with COPD.


PMID: 21235463  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Drugs Today (Barc). 2010 Nov;46(11):823-31. doi: 10.1358/dot.2010.46.11.1521831.

Roflumilast for COPD.

Izquierdo JL(1), Aparicio J.

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonology Department, Hospital General Universitario, Guadalajara, Spain.
jlizquierdo@sescam.org

Patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and chronic bronchitis
have a reduction in lung function and a higher risk of suffering exacerbations,
which result in a deterioration in their quality of life, an accelerated
progression of the disease and a greater mortality. COPD is currently considered 
an inflammatory disease involving airways and lung parenchyma. The symptoms that 
are typical of chronic bronchitis (chronic cough and sputum production) are
markers of underlying inflammation, characteristic of COPD. Roflumilast, an
antiinflammatory drug that belongs to the new therapeutic class of
phosphodiesterase PDE4 inhibitors, is the first drug developed for the treatment 
of a specific phenotype of COPD (COPD associated with chronic bronchitis). The
results of clinical trials indicated that in patients with COPD associated with
chronic bronchitis and a history of exacerbations, roflumilast improves lung
function and reduces the frequency of exacerbations that require medical
interventions. This effect remained when it was added to a regular treatment with
long-acting bronchodilators such as tiotropium or long-acting β₂-adrenoceptor
agonists (LABAs) such as salmeterol. Roflumilast has been shown to be generally
well tolerated. Side effects were typically mild to moderate and included
diarrhea, nausea, weight decrease and headache. Gastrointestinal side effects
mainly occurred within the first weeks of therapy and mostly resolved on
continued treatment.

Copyright 2010 Prous Science, S.A.U. or its licensors. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1358/dot.2010.46.11.1521831 
PMID: 21225021  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Zhonghua Jie He He Hu Xi Za Zhi. 2010 Oct;33(10):750-3.

[Attitudes and actions of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease patients on
treatment:a national multi-center investigative study].

[Article in Chinese]

Chen YH(1), Yao WZ, Kang J, Cai BQ, Zhou X, Liu Z, Chen P, Sun DJ, Zheng JP, Wang
GY, Feng YL, Xu YJ, Jia Y, Lu M, Chang C, Wang XH.

Author information: 
(1)Respiratory Department, Peking University Third Hospital, Beijing 100191,
China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the attitudes and actions of patients with chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) on treatment.
METHODS: A nation-wide multi-center, questionnaire study was carried out to
investigate the patient understanding and experience of COPD treatment between
Sep. 2007 and Dec. 2008. The questionnaire included the patients' understanding
of goal of COPD treatment, previous treatment, and expectation on drugs. The data
were analyzed by descriptive statistical methods.
RESULTS: 2072 patients with COPD in 11 centers were interviewed in the study. The
final effective questionnaires were collected from 1698 cases. 653 patients had
known of COPD. The attitudes and actions on treatment were analyzed based on
these patients. The patients had different understanding of goals for COPD
treatment, including 59.1% (384/650) for relieving symptoms. In recent 3 months, 
the most commonly used drugs were theophylline (53.7%, 351/653), iprotropium
(39.8%, 260/653), tiotropium (27.1%, 177/653). 72.0% (465/646) patients used the 
drugs according to the prescriptions. There were more than 80% patients who did
not understand the side effects of anti-cholinergics, β-adrenergic agonists,
inhaled steroids, inhaled steroid/long-acting β-agonist combination therapy, or
theophyllines. 37.4% (240/641) patients were afraid of side effects of inhaled
steroids. 42.2% (274/650) patients often took antibiotics. There was no oxygen
supply at home in 60.1% (391/651) patients. 70.5% (457/648) did not have
pulmonary rehabilitation. Requirement of long-term regular treatment was
considered in 77.4% (500/646) patients. The most important thing about patients' 
attitude on ideal drugs for COPD was drug efficacy (79.6%, 481/604). The most
ideal drug used in the past was fluticasone/salmeterol or tiotropium (16.9%,
78/461).
CONCLUSIONS: Patients had different attitudes and actions on COPD treatment.
Patient education should be strengthened to realize treatment goals for COPD.


PMID: 21176506  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Clin Respir J. 2011 Jan;5(1):44-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1752-699X.2010.00198.x.

Bias due to withdrawal in long-term randomised trials in COPD: evidence from the 
TORCH study.

Vestbo J(1), Anderson JA, Calverley PM, Celli B, Ferguson GT, Jenkins C, Yates
JC, Jones PW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology and Respiratory Medicine, Hvidovre Hospital and
University of Copenhagen, Hvidovre, Denmark. joergen.vestbo@hvh.regionh.dk

INTRODUCTION: Randomised controlled trials (RCTs) are considered the least biased
method for evaluating drug efficacy and several large long-term RCTs in chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease have been published. These usually include drugs
with symptomatic benefits and have significant withdrawal rates.
OBJECTIVES: We aimed at examining bias due to differential withdrawal in the
Towards a Revolution in COPD Health (TORCH) trial.
METHODS: We did an observational study nested in the TORCH trial, a
placebo-controlled trial of salmeterol/fluticasone propionate combination (SFC)
therapy in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. We included 3057 patients
randomly allocated to placebo or SFC in the analyses. We examined rates of
withdrawal from the study and analysed change in effect parameters over time and 
in relation to withdrawal, as well as medication uptake after withdrawal.
RESULTS: There was differential withdrawal with a significantly higher withdrawal
rate from the group allocated to placebo than to SFC, 44% compared with 34%.
Regardless of treatment group, withdrawal was associated with worse baseline lung
function and more frequent exacerbations, leading to selection of a study
population in better health than those originally recruited. As a result,
annualized exacerbation rates in the first 6 months of the study compared with
the last 6 months of the study decreased from 6.8 to 0.9 in the placebo group and
from 3.0 to 0.8 in the SFC group. Also, use of medications under test in the
study was frequent in patients after withdrawal.
CONCLUSION: Significant bias may occur in long-term RCTs of registered
medications with symptomatic benefits as a result of differential withdrawal.

© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1752-699X.2010.00198.x 
PMID: 21159140  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Phys Sportsmed. 2010 Dec;38(4):19-27. doi: 10.3810/psm.2010.12.1821.

Long-term use of fluticasone propionate/salmeterol fixed-dose combination and
incidence of nonvertebral fractures among patients with COPD in the UK General
Practice Research Database.

Miller DP(1), Watkins SE, Sampson T, Davis KJ.

Author information: 
(1)GlaxoSmithKline, Research Triangle Park, NC, USA.

INTRODUCTION: There has been inconsistent evidence on the association between use
of inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) and increased risk of nonvertebral fractures in 
patients with asthma or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). In a large 
population-based study in the United Kingdom, we estimated the association
between fluticasone propionate/salmeterol fixed-dose combination (FSC) and other 
ICS use and nonvertebral fracture incidence among patients with COPD.
METHODS: We identified a cohort of patients aged ≥ 45 years with COPD in the
General Practice Research Database (GPRD) between 2003 and 2006. We used a nested
case-control design to estimate the odds of incident nonvertebral fractures
associated with prior prescriptions of FSC and other ICS, applying conditional
logistic regression and controlling for potential confounders. Exposure to FSC
and other ICS was assessed by recency, duration, and number of prescriptions.
Average daily dose was defined as low, medium, high, or very high using
fluticasone propionate equivalents.
RESULTS: We identified 1523 nonvertebral fracture cases among 53 191 patients
with COPD at risk in the cohort. Use of FSC in the year prior to the index date
was associated with a statistically significant increase in the odds of
nonvertebral fractures (odds ratio [OR], 1.25; 95% confidence interval [CI],
1.07-1.47); however, there was no increase in the odds of nonvertebral fractures 
for other ICS use (OR, 1.12; 95% CI, 0.97-1.30). When examining results by the
recent use of prescriptions, an exposure that occurred farther from the index
date was associated with a significant increase in nonvertebral fracture (26-52
days prior OR, 1.36; 95% CI, 1.04-1.77; 53-365 days prior OR, 1.39; 95% CI,
1.07-1.78), whereas categories of more recent use (0-12 days prior or 13-25 days 
prior) were not associated with nonvertebral fractures relative to no FSC use. No
pattern of association between increasing levels of FSC or other ICS average
daily dose and increased odds of nonvertebral fracture was observed.
CONCLUSION: We did not observe a consistent association between prescriptions of 
FSC or other ICS in terms of recent use or average daily dose in the prior year
and increases in the odds of nonvertebral fractures in patients with COPD,
although ever use of FSC was associated with a slight elevation in the odds.

DOI: 10.3810/psm.2010.12.1821 
PMID: 21150138  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Drugs. 2010 Dec 3;70(17):2269-80. doi: 10.2165/11203960-000000000-00000.

Indacaterol: in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Moen MD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Adis, a Wolters Kluwer Business, Auckland, New Zealand. demail@adis.co.nz

Indacaterol is a long-acting β₂-adrenoceptor agonist that is available in the EU 
for the maintenance treatment of airflow obstruction in adult patients with
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Indacaterol has a 24-hour
bronchodilatory effect, which allows for once-daily administration. The onset of 
bronchodilation after inhalation of indacaterol is fast, with significant
improvements versus placebo seen 5 minutes after inhalation. In four large
(n > 400), randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, multicentre phase III
trials, patients with COPD who received indacaterol 150 or 300 μg once daily had 
a significantly higher mean trough forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV₁)
than placebo recipients after 12 weeks. Trough FEV₁ differences between
indacaterol and placebo recipients were 130-180 mL and exceeded the clinically
relevant threshold of 120 mL in all trials. Furthermore, indacaterol recipients
had significantly higher mean trough FEV₁ values after 12 weeks than patients who
received formoterol, salmeterol or open-label tiotropium. COPD exacerbations and 
symptoms, and health-related quality of life were also significantly improved for
indacaterol versus placebo recipients in some studies. Indacaterol was generally 
well tolerated by adults with moderate to severe COPD.

DOI: 10.2165/11203960-000000000-00000 
PMID: 21080743  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Respir Res. 2010 Oct 29;11:149. doi: 10.1186/1465-9921-11-149.

Long-acting beta-agonists in the management of chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease: current and future agents.

Tashkin DP(1), Fabbri LM.

Author information: 
(1)David Geffen School of Medicine, Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care
Medicine, UCLA, Los Angeles, California, USA. dtashkin@mednet.ucla.edu

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is characterized by progressive
airflow limitation and debilitating symptoms. For patients with
moderate-to-severe COPD, long-acting bronchodilators are the mainstay of therapy;
as symptoms progress, guidelines recommend combining bronchodilators from
different classes to improve efficacy. Inhaled long-acting β2-agonists (LABAs)
have been licensed for the treatment of COPD since the late 1990s and include
formoterol and salmeterol. They improve lung function, symptoms of breathlessness
and exercise limitation, health-related quality of life, and may reduce the rate 
of exacerbations, although not all patients achieve clinically meaningful
improvements in symptoms or health related quality of life. In addition, LABAs
have an acceptable safety profile, and are not associated with an increased risk 
of respiratory mortality, although adverse effects such as palpitations and
tremor may limit the dose that can be tolerated. Formoterol and salmeterol have
12-hour durations of action; however, sustained bronchodilation is desirable in
COPD. A LABA with a 24-hour duration of action could provide improvements in
efficacy, compared with twice-daily LABAs, and the once-daily dosing regimen
could help improve compliance. It is also desirable that a new LABA should
demonstrate fast onset of action, and a safety profile at least comparable to
existing LABAs.A number of novel LABAs with once-daily profiles are in
development which may be judged against these criteria. Indacaterol, a LABA with 
a 24-hour duration of bronchodilation and fast onset of action, is the most
advanced of these. Preliminary results from large clinical trials suggest
indacaterol improves lung function compared with placebo and other long-acting
bronchodilators. Other LABAs with a 24-hour duration of bronchodilation include
carmoterol, vilanterol trifenatate and oldaterol, with early results indicating
potential for once-daily dosing in humans.The introduction of once-daily LABAs
also provides the opportunity to develop combination inhalers of two or more
classes of once-daily long-acting bronchodilators, which may be advantageous for 
COPD patients through simplification of treatment regimens as well as
improvements in efficacy. Once-daily LABAs used both alone and in combination
with long-acting muscarinic antagonists represent a promising advance in the
treatment of COPD, and are likely to further improve outcomes for patients.

DOI: 10.1186/1465-9921-11-149 
PMCID: PMC2991288
PMID: 21034447  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. N Engl J Med. 2010 Oct 28;363(18):1715-26. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1008770. Epub 2010 
Sep 19.

Tiotropium bromide step-up therapy for adults with uncontrolled asthma.

Peters SP(1), Kunselman SJ, Icitovic N, Moore WC, Pascual R, Ameredes BT, Boushey
HA, Calhoun WJ, Castro M, Cherniack RM, Craig T, Denlinger L, Engle LL, DiMango
EA, Fahy JV, Israel E, Jarjour N, Kazani SD, Kraft M, Lazarus SC, Lemanske RF Jr,
Lugogo N, Martin RJ, Meyers DA, Ramsdell J, Sorkness CA, Sutherland ER, Szefler
SJ, Wasserman SI, Walter MJ, Wechsler ME, Chinchilli VM, Bleecker ER; National
Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute Asthma Clinical Research Network.

Author information: 
(1)Wake Forest University Health Sciences, Center for Genomics and Personalized
Medicine Research, Medical Center Blvd., Winston-Salem, NC 27157, USA.
sppeters@wfubmc.edu

Comment in
    J R Coll Physicians Edinb. 2010 Dec;40(4):321-2.
    Ann Intern Med. 2011 Feb 15;154(4):JC2-4.
    N Engl J Med. 2010 Oct 28;363(18):1764-5.
    N Engl J Med. 2010 Oct 28;363(18):1763.
    N Engl J Med. 2011 Feb 10;364(6):578; author reply 578-9.
    N Engl J Med. 2011 Feb 10;364(6):578; author reply 578-9.

BACKGROUND: Long-acting beta-agonist (LABA) therapy improves symptoms in patients
whose asthma is poorly controlled by an inhaled glucocorticoid alone. Alternative
treatments for adults with uncontrolled asthma are needed.
METHODS: In a three-way, double-blind, triple-dummy crossover trial involving 210
patients with asthma, we evaluated the addition of tiotropium bromide (a
long-acting anticholinergic agent approved for the treatment of chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease but not asthma) to an inhaled glucocorticoid, as
compared with a doubling of the dose of the inhaled glucocorticoid (primary
superiority comparison) or the addition of the LABA salmeterol (secondary
noninferiority comparison).
RESULTS: The use of tiotropium resulted in a superior primary outcome, as
compared with a doubling of the dose of an inhaled glucocorticoid, as assessed by
measuring the morning peak expiratory flow (PEF), with a mean difference of 25.8 
liters per minute (P<0.001) and superiority in most secondary outcomes, including
evening PEF, with a difference of 35.3 liters per minute (P<0.001); the
proportion of asthma-control days, with a difference of 0.079 (P=0.01); the
forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1) before bronchodilation, with a
difference of 0.10 liters (P=0.004); and daily symptom scores, with a difference 
of -0.11 points (P<0.001). The addition of tiotropium was also noninferior to the
addition of salmeterol for all assessed outcomes and increased the
prebronchodilator FEV1 more than did salmeterol, with a difference of 0.11 liters
(P=0.003).
CONCLUSIONS: When added to an inhaled glucocorticoid, tiotropium improved
symptoms and lung function in patients with inadequately controlled asthma. Its
effects appeared to be equivalent to those with the addition of salmeterol.
(Funded by the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute; ClinicalTrials.gov
number, NCT00565266.).

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa1008770 
PMCID: PMC3011177
PMID: 20979471  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Respirology. 2011 Jan;16(1):95-101. doi: 10.1111/j.1440-1843.2010.01869.x.

Effects of adding salmeterol/fluticasone propionate to tiotropium on airway
dimensions in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Hoshino M(1), Ohtawa J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Atami Hospital, International University
of Health and Welfare, Atami, Japan. hoshino@iuhw.ac.jp

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Although salmeterol/fluticasone propionate combination 
(SFC) therapy has been widely used for the treatment of COPD, the relationship
between airway dimensions and improvement in pulmonary function remains unknown. 
The aim of this study was to compare the effects of SFC in combination with
tiotropium (Tio) and Tio alone, on airway dimensions and pulmonary function in
COPD patients.
METHODS: Thirty COPD patients were randomized to receive inhaled Tio (18 µg once 
daily) or inhaled SFC (50/250 µg twice daily) plus Tio for 12 weeks. Spirometry
and CT were performed, and the St. George's Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ) was 
completed, before and after the trial. Airway dimensions were assessed by a
validated CT technique, and airway wall area (WA) corrected for body surface area
(BSA), percentage wall area (WA%), absolute wall thickness T/√BSA, and luminal
area Ai/BSA at the right apical segmental bronchus, were measured.
RESULTS: Treatment with SFC plus Tio significantly decreased WA/BSA (P < 0.05),
WA% (P < 0.01) and T/√BSA (P < 0.01), and increased Ai/BSA (P < 0.01), whereas
treatment with Tio alone had no effect. The changes in WA/BSA and Ai/BSA were
significantly correlated with increases in FEV1 (r = 0.48, P < 0.05, and
r = 0.36, P < 0.05, respectively). There were significant improvements in SGRQ
scores after treatment with SFC plus Tio.
CONCLUSIONS: Airway wall thickening and airway narrowing decreased after
treatment with SFC plus Tio, and the changes in airway dimensions were
proportional to the improvements in FEV1 . These results suggest that SFC plus
Tio is more effective than Tio alone in the management of COPD patients.

© 2010 The Authors. Respirology © 2010 Asian Pacific Society of Respirology.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1440-1843.2010.01869.x 
PMID: 20920142  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Clin Respir J. 2010 Oct;4(4):241-7. doi: 10.1111/j.1752-699X.2010.00185.x.

The effect of inhaled salmeterol, alone and in combination with fluticasone
propionate, on management of COPD patients.

Mansori F(1), Nemat Khorasani A, Boskabady MH, Boskabady M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Medical School, Kermanshah University of Medical
Sciences, Mashhad, Iran.

INTRODUCTION:   Airway inflammation is a known pathological feature of chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). We examined the effect of inhaled
salmeterol, alone and in combination with fluticasone propionate, on the
management of patients with COPD.
METHODS:   Forty male COPD patients were randomly divided into two groups; group 
1 (n=20) were treated with long-acting ß2-agonist, and group 2 (n=20) with
long-acting ß2-agonist and inhaled glucocoticoid each day for 3 months. Pulmonary
function tests (PFTs), including forced vital capacity (FVC), forced expiratory
volume in 1s (FEV1) and peak expiratory flow (PEF), were measured at the
beginning, 1 and 2 months after treatment and at the end of the study. The
frequency of using inhaled salbutamol/day and the 6-min walk distance were also
measured at four different visits. The frequency of exacerbation was also
recorded during the 90-day treatment period in the two groups.
RESULTS:   FEV(1) , FVC and PEF were significantly higher after 30 days of
treatment with fluticasone propionate (mean change from baseline in group 2:
155mL, 200mL and 70L/s, respectively; P<0.001). Six-minute walk distance also
increased significantly (mean change from baseline: 160 m; P < 0.001), and there 
was a 70%-80% reduction in the use of inhaled salbutamol (P<0.001). All
improvements were maintained over the remainder of the study period.
Exacerbations over the 90-day treatment period were significantly fewer than in
the same 90-day period in the previous year (2.8±0.7 vs 0.8±0.9; P<0.001). In
contrast, only PEF increased significantly with treatment in group 1 (salmeterol 
treatment alone).
CONCLUSIONS:   These results indicated that inhaled corticosteroids may be
beneficial in some patients with COPD.

© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1752-699X.2010.00185.x 
PMID: 20887348  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Surg Today. 2010 Oct;40(10):923-30. doi: 10.1007/s00595-009-4196-1. Epub 2010 Sep
25.

Efficacy of perioperative administration of long-acting bronchodilator on
postoperative pulmonary function and quality of life in lung cancer patients with
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Preliminary results of a randomized
control study.

Suzuki H(1), Sekine Y, Yoshida S, Suzuki M, Shibuya K, Takiguchi Y, Tatsumi K,
Yoshino I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba University,
Chiba, Japan.

PURPOSE: Long-acting bronchodilators are recommended as a first-line treatment
for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), although their effects for
postoperative lung cancer patients with COPD are still not well known. A
prospective randomized trial was used to examine the efficacy of bronchodilators 
on postoperative pulmonary function and quality of life (QOL).
METHODS: Twenty lung cancer patients with COPD who had lobectomies were
randomized. A control group (n = 10) did not receive bronchodilators. An
experimental group (n = 10) received tiotropium and salmeterol. Patients were
divided into two COPD grades: stage I COPD and stage II-III COPD. Results for
pulmonary function, 6-minute walking test, and the St. George's Respiratory
Questionnaire (SGRQ) were compared. Diaphragmatic motion on dynamic magnetic
resonance imaging was also analyzed.
RESULTS: The patient demographics were similar in the two groups. Except for
pulmonary function results at 2 weeks, no other parameters were significantly
different. However, in stage II-III COPD, forced expiratory volume in 1 second,
forced vital capacity, inspiratory capacity, the total score of the SGRQ, and
diaphragmatic motion in the experimental group (n = 5) were significantly better 
than those in the control group (n = 4) at various time points (all P < 0.05).
CONCLUSION: The daily inhalation of bronchodilators was effective for maintaining
the respiratory function and QOL in lung cancer patients with moderate to severe 
COPD.

DOI: 10.1007/s00595-009-4196-1 
PMID: 20872194  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Tuberk Toraks. 2010;58(2):192-201.

[Inhaled corticosteroid/beta-2 agonist therapy in moderate COPD].

[Article in Turkish]

Yıldırım N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chest Diseases, Faculty of Cerrahpasa Medicine, Istanbul
University, Istanbul, Turkey. nurhayatyil@hotmail.com

Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease (GOLD) guideline defines
moderate chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) as cases with
postbronchodilator FEV(1) values between 80-50%. Guidelines list their
expectations of COPD treatment as improvement in quality of life and functions,
slowing functional progression, decreasing and treatment of exacerbations and
complications and reduction in mortality. Guidelines, specifically the more
commonly used GOLD guideline, recommends regular use of long acting
bronchodilators alone or in combinations in symptomatic moderate COPD patients.
Inhalation route is preferred. Use of salmeterol in symptomatic moderate COPD
cases has increased FEV(1) and slowed down annual functional progression. Use of 
tiotropium as a single agent in the beginning of the study has improved quality
of life, increased FEV(1), showed no effect on total number of exacerbations but 
reduced the number of exacerbations requiring hospitalization; however among
patients treated with tiotropium alone, ICS + LABA, ICS alone and LABA alone had 
to be added to the treatment in 23%, 24% and 28% of the patients respectively.
Only 37% of the patients did not need any additional treatment. Addition of
tiotropium to a previous treatment has also improved quality of life and FEV(1)
values. Bronchodilators have failed to meet the treatment expectations defined in
guidelines in moderate COPD patients. Fixed combinations of inhaler
corticosteroids and long acting beta agonists caused an improvement of -3.7 units
in quality of life which is statistically insignificant but clinically very close
to significance. Fixed combinations also managed to increase FEV(1), to slow down
annual functional progression and to reduce total number of exacerbations and
mortality which were all clinically and statistically significant. Use of
ICS/LABA combinations, in which the components potentialize each other and which 
meet all of the expectations defined for COPD treatment, in bronchodilator and
anti-inflammatory treatment promises to be a wise choice.


PMID: 20865575  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Postgrad Med. 2010 Sep;122(5):150-64. doi: 10.3810/pgm.2010.09.2212.

Innovations to achieve excellence in COPD diagnosis and treatment in primary
care.

Fromer L(1), Barnes T, Garvey C, Ortiz G, Saver DF, Yawn B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Family Medicine, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of 
California, Los Angeles, CA, USA. lf@grouppracticeforum.com

Recognition of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is often missed or
delayed in primary care. Once recognized, COPD is often undertreated or
episodically treated, focusing on acute exacerbations without establishing
maintenance treatment to control ongoing disease. Diagnostic and therapeutic
pessimism result in missed opportunities to reduce exacerbations, maintain
physical functioning, and reduce emergent health care requirements. Proactive
diagnosis and evidence-based management can alleviate the impact of COPD on
patients' lives. Smoking cessation has been proven to slow the rate of lung
function decline. Maintenance pharmacotherapy and immunizations reduce
exacerbations. Pulmonary rehabilitation improves respiratory symptoms and
physical functioning and reduces rehospitalizations after exacerbations.
Self-management education improves health-related quality of life and reduces
inpatient and emergency care usage. Maintenance treatment with long-acting
inhaled bronchodilators is appropriate beginning in moderate COPD to maintain
airway patency and reduce exacerbations. Tiotropium is US Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) approved to treat bronchospasm and reduce exacerbations in
patients with COPD; salmeterol/fluticasone is FDA approved to treat airflow
obstruction in COPD and reduce exacerbations in patients with a history of
exacerbations. Other maintenance long-acting bronchodilators-salmeterol,
formoterol, and budesonide/formoterol-are FDA approved to treat airway
obstruction in COPD but lack an approved indication against exacerbations. FDA
warnings on the use of long-acting beta-adrenergic agents (LABAs) in asthma
specifically exempt COPD and do not apply to LABA/inhaled corticosteroid
combinations used in COPD. The actual effectiveness achieved in practice with any
COPD therapies depends on patients' inhaler technique, adherence, and
persistence. Medication usage rates and inhaler proficiency may be improved by
concordance, in which the health care provider and patient collaborate to make
treatment plans sustainable in the patient's daily life. Practice redesign for
whole-patient primary care provides additional tools for comprehensive COPD
management. Innovations such as group visits and the patient-centered medical
home provide newer ways to interact with COPD patients and their families.
Patient-focused and evidence-based options enable primary care practices to
manage COPD longitudinally and improve patient outcomes through the course of the
disease.

DOI: 10.3810/pgm.2010.09.2212 
PMID: 20861599  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2010 Sep 7;5:311-8.

Onset of action of indacaterol in patients with COPD: comparison with salbutamol 
and salmeterol-fluticasone.

Balint B(1), Watz H, Amos C, Owen R, Higgins M, Kramer B; INSURE Study
Investigators.

Author information: 
(1)Csongrád Megyei OnkormányzatMellkasi Betegségek Szakkórháza, Deszk, Hungary.

BACKGROUND: indacaterol is a novel, inhaled once-daily ultra-long-acting
β(2)-agonist for the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
OBJECTIVES: this study compared the onset of action of single doses of
indacaterol 150 and 300 μg with salbutamol 200 μg, salmeterol-fluticasone 50/500 
μg, and placebo in moderate-to-severe COPD patients.
METHODS: this was a multicenter, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled
crossover study. The primary variable was forced expiratory volume in one second 
(FEV(1)) at five minutes postdose.
RESULTS: out of 89 patients randomized (mean age 62 years), 86 completed the
study. At five minutes postdose, both indacaterol doses were statistically and
clinically superior to placebo (P < 0.001), with treatment-placebo differences in
FEV(1) of 100 (95% confidence interval [CI] 70-130) mL and 120 (95% CI 90-150) mL
for indacaterol 150 and 300 μg, respectively. FEV(1) at five minutes postdose
with both indacaterol doses was numerically higher than for salbutamol (10 and 30
mL for indacaterol 150 and 300 μg, respectively) and significantly higher than
for salmeterol-fluticasone (50 mL, P = 0.003; 70 mL, P < 0.001, respectively).
Moreover, both indacaterol doses showed significantly higher FEV(1) than placebo 
(P < 0.001) at all postdose time points. The numbers of patients with an FEV(1)
increase of at least 12% and 200 mL at five minutes postdose were 16 (18.8%), 24 
(27.6%), 20 (23.3%), 8 (9.1%), and 3 (3.4%) for indacaterol 150 and 300 μg,
salbutamol 200 μg, salmeterol-fluticasone 50/500 μg, and placebo, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: single doses of indacaterol 150 and 300 μg demonstrated a fast onset
of action similar to that for salbutamol and faster than that for
salmeterol-fluticasone.


PMCID: PMC2939686
PMID: 20856830  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Chin Med J (Engl). 2010 Jul;123(13):1652-7.

Salmeterol/fluticasone treatment reduces circulating C-reactive protein level in 
patients with stable chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Tang YJ(1), Wang K, Yuan T, Qiu T, Xiao J, Yi Q, Feng YL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, West China Hospital, Sichuan University,
Chengdu, Sichuan 610041, China.

BACKGROUND: Evidence suggests that systemic inflammation may play an important
role in the progression and morbidity of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
It remains controversial whether inhaled corticosteroid in combination with a
long-acting beta(2)-adrenoceptor agonist can attenuate systemic inflammation. We 
evaluated the effect of salmeterol/fluticasone propionate on circulating
C-reactive protein level in stable chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
patients.
METHODS: An open-label clinical trial was conducted to recruit 122 outpatients
with stable moderate-to-severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease from
department of respiratory medicine in two teaching hospitals between June 2007
and March 2008. Patients were randomized into two groups (1:1) to receive either 
the combination of 50 microg salmeterol and 500 microg fluticasone twice daily (n
= 61), or the combination of 206 microg albuterol and 36 microg ipratropium q.i.d
(n = 61) over 6 months. Circulating C-reactive protein concentrations were
measured before randomization and during the follow-up. The efficacy of treatment
was also assessed by spirometry, as well as health status and dyspnea score at
baseline and after 6-month treatment.
RESULTS: Baseline characteristics of two groups were similar. Compared with
ipratropium/albuterol, the combination of salmeterol/fluticasone significantly
reduced circulating level of C-reactive protein (-1.73 vs. 0.08 mg/L,
respectively, P < 0.05) after 6-month treatment. Forced expiratory volume in one 
second (FEV(1)) and health status also improved significantly in
salmeterol/fluticasone group compared with ipratropium/albuterol.
Salmeterol/fluticasone treatment subjects who had a decrease of circulating
C-reactive protein level had a significant improvement in FEV(1) and St George's 
Respiratory Questionnaire total scores compared with those who did not (185 vs.
83 ml and -5.71 vs. -1.79 units, respectively, both P < 0.01).
CONCLUSION: Salmeterol/fluticasone treatment reduced circulating C-reactive
protein concentration in clinically stable moderate-to-severe chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease patients after 6-month treatment.


PMID: 20819623  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Curr Med Res Opin. 2010 Oct;26(10):2421-9. doi: 10.1185/03007995.2010.516284.

Adherence to controller therapy for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: a
review.

Charles MS(1), Blanchette CM, Silver H, Lavallee D, Dalal AA, Mapel D.

Author information: 
(1)Lovelace Respiratory Research Institute, Kannapolis, North Carolina 28081,
USA. cblanchette@LRRI.org

OBJECTIVE: While several studies have examined adherence to controller
medications for the treatment of COPD, few systematic reviews have taken the
translational step to identifying important and necessary areas for further
research. The objective of this study was to review data on the outcomes of
adherence to various controller therapies in patients with COPD in an effort to
help prescribers understand adherence properties for each therapy.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: This is a systematic review of studies investigating
adherence to an array of controller pharmaceutical regimens. The studies were
obtained from PubMed during 2008 and 2009 using the following key words: chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease, COPD, adherence, controller medication, and
persistence. Only articles encompassing adherence or persistence data to
controller medications and published after 1990 were utilized.
RESULTS: After the search results were filtered for only the articles that
pertained to adherence or persistence measurements in COPD, 35 articles remained;
and finally, discounting those articles not published in English, articles which 
did not compare treatments for COPD, as well as those which were review articles,
ten applicable articles remained. Each of these found low levels of medication
adherence and/or persistence among patients receiving medications for COPD.
Patients receiving fluticasone/salmeterol (FSC) and tiotropium (TIO) for
treatment showed the highest adherence among all controller medications. Patients
who were married, older, and white were more likely to adhere to their
medications.
CONCLUSION: Characteristics of the medication used (i.e. dosing schedule,
formulation, etc.) as well as patient characteristics affect the
adherence/persistence to medications for the treatment of COPD. Further patient
education is necessary in order to effectively improve disease management and
patient outcomes in COPD. There is a need for future research and educational
efforts to improve adherence in COPD and more clearly identify specific
behavioral and treatment characteristics associated with specific COPD
medications that can facilitate adherence.

DOI: 10.1185/03007995.2010.516284 
PMID: 20815661  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2011 Feb 1;183(3):317-22. doi:
10.1164/rccm.201004-0665OC. Epub 2010 Sep 2.

Sex differences in mortality and clinical expressions of patients with chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease. The TORCH experience.

Celli B(1), Vestbo J, Jenkins CR, Jones PW, Ferguson GT, Calverley PM, Yates JC, 
Anderson JA, Willits LR, Wise RA; Investigators of the TORCH Study.

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary and Critical Care Division, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA
02115, USA. bcelli@copdnet.org

RATIONALE: There is limited knowledge regarding sex differences and outcomes in
patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
OBJECTIVES: Determine sex differences in survival, causes of death, and
patient-centered outcomes in the 3-year Toward a Revolution in COPD Health
(TORCH) study.
METHODS: A total of 1,481 women and 4,631 men with COPD were enrolled in TORCH, a
trial comparing salmeterol, 50 μg, plus fluticasone propionate, 500 μg, twice a
day and each component individually. Causes of death were determined by an
endpoint committee. Sex differences in survival were explored using a Cox
proportional hazards model adjusted for other baseline factors. Exacerbation rate
was compared using a negative binomial model. Dyspnea was evaluated using the
Medical Research Council scale and health status using the St. George's
Respiratory Questionnaire.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: At baseline, women were younger (63 vs. 66 yr),
had higher FEV(1) (47% vs. 44% predicted), and worse St. George's Respiratory
Questionnaire (51.3 vs. 48.7) and Medical Research Council score. During the
study, 707 (15.3%) men and 168 (11.3%) women died. After adjusting for
differences in baseline factors, the risk of dying was 16% higher in men than in 
women; however, this was not statistically significant (hazard ratio 1.16 [95%
CI, 0.98-1.39]). Causes of death were similar in women and men. Exacerbation rate
was 25% higher in women than in men.
CONCLUSIONS: Women enrolled in TORCH had a lower mortality rate than men but
similar causes of death. The risk of dying was similar in women and men after
adjusting for important baseline variables. Women reported more exacerbations,
and worse dyspnea and health status scores than men. Clinical trial registered
with www.clinicaltrials.gov (NCT00268216).

DOI: 10.1164/rccm.201004-0665OC 
PMID: 20813884  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Pharmacoeconomics. 2010;28(9):733-49. doi: 10.2165/11535600-000000000-00000.

A new method for examining the cost savings of reducing COPD exacerbations.

Mapel DW(1), Schum M, Lydick E, Marton JP.

Author information: 
(1)Lovelace Clinic Foundation, Albuquerque, New Mexico 87106-4264, USA.
Doug.Mapel@LCFresearch.org

BACKGROUND: Some treatments for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) can 
reduce exacerbations, and thus could have a favourable impact on overall
healthcare costs.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate a new method for assessing the potential cost savings of
COPD controller medications based on the incidence of exacerbations and their
related resource utilization in the general population.
METHODS: Patients with COPD (n = 1074) enrolled in a regional managed care system
in the US were identified using administrative data and divided by their
medication use into three groups (salbutamol, ipratropium and salmeterol).
Exacerbations were captured using International Classification of Diseases, Ninth
Edition (ICD-9) and current procedural terminology (CPT) codes, then logistic
regression models were created that described the risk of exacerbations for each 
comparator group and exacerbation type over a 6-month period. A Monte Carlo
simulation was then applied 1000 times to provide the range of potential
exacerbation reductions and cost consequences in response to a range of
hypothetical examples of COPD controller medications.
RESULTS: Exacerbation events for each group could be modelled such that the
events predicted by the Monte Carlo estimates were very close to the actual
prevalences. The estimated cost per exacerbation avoided depended on the
incidence of exacerbation in the various subpopulations, the assumed relative
risk reduction, the projected daily cost for new therapy, and the costs of
exacerbation treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: COPD exacerbation events can be accurately modelled from the
healthcare utilization data of a defined cohort with sufficient accuracy for
cost-effectiveness analysis. Treatments that reduce the risk or severity of
exacerbations are likely to be cost effective among those patients who have
frequent exacerbations and hospitalizations.

DOI: 10.2165/11535600-000000000-00000 
PMID: 20799755  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2010 Aug 9;5:179-87.

Cost-effectiveness of combination fluticasone propionate-salmeterol 250/50 microg
versus salmeterol in severe COPD patients.

Dalal AA(1), St Charles M, Petersen HV, Roberts MH, Blanchette CM,
Manavi-Zieverink K.

Author information: 
(1)US Health Outcomes, GlaxoSmithKline, Research Triangle Park, NC, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To estimate the cost-effectiveness of fluticasone
propionate-salmeterol combination (FSC) compared to salmeterol for maintenance
therapy in severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
STUDY DESIGN: Pooled economic analysis.
METHODS: We performed an economic analysis of pooled data from two randomized
clinical trials (combined N = 1554) that evaluated the effect of maintenance
therapy with FSC (250/50 microg twice daily) or salmeterol (50 microg twice
daily) on exacerbation rates in patients with severe COPD. We calculated
exacerbation rates and applied standardized costs to exacerbation-related health 
care utilization reported in the trials (office, urgent care, and emergency
department visits; hospitalizations; and oral corticosteroids and antibiotics) to
determine cost differences between FSC and salmeterol treatment outcomes.
RESULTS: Annual rates of any exacerbation and moderate/severe exacerbation were
lower in the FSC group than the salmeterol group (4.91 vs 5.78 and 1.32 vs 2.00
respectively, both P < 0.05). Total adjusted annual COPD related exacerbation and
therapeutic costs were $4,842 (95% CI; $4,731-$4,952) in the FSC group and $5,066
(95% CI; $4,937-$5,195) in the salmeterol group.
CONCLUSIONS: FSC combination therapy is associated with reduced risk of any
exacerbation and moderate/severe exacerbation, and incurs lower annual
COPD-related health care costs compared to treatment with salmeterol. This
analysis demonstrates that FSC therapy may be advantageous from both a clinical
and cost-benefit standpoint for patients with severe COPD.


PMCID: PMC2921685
PMID: 20714371  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Respir Med. 2011 Feb;105(2):250-8. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2010.07.009. Epub 2010 Aug
10.

Predictive factors for evaluation of response to fluticasone
propionate/salmeterol combination in severe COPD.

Tonnel AB(1), Tillie-Leblond I, Attali V, Bavelele Z, Lagrange O.

Author information: 
(1)Hôpital Albert Calmette, Boulevard du Pr Jules Leclercq, 59037 Lille Cedex,
France. andretonnel@aol.com

BACKGROUND: The predictive factors for treatment response in patients with severe
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) are unknown. We investigated
predictive factors for response to fluticasone propionate/salmeterol (FSC) in
severe COPD patients.
METHODS: This prospective, open-label, non-comparative study included 921 adult
patients with severe COPD (baseline forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV(1)) <50%
of predicted), a history of repeated exacerbations, and symptoms despite
bronchodilator treatment. FSC (500 μg/50 μg) was delivered via an inhaler, twice 
a day, for 12 weeks. The primary efficacy endpoint was the response rate for
inspiratory capacity (IC), FEV(1), or quality of life (QoL), assessed with the
Saint George's respiratory questionnaire, at week 6 and week 12.
RESULTS: The overall response rate to FSC at 6 and 12 weeks was 79%. The
corresponding rates for FEV(1), IC, and QoL were 38%, 55%, and 62%, respectively.
More than 40% of patients showed a response for IC and/or QoL without being
responders for FEV(1.) Overall lung function and QoL were improved. FSC was well 
tolerated with a safety profile consistent with that observed previously.
CONCLUSION: Nearly 80% of patients responded to FSC treatment in this real-life
study. Improvements in IC and QoL at 12 weeks revealed a clinically relevant
response in patients with no improvement in FEV(1). IC reversibility to
salbutamol before treatment might represent, better than FEV1, a prognostic
factor of response to FSC in severe COPD. Moreover these tests are easy to
perform routinely and in large numbers of patients.

Copyright Â© 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2010.07.009 
PMID: 20702076  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Eur Respir J. 2011 Feb;37(2):273-9. doi: 10.1183/09031936.00045810. Epub 2010 Aug
6.

Once-daily indacaterol versus twice-daily salmeterol for COPD: a
placebo-controlled comparison.

Kornmann O(1), Dahl R, Centanni S, Dogra A, Owen R, Lassen C, Kramer B; INLIGHT-2
(Indacaterol Efficacy Evaluation Using 150-µg Doses with COPD Patients) study
investigators.

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary Division, Internal Medicine, University Hospital, Mainz, Germany.
kornmann@ikf-pneumologie.de

Indacaterol is a novel, inhaled, once-daily, ultra-long-acting β(2)-agonist
bronchodilator recently approved in Europe for the treatment of chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). The aim of the present study was to
investigate the efficacy and safety of indacaterol compared with placebo and the 
twice-daily β(2)-agonist, salmeterol, as an active control. Patients with
moderate-to-severe COPD were randomised to 6 months double-blind treatment with
indacaterol (150 μg once daily), salmeterol (50 μg twice daily) or placebo. The
primary efficacy end-point was trough (24 h post-dose) forced expiratory volume
in 1 s (FEV(1)) after 12 weeks. 1,002 patients were randomised and 838 (84%)
completed the study. Indacaterol increased trough FEV(1) at week 12 by 170 mL
over placebo (p<0.001) and by 60 mL over salmeterol (p<0.001). Both active
treatments improved health status (St George's Respiratory Questionnaire) and
dyspnoea (transition dyspnoea index) compared with placebo, with differences
between them favouring indacaterol. Safety profiles were similar across the
treatment groups, and both indacaterol and salmeterol were well tolerated.
Once-daily treatment with 150 μg indacaterol had a significant and clinically
relevant bronchodilator effect over 24 h post-dose and improved health status and
dyspnoea to a greater extent than twice-daily 50 μg salmeterol. Indacaterol
should prove a useful additional treatment for patients with COPD.

DOI: 10.1183/09031936.00045810 
PMID: 20693243  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Drug Des Devel Ther. 2010 Jul 21;4:147-58.

Roflumilast: first phosphodiesterase 4 inhibitor approved for treatment of COPD.

Giembycz MA(1), Field SK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Faculty of Medicine, University of 
Calgary, Alberta, Canada.

In April 2010, the European Medicines Agency Committee for Medicinal Products for
Human Use recommended approval of roflumilast, a selective phosphodiesterase 4
inhibitor, for the "maintenance treatment of severe chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD, FEV(1) postbronchodilator less than 50% predicted) associated with
chronic bronchitis in adult patients with a history of frequent exacerbations as 
add-on to bronchodilator treatment". This decision was based, in part, on the
results of several large, international, multicenter, randomized,
placebo-controlled trials of either six or 12 months' duration that had been
undertaken in COPD patients. Roflumilast 500 mug daily improved lung function and
reduced exacerbations in patients with more severe COPD, especially those with
chronic bronchitis, frequent exacerbations, or who required frequent rescue
inhaler therapy in the placebo-controlled trials. It also improved lung function 
and reduced exacerbations in patients with moderately severe COPD treated with
salmeterol or tiotropium. Advantages of roflumilast over inhaler therapy are that
it is an oral tablet and only needs to be taken once daily. While taking
roflumilast, the most common adverse effects patients experienced were
gastrointestinal upset and headache. Weight loss, averaging 2.2 kg, occurred in
patients treated with roflumilast. Patients taking roflumilast were more likely
to drop out of the trials than patients in the control groups. Patients who
discontinued therapy usually did so during the first few weeks and were more
likely to have experienced gastrointestinal side effects. Roflumilast is the
first selective phosphodiesterase 4 inhibitor and will offer physicians another
treatment option for patients with more severe COPD.


PMCID: PMC2915539
PMID: 20689641  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Drugs. 2010 Aug 20;70(12):1615-27. doi: 10.2165/11205930-000000000-00000.

Roflumilast: in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Sanford M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Adis, a Wolters Kluwer Business, Mairangi Bay, North Shore, Auckland, New
Zealand. demail@adis.co.nz

Erratum in
    Drugs. 2010 Aug 20;70(12):1627.

Roflumilast is an orally administered, selective phosphodiesterase 4 inhibitor
that is a novel treatment for patients with severe chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD). Across four randomized, double-blind, multinational trials in
patients with moderate to severe or severe COPD, roflumilast 500 microg/day
produced significantly greater improvements from baseline than placebo in pre-
and post-bronchodilator forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV(1)). While mean
increases in FEV(1) in roflumilast groups were small, they were in marked
contrast to the decreases or negligible increase in FEV(1) in the placebo groups.
In three of four trials, roflumilast significantly reduced the COPD exacerbation 
rate; in a pooled analysis of two 52-week trials, roflumilast was associated with
a 17% reduction over placebo. Further randomized, double-blind, multinational
trials compared roflumilast 500 microg plus salmeterol with placebo plus
salmeterol and roflumilast 500 microg plus tiotropium bromide with placebo plus
tiotropium bromide. In both trials, roflumilast plus long-acting bronchodilator
produced significantly greater increases in pre- and post-bronchodilator FEV(1)
than placebo plus long-acting bronchodilator. Roflumilast had an acceptable
tolerability profile. In a pooled analysis of two trials, 19% and 22% of
roflumilast and placebo recipients had serious adverse events; in the
corresponding groups, 14% and 11% discontinued medications because of adverse
events.

DOI: 10.2165/11205930-000000000-00000 
PMID: 20687624  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Thorax. 2010 Aug;65(8):719-25. doi: 10.1136/thx.2010.136077.

Cardiovascular events in patients with COPD: TORCH study results.

Calverley PM(1), Anderson JA, Celli B, Ferguson GT, Jenkins C, Jones PW, Crim C, 
Willits LR, Yates JC, Vestbo J; TORCH Investigators.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University Hospital Aintree, Longmoor Lane, Liverpool,
UK. pmacal@liverpool.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: Previous studies have suggested that long-term use of beta agonists
to treat chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) may increase the risk of
cardiovascular adverse events. In this post hoc analysis, data from the TOwards a
Revolution in COPD Health (TORCH) study were used to investigate whether use of
the long-acting beta(2) agonist salmeterol over 3 years increased the risk of
cardiovascular adverse events in patients with moderate to severe COPD.
METHODS: TORCH was a randomised, double-blind, placebo controlled study conducted
at 444 centres in 42 countries. Patients (n=6184; safety population) received
twice daily combined salmeterol 50 microg plus fluticasone propionate 500 microg 
(SFC), either component alone, or placebo. Adverse events were recorded every 12 
weeks for 3 years.
RESULTS: The probability of having a cardiovascular adverse event by 3 years was 
24.2% for placebo, 22.7% for salmeterol, 24.3% for fluticasone propionate and
20.8% for SFC. Although a history of myocardial infarction doubled the
probability of cardiovascular adverse events, the event rates remained similar
across treatment groups.
CONCLUSION: Post hoc analysis of the 3-year TORCH dataset showed that salmeterol 
alone or in combination (SFC) did not increase the risk of cardiovascular events 
in patients with moderate to severe COPD.

DOI: 10.1136/thx.2010.136077 
PMID: 20685748  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Clin Ther. 2010 May;32(5):965-72. doi: 10.1016/j.clinthera.2010.05.004.

Impact of prior authorization for asthma medications on the use of emergency
health services: a retrospective cohort study among newly diagnosed patients with
asthma.

Guénette L(1), Gaudet M.

Author information: 
(1)Direction Scientifique du Suivi et de L'usage Optimal, Conseil du Médicament
du Québec, Québec City, Québec, Canada. line.guenette@msss.gouv.qc.ca

Comment in
    Clin Ther. 2010 May;32(5):962-4.

BACKGROUND: A prior authorization process to limit the nonoptimal use of
medications combining inhaled corticosteroids and long-acting bronchodilators was
introduced in the province of Québec, Canada, on October 1, 2003.
OBJECTIVE: We assessed the impact of this administrative measure on the rate of
asthma-related emergency department (ED) visits and hospitalizations.
METHODS: A retrospective cohort study was conducted using Régie de l'assurance
maladie du Québec administrative databases. We identified all persons aged 6 to
44 years with an incident asthma diagnosis in the 2-year periods preceding
(October 1, 2001-September 30, 2003) and following (October 1, 2003-September 30,
2005) the introduction of the process. Children aged < or = 5 years at the time
of the first encountered diagnosis were excluded because it is difficult to make 
an objective asthma diagnosis until 6 years of age. People aged > or = 45 years
at the time of the first encountered diagnosis were also excluded to avoid the
inclusion of persons who might also have had chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease. Two groups were created based on their prescription drug insurance
(private or public). Publicly insured persons were considered exposed to the
process while privately insured persons were considered not exposed. Cox
proportional hazards regression was used to assess, for each insurance group, the
hazard ratio (HR) for an asthma-related first hospitalization or ED visit between
the 2 periods. The use of medication, quality of life, and visits to physicians' 
offices were not considered in the analysis. The interaction between group and
period was assessed to test whether the change in risk between the preprocess and
postprocess periods differed by insurance group; statistical models were adjusted
for sex, age, region, presence of a comorbidity other than asthma, and discipline
of diagnosing physician.
RESULTS: There were 47,579 publicly insured persons and 93,177 privately insured 
persons with incident asthma during the study period. The risk of an
asthma-related first hospitalization or ED visit remained unchanged in the 2
periods evaluated among both the publicly insured (adjusted HR, 0.95 [95% CI,
0.88-1.03]) and the privately insured (adjusted HR, 1.03 [95% CI, 0.96-1.03]).
The change in risk between the preprocess and postprocess periods was not
significantly different between insurance groups.
CONCLUSIONS: The prior authorization process introduced to limit the nonoptimal
use of combination products (formoterol/budesonide and salmeterol/fluticasone)
had no apparent impact on first asthma-related hospitalization or ED visit in
these patients newly diagnosed with asthma who were covered by Québec's public
prescription drug insurance plan.

Copyright 2010 Excerpta Medica Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clinthera.2010.05.004 
PMID: 20685505  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Clin Ther. 2010 Jul;32(7):1320-8. doi: 10.1016/j.clinthera.2010.06.022.

Relative effectiveness of budesonide/formoterol and fluticasone
propionate/salmeterol in a 1-year, population-based, matched cohort study of
patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD): Effect on
COPD-related exacerbations, emergency department visits and hospitalizations,
medication utilization, and treatment adherence.

Blais L(1), Forget A, Ramachandran S.

Author information: 
(1)University of Montreal, Quebec, Canada. lucie.blais@umontreal.ca

BACKGROUND: According to evidence-based guidelines, the combination of inhaled
corticosteroids and inhaled long-acting beta(2)-agonists in a single inhaler is
recommended for patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) who
are experiencing exacerbations. The relative effectiveness of combination
products such as budesonide/formoterol (BUD/FM) and fluticasone
propionate/salmeterol (FP/SM) has not been well documented.
OBJECTIVE: This study was conducted to investigate the different outcomes
associated with the use of either BUD/FM or FP/SM in a single inhaler in patients
with COPD. Outcomes included rates of exacerbations, emergency department (ED)
visits and hospitalizations for COPD, medication utilization, and treatment
adherence.
METHODS: A 1-year, population-based, matched cohort study was conducted using
administrative health care databases from the Canadian province of Quebec.
Patients treated with BUD/FM were matched (1:1) to patients treated with FP/SM
based on the following criteria: age group, sex, calendar year of treatment
initiation, the number of COPD exacerbations in the year before treatment
initiation, and use of inhaled short acting beta(2)-agonists (SABAs) and
ipratropium bromide in the 3 months before treatment initiation. COPD
exacerbations were defined as a claim for a short-course (< or =14 days)
prescription of oral corticosteroids, or an ED visit or a hospitalization for
COPD. Events occurring within 15 days were counted as a single exacerbation.
Between-group comparisons of the number of exacerbations, ED visits, and
hospitalizations for COPD, as well as claims for oral corticosteroids, were
performed using Poisson regression models. Between-group comparisons of the mean 
number of doses of SABAs and ipratropium bromide per day were performed using
linear regression models. Treatment adherence was also assessed.
RESULTS: Of the 2262 patients in the matched cohort, 78.1% were aged > or =65
years and 52.1% were men. COPD exacerbations, claims for oral corticosteroids,
use of SABAs, and patient adherence to treatment did not differ significantly
between the BUD/FM and FP/SM groups. However, the BUD/FM group was significantly 
less likely to have an ED visit (adjusted relative risk [RR] = 0.75; 95% CI, 0.58
to 0.97) or hospitalization (adjusted RR = 0.61; 95% CI, 0.47 to 0.81) for COPD
and had fewer claims for prescriptions for tiotropium (adjusted RR = 0.71; 95%
CI, 0.57 to 0.89). The BUD/FM group also used fewer doses of ipratroprium bromide
than the FP/SM group (adjusted mean difference, -0.2 dose; 95% CI, -0.3 to -0.1).
CONCLUSIONS: These COPD patients treated with BUD/FM were less likely to have ED 
visits and hospitalizations for COPD and used fewer doses of anticholinergic
medication than patients treated with FP/SM in the year after treatment
initiation. However, due to the observational nature of the study design, we
cannot conclude with certainty that the medication was the only factor
responsible for the observed differences.

2010 Excerpta Medica Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clinthera.2010.06.022 
PMID: 20678680  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Expert Rev Respir Med. 2010 Oct;4(5):543-55. doi: 10.1586/ers.10.56.

Roflumilast for the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Rabe KF(1).

Author information: 
(1)Leiden University Medical Center, Department of Pulmonology, Albinusdreef 2,
2333 ZA Leiden, The Netherlands. k.f.rabe@lumc.nl

Roflumilast is a new phosphodiesterase 4 inhibitor that has recently completed
Phase III trials for the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD). Preclinical studies have shown that roflumilast targets inflammatory
processes in COPD, with beneficial effects on tobacco-induced lung inflammation, 
lung fibrosis and remodeling, mucociliary malfunction and oxidative stress. Two
recent, 1-year Phase III trials in COPD have shown that roflumilast reduces
exacerbations and improves lung function in patients with COPD who have symptoms 
of chronic bronchitis and a history of exacerbations. Two other 6-month Phase III
trials have demonstrated the beneficial effects of roflumilast in patients
already receiving treatment with the long-acting &#x03B2;-agonist salmeterol or
the long-acting muscarinic antagonist tiotropium. This article reviews the
pharmacology, pharmacokinetics and preclinical pharmacology of roflumilast, the
clinical studies supporting its use in COPD and its side-effect profile.

DOI: 10.1586/ers.10.56 
PMID: 20649375  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Expert Opin Pharmacother. 2010 Aug;11(12):2077-85. doi:
10.1517/14656566.2010.499358.

Indacaterol maleate for the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Tashkin DP(1).

Author information: 
(1)David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles, California 90095, USA.
dtashkin@mednet.ucla.edu

IMPORTANCE OF THE FIELD: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a
partially reversible, progressive obstructive disorder. Bronchodilators are the
mainstay of treatment since they improve lung function and patient-reported
outcomes and reduce acute exacerbations. Long-acting inhaled bronchodilators (at 
present including the once-daily antimuscarinic tiotropium, and the twice-daily
beta(2)-agonists formoterol and salmeterol) are recommended as first-line
treatment for patients with persistent symptoms. Indacaterol maleate has been
developed as a new once-daily inhaled beta(2)-selective agonist.
AREAS COVERED IN THIS REVIEW: This article reviews the published literature on
the pharmacologic properties and the Phase II and III trials that have evaluated 
the safety and efficacy of this new agent.
WHAT THE READER WILL GAIN: The reader will obtain an appreciation of the safety
and efficacy of indacaterol and the role that it might play in the future
management of COPD of varying severity.
TAKE HOME MESSAGE: Indacaterol is a new, once-daily beta(2)-agonist with an onset
of action within 5 min and a duration of bronchodilation of at least 24 h. In
doses of 150 and 300 microg, it has sustained benefits over 6 - 12 months with
respect to both bronchodilation and patient-reported outcomes and is
well-tolerated with an acceptable safety profile.

DOI: 10.1517/14656566.2010.499358 
PMID: 20642373  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Am J Med Sci. 2010 Oct;340(4):309-18. doi: 10.1097/MAJ.0b013e3181e40cd1.

Primary care management of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease to reduce
exacerbations and their consequences.

Anzueto A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Texas, San Antonio Health Science
Center, San Antonio, TX, USA. anzueto@uthscsa.edu

Exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)-acute worsenings of
dyspnea, cough and/or sputum production beyond daily symptom variations,
necessitating a change in treatment-account for most COPD-related morbidity, care
burden and direct costs. Frequent exacerbations (especially those requiring
emergency, inpatient or intensive care) reduce physical activity, accelerate lung
function decline and increase mortality. This review profiles exacerbation
diagnosis, treatment and reduction measures for primary care physicians. Chronic 
maintenance pharmacotherapy is important to reduce exacerbations. Tiotropium, a
long-acting anticholinergic, and salmeterol/fluticasone, a long-acting
β-agonist/inhaled corticosteroid combination, are Food and Drug
Administration-approved maintenance therapies to reduce exacerbations of COPD.
Influenza and pneumonia vaccinations reduce infectious triggers; pulmonary
rehabilitation reduces exacerbation recurrence. Acute exacerbation treatment
(short-acting bronchodilators, systemic corticosteroids and/or antibiotics)
should be complemented by long-term COPD maintenance therapy to reduce future
exacerbations. Recognition of a COPD exacerbation signals primary care physicians
to establish long-term COPD management to reduce morbidity, disability and
mortality.

DOI: 10.1097/MAJ.0b013e3181e40cd1 
PMID: 20625276  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Pulm Pharmacol Ther. 2011 Feb;24(1):162-8. doi: 10.1016/j.pupt.2010.06.005. Epub 
2010 Jul 7.

Sustained 24-hour efficacy of once daily indacaterol (300 μg) in patients with
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: a randomized, crossover study.

Laforce C(1), Aumann J, de Teresa Parreño L, Iqbal A, Young D, Owen R, Higgins M,
Kramer B; INTEGRAL Study Investigators.

Author information: 
(1)North Carolina Clinical Research, Raleigh, NC, USA.

PURPOSE: Indacaterol is a novel, once daily, inhaled ultra-long-acting β₂-agonist
for the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Here we
compared the 24-h spirometry profile of once daily indacaterol 300 μg with that
of placebo and twice daily salmeterol 50 μg in patients with COPD.
METHODS: This randomized, multicenter, placebo-controlled, crossover study
comprised three 14-day treatment periods (with 14-day washouts). Patients
(male/female ≥ 40 years) with moderate-to-severe COPD were randomized to receive 
double-blind indacaterol 300 μg or placebo once daily, or open-label salmeterol
50 μg twice daily. The primary outcome measure was 24-h post-dose (trough) FEV₁
(mean of FEV₁ at 23 h 10 min and 23 h 45 min post-indacaterol dose) after 14
days. FEV₁ was assessed at multiple time points on Days 1 and 14 of each
treatment period. Safety and tolerability were also monitored.
RESULTS: Of 68 randomized patients, 61 completed. Trough FEV₁ (primary endpoint) 
on Day 14 for indacaterol was 200 mL higher than placebo (p < 0.001), exceeding
the prespecified minimum clinically important difference (120 mL), and was 90 mL 
higher than for salmeterol (p = 0.011). After Day 1, trough FEV(1) for
indacaterol was 150 mL higher than placebo (p < 0.001). Indacaterol provided
superior bronchodilation compared with placebo (p < 0.001) across the full 24-h
assessment period on Days 1 and 14. In addition, on both days, indacaterol
provided superior FEV₁ compared with salmeterol (p < 0.05) at many post-baseline 
time points, including 5 min post-dose. All treatments were well tolerated.
CONCLUSIONS: Once daily indacaterol 300 μg produced effective sustained 24-h
bronchodilation from the first dose, an efficacy profile superior to placebo and 
twice daily salmeterol. Given its effective bronchodilation with once daily
dosing, indacaterol is likely to be a useful treatment option for patients with
moderate-to-severe COPD.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pupt.2010.06.005 
PMID: 20619353  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Semin Respir Crit Care Med. 2010 Jun;31(3):321-33. doi: 10.1055/s-0030-1254072.
Epub 2010 May 21.

Mono- and combination therapy of long-acting bronchodilators and inhaled
corticosteroids in advanced COPD.

Ohar JA(1), Donohue JF.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Pulmonary, Critical Care, Allergy, and Immunologic Diseases,
Department of Internal Medicine, Wake Forest University School of Medicine,
Winston-Salem, North Carolina, USA.

Beta-2 adrenergic agonists are sympathomimetic agents that stimulate
bronchodilation by activation of adenyl cyclase to produce cyclic 3'5' adenosine 
monophosphate (AMP). Short-acting beta-agonists (SABAs) have a 3- to 6-hour
duration of action, and the duration of action of long-acting beta-agonists
(LABAs) exceeds 12 hours. Because of their rapid onset of action, SABAs are
effective for rescue from symptoms of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD). LABAs-salmeterol and formoterol-have been shown to significantly improve 
lung function, health status, and symptom reduction, compared with ipratropium.
Despite safety concerns over the use of LABAs as monotherapy in asthma the use of
these medications in COPD has generally been described as safe. Novel
bronchodilators for COPD in late-stage development include the beta-agonists
indacterol and carmoterol. Parasympathetic activity in the large and medium-size 
airways is mediated through the muscarinic receptors and results in airway
smooth-muscle contraction, mucus secretion, and possibly increased ciliary
activity. Although short-acting ipratropium has been used as monotherapy or in
combination with albuterol the use of long-acting antimuscarinics is superior in 
improving health outcomes. The use of tiotropium results in improved health
status, dyspnea, and exercise capacity, and reduced hyperinflation and COPD
exacerbation rate in patients with moderate to severe COPD. Analysis of
prospective clinical trial data shows a mortality reduction in subjects treated
with tiotropium, despite retrospective review of insurance claims that show an
enhanced mortality. Theophylline is a nonselective phosphodiesterase inhibitor
that acts as both a weak bronchodilator and a respiratory stimulant. Novel
approaches include using the inhalation route to reduce side effects and
combination with inhaled corticosteroids (ICS). However, because of its potential
adverse effects and narrow therapeutic index, it should only be used when
symptoms persist despite optimal bronchodilator therapy. Current guidelines
highlight that for COPD patients uncontrolled by bronchodilator monotherapy,
combination therapy is recommended. These include LABA/ICS and LAMA/LABA
combinations. Bronchodilators and their combination with ICS are central to the
management of COPD. The choice of agents is based primarily on disease stage,
individual response, cost, side effect profile, and availability.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0030-1254072 
PMID: 20496301  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2010 May 12;(5):CD007891. doi:
10.1002/14651858.CD007891.pub2.

Combination inhaled steroid and long-acting beta2-agonist versus tiotropium for
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Welsh EJ(1), Cates CJ, Poole P.

Author information: 
(1)Community Health Sciences, St George's, University of London, Cranmer Terrace,
London, UK, SW17 0RE.

Update in
    Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2013;5:CD007891.

BACKGROUND: Combination therapy (inhaled corticosteroids and long-acting
beta(2)-agonists) and tiotropium are both used in the treatment of chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). There is uncertainty about the relative
benefits and harms of these treatments.
OBJECTIVES: To assess the relative effects of inhaled combination therapy and
tiotropium on patients with COPD.
SEARCH STRATEGY: We searched the Cochrane Airways Group Specialised Register of
trials (March 2010) and reference lists of articles. We also contacted authors of
the studies.
SELECTION CRITERIA: We included only parallel, randomised controlled trials
comparing inhaled combination corticosteroid and long-acting beta(2)-agonist
against inhaled tiotropium bromide.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Two authors independently assessed trials for
inclusion and then extracted data on trial quality and outcome results. We
contacted study authors for additional information. Discrepancies were resolved
through discussion.
MAIN RESULTS: One large two year trial (INSPIRE) and two smaller, shorter trials 
(Dawber 2005; SCO40034) were found. The results from these trials were not
pooled. The number of withdrawals from each arm of the INSPIRE trial was large
and imbalanced and outcome data was not collected for patients who withdrew,
raising concerns about the reliability of data from this study.In INSPIRE, there 
were more deaths on tiotropium than on fluticasone/salmeterol (Peto OR 0.55; 95% 
CI 0.33 to 0.93). This was a statistically significant difference, however the
number of withdrawals from each of the arms was eleven times larger than the
observed number of deaths for participants on fluticasone/salmeterol and seven
times larger for participants on tiotropium. There were more all cause hospital
admissions in patents on fluticasone/salmeterol than those on tiotropium in
INSPIRE (Peto OR 1.32; 95% CI 1.04 to 1.67). There was no statistically
significant difference in hospital admissions due to exacerbations, the primary
outcome of INSPIRE. There was no significant difference in exacerbations in
patients on fluticasone/salmeterol compared to tiotropium. Exacerbations
requiring treatment with oral corticosteroids were less frequent in patients on
fluticasone/salmeterol (Rate Ratio 0.81; 95% CI 0.67 to 0.99). Conversely
exacerbations requiring treatment with antibiotics were more frequent in patients
treated with fluticasone/salmeterol (Rate Ratio 1.19; 95% CI 1.02 to 1.38). There
were more cases of pneumonia in patients on fluticasone/salmeterol than those on 
tiotropium (Peto OR 2.13; 95% CI 1.33 to 3.40). Confidence intervals for these
outcomes do not reflect the additional uncertainty arising from unknown outcome
data for patients who withdrew.
AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: Since the proportion of missing outcome data compared to
the observed outcome data is enough to induce a clinically relevant bias in the
intervention effect, the relative efficacy and safety of combined inhalers and
tiotropium remains uncertain. Further large, long-term randomised controlled
trials comparing combination therapy to tiotropium are required, including
adequate follow-up of all participants randomised (similar to the procedures
undertaken in TORCH and UPLIFT). Additional studies comparing alternative inhaled
LABA/steroid combination therapies with tiotropium are also required.

DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD007891.pub2 
PMID: 20464758  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Respir Res. 2010 May 11;11:56. doi: 10.1186/1465-9921-11-56.

The effects of long-acting bronchodilators on total mortality in patients with
stable chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Kliber A(1), Lynd LD, Sin DD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine (Respiratory Division), University of British Columbia,
6040 Iona Drive, Vancouver, V6T 2E8, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is the 4th leading cause
of mortality worldwide. Long-acting bronchodilators are considered first line
therapies for patients with COPD but their effects on mortality are not well
known. We performed a comprehensive systematic review and meta-analysis to
evaluate the effects of long-acting bronchodilators on total mortality in stable 
COPD.
METHODS: Using MEDLINE, EMBASE and Cochrane Systematic Review databases, we
identified high quality randomized controlled trials of tiotropium, formoterol,
salmeterol, formoterol/budesonide or salmeterol/fluticasone in COPD that had a
follow-up of 6 months or longer and reported on total mortality. Two reviewers
independently abstracted data from the original trials and disagreements were
resolved by iteration and consensus.
RESULTS: Twenty-seven trials that included 30,495 patients were included in the
review. Relative risk (RR) for total mortality was calculated for each of the
study and pooled together using a random-effects model. The combination of
inhaled corticosteroid (ICS) and long-acting beta-2 agonist (LABA) therapy was
associated with reduced total mortality compared with placebo (RR, 0.80; p =
0.005). Neither tiotropium (RR, 1.08; p = 0.61) nor LABA by itself (RR, 0.90; p =
0.21) was associated with mortality.
CONCLUSIONS: A combination of ICS and LABA reduced mortality by approximately
20%. Neither tiotropium nor LABA by itself modifies all-cause mortality in COPD.

DOI: 10.1186/1465-9921-11-56 
PMCID: PMC2876086
PMID: 20459831  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Adv Ther. 2010 Mar;27(3):150-9. doi: 10.1007/s12325-010-0017-6. Epub 2010 Apr 19.

The short, the long and the "ultra-long": why duration of bronchodilator action
matters in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Beeh KM(1), Beier J.

Author information: 
(1)Insaf Respiratory Research Institute, Wiesbaden, Germany. k.beeh@insaf-wi.de

Bronchodilators are the cornerstone of symptomatic treatment for all chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) severity stages when administered on a
regular basis to prevent or reduce symptoms and exacerbations. The principal
inhaled bronchodilator treatments are beta-2 agonists and anticholinergics, used 
singularly or in combination. There is good evidence that regular treatment with 
long-acting bronchodilators is more effective and convenient than treatment with 
short-acting bronchodilators. Long-acting agents include the twice-daily beta-2
agonists formoterol and salmeterol, the once-daily anticholinergic tiotropium,
and, more recently, the once-daily beta-2 agonist indacaterol. Long-acting
bronchodilators have been shown to improve multiple clinical outcomes in COPD in 
comparison to short-acting agents including lung function, symptoms, dyspnea,
quality of life, and exacerbations. Studies of head-to-head comparisons of
long-acting bronchodilators are scant but indicate superior bronchodilation of
tiotropium over salmeterol, while preliminary data from trials with the novel
once-daily beta-2 agonist indacaterol indicate superior bronchodilation and
clinical efficacy over twice-daily long-acting beta-2 agonists and at least
equipotent bronchodilation as once-daily tiotropium. These recent therapeutic
developments in COPD represent a change of paradigm with a shift from
short-acting bronchodilators with multiple dosing per day to reduced dosing
frequency and prolonged duration of action including once-daily treatment. This
review summarizes relevant data and landmark studies comparing the efficacy of
short-acting versus longer-acting bronchodilators in COPD, including new data for
once-daily indacaterol, and discusses potential mechanism underlying the improved
efficacy of long-acting versus short-acting bronchodilators.

DOI: 10.1007/s12325-010-0017-6 
PMID: 20411368  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Expert Rev Pharmacoecon Outcomes Res. 2010 Apr;10(2):115-7. doi:
10.1586/erp.10.10.

Adherence to inhaled therapy in COPD: effects on survival and exacerbations.

Antoniu SA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Gr T Popa University of Medicine and Pharmacy Iasi, Department of Internal
Medicine II-Pulmonary Disease, Pulmonary Disease University Hospital, 30 Dr I
Cihac Str, 700115 Iasi, Romania. sabina.antonela.antoniu@pneum.umfiasi.ro

Comment on
    Thorax. 2009 Nov;64(11):939-43.

Evaluation of: Vestbo J, Anderson JA, Calverley PMA et al. Adherence to inhaled
therapy, mortality and hospital admission in COPD. Thorax 64, 939-943 (2009). In 
chronic diseases, adherence to inhaled therapy can impact treatment effectiveness
and can influence disease mortality and morbidity. In chronic respiratory
diseases in general, and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) in
particular, adherence to inhaled therapy can potentially influence disease
prognosis, as demonstrated in the analyses discussed in this article and a 3-year
study assessing the effects of inhaled salmeterol, inhaled fluticasone and an
inhaled combination over placebo in patients with moderate-to-severe COPD
patients. It is demonstrated that good adherence to inhaled therapy can reduce
all-cause mortality and hospital admissions. Such results are very useful in
clinical practice to motivate patients to adhere to their inhaled treatment.

DOI: 10.1586/erp.10.10 
PMID: 20384558  [PubMed]


257. J Asthma. 2010 Mar;47(2):214-6. doi: 10.3109/02770900903483832.

Does low-dose seretide reverse chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and are the 
benefits sustained over time? An open-label Swedish crossover cohort study
between 1999 and 2005.

Rustscheff S(1), Rydén L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Varnamo General Hospital, Varnamo, 33185
Sweden. stefan.rustscheff@lj.se

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) still poses a formidable challenge
to patients and clinicians alike. A fixed-dose dry powder combination inhaler,
Seretide/Advair, containing salmeterol and fluticasone, is licensed in the
European Community for the treatment of moderate to severe COPD in the strength
of 50/500 microg twice daily (BID). Several studies have investigated the effects
of this combination and show improved forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV(1)),
quality of life, and a decrease of exacerbations. Most of the studies have run
for less than 1 year. The aim of this investigator-initiated, independent study
was to elucidate if the combination containing 50 microg of salmeterol and 250
microg of fluticasone BID could be shown to have the same beneficial effect as
the higher dosage, and if the effect could be sustained over time.

DOI: 10.3109/02770900903483832 
PMID: 20170332  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Arch Bronconeumol. 2009;45 Suppl 5:14-20. doi: 10.1016/S0300-2896(09)72950-3.

[Impact of efficacy and mortality studies (TORCH and UPLIFT) in bronchodilator
treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease].

[Article in Spanish]

Soler-Cataluña JJ(1), García MA.

Author information: 
(1)Unidad de Neumología, Servicio de Medicina Interna, Hospital General de
Requena, Valencia, España. jjsoler@telefonica.net

The TORCH and UPLIFT studies are probably the most ambitious clinical trials
performed to date in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Unfortunately,
the main objectives were not achieved. Compared with placebo, combination therapy
with salmeterol and fluticasone did not significantly reduce all-cause mortality,
nor did tiotropium slow lung function deterioration over 4 years. However,
careful analysis of the results reduces the initial disappointment to a minimum
and leads to moderate optimism, as both trials showed a decrease in the number of
exacerbations, improvement in health-related quality of life (HRQoL) and, in
general, a good safety profile throughout the studies. Moreover, some benefits on
survival were noted. This latter observation opens new horizons as it suggests
that, apart from lung function, there are other therapeutic targets with
prognostic importance. When analyzed overall, the UPLIFT and TORCH studies
confirm and highlight the key role of prolonged action bronchodilators in the
management of COPD. Although inhaled corticosteroids, administered in
monotherapy, reduce exacerbations and improve HRQoL, these drugs show no benefit 
on survival and increase the risk of adverse effects. Nevertheless, when inhaled 
corticosteroids are associated with bronchodilator treatment, their benefits seem
to be enhanced.

Copyright © 2009 Sociedad Española de Neumología y Cirugía Torácica. Published by
Elsevier Espana. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S0300-2896(09)72950-3 
PMID: 20116757  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Clinicoecon Outcomes Res. 2010;2:25-36. Epub 2010 Mar 9.

Evaluating the cost-effectiveness of tiotropium versus salmeterol in the
treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Naik S(1), Kamal KM, Keys PA, Mattei TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Duquesne University School of Pharmacy, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To assess the cost-effectiveness of 3 treatments (tiotropium,
salmeterol, and no treatment) in patients with moderate chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD).
METHODS: A Markov model with a time horizon of 1 year was developed. A
hypothetical cohort of 100,000 subjects with moderate COPD with mean age of 65
years, smoking history of 50 pack-years, and disease duration of 9.5 years were
included in the model. The efficacy and withdrawal data were taken from published
randomized clinical trials. The effectiveness measure was exacerbations avoided
per patient per year. Incremental cost-effectiveness ratio (ICER) was calculated 
as additional cost per patient to prevent 1 exacerbation, compared with the next 
most expensive option. A payer's perspective was used and only direct costs were 
included in the study. Sensitivity analyses were conducted to test the robustness
of the baseline estimates and study assumptions.
RESULTS: The mean annual costs for the no treatment, salmeterol, and tiotropium
groups were $392.1, $1268.7, and $1408.6, respectively. The ICER of tiotropium
compared with no treatment was $1817.36 per exacerbation avoided, while the ICER 
of salmeterol compared with no treatment was $2454.48 per exacerbation avoided.
Thus, in patients with moderate COPD, tiotropium is more cost-effective than
salmeterol and no treatment.


PMCID: PMC3169962
PMID: 21935312  [PubMed]


260. Am J Geriatr Pharmacother. 2009 Oct;7(5):262-70. doi:
10.1016/j.amjopharm.2009.11.003.

Burden of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease in Medicare beneficiaries
residing in long-term care facilities.

Simoni-Wastila L(1), Blanchette CM, Qian J, Yang HW, Zhao L, Zuckerman IH, Pak
GH, Silver H, Dalal AA.

Author information: 
(1)Peter Lamy Center on Drug Therapy and Aging, University of Maryland Baltimore 
School of Pharmacy, Baltimore, Maryland 21201, USA. lsimoniw@rx.umaryland.edu

BACKGROUND: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a leading cause of
morbidity and mortality worldwide. COPD increases health care resource
utilization and spending and adversely affects quality of life. Data from the
clinical and economic outcomes in Medicare beneficiaries with COPD who reside in 
long-term care (LTC) facilities are limited.
OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this study was to investigate the clinical and economic
outcomes associated with COPD in Medicare beneficiaries residing in LTC
facilities.
METHODS: This retrospective cohort study analyzed data from MarketScan Medicaid, 
a large US administrative claims database containing data on Medicaid programs in
8 states. The study cohort comprised LTC facility residents aged > or =60 years
who had a diagnosis of COPD. Eligible patients also had a prescription filled
between January 1, 2003, and June 30, 2005, for one of the following COPD
treatments: fluticasone propionate + salmeterol xinafoate, tiotropium bromide,
ipratropium bromide, or ipratropium bromide + albuterol sulfate. The date of the 
first prescription fill was considered the index date. Measures of health care
resource utilization included COPD-related and all-cause hospitalizations and
emergency department (ED) visits. Cost analysis outcomes included COPD-related
and all-cause inpatient, outpatient, pharmacy, LTC, and total costs during the
12-month postindex period.
RESULTS: Data from 3037 patients were included (63.0% women; 82.2% white; mean
[SD] age, 78.1 [10.0] years). A total of 43.3% of patients had > or =1
hospitalization; 90.0%, > or =1 ED visit. With the exception of age <70 years,
age was associated with all-cause hospitalization (age 70-<75 years, hazard ratio
[HR] = 1.31 [95% CI, 1.03-1.68]; age 75-<80 years, HR = 1.40 [95% CI, 1.11-1.78];
age > or =80 years, HR = 1.48 [95% CI, 1.19-1.85]). Age was not associated with
COPD-related hospitalization, all-cause ED visits, or COPD-related ED visits. The
risk for all-cause hospitalization in white patients was significantly lower
compared with that in nonwhite patients (HR = 0.79 [95% CI, 0.69-0.91]). Patients
with comorbid asthma had a higher risk for a COPD-related ED visit (HR = 1.34
[95% CI, 1.08-1.66]) than did patients without asthma. Preindex all-cause
hospitalization was associated with COPD-related hospitalization (HR = 1.78 [95% 
CI, 1.49-2.14]) and all-cause hospitalization (HR = 2.05 [95% CI, 1.932.19]).
Twelve-month COPD-related and all-cause direct expenditures per beneficiary were 
US $7391 and $48,183. In COPD-related and all-cause estimates, mean (SD) LTC
costs were the largest cost components ($5629 [$12,562] and $32,966 [$14,871],
respectively), followed by pharmacy costs ($956 [$957] and $5565 [$3873]),
inpatient costs ($466 [$3393] and $6436 [$22,603]), and outpatient costs ($341
[$1793] and $3216 [$6458]).
CONCLUSION: This study found that the utilization of health care resources and
economic burden of LTC residents with COPD were primarily due to LTC, pharmacy,
and inpatient costs.

DOI: 10.1016/j.amjopharm.2009.11.003 
PMID: 19948302  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Eur Respir J. 2010 Jul;36(1):178-86. doi: 10.1183/09031936.00158008. Epub 2009
Nov 19.

Effects of formoterol and salmeterol on cytokine release from monocyte-derived
macrophages.

Donnelly LE(1), Tudhope SJ, Fenwick PS, Barnes PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Airway Disease, National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College London,
Dovehouse Street, London, SW3 6LY, UK. l.donnelly@imperial.ac.uk

Pulmonary macrophages are a target for inhaled therapies. Combinations of
long-acting beta(2)-agonists (LABA) and glucocorticosteroids have been developed 
for asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). This study examined 
two LABA, salmeterol and formoterol, and the glucocorticosteroid, budesonide, on 
cytokine release from monocyte-derived macrophages (MDM) to determine whether
anti-inflammatory effects observed in patients are due to inhibition of
macrophages. MDM were incubated in the absence or presence of LABA or budesonide 
prior to stimulation with lipopolysaccharide (LPS). Tumour necrosis factor
(TNF)-alpha, granulocyte macrophage-colony stimulating factor (GM-CSF) and CXC
chemokine ligand (CXCL)8 were measured by ELISA. Formoterol and salmeterol
inhibited LPS-stimulated release of TNF-alpha (mean effective concentration
(EC(50)) 2.4+/-1.8 and 3.5+/-2.7 nM, respectively; n = 11-16), GM-CSF (EC(50)
24.6+/-2.1 and 52.4+/-40.8 nM, respectively, n = 11-12) but not CXCL8 from
LPS-stimulated MDM. Budesonide inhibited release of all three cytokines (EC(50)
TNF-alpha: 1.2+/-0.4 nM; GM-CSF: 0.4+/-0.2 nM; CXCL8: 0.4+/-0.1 nM; n = 3-4).
Formoterol but not salmeterol elevated cAMP in these cells. These effects were
attenuated by beta-adrenoceptor antagonists, propranolol and ICI118551.
Salmeterol (10(-7) M) also inhibited formoterol-induced cAMP and
formoterol-mediated attenuation of cytokine release. Combining budesonide (0.3
nM) with formoterol, inhibited TNF-alpha release additively. LABA may inhibit
inflammatory cytokine release from macrophages in a cAMP-independent manner and
act additively with budesonide.

DOI: 10.1183/09031936.00158008 
PMID: 19926732  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Br J Clin Pharmacol. 2009 Nov;68(5):731-6. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2125.2009.03517.x.

Inhaled tiotropium bromide and risk of stroke.

Grosso A(1), Douglas I, Hingorani AD, MacAllister R, Hubbard R, Smeeth L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy, University College London Hospitals NHS Foundation
Trust, London, UK. anthony.grosso@uclh.nhs.uk

AIMS: A recent communication from the United States Food and Drug Administration 
highlighted a possible increased risk of stroke associated with use of the
relatively new inhaled anticholinergic drug, tiotropium bromide. Using the United
Kingdom General Practice Research Database, we set out to assess the risk of
stroke in individuals exposed to inhaled tiotropium bromide and two other inhaled
treatments for airways disease.
METHODS: We used the self-controlled case-series that reduces confounding and
minimizes the potential for biases in the quantification of risk estimates.
RESULTS: Of 1043 people with a diagnosis of incident stroke who had had at least 
one prescription for tiotropium bromide, 980 satisfied inclusion criteria. The
age-adjusted incidence rate ratio for all-cause stoke in individuals exposed to
tiotropium bromide (n = 980), ipratropium bromide (n = 4181) and fluticasone
propionate/salmeterol xinafoate (n = 1000) was 1.1 [95% confidence interval (CI) 
0.9, 1.3], 0.8 (95% CI 0.7, 0.9) and 1.0 (95% CI 0.9, 1.2), respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: We found no evidence of an increased risk of all-cause stroke for
individuals exposed to commonly prescribed inhaled treatments for chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2125.2009.03517.x 
PMCID: PMC2791979
PMID: 19916997  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2009 Nov;124(5):873-80; quiz 881-2. doi:
10.1016/j.jaci.2009.09.040.

Management of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: moving beyond the asthma
algorithm.

Gordon E(1), Lazarus SC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, University of California,
San Francisco, Calif 94143-0111, USA.

For many years, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) was considered a
disease of fixed airflow obstruction for which there was no good treatment. Out
of desperation and frustration, health care providers extrapolated from asthma to
COPD, and standard asthma therapy was adopted without evidence for efficacy. In
recent years, we have gained a better understanding of the pathophysiologic
differences between asthma and COPD, and prospective controlled trials have
provided a rationale for therapy. Smoking cessation is critically important, both
as primary prevention and as an effective way to slow the decrease in lung
function in patients with established disease. beta(2)-Adrenergic and
anticholinergic agonists improve lung function and relieve symptoms in most
patients. Tiotropium improves exercise tolerance and quality of life and reduces 
exacerbations and hospitalizations. The increase in lung function seen with
tiotropium is sustained with continued use over at least 3 to 4 years. Inhaled
corticosteroids decrease exacerbations and improve quality of life, and their
effect seems greatest in patients with lower lung function and in
exacerbation-prone patients. There is no evidence that inhaled corticosteroids
alone affect mortality, despite the reduction in exacerbations and increased risk
of pneumonia. In some patient populations, inhaled fluticasone, salmeterol, or
the combination might slow the rate of loss of lung function. Rather than
reflexively using effective asthma therapy in the patient with COPD, current and 
future therapy for COPD is increasingly evidence based and targeted to specific
inflammatory pathways that are important in patients with COPD.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaci.2009.09.040 
PMID: 19895979  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Respir Res. 2009 Oct 31;10:104. doi: 10.1186/1465-9921-10-104.

The bioavailability and airway clearance of the steroid component of
budesonide/formoterol and salmeterol/fluticasone after inhaled administration in 
patients with COPD and healthy subjects: a randomized controlled trial.

Dalby C(1), Polanowski T, Larsson T, Borgström L, Edsbäcker S, Harrison TW.

Author information: 
(1)Respiratory Medicine Unit, City Hospital Campus, Nottingham University,
Nottingham, UK. chris.dalby@nuh.nhs.uk

BACKGROUND: Airway absorption and bioavailability of inhaled corticosteroids
(ICSs) may be influenced by differences in pharmacokinetic properties such as
lipophilicity and patient characteristics such as lung function. This study aimed
to further investigate and clarify the distribution of budesonide and fluticasone
in patients with severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) by measuring
the systemic availability and sputum concentration of budesonide and fluticasone,
administered via combination inhalers with the respective long-acting
beta2-agonists, formoterol and salmeterol.
METHODS: This was a randomized, double-blind, double-dummy, two-way crossover,
multicenter study. Following a run-in period, 28 patients with severe COPD (mean 
age 65 years, mean forced expiratory volume in 1 second [FEV1] 37.5% predicted
normal) and 27 healthy subjects (mean age 31 years, FEV1 103.3% predicted normal)
received two single-dose treatments of budesonide/formoterol (400/12 microg) and 
salmeterol/fluticasone (50/500 microg), separated by a 4-14-day washout period.
ICS concentrations were measured over 10 hours post-inhalation in plasma in all
subjects, and over 6 hours in spontaneously expectorated sputum in COPD patients.
The primary end point was the area under the curve (AUC) of budesonide and
fluticasone plasma concentrations in COPD patients relative to healthy subjects.
RESULTS: Mean plasma AUC values were lower in COPD patients versus healthy
subjects for budesonide (3.07 microM x hr versus 6.21 microM x hr) and
fluticasone (0.84 microM x hr versus 1.50 microM x hr), and the dose-adjusted AUC
(geometric mean) ratios in healthy subjects and patients with severe COPD for
plasma budesonide and fluticasone were similar (2.02 versus 1.80; primary end
point). In COPD patients, the Tmax and the mean residence time in the systemic
circulation were shorter for budesonide versus fluticasone (15.5 min versus 50.8 
min and 4.41 hrs versus 12.78 hrs, respectively) and Cmax was higher (1.08 microM
versus 0.09 microM). The amount of expectorated fluticasone (percentage of
estimated lung-deposited dose) in sputum over 6 hours was significantly higher
versus budesonide (ratio 5.21; p = 0.006). Both treatments were well tolerated.
CONCLUSION: The relative systemic availabilities of budesonide and fluticasone
between patients with severe COPD and healthy subjects were similar. In patients 
with COPD, a larger fraction of fluticasone was expectorated in the sputum as
compared with budesonide.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: Trial registration number NCT00379028.

DOI: 10.1186/1465-9921-10-104 
PMCID: PMC2780403
PMID: 19878590  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Ann Intern Med. 2009 Oct 20;151(8):517-27.

Effect of fluticasone with and without salmeterol on pulmonary outcomes in
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: a randomized trial.

Lapperre TS(1), Snoeck-Stroband JB, Gosman MM, Jansen DF, van Schadewijk A,
Thiadens HA, Vonk JM, Boezen HM, Ten Hacken NH, Sont JK, Rabe KF, Kerstjens HA,
Hiemstra PS, Timens W, Postma DS, Sterk PJ; Groningen Leiden Universities
Corticosteroids in Obstructive Lung Disease Study Group.

Collaborators: Kauffman HF, de Reus D, Boezen HM, Jansen DF, Vonk JM, Barentsen
MD, Timens W, Zeinstra-Smit M, Luteijn AJ, van der Molen T, ter Veen G, Gosman
MM, ten Hacken NH, Kerstjens HA, van Maaren MS, Postma DS, Veltman CA, Verbokkem 
A, Verhage I, Vink-Klooster HK, Thiadens HA, Snoeck-Stroband JB, Sont JK,
Gast-Strookman J, Hiemstra PS, Janssen K, Lapperre TS, Rabe KF, van Schadewijk A,
Schrumpf JA, Smit-Bakker J, Sterk PJ, Stolk J, Tiré AC, van der Veen H, Wijffels 
MM, Willems LN, Sterk PJ, Mauad T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The
Netherlands.

Summary for patients in
    Ann Intern Med. 2009 Oct 20;151(8):I21.

BACKGROUND: Inhaled corticosteroids (ICSs) and long-acting beta(2)-agonists
(LABAs) are used to treat moderate to severe chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD).
OBJECTIVE: To determine whether long-term ICS therapy, with and without LABAs,
reduces inflammation and improves pulmonary function in COPD.
DESIGN: Randomized, placebo-controlled trial. (ClinicalTrials.gov registration
number: NCT00158847)
SETTING: 2 university medical centers in The Netherlands.
PATIENTS: 114 steroid-naive current or former smokers with moderate to severe
COPD.
MEASUREMENTS: Cell counts in bronchial biopsies and sputum (primary outcome);
methacholine responsiveness at baseline, 6, and 30 months; and clinical outcomes 
every 3 months.
INTERVENTION: Random assignment by minimization method to receive fluticasone
propionate, 500 microg twice daily, for 6 months (n = 31) or 30 months (n = 26); 
fluticasone, 500 microg twice daily, and salmeterol, 50 microg twice daily, for
30 months (single inhaler; n = 28); or placebo twice daily (n = 29).
RESULTS: 101 patients were greater than 70% adherent to therapy. Fluticasone
therapy decreased counts of mucosal CD3(+) cells (-55% [95% CI, -74% to -22%]; P 
= 0.004), CD4(+) cells (-78% [CI, -88% to 60%]; P < 0.001), CD8(+) cells (-57%
[CI, -77% to -18%]; P = 0.010), and mast cells (-38% [CI, -60% to -2%]; P =
0.039) and reduced hyperresponsiveness (P = 0.036) versus placebo at 6 months,
with effects maintained after 30 months. Fluticasone therapy for 30 months
reduced mast cell count and increased eosinophil count and percentage of intact
epithelium, with accompanying reductions in sputum neutrophil, macrophage, and
lymphocyte counts and improvements in FEV(1) decline, dyspnea, and quality of
life. Reductions in inflammatory cells correlated with clinical improvements.
Discontinuing fluticasone therapy at 6 months increased counts of CD3(+) cells
(120% [CI, 24% to 289%]; P = 0.007), mast cells (218% [CI, 99% to 407%]; P <
0.001), and plasma cells (118% [CI, 9% to 336%]; P = 0.028) and worsened clinical
outcome. Adding salmeterol improved FEV(1) level.
LIMITATIONS: The study was not designed to evaluate clinical outcomes.
Measurement of primary outcome was not available for 24% of patients at 30
months.
CONCLUSION: ICS therapy decreases inflammation and can attenuate decline in lung 
function in steroid-naive patients with moderate to severe COPD. Adding LABAs
does not enhance these effects. .


PMID: 19841453  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Ann Intern Med. 2009 Oct 20;151(8):I21.

Summaries for patients. Effect of treatment with fluticasone with and without
salmeterol on airway inflammation and lung function in patients with chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease: a randomized trial.

[No authors listed]

Original report in
    Ann Intern Med. 2009 Oct 20;151(8):517-27.


PMID: 19841438  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. J Med Econ. 2009;12(4):339-47. doi: 10.3111/13696990903369135.

Healthcare costs associated with initial maintenance therapy with fluticasone
propionate 250 μg/salmeterol 50 μg combination versus anticholinergic
bronchodilators in elderly US Medicare-eligible beneficiaries with COPD.

Dalal AA(1), Petersen H, Simoni-Wastila L, Blanchette CM.

Author information: 
(1)GlaxoSmithKline, Research Triangle Park, NC, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To compare, in elderly Medicare beneficiaries, chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD)-related healthcare costs for patients initiating
treatment with fluticasone propionate/salmeterol 250 μg/50 μg (FSC) with those
for patients initiating treatment with ipratropium bromide/albuterol (IPA),
ipratropium bromide (IPR), and tiotropium bromide (TIO).
METHODS: In this retrospective, observational, cohort study, COPD-related medical
costs (inpatient/emergency department, outpatient) and pharmacy costs were
assessed in Medicare beneficiaries ≥ 65 years old who were enrolled in a
commercial Medicare health maintenance organization plan and had a diagnosis of
COPD (ICD-9-CM codes 491.xx, 492.xx, or 496.xx) within 12 months before initial
treatment with FSC, IPA, IPR, or TIO.
RESULTS: In these ≥ 65-year-old patients (N=14,689), initial maintenance
treatment with FSC was associated with total COPD-related cost savings (medical +
pharmacy) of $295 versus IPA, $1,235 versus IPR, and $110 versus TIO (p<0.05,
each comparison) over a 1-year follow-up period.
CONCLUSIONS: Initiation of maintenance therapy with FSC was associated with
significant reduction in total costs (medical + pharmacy) relative to costs
associated with the short-acting anticholinergic bronchodilators IPR and IPA and 
the long-acting anticholinergic bronchodilator TIO in an elderly
Medicare-eligible population. These data considered in the context of the
substantial efficacy and effectiveness data suggest that early introduction of
maintenance treatment with FSC has both clinical and economic benefits.
Limitations inherent in handling of administrative data include lack of objective
clinical measures such as spirometry and smoking status. Furthermore, accuracy of
diagnosis codes cannot be verified.

DOI: 10.3111/13696990903369135 
PMID: 19827993  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Curr Med Res Opin. 2009 Nov;25(11):2729-35. doi: 10.1185/03007990903267157.

Hospital and emergency department utilization associated with treatment for
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease in a managed-care Medicare population.

Simoni-Wastila L(1), Yang HW, Blanchette CM, Zhao L, Qian J, Dalal AA.

Author information: 
(1)Long-Term Care Research Initiative, University of Maryland School of Pharmacy,
220 Arch Street, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA. lsimoniw@rx.umaryland.edu

BACKGROUND: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a highly prevalent
condition with high morbidity and mortality among older and disabled adults. Few 
studies have examined the comparative effectiveness of maintenance therapies for 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) in this vulnerable population.
OBJECTIVES: The study aims to compare healthcare resource utilization associated 
with hospitalization or emergency department (ED) visits between FDA-approved
inhaled corticosteroid/long-acting beta-agonist combinations [fluticasone
propionate 250 microg/salmeterol 50 microg combination (FSC)] and anticholinergic
treatments (ATC) in managed-care Medicare beneficiaries with COPD.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: Data from the Integrated Health Care Information
Systems (IHCIS) National Managed Care Benchmark Database was used in this
retrospective, observational cohort study. The cohort consisted of managed-care
Medicare beneficiaries with a diagnosis of COPD [International Classification of 
Disease, 9th revision, Clinical Modification (ICD-9-CM) codes 491.xx, 492.xx, or 
496.xx] without evidence of comorbid asthma (ICD-9-CM 493.xx) who received
treatment with FSC or ATC between 2003 and 2005. Cox proportional hazards
regression models were conducted to examine the risk of all-cause and
COPD-related hospitalizations and emergency department (ED) visits.
RESULTS: COPD patients treated with FSC had a 18% lower risk of a COPD-related
hospitalization (HR = 0.82; 95% CI = 0.75, 0.89) and an ED visit (HR = 0.82; 95% 
CI = 0.76, 0.89) compared to patients treated with ATC. Findings were similar for
all-cause utilization (hospitalization HR = 0.83; 95% CI = 0.78, 0.88; ED visit
HR = 0.84; 95% CI = 0.80, 0.88).
CONCLUSIONS: FSC is associated with a lower risk of COPD-related exacerbation
events relative to ATC in managed-care Medicare beneficiaries with COPD. Findings
from this study are only generalizable to managed-care Medicare beneficiaries
residing in the community.

DOI: 10.1185/03007990903267157 
PMID: 19778165  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Ther Adv Respir Dis. 2009 Aug;3(4):1-11. doi: 10.1177/1753465809344870. Epub 2009
Sep 4.

Effect on lung function and morning activities of budesonide/formoterol versus
salmeterol/fluticasone in patients with COPD.

Partridge MR(1), Schuermann W, Beckman O, Persson T, Polanowski T.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Medicine, Imperial College London, NHLI Division at Charing Cross
Hospital, London, UK. m.partridge@imperial.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: Patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) often
experience symptoms and problems with activities early in the morning. This is
the first study to compare the effect of budesonide/formoterol and
salmeterol/fluticasone on lung function, symptoms and activities early in the
morning.
METHODS: Lung function (peak expiratory flow [PEF] and forced expiratory volume
in 1 second [FEV( 1)]) and symptoms were measured at bedside and activities were 
measured during the morning using a six-item questionnaire concerning basic
morning routines. In a randomised, double-blind, multicentre, cross-over study,
442 patients with COPD aged >or=40 years (pre-bronchodilator FEV(1) <or=50%;
FEV(1)/vital capacity <70%) received budesonide/formoterol (320/9 microg, one
inhalation twice daily) dry powder inhaler (DPI) or salmeterol/fluticasone
(50/500 microg, one inhalation twice daily) DPI daily, for 1 week each, separated
by a 1- to 2-week washout. Lung function (PEF and FEV(1)) shortly after rising
from bed in the morning, symptoms and basic morning activities were assessed by
electronic diary (e-Diary) recordings.
RESULTS: Budesonide/formoterol and salmeterol/fluticasone treatment increased
morning PEF 5 minutes post-dose, measured as a mean improvement from baseline
over the full study period (primary endpoint; adjusted mean change: 15.1 l/min
and 14.2 l/min, respectively [difference 1.0 l/min; p = 0.603]). Mean morning
FEV(1) improved more following budesonide/ formoterol treatment versus
salmeterol/fluticasone at 5 minutes (0.12 l versus 0.09 l; p = 0.090) and 15
minutes (0.14 l versus 0.10 l; p < 0.05) post-dose. Budesonide/formoterol
demonstrated a more rapid onset of effect as reflected by increases in
e-Diary-recorded PEF and FEV( 1) from pre-dose to 5 and 15 minutes post-dose (all
p < 0.001) and spirometry at the clinic measured after the first dose (FEV(1) p <
0.001; 5 minutes post-dose). Improvements in symptom scores within 15 minutes
after drug administration were similar for both drugs, but budesonide/formoterol 
treatment resulted in significantly greater improvements in total morning
activities score (getting washed, dried, dressed, eating breakfast and walking
around the home; 0.22 versus 0.12 respectively, p < 0.05). Both treatments were
well tolerated.
CONCLUSIONS: Short-term treatment with budesonide/formoterol DPI or
salmeterol/fluticasone DPI was effective in patients with COPD.
Budesonide/formoterol had a more rapid onset of effect compared with
salmeterol/fluticasone and resulted in greater improvements in ability to perform
morning activities despite the lower inhaled corticosteroid dose.

DOI: 10.1177/1753465809344870 
PMID: 19734176  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Lancet. 2009 Aug 29;374(9691):695-703. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(09)61252-6.

Roflumilast in moderate-to-severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease treated
with longacting bronchodilators: two randomised clinical trials.

Fabbri LM(1), Calverley PM, Izquierdo-Alonso JL, Bundschuh DS, Brose M, Martinez 
FJ, Rabe KF; M2-127 and M2-128 study groups.

Collaborators: Abdulla R, Abdullah I, Adler M, Aguilaniu, Albert I, Almonacid C, 
Altés A, Amaducci S, Angrill J, Antonana JM, Artner H, Bálint B, Bantje TA, Barbé
F, Bateman E, Bauchnect E, Belda J, Bernabeu L, Bettendorf A, Blagden M, Blanquer
R, Blecher L, Bonnaud F, Bourbeau J, Boyer GR, Brotons C, Brüning AH, Bucca C,
Burns GE, von der Heydt BB, Caldwell, Canonica GW, Carter J, Chan V, Chapman KR, 
Chapman G, Cheung D, Chiner E, Chopra A, Clini E, Coulet P, Craig B,
Croonenborghs L, Czompó M, Dal Negro RW, Dapper T, de Graaff CS, Ramos Pde L, De 
Munck DR, Decramer M, Delobbe A, Denier W, De-Teresa L, Dhar A, Di Maria G,
Dupouy J, Duschek G, Echave J, Esteban C, Farmer IS, Flemale A, Fletcher P,
Foden, Fouquert L, Franz KH, Frognier, Gagnon M, Garcia Mdel M, Garelli G,
Gehling U, Ginko T, Glekin B, Gooding T, Graham A, Greillier P, Greses JV,
Grillenberger J, Gross B, Grygier H, Györi Z, Harper, Henein S, Heredia JL,
Hernandez P, Hoefer M, Hoffstein V, Holgate K, Höller W, Holub G, Homik L, Houle 
PA, Hutter C, Hyvernat P, Irusen EM, Jackson A, Janisty W, Jasnot JY, Joubert J, 
Juhasz G, Jullian H, Kafe H, Kelly P, Kidney J, Killian K, Kinch H, Kirsten DL,
Kleinecke-Pohl U, Korlipara K, Krige LP, Kroker A, Kuipers AF, Labrecque M,
Larivee P, Laskowitz C, Le Merre C, Lemoigne F, Ludwig-Sengpiel A, Luengo M,
Luton R, MacNee W, Ali SM, Maltais F, Mansur A, Marciniuk D, Marín A, Martin P,
Martinot JB, Mazza F, Mc Bride, McDonald B, McKinnon C, Mclvor A, McNally D,
Mengeot PM, Messner J, Moder G, Mooney P, Moretti AM, Muller D, Murio C, Nardini 
S, Nel A, Ochoa, de Saracho JO, Paggiaro P, Paradis B, Patrick J, Peché R,
Pellicer C, Perez T, Pérez E, de Llano LA, Philteos G, Pieters WR, Pigearias B,
Pohl W, Popovic R, Prins M, Querfurt H, Rajkay K, Ras G, Road J, Roig J, Roldaan 
AC, Rolke M, Rozen D, Sanchez-Toril F, Savani N, Savary L, Schiavina M,
Schiesbühl H, Schreurs AJ, Schröder-Babo W, Schürmann W, Seiz V, Sevette C,
Sharma R, Shum C, Damsté HE, Smithers A, Soler JJ, Steffen H, Steinhauser U,
Sweilem M, Tellier G, Terol B, Terzano C, Timar M, Toma G, Monserrat PT, Trauth
HA, Valyon E, Van den Brande, van Noord JA, Vaquer JV, Hernandez-Hector HV,
Vereecken G, Verkindre C, Vígh M, Viljoen JJ, Vincken W, Vinkler I, Visser S,
Volgmann L, Vorderstrasse W, Voves R, Vrancken F, Weber HH, Wielders PL,
Willoughby P, Würtz J, Yang W, Zabaleta M, Zachgo W, Zanini A, Zeiner M, Zeiner
M, Michael H, Grillenberger J, Holub G, Popovic R, Würtz J, Duschek G, Janistyn
W, Hutter C, Schiesbühl H, Messner J, Pohl W, Sweilem M, Voves R, Höller W, Moder
G, Vincken W, Decramer M, Martinot JB, Croonenborghs L, Rozen D, Vereecken G,
Denier W, Flemale A, Vrancken F, Delobbe A, Frognier, Peché R, Van den Brande,
Delobbe A, Mengeot PM, Maltais F, Bourbeau J, Mclvor A, Larivee P, Craig B, Road 
J, Houle PA, Yang W, Chapman KR, Gagnon M, Luton R, Hernandez P, Homik L,
Marciniuk D, Henein S, Hoffstein V, Killian K, Paradis B, Carter J, Labrecque M, 
Willoughby P, Abdulla R, Philteos G, Chan V, Dhar A, Tellier G, Hyvernat P, Perez
T, Kafe H, Dupouy J, Coulet P, Pigearias B, Jullian H, Fouquert L, Boyer GR,
Bernabeu L, Verkindre C, Bettendorf A, Jasnot JY, Aguilaniu, Savary L, Bonnaud F,
Lemoigne F, Sevette C, Greillier P, Muller D, Terol B, Le Merre C, Hoefer M,
Trauth HA, Querfurt H, Volgmann L, Steinhauser U, Ginko T, Franz KH, Kroker A,
Schröder-Babo W, Gehling U, Martin P, Ludwig-Sengpiel A, Dapper T, Zachgo W,
Kleinecke-Pohl U, Rolke M, Blecher L, Steffen H, Grygier H, Weber HH,
Vorderstrasse W, Schürmann W, Laskowitz C, Seiz V, Gross B, von der Heydt BB,
Valyon E, Czompó M, Juhasz G, Györi Z, Timar M, Albert I, Rajkay K, Bauchnect E, 
Vinkler I, Bálint B, Vígh M, Amaducci S, Canonica GW, Di Maria G, Zanini A,
Paggiaro P, Schiavina M, Dal Negro RW, Mazza F, Toma G, Bucca C, Terzano C,
Garelli G, Moretti AM, Nardini S, Fabbri L, Barbaro MP, Canonica GW, Clini E,
Wielders PL, Kuipers AF, de Graaff CS, Cheung D, Damsté HE, Pieters WR, Schreurs 
AJ, van Noord JA, De Munck DR, Bantje TA, Roldaan AC, Irusen EM, Ras G, Prins M, 
Bateman E, Joubert J, Abdullah I, Visser S, Brüning AH, Viljoen JJ, Krige LP, Nel
A, Kirsten DL, Izquierdo JL, Garcia Mdel M, Shum C, Chiner E, Heredia JL,
Zabaleta M, Luengo M, de Saracho JO, Monserrat PT, Vaquer JV, Marín A, Angrill J,
Brotons C, Altés A, Pérez E, Sanchez-Toril F, Ramos Pde L, Hernandez-Hector HV,
Almonacid C, Belda J, Antonana JM, Blanquer R, Soler JJ, Barbé F, Murio C,
De-Teresa L, Esteban C, Greses JV, Pellicer C, Echave J, de Llano LA, Roig J,
Chopra A, Savani N, Glekin B, Jackson A, Blagden M, Sharma R, Chapman G, McNally 
D, Patrick J, Mc Bride, Burns GE, Kidney J, Kelly P, MacNee W, Kinch H, Ali SM,
Adler M, Blagden M, Mooney P, Caldwell, Farmer IS, Graham A, Holgate K, Fletcher 
P, Korlipara K, McDonald B, McKinnon C, Smithers A, Mansur A, Gooding T, Harper, 
Ochoa, Foden.

Comment in
    Lancet. 2012 Feb 25;379(9817):710-1; author reply 711-2.
    Chest. 2014 May;145(5):937-9.
    Lancet. 2009 Aug 29;374(9691):665-7.
    Chest. 2014 May;145(5):939-42.

BACKGROUND: Patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) have few
options for treatment. The efficacy and safety of the phosphodiesterase-4
inhibitor roflumilast have been investigated in studies of patients with
moderate-to-severe COPD, but not in those concomitantly treated with longacting
inhaled bronchodilators. The effect of roflumilast on lung function in patients
with COPD that is moderate to severe who are already being treated with
salmeterol or tiotropium was investigated.
METHODS: In two double-blind, multicentre studies done in an outpatient setting, 
after a 4-week run-in, patients older than 40 years with moderate-to-severe COPD 
were randomly assigned to oral roflumilast 500 microg or placebo once a day for
24 weeks, in addition to salmeterol (M2-127 study) or tiotropium (M2-128 study). 
The primary endpoint was change in prebronchodilator forced expiratory volume in 
1 s (FEV(1)). Analysis was by intention to treat. The studies are registered with
ClinicalTrials.gov, number NCT00313209 for M2-127, and NCT00424268 for M2-128.
FINDINGS: In the salmeterol plus roflumilast trial, 466 patients were assigned to
and treated with roflumilast and 467 with placebo; in the tiotropium plus
roflumilast trial, 371 patients were assigned to and treated with roflumilast and
372 with placebo. Compared with placebo, roflumilast consistently improved mean
prebronchodilator FEV(1) by 49 mL (p<0.0001) in patients treated with salmeterol,
and 80 mL (p<0.0001) in those treated with tiotropium. Similar improvement in
postbronchodilator FEV(1) was noted in both groups. Furthermore, roflumilast had 
beneficial effects on other lung function measurements and on selected
patient-reported outcomes in both groups. Nausea, diarrhoea, weight loss, and, to
a lesser extent, headache were more frequent in patients in the roflumilast
groups. These adverse events were associated with increased patient withdrawal.
INTERPRETATION: Roflumilast improves lung function in patients with COPD treated 
with salmeterol or tiotropium, and could become an important treatment for these 
patients.
FUNDING: Nycomed.

DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(09)61252-6 
PMID: 19716961  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Thorax. 2009 Nov;64(11):939-43. doi: 10.1136/thx.2009.113662. Epub 2009 Aug 23.

Adherence to inhaled therapy, mortality and hospital admission in COPD.

Vestbo J(1), Anderson JA, Calverley PM, Celli B, Ferguson GT, Jenkins C, Knobil
K, Willits LR, Yates JC, Jones PW.

Author information: 
(1)Respiratory Medicine Research Group, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK.
jorgen.vestbo@manchester.ac.uk

Comment in
    Thorax. 2009 Nov;64(11):922-3.
    Expert Rev Pharmacoecon Outcomes Res. 2010 Apr;10(2):115-7.

BACKGROUND: Little is known about adherence to inhaled medication in chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and the impact on mortality and morbidity.
METHODS: Data on drug adherence from a randomised double-blind trial comparing
inhaled salmeterol 50 microg + fluticasone propionate 500 microg twice daily with
placebo and each drug individually in 6112 patients with moderate to severe COPD 
over 3 years in the TORCH study were used. All-cause mortality and exacerbations 
leading to hospital admission were primary and secondary end points. The study of
adherence was not specified a priori as an ancillary study.
RESULTS: Of the 4880 patients (79.8%) with good adherence defined as >80% use of 
study medication, 11.3% died compared with 26.4% of the 1232 patients (20.2%)
with poor adherence. The annual rates of hospital admission for exacerbations
were 0.15 and 0.27, respectively. The association between adherence and mortality
remained unchanged and statistically significant after adjusting for other
factors related to prognosis (hazard ratio 0.40 (95% CI 0.35 to 0.46), p<0.001). 
The association was even stronger when analysing on-treatment deaths only.
Similarly, the association between adherence and hospital admission remained
unchanged and significant in a multivariate analysis (rate ratio 0.58 (95% CI
0.44 to 0.73, p<0.001). The association between increased adherence and improved 
mortality and reduction in hospital admission was independent of study treatment.
The effect of treatment was more pronounced in patients with good adherence than 
in those with poor adherence.
CONCLUSION: Adherence to inhaled medication is significantly associated with
reduced risk of death and admission to hospital due to exacerbations in COPD.
Further research is needed to understand these strong associations.

DOI: 10.1136/thx.2009.113662 
PMID: 19703830  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Respiration. 2010;79(6):475-81. doi: 10.1159/000235619. Epub 2009 Aug 14.

Effects of salmeterol on sleeping oxygen saturation in chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease.

Ryan S(1), Doherty LS, Rock C, Nolan GM, McNicholas WT.

Author information: 
(1)Sleep Research Laboratory, St. Vincent's University Hospital, Dublin, Ireland.

BACKGROUND: Sleep is associated with important adverse effects in patients with
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), such as disturbed sleep quality and
gas exchange, including hypoxemia and hypercapnia. The effects of inhaled
long-acting beta(2)-agonist therapy (LABA) on these disturbances are unclear.
OBJECTIVES: The aim of the study was to assess the effect of inhaled salmeterol
on nocturnal sleeping arterial oxygen saturation (SaO(2)) and sleep quality.
METHODS: In a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover study of
moderate/severe stable COPD patients, we compared the effects of 4 weeks of
treatment with salmeterol 50 microg b.d. and matching placebo on sleeping SaO(2) 
and sleep quality. Overnight polysomnography (PSG) was performed at baseline, and
after 4 and 8 weeks in addition to detailed pulmonary function testing. Of 15
patients included, 12 completed the trial (median age 69 years, forced expiratory
volume in 1 s, FEV(1): 39%).
RESULTS: Both mean SaO(2) [salmeterol vs. placebo: 92.9% (91.2, 94.7) vs. 91.0%
(88.9, 94.8); p = 0.016] and the percentage of sleep spent below 90% of SaO(2)
[1.8% (0.0, 10.8) vs. 25.6% (0.5, 53.5); p = 0.005] improved significantly with
salmeterol. Sleep quality was similar with both salmeterol and placebo on PSG.
Static lung volumes, particularly trapped gas volume, tended to improve with
salmeterol.
CONCLUSION: We conclude that inhaled LABA therapy improves sleeping SaO(2)
without significant change in sleep quality.

Copyright 2009 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000235619 
PMID: 19684384  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Respir Res. 2009 Jun 30;10:59. doi: 10.1186/1465-9921-10-59.

Efficacy of salmeterol/fluticasone propionate by GOLD stage of chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease: analysis from the randomised, placebo-controlled
TORCH study.

Jenkins CR(1), Jones PW, Calverley PM, Celli B, Anderson JA, Ferguson GT, Yates
JC, Willits LR, Vestbo J.

Author information: 
(1)Woolcock Institute of Medical Research, Sydney, Australia. crj@med.usyd.edu.au

BACKGROUND: The efficacy of inhaled salmeterol plus fluticasone propionate (SFC) 
in patients with severe or very severe COPD is well documented. However, there
are only limited data about the influence of GOLD severity staging on the
effectiveness of SFC, particularly in patients with milder disease.
METHODS: TORCH was a 3-year, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial of 6112
patients with moderate/severe COPD with pre-bronchodilator FEV1 < 60% predicted
(mean age 65 years, 76% male, mean 44% predicted FEV1, 43% current smokers). To
understand the relative efficacy of SFC and its components by GOLD stages, we
conducted a post-hoc analysis of the TORCH dataset using baseline
post-bronchodilator FEV1 to segment patients into three groups: moderate COPD
(GOLD stage II and above: >or= 50%; n = 2156), severe COPD (GOLD stage III: 30%
to < 50%; n = 3019) and very severe COPD (GOLD stage IV: < 30%; n = 937).
RESULTS: Compared with placebo, SFC improved post-bronchodilator FEV1: 101 ml
(95% confidence interval [CI]: 71, 132) in GOLD stage II, 82 ml (95% CI: 60, 104)
in GOLD stage III and 96 ml (95% CI: 54, 138) in GOLD stage IV patients, and
reduced the rate of exacerbations: 31% (95% CI: 19, 40) in GOLD stage II, 26%
(95% CI: 17, 34) in GOLD stage III and 14% (95% CI: -4, 29) in GOLD stage IV. SFC
improved health status to a greater extent than other treatments regardless of
baseline GOLD stage. Similarly, SFC reduced the risk of death by 33% (hazard
ratio [HR] 0.67; 95% CI: 0.45, 0.98) for GOLD stage II, 5% (HR 0.95; 95% CI:
0.73, 1.24) for GOLD stage III, and 30% (HR 0.70; 95% CI: 0.47, 1.05) for GOLD
stage IV. The rates of adverse events were similar across treatment arms and
increased with disease severity. Overall, there was a higher incidence of
pneumonia in the fluticasone propionate and SFC arms, compared with other
treatments in all GOLD stages.
CONCLUSION: In the TORCH study, SFC reduced moderate-to-severe exacerbations and 
improved health status and FEV1 across GOLD stages. Treatment with SFC may be
associated with reduced mortality compared with placebo in patients with GOLD
stage II disease. The effects were similar to those reported for the study as a
whole. Thus, SFC is an effective treatment option for patients with GOLD stage II
COPD.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: Clinicaltrial.gov registration NCT00268216; Study number:
SCO30003.

DOI: 10.1186/1465-9921-10-59 
PMCID: PMC2714501
PMID: 19566934  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Eur J Clin Pharmacol. 2009 Sep;65(9):853-71. doi: 10.1007/s00228-009-0682-z. Epub
2009 Jun 26.

Inhaled corticosteroids as combination therapy with beta-adrenergic agonists in
airways disease: present and future.

Chung KF(1), Caramori G, Adcock IM.

Author information: 
(1)Airway Disease Section, National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College
London, Dovehouse Street, London SW36LY, UK. f.chung@imperial.ac.uk

Inhaled corticosteroid (ICS) therapy in combination with long-acting
beta-adrenergic agonists represents the most important treatment for chronic
airways diseases such as asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
ICS therapy forms the basis for treatment of asthma of all severities, improving 
asthma control, lung function and preventing exacerbations of disease. Use of ICS
has also been established in the treatment of COPD, particularly symptomatic
patients, who experience useful gains in quality of life, likely from an
improvement in symptoms such as breathlessness and in reduction in exacerbations,
and an attenuation of the yearly rate of deterioration in lung function. The
addition of long-acting beta-agonist (LABA) therapy with ICS increases the
efficacy of ICS effects in moderate-to-severe asthma. Thus, a 800 mug daily dose 
of the ICS budesonide reduced severe exacerbation rates by 49% compared to a low 
dose of 200 mug daily, and addition of the LABA formoterol to budesonide (800
mug) led to a 63% reduction. In COPD, the effects of ICS are less prominent but
there are beneficial effects on the decline in FEV(1) and the rate of
exacerbations. A reduction in the rate of decline in FEV(1) of 16 ml/year with a 
25% reduction in exacerbation rate has been reported with the salmeterol and
fluticasone combination. A non-significant 17.5% reduction in all-cause mortality
rate with ICS and LABA is reported. Chronic inflammation is a feature of both
asthma and COPD, although there are site and characteristic differences. ICS
targets this inflammation although this effect of ICS is less effective in
patients with severe asthma and with COPD; however, addition of LABA may
potentiate the anti-inflammatory effects of ICS. An important consideration is
the presence of corticosteroid insensitivity in these patients. Currently
available ICS have variably potent binding activities to specific glucocorticoid 
receptors, leading to inhibition of gene expression by either binding to DNA and 
inducing anti-inflammatory genes or by repressing the induction of
pro-inflammatory mediators. Local side effects of ICS include oral candidiasis,
hoarseness and dysphonia, while systemic side effects, such as easy bruising and 
reduction in growth velocity or bone mineral densitometry, are usually restricted
to doses above maximally recommended doses. Use of LABA alone in patients with
asthma increases the risk of asthma-related events including deaths, but this is 
less observed with the combination of ICS and LABA. Therefore, use of LABA alone 
is not recommended for asthma therapy. Future progress in ICS development will be
characterised by the introduction of ICS with greater efficacy with a limited
side-effect profile, and by longer-acting ICS that can be used in combination
with once-daily LABAs. Other agents that could improve the efficacy of
corticosteroids or reverse corticosteroid insensitivity may be added to ICS. ICS 
in combination with LABAs will continue to remain the main focus of treatment of 
airways diseases.

DOI: 10.1007/s00228-009-0682-z 
PMID: 19557399  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Respir Med. 2009 Oct;103(10):1421-9. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2009.05.020. Epub 2009
Jun 24.

Tiotropium and risk for fatal and nonfatal cardiovascular events in patients with
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: systematic review with meta-analysis.

Rodrigo GJ(1), Castro-Rodriguez JA, Nannini LJ, Plaza Moral V, Schiavi EA.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Emergencia, Hospital Central de las Fuerzas Armadas, Av. 8 de 
Octubre 3020, Montevideo 11600, Uruguay. gurodrig@adinet.com.uy

BACKGROUND: There are safety concerns regarding the use of anticholinergics in
the COPD patient population. The purpose of this review was to evaluate the
cardiovascular risk of regular use of inhaled tiotropium bromide in patients with
COPD of any severity.
METHODS: Systematic searches were conducted in MEDLINE, EMBASE, the Cochrane
Controlled Trials Register, manufactures' trial register, and FDA databases,
without language restriction. Primary outcomes were a composite of major adverse 
cardiovascular events, cardiovascular mortality, and nonfatal myocardial
infarction (MI) or stroke during the treatment period. Relative risks (RR) were
estimated using fixed-effects models and statistical heterogeneity was estimated 
with the I2 statistic.
RESULTS: Nineteen randomized controlled trials (18,111 participants) were
selected. There was no difference in the incidence of adverse cardiovascular
events (RR=0.96; 95% CI, 0.82-1.12, I2=6%). Among individual components of the
composite outcome, tiotropium did not significantly increase the risk of
cardiovascular death (RR=0.93; 95% CI, 0.73-1.20, I2=1%), nonfatal MI (RR=0.84;
95% CI, 0.64-1.09, I2=0%), and nonfatal stroke (RR=1.04; 95% CI, 0.78-1.39,
I2=0%). A smoking history of > or = 55 pack-years presented a trend to a higher
rate of cardiovascular adverse events in patients receiving tiotropium.
CONCLUSIONS: Compared with control (placebo or salmeterol), tiotropium did not
significantly increase the risk of adverse major cardiovascular events among COPD
patients. Subgroup analysis suggested that smoking history can modify the risk of
cardiovascular adverse events.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2009.05.020 
PMID: 19556116  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Ir Med J. 2009 Mar;102(3):73-6.

An analysis of the utilisation and expenditure of medicines dispensed for the
management of severe asthma.

McGowan B(1), Bennett K, Barry M, Owens M, O'Connor M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Therapeutics, Trinity Centre for Health
Sciences, St James's Hospital, James's St, Dublin 8. mcgowab@tcd.ie

There are approximately 6,300 people in Ireland with a diagnosis of Chronic
Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD) and with a fast growing elderly population
the incidence of COPD is likely to increase. This study examines the prescribing 
patterns of medicines dispensed for the management Asthma/COPD in patients over
the age of 35 years using the HSE-Primary Care Reimbursement Services (PCRS)
prescribing databases. The HSE-PCRS pharmacy claims data, which covers all those 
over 70 years of age and means tested for those less than 70 years, was analysed 
for the years 2005/2006. Approximately 26,548 (17.9%) of patients who were
prescribed a respiratory drug received inhaled short-acting beta2 agonists in
combination with a regular standard-dose inhaled corticosteroid. A further 5,044 
(3.4%) were also prescribed a regular inhaled long-acting beta2 agonist
(salmeterol or formoterol). A total of 2506 patients (6.2%) on combination
therapy were co-prescribed four different anti-asthmatic treatments inclusive of 
oral prednisolone. A small proportion of the patients prescribed a respiratory
drug were co-prescribed nicotine replacement therapy (n = 5177, 3.5%). In total
there were 9,728 (6.2%) patients prescribed a mucolytic drug in combination with 
a respiratory drug and the rate of co-prescribing with antibiotics was 22%. COPD 
is a debilitating disease that is primarily caused by smoking and is therefore
largely preventable. The HSE-PCRS pharmacy claims data is a valuable tool for
helping to assess the burden of this disease in the Irish context.


PMID: 19489193  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Eur Respir J. 2009 Sep;34(3):641-7. doi: 10.1183/09031936.00193908. Epub 2009 May
14.

Pneumonia risk in COPD patients receiving inhaled corticosteroids alone or in
combination: TORCH study results.

Crim C(1), Calverley PM, Anderson JA, Celli B, Ferguson GT, Jenkins C, Jones PW, 
Willits LR, Yates JC, Vestbo J.

Author information: 
(1)GlaxoSmithKline, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709-3398, USA.
courtney.c.crim@gsk.com

Inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) are important in reducing exacerbation frequency
associated with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). However, little is 
known about the risk of associated infections. In a post hoc analysis of the
TOwards a Revolution in COPD Health (TORCH) study, we analysed and identified
potential risk factors for adverse event reports of pneumonia in this randomised,
double-blind trial comparing twice-daily inhaled salmeterol (SAL) 50 microg,
fluticasone propionate (FP) 500 microg, and the combination (SFC) with placebo in
6,184 patients with moderate-to-severe COPD over 3 yrs. Despite a higher
withdrawal rate in the placebo arm, after adjusting for time on treatment, a
greater rate of pneumonia was reported in the FP and SFC treatment arms (84 and
88 per 1,000 treatment-yrs, respectively) compared with SAL and placebo (52 and
52 per 1,000 treatment-yrs, respectively). Risk factors for pneumonia were age > 
or =55 yrs, forced expiratory volume in 1 s <50% predicted, COPD exacerbations in
the year prior to the study, worse Medical Research Council dyspnoea scores and
body mass index <25 kg.m(-2). No increase in pneumonia deaths with SFC was
observed; this could not be concluded for FP. Despite the benefits of
ICS-containing regimens in COPD management, healthcare providers should remain
vigilant regarding the possible development of pneumonia as a complication in
COPD patients receiving such therapies.

DOI: 10.1183/09031936.00193908 
PMID: 19443528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Br J Pharmacol. 2009 Sep;158(1):277-86. doi: 10.1111/j.1476-5381.2009.00224.x.
Epub 2009 Apr 30.

Pharmacogenetic characterization of indacaterol, a novel beta 2-adrenoceptor
agonist.

Sayers I(1), Hawley J, Stewart CE, Billington CK, Henry A, Leighton-Davies JR,
Charlton SJ, Hall IP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Therapeutics & Molecular Medicine, University Hospital of
Nottingham, Nottingham, UK. ian.sayers@nottingham.ac.uk

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Indacaterol is a novel beta(2)-adrenoceptor agonist in
development for the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. The aim
of this study was to investigate the comparative pharmacology of indacaterol in
recombinant cells expressing the common polymorphic variants of the human
beta(2)-adrenoceptor and in human primary airway smooth muscle (ASM) cells.
EXPERIMENTAL APPROACH: Chinese hamster ovarian-K1 cell lines expressing high and 
low levels of the common human beta(2)-adrenoceptor variants were generated
[Gly16-Glu27-Val34-Thr164(GEVT), RQVT, GQVT] and also the rare GQVI variant.
Human primary ASM cells were isolated from explants of trachealis muscle.
Adenosine-3',5'-cyclic-monophosphate production was used as an outcome measure.
KEY RESULTS: In both the low- and high-expression recombinant GEVT 'wild type'
cell lines indacaterol is a high-efficacy agonist. Salmeterol and formoterol were
identified as low- and high-efficacy agonists, respectively, and showed similar
potencies to indacaterol irrespective of the beta(2)-adrenoceptor genotype. The
I164 variant cell line was associated with a reduced capacity to generate
adenosine-3',5'-cyclic-monophosphate in response to beta(2)-adrenoceptor agonist.
In the human primary ASM cells indacaterol gave a maximal response intermediate
between that of salmeterol and formoterol.
CONCLUSIONS AND IMPLICATIONS: These data demonstrate that indacaterol is a
high-efficacy agonist in recombinant cell systems but acts with lower efficacy in
human primary ASM cells. No marked genotype-dependent effects were observed for
common variants; however, changes in I164 receptor activity were identified,
which were dependent on the level of expression of beta(2)-adrenoceptors.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1476-5381.2009.00224.x 
PMCID: PMC2795231
PMID: 19422388  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Prescrire Int. 2008 Dec;17(98):229.

Fluticasone/salmeterol: labeling change.

[No authors listed]

The fixed-dose combination of fluticasone and salmeterol has no place in the
treatment of asthma or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).


PMID: 19418648  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Am J Manag Care. 2009 Apr;15(4):226-32.

Cost-effectiveness of salmeterol, fluticasone, and combination therapy for COPD.

Oba Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonary, Critical Care and Environmental Medicine, University 
of Missouri-Columbia, One Hospital Dr, Health Science Center MA419A, Columbia, MO
65212, USA. obay@health.missouri.edu

OBJECTIVE: To assess the incremental cost-effectiveness of inhaled medication use
in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
STUDY DESIGN: A Markov model was constructed to estimate the incremental
quality-adjusted life-years (QALYs) gained of the alternative treatment arms used
in the Towards a Revolution in COPD Health (TORCH) study (ie,
salmeterol-fluticasone propionate combination [SFC], salmeterol, fluticasone, and
placebo).
METHODS: The cycle length for the model was set to 3 months, and the maximum time
horizon was set to 3 years. The cost-effective analysis was conducted from a
third-party payer's perspective in the US healthcare system. Future costs and
effects were discounted at 3%. Multiple 1-way sensitivity analyses and a
probabilistic sensitivity analysis using Monte Carlo simulation were performed to
handle uncertainty.
RESULTS: The most cost-effective strategies are placebo (as-needed short-acting
bronchodilator use with no maintenance therapy) when willingness to pay (WTP) is 
less than $52,800/QALY gained and SFC when WTP exceeds that threshold. When no
maintenance therapy is not an acceptable option, the most cost-effective
strategies are treatment with salmeterol when WTP is less than $49,500/QALY
gained and treatment with SFC when WTP exceeds that threshold. The base-case
analysis showed that incremental cost-effectiveness ratios of salmeterol,
fluticasone, and SFC relative to placebo were $56,519, $62,833, and $52,046/QALY 
gained, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: The most cost-effective strategy in moderate-to-severe COPD depends 
on how much society is willing to pay to achieve health improvements. When
treatment with as-needed short-acting bronchodilator use does not provide
adequate control, salmeterol or SFC would be the drug of choice depending on WTP.


PMID: 19355795  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Curr Med Res Opin. 2009 May;25(5):1235-45. doi: 10.1185/03007990902868971 .

Progression of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: impact of inflammation,
comorbidities and therapeutic intervention.

Stockley RA(1).

Author information: 
(1)University Hospital Birmingham NHS Foundation Trust, Birmingham, UK.
r.a.stockley@bham.ac.uk

BACKGROUND AND AIM: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a major cause
of morbidity and mortality, and through under-diagnosis, is often inappropriately
treated. This multicomponent disease involves both airway and systemic
inflammation at all stages and may influence the progression of disease and the
pathophysiology of comorbidities. This review examines evidence linking
inflammation, disease progression and comorbidities in COPD, and the potential
role of anti-inflammatory therapies.
METHODS: Systematic searches of Medline and Cochrane Reviews databases from 1976 
to March 2008 using the terms: chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, disease
progression, inflammation, inflammatory, comorbid condition, comorbidity,
treatment, therapy, bronchodilator, inhaled corticosteroid.
FINDINGS: Increased levels of interleukin-8, tumour necrosis factor-alpha and
systemic C-reactive protein correlate with worse disease severity, exacerbation
rates and lung function decline. Increased systemic C-reactive protein is also
associated with poorer health status and comorbidities (e.g. cardiovascular
disease, cancer and skeletal muscle dysfunction). The pivotal role of
inflammation in the pathogenesis of COPD and its comorbidities suggests
anti-inflammatory therapies will be important in the overall management of COPD. 
Long-term studies indicate that combination therapies consisting of a long-acting
beta-agonist plus an inhaled corticosteroid in one inhaler have the potential to 
modify disease progression through positive effects on lung function,
exacerbations, symptoms and health status. The TOwards a Revolution in COPD
Health (TORCH) study is the first to demonstrate that a COPD pharmacotherapy
(combination salmeterol plus fluticasone propionate) significantly decreased the 
rate of lung function decline versus placebo.
CONCLUSION: Better understanding of the specific inflammatory mechanisms
underlying COPD disease progression and associated comorbidities will likely lead
to more effective management of the disease.

DOI: 10.1185/03007990902868971   
PMID: 19335322  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Clin Exp Allergy. 2009 May;39(5):688-99. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2222.2009.03220.x.
Epub 2009 Mar 20.

Opposite effect of fluticasone and salmeterol on fibronectin and tenascin-C
expression in primary human lung fibroblasts.

Degen M(1), Goulet S, Ferralli J, Roth M, Tamm M, Chiquet-Ehrismann R.

Author information: 
(1)Friedrich Miescher Institute for Biomedical Research, Novartis Research
Foundation, Basel, Switzerland.

BACKGROUND: Airway remodelling is a key feature of asthma and chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD). The remodelling process involves the deposition of
extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins within the airways. Current therapies for
asthma and COPD consist of inhaled corticosteroids and long-acting
beta(2)-agonists (LABA). However, their effect on airway remodelling is not well 
understood so far.
OBJECTIVE: In this study we investigated the effect of fluticasone and
salmeterol, either alone or in combination, on fibronectin and tenascin-C
protein, isoform, and mRNA levels in primary human lung fibroblasts.
METHODS: In our model, fibroblasts cultured in serum-free medium represented a
non-inflammatory condition and stimulation with 5% fetal calf serum and/or
TGF-beta(1) mimicked a pro-fibrotic environment with activation of tissue repair.
Using these two different conditions, the effects of fluticasone and salmeterol
on fibronectin and tenascin-C protein and mRNA levels were analysed by
immunoblotting and semi-quantitative RT-PCR.
RESULTS: In both conditions, fluticasone increased fibronectin transcript and
protein levels, whereas it decreased those of tenascin-C. Salmeterol neither
affected fibronectin and tenascin-C synthesis significantly nor did it influence 
the effect of fluticasone when applied in combination. Furthermore, we found that
treatment with fluticasone had an opposite effect on extra domain A and B
containing fibronectin isoforms generated by alternative splicing compared with
total fibronectin transcript levels, whereas tenascin-C isoforms were not
differently modulated by fluticasone.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results indicate that standard therapies for inflammatory lung
disorders influence ECM protein composition and relative expression levels. In
contrast to corticosteroids, LABA did not significantly alter the expression of
tenascin-C and fibronectin in cultures of primary human lung fibroblasts.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2222.2009.03220.x 
PMID: 19309351  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Eur Respir J. 2009 Apr;33(4):778-84. doi: 10.1183/09031936.00115308. Epub 2009
Jan 7.

Anti-inflammatory effects of salmeterol/fluticasone, tiotropium/fluticasone or
tiotropium in COPD.

Perng DW(1), Tao CW, Su KC, Tsai CC, Liu LY, Lee YC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chest Medicine, Taipei Veterans General Hospital, Taipei,
Taiwan. dwperng@vghtpe.gov.tw

The anti-inflammatory effects of salmeterol/fluticasone (SFP),
tiotropium/fluticasone (Tio+FP) and tiotropium (Tio) alone were investigated on
the inflammatory cells and mediators in sputum induced from chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease patients. Subjects were either newly diagnosed or had not taken
any medication for 3 months prior to the study. Subjects (n = 99) were randomised
(not double blinded) and received either SFP (100/1,000 microg daily), Tio+FP
(18/1,000 microg daily) or Tio (18 microg daily) for 12 weeks. Induced sputum and
serum C-reactive protein (CRP) were analysed prior to and at the end of
treatment. The results showed that treatment with SFP caused a significant
reduction in interleukin (IL)-8 and matrix metalloprotease (MMP)-9 in induced
sputum, compared with treatment with Tio alone. There were no treatment
differences between the SFP and Tio+FP groups in decreasing IL-8 and MMP-9
levels. The reduction in IL-8 showed significant association with the reduction
in MMP-9. All treatment groups failed to significantly reduce the numbers of
total cells, neutrophils, macrophages and eosinophils in induced sputum; in
addition, there were no treatment differences in terms of improvement of forced
expiratory volume in one second, forced vital capacity, CRP or quality of life
between the three groups. The anti-inflammatory effects of salmeterol/fluticasone
probably contribute to the clinical benefits seen in chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease patients.

DOI: 10.1183/09031936.00115308 
PMID: 19129278  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Ther Adv Respir Dis. 2008 Apr;2(2):37-48. doi: 10.1177/1753465808089455.

Arformoterol and salmeterol in the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease: a one year evaluation of safety and tolerance.

Donohue JF(1), Hanania NA, Sciarappa KA, Goodwin E, Grogan DR, Baumgartner RA,
Hanrahan JP.

Author information: 
(1)University of North Carolina School of Medicine, Chapel Hill, NC, USA.

INTRODUCTION: Concerns have been raised regarding the safety of extended use of
long-acting beta2-agonists (LABAs). The safety of arformoterol (50 microg QD),
and salmeterol (42 microg BID), was assessed over 12 months in subjects with
COPD. The study also examined the occurrence of tolerance with these agents, i.e.
whether improvement in airway function diminished or frequency of exacerbations
increased with 12-months of use.
METHODS: Subjects with COPD (mean FEV1 1.2 L, ~41% predicted) were enrolled in
the study and randomized to receive nebulized arformoterol 50 microg QD (n = 528)
or salmeterol 42 microg BID (MDI; n = 265) in a prospective, multicenter,
open-label, 12-month trial. The frequency of adverse events, COPD exacerbations, 
and use of short-acting bronchodilator agents were assessed throughout the study 
period. Pulmonary function was also examined.
RESULTS: Among treated subjects, the frequency of adverse events was similar for 
those taking arformoterol (90.5%) and salmeterol (88.3%). Tremor was more
frequent among subjects treated with arformoterol (13.4%) than those treated with
salmeterol (1.1%). The frequency of COPD exacerbations did not increase over 12
months for arformoterol and salmeterol (weeks 0-13: 15.7% and 11.7%,
respectively; weeks 39-52: 10.0% and 9.4%, respectively). Supplemental
ipratropium bromide and rescue racemic albuterol use decreased for both groups by
0.8 to 1.5 actuations/day, decreases that remained stable throughout the 52-week 
study. Mean predose (trough) FEV1 improved for arformoterol and salmeterol at
week 13 (7.1% +/- 17.0 and 7.6% +/- 17.8, respectively) and the improvement
continued at week 52 (5.9% and 6.2%, respectively). Mean peak percent predicted
postdose FEV1 over the course of the 52-week study declined by about 2% for both 
treatments, but throughout was higher for arformoterol than for salmeterol.
CONCLUSION: In this trial, both arformoterol 50 microg QD and salmeterol 42
microg BID were well tolerated in patients with COPD. Both LABAs produced
effective bronchodilation and their use was not associated with the development
of clinically meaningful tolerance over a 1-year treatment period.

DOI: 10.1177/1753465808089455 
PMID: 19124357  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Respir Med. 2009 Apr;103(4):582-8. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2008.10.017. Epub 2008 Dec
21.

Primary care of the patient with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease in Italy.

Cazzola M(1), Bettoncelli G, Sessa E, Cricelli C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Unit of Respiratory Diseases, University of
Rome Tor Vergata, Rome, Italy. mario.cazzola@uniroma2.it

Using a general practice research database with general practitioner (GP)
clinical records, it has been observed that among the 617,280 subjects registered
with 400 Italian GPs, 15,229 (2.47%) patients were suffering from chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Of these, 67.7% had a chest radiograph at
least once in a period of 10 years (1997-2006), while in the same period only
31.9% had a spirometry, 29.9% had a visit to a specialist, and 0.94% had a visit 
to an allergologist. From 1997 to 2006, 7.5% of patients with COPD, especially
the oldest ones, were hospitalized at least once for the disease, although 44.0% 
of all patients with COPD were hospitalized for other pathologies. With regard to
treatment, in 2006, 10,936 (71.1%) of COPD patients received at least one drug
for their disease (drugs classified within the R03 therapeutic pharmacological
subgroup of the Anatomical Therapeutic Chemical Classification). In particular,
salmeterol/fluticasone was prescribed 6441 times, tiotropium 4962, theophylline
3142, beclomethasone 2853, salbutamol 2256, formoterol 2191,
salbutamol/beclomethasone 2129, oxitropium 1802 and formoterol/budesonide 1741
times. Based on these findings, the level of COPD management in Italy seems to
fall short of recommended international COPD guidelines. In particular, it
appears that GPs usually prescribe treatment without the use of spirometry,
and/or without taking into account the severity of airway obstruction. It must
also be noted that, in general, patients with COPD are undertreated.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2008.10.017 
PMID: 19103479  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Zhonghua Jie He He Hu Xi Za Zhi. 2008 Nov;31(11):811-4.

[Combination of inhaled salmeterol/fluticasone and tiotropium in the treatment of
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: a randomised controlled trial].

[Article in Chinese]

Fang LZ(1), Liang X, Zhang JQ, Liu L, Fu WP, Zhao ZH, Dai LM.

Author information: 
(1)Department 2 of Respiratory Medicine, the First Affiliated Hospital of Kunming
Medical College, Kunming 650032, China.

OBJECTIVE: To observe the efficacy of combination therapy with inhaled
salmeterol/fluticasone and tiotropium in reducing the frequency of acute episodes
of symptom exacerbation and improving lung function and health status in chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
METHODS: One hundred and twenty-six patients (M/F: 92/34) with COPD were treated 
in a randomised, parallel-group, controlled study with salmeterol/fluticasone
(50/250 microg) twice daily and tiotropium 18 microg once daily (n = 33, M/F:
23/10); salmeterol/fluticasone (50/250 microg) twice daily (n = 32, M/F: 24/8);
or tiotropium 18 microg once daily (n = 32, M/F: 23/9) for 12 months. Patients in
the blank control group (n = 29, M/F: 22/7) did not receive any inhaled
anticholinergic drugs, long-acting beta(2) agonists or glucocorticoid therapy.
Intention-to-treat analysis (n = 161) and per-protocol analysis (n = 126, age 45 
- 71 years) were performed.
RESULTS: Three active treatments significantly improved symptoms and health
status. The use of rescue medication in the combination group [1 (0 - 7) time,
95% CI] was significantly decreased compared with those in the blank group [2 (0 
- 29) times], salmeterol/fluticasone alone [2 (0 - 13) times], tiotropium alone
[1 (0 - 11) time], F = 4.914, P < 0.01. The frequency of exacerbations in the
combination group was (0.7 +/- 0.5) time, significantly lower than that in the
blank group [(1.5 +/- 0.9) times], salmeterol/fluticasone alone [(1.2 +/- 0.6)
times], and tiotropium alone [(1.1 +/- 0.5) times], F = 8.513, P < 0.01. The
FEV(1) in the combination group after the trial was (1.19 +/- 0.03) L,
significantly improved compared to that before treatment (1.09 +/- 0.04) L, a
9.5% increase, which was greater than the blank (0.9%), tiotropium alone (8.2%)
and salmeterol/fluticasone alone (6.3%), t = -5.024 to -15.58, P < 0.01.
CONCLUSION: Combination therapy with salmeterol/fluticasone and tiotropium leads 
to better control of symptoms and improved lung function, with no greater risk of
side-effects, as compared to salmeterol/fluticasone or tiotropium alone in the
treatment of COPD.


PMID: 19080533  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Pulm Pharmacol Ther. 2009 Feb;22(1):44-9. doi: 10.1016/j.pupt.2008.11.010. Epub
2008 Nov 30.

Faster onset of action of formoterol versus salmeterol in patients with chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease: a multicenter, randomized study.

Cote C(1), Pearle JL, Sharafkhaneh A, Spangenthal S.

Author information: 
(1)Bay Pines Veterans Affairs Health Care System, Bay Pines, FL 33708, United
States. claudia.cote@va.gov

BACKGROUND: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a growing public
health problem that has increased in recent years. It similarly affects men and
women, especially those who smoke. The goals of COPD pharmacotherapy are to
improve lung function, reduce symptoms, prevent exacerbations, and improve
patients' health status. Bronchodilators are the foundation of treatment for
COPD, and the long-acting beta2-agonists formoterol and salmeterol are both
indicated for regular use by patients with stable COPD.
OBJECTIVE: A clinical study was conducted to compare the onset of bronchodilator 
effects following treatment with formoterol 12 microg administered twice-daily
(BID) or salmeterol 50 microg BID. The trial also assessed whether the
bronchodilator effects of treatment resulted in significant differences in
clinical response.
METHODS: This was a randomized, multicenter, open-label, parallel-group study of 
formoterol 12 microg BID versus salmeterol 50 microg BID, both administered for
28 days. Patients were current or previous smokers aged>or=40 years, with a
diagnosis of stable COPD. The primary efficacy variable was change from baseline 
in forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1) 5 min after drug administration on day 
28. Secondary efficacy variables included changes from baseline in the 6-min walk
test (6MWT) and rescue medication use. The primary variable was assessed by
analysis of covariance, with baseline FEV1 as the covariate.
RESULTS: A total of 270 patients were randomized to formoterol 12 microg BID
(n=137) or salmeterol 50 microg BID (n=133). In the intent-to-treat population
the least square (LS) mean change from baseline in FEV1 at 5 min postdose on day 
28 was 0.13 L in the formoterol group compared with 0.07 L in the salmeterol
group (P=0.022). At 30 min postdose on day 28, the LS mean change from baseline
in FEV1 was 0.17 L in the formoterol group compared with 0.07 L in the salmeterol
group (P<0.001). Similar changes were reported at 60 min postdose (0.19 L for the
formoterol group versus 0.13 L for the salmeterol group, P=0.069). Patients in
the formoterol group walked longer distances in the 6MWT and used less rescue
medication compared with patients in the salmeterol group, although the
differences were not statistically significant.
CONCLUSIONS: Significantly greater improvements from baseline in FEV1 were
observed at 5 and 30 min postdose with formoterol 12 microg compared with
salmeterol 50 microg after 28 days of treatment. Numeric improvements in the 6MWT
and rescue medication use were also observed with formoterol.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pupt.2008.11.010 
PMID: 19071226  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Expert Opin Pharmacother. 2008 Dec;9(18):3271-3. doi: 10.1517/14656560802591406 .

Inhaled corticosteroids in COPD: systemic effects of a local therapy?

Antoniu SA(1).

Author information: 
(1)University of Medicine and Pharmacy 'Gr. T. Popa' Iasi, Division of Pulmonary 
Disease, Pulmonary Disease University Hospital, 30 Dr I Cihac Street, 700115
Iasi, Romania. sabina.antonela.antoniu@pneum.umfiasi.ro

Comment on
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2008 Jun 1;177(11):1207-14.

BACKGROUND: There are few data on the effects of inhaled corticosteroids on
systemic inflammation in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
OBJECTIVE: Evaluation of the systemic anti-inflammatory effects of inhaled
corticosteroids alone or in combination with long acting beta2-agonists.
METHODS: Analysis of the results of a randomized study assessing the short-term
effects of inhaled fluticasone propionate, inhaled fluticasone + salmeterol and
placebo on three inflammation biomarkers represented by C-reactive protein, IL-6 
and surfactant protein-D.
RESULTS/CONCLUSIONS: Inhaled corticosteroids alone or in combination exhibited
partial systemic anti-inflammatory effects, reducing significantly only SP-D
serum levels. Further evaluation of effects of inhaled corticosteroids on various
biomarkers of systemic inflammation is required in more severe stable COPD.

DOI: 10.1517/14656560802591406   
PMID: 19040347  [PubMed]


289. Crit Care. 2008;12(6):R140. doi: 10.1186/cc7117. Epub 2008 Nov 14.

Duration of salmeterol-induced bronchodilation in mechanically ventilated chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease patients: a prospective clinical study.

Malliotakis P(1), Linardakis M, Gavriilidis G, Georgopoulos D.

Author information: 
(1)Intensive Care Medicine Department, University Hospital of Heraklion,
University of Crete, PO Box 1352, 71110 Heraklion, Crete, Greece.
malliot@altecnet.gr

INTRODUCTION: Delivery of bronchodilators with a metered-dose inhaler (MDI) and a
spacer device in mechanically ventilated patients has become a widespread
practice. However, except for the short-acting beta2-agonist salbutamol, the
duration of action of other bronchodilators, including long-acting
beta2-agonists, delivered with this technique is not well established. The
purpose of this study was to examine the duration of bronchodilation induced by
the long-acting beta2-agonist salmeterol administered with an MDI and a spacer in
a group of mechanically ventilated patients with exacerbation of chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
METHODS: Ten mechanically ventilated patients with acute exacerbation of COPD
received four puffs of salmeterol (25 microg/puff). Salmeterol was administered
with an MDI adapted to the inspiratory limb of the ventilator circuit using an
aerosol cloud enhance spacer. Static and dynamic airway pressures, minimum (Rint)
and maximum (Rrs) inspiratory resistance, and the difference between Rrs and Rint
(DeltaR) were measured before and at 15, 30, and 60 minutes as well as at 2, 3,
4, 6, 8, 10, and 12 hours after salmeterol administration. The overall effects of
salmeterol on respiratory system mechanics and heart rate during the 12-hour
study period were analyzed by nonparametric Wilcoxon signed rank test.
RESULTS: Salmeterol caused a significant decrease in dynamic and static airway
pressures, Rint, and Rrs. These changes were evident at 30 minutes and remained
significant for 8 hours after salmeterol administration. The duration of
bronchodilation varied significantly among patients, lasting in some patients
more than 10 hours and wearing off in others in less than 6 hours.
CONCLUSIONS: It is concluded that four puffs of salmeterol delivered with an MDI 
and a spacer device induces significant bronchodilation in mechanically
ventilated patients with COPD exacerbation, the duration of which is highly
variable, precluding definite conclusions in regard to optimum dosing schedules.

DOI: 10.1186/cc7117 
PMCID: PMC2646351
PMID: 19014570  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Medicine (Baltimore). 2008 Nov;87(6):319-28. doi: 10.1097/MD.0b013e31818fcc02.

Arrhythmias in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD):
occurrence frequency and the effect of treatment with the inhaled long-acting
beta2-agonists arformoterol and salmeterol.

Hanrahan JP(1), Grogan DR, Baumgartner RA, Wilson A, Cheng H, Zimetbaum PJ,
Morganroth J.

Author information: 
(1)Sepracor Inc., Marlborough, Massachusetts 01752, USA.

Beta-adrenergic stimulation may increase heart rate and the potential for cardiac
arrhythmias. The effect of inhaled long-acting beta2-agonists (LABAs) on these
outcomes was evaluated in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD) in 2 double-blind randomized clinical trials. The pretreatment arrhythmia 
occurrence frequency in these patients was also described. In this analysis,
24-hour Holter monitoring data were pooled from 2 identically designed Phase III 
trials. Patients were randomized to LABA treatment or placebo for 12 weeks: a)
nebulized arformoterol 15 microg BID, b) 25 microg BID, or c) 50 microg QD; d)
salmeterol metered dose inhaler 42 microg BID; or e) placebo. The 24-hour Holter 
monitoring was performed pretreatment and at Weeks 0 (first day of dosing), 6,
and 12. We assessed the proportion of patients with each of 4 arrhythmias: atrial
tachycardia, atrial fibrillation/flutter, and "nonsustained"; (4-10 beats) and
"sustained"; (>10 beats) ventricular tachycardia. There were 5226 Holter
recordings in 1429 treated patients. At baseline, there was a low frequency of
occurrence of atrial fibrillation/flutter (0.1%), nonsustained ventricular
tachycardia (3.1%), and >10 beat ventricular tachycardia (0.3%). Atrial
tachycardia occurred frequently (41.8%). The proportion of patients with
treatment-emergent atrial tachycardia ranged from 27% to 32% and was
non-significantly higher, by approximately 2%-5% (p = 0.70), in the LABA groups
compared with the placebo group. The rates of the other more serious arrhythmias 
did not increase with LABA treatment and were similar to placebo. All treatment
groups (LABA and placebo) had consistent small decreases from baseline in mean
24-hour and maximum hourly heart rate. In conclusion, in this large cohort of
COPD patients with no or stable cardiac comorbidities, a high proportion (
approximately 40%) of patients were observed to have atrial tachycardia before
treatment, which increased by 2%-5% with LABA treatment. More serious arrhythmias
were infrequent and did not increase with inhaled LABA therapy. LABA
administration did not increase mean heart rate.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0b013e31818fcc02 
PMID: 19011503  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Ann Pharmacother. 2008 Dec;42(12):1832-42. doi: 10.1345/aph.1L250. Epub 2008 Oct 
28.

Long-acting bronchodilator therapy for the treatment of chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease.

Chen AM(1), Bollmeier SG, Finnegan PM.

Author information: 
(1)St. Louis College of Pharmacy, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To review clinical data on the use of long-acting bronchodilator
agents as monotherapy and in combination for the treatment of moderate-to-severe 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
DATA SOURCES: A literature search was performed via MEDLINE (1966-April 2008). In
addition, references from publications identified were reviewed. These searches
were limited to human data published in the English language. Searches used the
following terms: COPD, long-acting beta(2)-agonists, long-acting
anticholinergics, combination therapy, pharmacoeconomics, safety, tiotropium,
salmeterol, and formoterol.
STUDY SELECTION AND DATA EXTRACTION: Relevant information on the pharmacology,
safety, efficacy, pharmacoeconomics, adherence, and available agents used in the 
treatment of COPD was selected. Randomized clinical trials and retrospective
reviews were included.
DATA SYNTHESIS: The Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease
guidelines provide general management recommendations to guide providers
regarding treatment choices for COPD; however, they lack clarity regarding which 
long-acting bronchodilator to use and when combining agents becomes appropriate. 
Prospective trials evaluating short-acting anticholinergics and long-acting
beta(2)-agonists have utilized spirometric endpoints that relate most to
short-term symptomatic relief. Tiotropium trials have focused more on
patient-oriented outcomes, with data being reported for one year. Tiotropium
significantly lowers exacerbation rates and improves health resource usage as
well as health-related quality of life. Tiotropium also provides superior
bronchodilation and improvement in dyspnea at all time points, although onset of 
bronchodilation is slower than with long-acting beta(2)-agonists. Combining these
agents has been shown to decrease daytime rescue inhaler use, improve morning and
evening peak expiratory flow rates, and improve bronchodilator efficacy compared 
with monotherapy. Pharmacoeconomic data lend support to the recommendation of
tiotropium as a first-line long-acting agent.
CONCLUSIONS: Tiotropium appears to be the best option as a first-line drug for
patients with moderate-to-severe COPD because of its ability to sustain
bronchodilator effect, improve quality of life, reduce COPD exacerbations, and
reduce health resource usage. Patients who remain symptomatic may benefit from
the addition of a long-acting beta(2)-agonist to tiotropium monotherapy.

DOI: 10.1345/aph.1L250 
PMID: 18957624  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Presse Med. 2008 Nov;37(11):1604-8. doi: 10.1016/j.lpm.2008.08.003. Epub 2008 Sep
30.

[Prevention of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease exacerbations].

[Article in French]

Dusser D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Faculté Cochin Port-Royal, Service de Pneumologie, Groupe Hospitalier Cochin
Saint-Vincent-de-Paul, APHP, Université Paris Descartes, Paris Cedex 14, France. 
daniel.dusser@cch.aphp.fr

Exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) aggravate disease
course, induce increased morbidity and mortality, impair quality of life, and
raise the direct costs of COPD. Their prevention is essential and is an integral 
part of the COPD program defined by French health authorities for the 2005-2010
period. Both pharmacologic and nonpharmacologic approaches have been shown to be 
effective in preventing exacerbations, but these treatments are still underused
and misused. Important nonpharmacologic therapies that directly decrease the risk
of exacerbation or hospitalization include smoking cessation, oxygen therapy,
pulmonary rehabilitation, and education. Most of the drugs available for
long-term management of COPD have significant effects on the frequency of
exacerbations: tiotropium and salmeterol, each used alone, as well as fixed
combinations of salmeterol/fluticasone or formoterol/budesonide. Tiotropium
reduces the frequency of exacerbation in both moderate and severe COPD. Inhaled
glucocorticosteroid agents are not recommended alone. They must be prescribed
only with a long-acting bronchodilator and only to patients with severe disease
and repeated exacerbations. Influenza vaccination is recommended.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lpm.2008.08.003 
PMID: 18829252  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Am J Geriatr Pharmacother. 2008 Aug;6(3):138-46. doi:
10.1016/j.amjopharm.2008.08.005.

Risk of hospitalizations/emergency department visits and treatment costs
associated with initial maintenance therapy using fluticasone propionate 500
microg/salmeterol 50 microg compared with ipratropium for chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease in older adults.

Blanchette CM(1), Akazawa M, Dalal A, Simoni-Wastila L.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Pharmacoeconomic and Outcomes Research, Lovelace Respiratory
Research Institute, Albuquerque, New Mexico 87108, USA. cblanchette@LRRI.org

BACKGROUND: Cost-effective treatments for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD) are needed to reduce the burden on the Medicare system.
OBJECTIVES: The objectives of this retrospective study were to compare the
effects of fluticasone propionate 500 microg/salmeterol 50 microg (FSC 500/50)
with those of ipratropium (IPR) in older adult patients with COPD on the
following factors: (1) the risk of all-cause and COPD-related hospitalization and
emergency department (ED) visits; and (2) all-cause and COPD-related treatment
costs.
METHODS: This retrospective, observational cohort study assessed commercially
insured patients aged > or =65 years (Medicare eligible) with COPD-related
medical costs (International Classification of Diseases, Ninth Revision, Clinical
Modification codes 490.xx, 491.xx, 492.xx, or 496.xx), 18 months of continuous
enrollment (12 months' pre-study and 6 months' poststudy), and > or =1
prescription claim (ie, the index event) for FSC 500/50 or IPR between January 2,
2001, and August 12, 2003. Exacerbation events (hospitalizations/ED visits) were 
assessed using Cox proportional hazards regression models controlling for
baseline factors and preindex events. Treatment costs were estimated using
multivariate generalized linear models to adjust for baseline characteristics and
preindex utilization and costs. A propensity-matched comparison was conducted as 
a sensitivity analysis.
RESULTS: A total of 1051 patients (540 women, 511 men) were identified: 952 in
the IPR group (mean age, 74.26 years) and 99 in the FSC 500/50 group (mean age,
72.38 years). Treatment with FSC 500/50 was not associated with a reduction in
the risk of all-cause hospitalization or ED visit compared with IPR (adjusted
hazards ratio [HR], 0.913 [95% CI, 0.673-1.238]); however, FSC 500/50 was
associated with a significantly lower risk (45%) of a COPD-related event
(adjusted HR, 0.547 [95% CI, 0.301-0.995]). Although treatment with FSC 500/50
was associated with significantly lower annual mean all-cause medical costs
compared with IPR ($18,642 vs $25,556, P < 0.05), the use of FSC 500/50 was also 
associated with significantly higher annual all-cause pharmacy costs ($2813 vs
$2244, P < 0.05). Compared with the IPR cohort, the FSC 500/50 cohort had lower
mean annual COPD-related medical costs (-$464 [P = NS]) and higher COPD-related
pharmacy costs ($260 [P < 0.01]). However, increased pharmacy costs may be
compensated for by decreased medical costs in both all-cause and COPD-related
services. Results from the sensitivity analysis with the propensity score-matched
sample of 194 patients were similar.
CONCLUSIONS: Compared with the IPR cohort, the FSC 500/50 cohort was 45% less
likely to have a COPD-related exacerbation event and had similar medical costs.
FSC 500/50 was a more effective initial maintenance therapy than IPR for this
Medicare population, and, despite the $260 increase in COPD-related pharmacy
costs, there was no significant difference in COPD-related medical costs.

DOI: 10.1016/j.amjopharm.2008.08.005 
PMID: 18775388  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Lung. 2008 Nov-Dec;186(6):381-6. doi: 10.1007/s00408-008-9103-9. Epub 2008 Aug
29.

Lung function response to 12-week treatment with combined inhalation of
long-acting beta2 agonist and glucocorticoid according to ADRB2 polymorphism in
patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Kim WJ(1), Oh YM, Sung J, Kim TH, Huh JW, Jung H, Lee JH, Kim EK, Lee JH, Lee SM,
Lee S, Lim SY, Shin TR, Yoon HI, Kwon SY, Lee SD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, College of Medicine, Kangwon National
University, Chuncheon, South Korea.

Recent reports suggest that beta(2)-adrenergic receptor (ADRB2) genotypes are
associated with therapeutic responses to beta(2) agonists in asthmatics. However,
few studies have investigated therapeutic responses to beta(2) agonists in
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) patients. This study investigated
immediate bronchodilator response and lung function responses following a 12-week
treatment with a long-acting beta(2) agonist combined with a steroid inhaler in
patients with COPD with various ADRB2 genotypes. One hundred four patients with
chronic obstruction were genotyped for codon 16 and 27 polymorphisms of the ADRB2
gene. The immediate bronchodilator response to beta(2)-agonist treatment was
evaluated after inhalation of 400 microg salbutamol. In addition, long-term
response was evaluated using observed change in spirometric values before and
after the treatment with salmeterol (50 microg) combined with fluticasone
propionate (500 microg) inhalation twice daily for 12 weeks. In terms of codon 16
variants, the immediate bronchodilator response to salbutamol was 6.4 +/- 0.8% (%
predicted value) in Arg/Arg patients, 4.9 +/- 0.7% in Arg/Gly patients, and 5.8
+/- 1.2% in Gly/Gly patients (p = 0.418). The FEV(1) changes following the
12-week treatment were 7.0 +/- 1.2% in Arg/Arg patients, 3.0 +/- 1.5% in Arg/Gly 
patients, and 7.2 +/- 1.2% in Gly/Gly patients (p = 0.229). Similarly, there was 
no difference between codon 27 variants in terms of immediate bronchodilator
response or FEV1 changes after 12 weeks of treatment. We were unable to
demonstrate an association between ADRB2 genotype and the effect on lung function
of 12-week treatment with combined long-acting beta(2) agonist and glucocorticoid
inhalation or on the immediate bronchodilator response to a short-acting beta(2) 
agonist in patients with COPD.

DOI: 10.1007/s00408-008-9103-9 
PMID: 18758858  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2008;3(2):205-15.

Formoterol in the management of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Steiropoulos P(1), Tzouvelekis A, Bouros D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pneumonology, University Hospital of Alexandroupolis, Greece.

Bronchodilators represent the hallmark of symptomatic treatment of Chronic
Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD). There are four categories of
bronchodilators: anticholinergics, methylxanthines, short-acting beta2-agonists, 
and long-acting beta2-agonists such as formoterol. Significant research has been 
performed to investigate the efficacy, safety and tolerability of formoterol in
the therapeutic field of COPD. Formoterol exhibits a rapid onset of
bronchodilation similar to that observed with salbutamol, yet its long
bronchodilatory duration is comparable to salmeterol. In addition, formoterol
presents with a clear superiority in lung function improvement compared with
either ipratropium bromide or oral theophylline, while its efficacy improves when
administered in combination with ipratropium. Formoterol has been shown to better
reduce dynamic hyperinflation, which is responsible for exercise intolerance and 
dyspnea in COPD patients, compared with other bronchodilators, whereas it exerts 
synergistic effect with tiotropium. Moreover, formoterol reduces exacerbations,
increases days free of use of rescue medication and improves patients' quality of
life and disease symptoms. Formoterol has a favorable safety profile and is
better tolerated than theophylline. Collectively, data extracted from multicenter
clinical trials support formoterol as a valid therapeutic option in the treatment
of COPD.


PMCID: PMC2629967
PMID: 18686730  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. COPD. 2008 Aug;5(4):221-7. doi: 10.1080/15412550802237408.

A double-blind crossover study comparing the safety and efficacy of three weeks
of Flu/Sal 250/50 bid plus albuterol 180 ug prn q4 hours to Flu/Sal 250/50 bid
plus albuterol/Ipratropium bromide 2 puffs prn q4 hours in patients with chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease.

Balkissoon R(1), Make B.

Author information: 
(1)National Jewish Medical and Research Center, Denver, Colorado 80206, USA.
balkissoonr@njc.org

Erratum in
    COPD. 2009 Apr;6(2):145. Dosage error in article text.

The Federal Drug Administration (FDA) approved the use of Fluticasone 250
microg/Salmeterol 50 microg 1 puff bid for maintenance therapy in patients with
COPD associated with chronic bronchitis. Short-acting beta agonists (SABA) have
been the recommended rescue medication; however, previous studies have shown that
combination short-acting Albuterol (alb) /Ipratropium bromide (IB) has superior
bronchodilator properties to albuterol alone in patients with COPD. The safety
and efficacy of Albuterol compared to Albuterol/Ipratropium bromide as rescue
medications for COPD patients on maintenance combination therapy of ICS/LABA has 
not been evaluated. Double-blind randomized crossover trial with COPD subjects
receiving Fluticasone/ Salmeterol 500 microg/50 microg (Flu/Sal) 1 puff twice
daily and 2 puffs of Albuterol Sulfate (90 microg micrograms per inhalation) or 2
puffs of Albuterol (90 microg/puff and Ipratropium Bromide 18 microg/puff. Either
Albuterol Sulfate (90 micrograms/puff) or Alb (90 micrograms/puff)/IB used prn
for 3 weeks before crossing over to the other rescue formulation. This is a
non-inferiority study where safety and efficacy outcomes were serially assessed, 
including adverse events, Baseline (BDI)/Transition Dyspnea Index (TDI), St.
George Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ), SF36, diary cards, 24-hour cardiac
monitoring, potassium and glucose levels and other adverse events. Twenty
subjects completed the study. The mean age was 62.5 (+/- 14.5); 12 were males.
The mean baseline FEV(1) (range) was 1.12 L (0.56-1.67) or 40.6 (21-65)%
predicted. There were no statistically significant differences between either
rescue inhaler formulation with regard to measures neither of lung function or
dyspnea nor in terms of safety parameters of cardiac monitoring, glucose and
potassium levels and other adverse events. SABA and combination SABA/Ipratropium 
bromide are equally safe and efficacious as rescue inhalers for patients on
combination Fluticasone 500 microg/Salmeterol 50 microg.

DOI: 10.1080/15412550802237408 
PMID: 18671147  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Thorax. 2008 Nov;63(11):962-7. doi: 10.1136/thx.2007.089557. Epub 2008 Jul 11.

Cost effectiveness of therapy with combinations of long acting bronchodilators
and inhaled steroids for treatment of COPD.

Najafzadeh M(1), Marra CA, Sadatsafavi M, Aaron SD, Sullivan SD, Vandemheen KL,
Jones PW, Fitzgerald JM.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of British Columbia, Vancouver,
British Columbia, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Little is known about the combination of different medications in
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). This study determined the cost
effectiveness of adding salmeterol (S) or fluticasone/salmeterol (FS) to
tiotropium (T) for COPD.
METHODS: This concurrent, prospective, economic analysis was based on costs and
health outcomes from a 52 week randomised study comparing: (1) T 18 microg once
daily + placebo twice daily (TP group); (2) T 18 microg once daily + S 25
microg/puff, 2 puffs twice daily (TS group); and (3) T 18 microg once daily + FS 
250/25 microg/puff, 2 puffs twice daily (TFS group). The incremental cost
effectiveness ratios (ICERs) were defined as incremental cost per exacerbation
avoided, and per additional quality adjusted life year (QALY) between treatments.
A combination of imputation and bootstrapping was used to quantify uncertainty,
and extensive sensitivity analyses were performed.
RESULTS: The average patient in the TP group generated CAN$2678 in direct medical
costs compared with $2801 (TS group) and $4042 (TFS group). The TS strategy was
dominated by TP and TFS. Compared with TP, the TFS strategy resulted in ICERs of 
$6510 per exacerbation avoided, and $243,180 per QALY gained. In those with
severe COPD, TS resulted in equal exacerbation rates and slightly lower costs
compared with TP.
CONCLUSIONS: TFS had significantly better quality of life and fewer
hospitalisations than patients treated with TP but these improvements in health
outcomes were associated with increased costs. Neither TFS nor TS are
economically attractive alternatives compared with monotherapy with T.

DOI: 10.1136/thx.2007.089557 
PMID: 18621985  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Am J Manag Care. 2008 Jul;14(7):438-48.

Economic assessment of initial maintenance therapy for chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease.

Akazawa M(1), Hayflinger DC, Stanford RH, Blanchette CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health Policy and Administration, University of North Carolina
at Chapel Hill, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To compare the effects of initial maintenance therapy with fluticasone
250 microgram plus salmeterol 50 microgram in a single inhaler versus other
inhaled medications on exacerbation risks and treatment costs among chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) patients.
STUDY DESIGN: A retrospective observational analysis was conducted by using
medical/pharmacy claims from a large managed care database between January 2000
and February 2004. Patients age 40 years or older with a primary diagnosis of
COPD (International Classification of Diseases, Ninth Revision, Clinical
Modification code 490, 491, 492, or 496), at least 18 months of continuous
eligibility, and an index prescription for fluticasone/salmeterol combination,
salmeterol alone, inhaled corticosteroid alone, ipratropium/albuterol
combination, or ipratropium alone (reference) were identified.
METHODS: Time to first COPD-related hospitalization or emergency department (ED) 
visit was estimated by using Cox proportional hazard models. All-cause and
COPD-related treatment costs were estimated by using generalized linear models
with a gamma distribution and log link. Multivariable regressions were used,
controlling for age, sex, comorbidities, COPD subtype, preindex medications, and 
hospitalizations and ED visits.
RESULTS: Initial maintenance therapy with fluticasone/salmeterol combination was 
associated with a 31% to 56% lower risk of hospitalization or ED visit compared
with ipratropium alone, adjusting for baseline characteristics and preindex
resource utilization. Fluticasone/salmeterol combination therapy was related to
lower medical costs, higher pharmacy costs, and almost similar total costs in all
populations studied.
CONCLUSION: Fluticasone/salmeterol combination therapy was considered to be
cost-effective compared with ipratropium alone because it achieved better
clinical outcomes with similar or lower treatment costs.


PMID: 18611095  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. J Mol Med (Berl). 2008 Sep;86(9):1045-56. doi: 10.1007/s00109-008-0360-0. Epub
2008 Jul 4.

Salmeterol with fluticasone enhances the suppression of IL-8 release and
increases the translocation of glucocorticoid receptor by human neutrophils
stimulated with cigarette smoke.

Mortaz E(1), Rad MV, Johnson M, Raats D, Nijkamp FP, Folkerts G.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pharmacology and Pathophysiology, Utrecht Institute for
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Faculty of Sciences, Utrecht University, P.O. Box 80082,
3508 TB Utrecht, The Netherlands. e.mortaz@uu.nl

The combination of inhaled corticosteroids and long-acting beta2-adrenoceptor
agonists is increasingly used in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
Recently, we have demonstrated that combination of salmeterol and fluticasone
propionate (FP) additionally suppress the production of IL-8 by human monocyte.
In this study, the molecular mechanism behind the effectiveness of this
combination therapy is investigated in human neutrophils. Human neutrophils were 
preincubated with salmeterol or FP or the combination. The amount of
interleukin-8 (IL-8), elastase and matrix metalloproteinases (MMP)-2 and -9
releases, and reactive oxygen species (ROS) generation and expression of MAP
kinase phosphatase (MKP-1) and glucocorticoid receptor (GR) were determined.
Cigarette smoke medium (CSM) induces an increased expression of CXC receptors and
the production of ROS that may explain the strong production of IL-8 by
neutrophils. The expression of CXC receptors, the production of ROS, and the
release of elastase and MMP-2 and -9 were not influenced by salmeterol, FP, or
the combination. Interestingly, the combination therapy had an additive
suppressive effect on the CSM-induced production of IL-8. The latter could be
explained by an increased mRNA expression of MKP-1, the GR and an increased
translocation of the GR to the nucleus. This leads eventually to suppression of
both the NF-kappaB and MAPK pathways and, hence, to less IL-8 production by the
neutrophil. These data are in support for the use of a combination therapy in
COPD patients.

DOI: 10.1007/s00109-008-0360-0 
PMCID: PMC2517086
PMID: 18600309  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. COPD. 2008 Jun;5(3):187-200. doi: 10.1080/15412550802093041.

Mortality in COPD: inevitable or preventable? Insights from the cardiovascular
arena.

Halpin D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Royal Devon & Exeter Hospital Barrack Road Exeter EX2 5DW, UK.
David.Halpin@rdeft.nhs.uk

Mortality due to chronic obstructive pulmonary disease continues to rise, whereas
mortality rates related to cardiovascular disease appear to be slowing, or even
declining. This is due at least in part to more widespread use of preventative
therapies that have been shown to reduce cardiovascular mortality, raising the
question of whether appropriate use of therapies for chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease which potentially reduce mortality could have a similar impact.
This article discusses approaches used successfully in managing heart disease and
considers whether these can be applied to chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
and whether a better understanding of the strongest predictors of mortality in
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease is needed. It reviews the role of inhaled
corticosteroids, both alone and in combination with long-acting beta(2)-agonists,
in individuals with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, including the role of 
combination therapy with inhaled corticosteroids/long-acting beta(2)-agonists
(budesonide/formoterol or salmeterol/fluticasone propionate) in decreasing
exacerbations and improving health status, potentially providing survival
benefits in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. This review also discusses the
potential impact of treatments indicated for cardiovascular disease on chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease and possible links between the two diseases.

DOI: 10.1080/15412550802093041 
PMCID: PMC2442901
PMID: 18568843  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. COPD. 2008 Jun;5(3):163-9. doi: 10.1080/15412550802092969.

Beta2-agonists potentiate corticosteroid-induced neutrophil survival.

Perttunen H(1), Moilanen E, Zhang X, Barnes PJ, Kankaanranta H.

Author information: 
(1)The Immunopharmacology Research Group, Medical School, University of Tampere
and Research Unit, Tampere University Hospital, Tampere, Finland.
heli.perttunen@uta.fi

Comment in
    COPD. 2008 Jun;5(3):143-5.

Neutrophils are considered to play a role in the pathogenesis of chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and severe asthma. Recent guidelines
recommend the use of a combination of inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) and
long-acting beta2-agonists (LABA) in the treatment of COPD with exacerbations and
asthma not adequately controlled by ICS alone. LABA have been proposed to have a 
synergistic effect with corticosteroids by activating glucocorticoid receptors.
The aim of this study was to investigate the effect of beta2-agonists on the
inhibitory effects of corticosteroids on human neutrophil apoptosis. In addition,
the effects of beta2-agonists on spontaneous neutrophil apoptosis and on GM-CSF- 
and LTB4-afforded survival were also evaluated. Neutrophils were isolated from
human blood under sterile conditions and cultured for 16 hours. Apoptosis was
assessed by relative DNA fragmentation assay. Morphological analysis was used as 
a control method to confirm the occurrence of apoptosis. Salbutamol, formoterol
and salmeterol prolonged the lifespan of budesonide- and fluticasone
propionate-treated neutrophils by inhibiting apoptosis. Formoterol and salbutamol
partly reversed the inhibitory effect of GM-CSF on neutrophil apoptosis. In
contrast, the effects of beta(2)-agonists on spontaneous neutrophil apoptosis and
on LTB(4)-afforded survival were negligible. beta2-agonists potentiate
corticosteroid-induced neutrophil survival at clinically relevant drug
concentrations. Whether these effects translate into clinically relevant changes 
in lung neutrophil numbers remains to be demonstrated.

DOI: 10.1080/15412550802092969 
PMID: 18568840  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2008 Aug 15;178(4):332-8. doi:
10.1164/rccm.200712-1869OC. Epub 2008 May 29.

Effect of pharmacotherapy on rate of decline of lung function in chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease: results from the TORCH study.

Celli BR(1), Thomas NE, Anderson JA, Ferguson GT, Jenkins CR, Jones PW, Vestbo J,
Knobil K, Yates JC, Calverley PM.

Author information: 
(1)Tufts University School of Medicine, Pulmonary and Critical Care Division,
Caritas-St Elizabeth's Medical Center, Boston, MA 02135-2997, USA.
bcelli@copdnet.org

Comment in
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2008 Aug 15;178(4):322-3.
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2009 Mar 1;179(5):426; author reply 426-7.
    Hosp Pract (1995). 2010 Apr;38(2):92-3.
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2009 Jan 15;179(2):171; author reply 171-2.

RATIONALE: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is characterized by an
accelerated decline in lung function. No drug has been shown conclusively to
reduce this decline.
OBJECTIVES: In a post hoc analysis of the Toward a Revolution in COPD Health
(TORCH) study, we investigated the effects of combined salmeterol 50 microg plus 
fluticasone propionate 500 microg, either component alone or placebo, on the rate
of post-bronchodilator FEV(1) decline in patients with moderate or severe COPD.
METHODS: A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study was conducted from 
September 2000 to November 2005 in 42 countries. Of 6,112 patients from the
efficacy population, 5,343 were included in this analysis.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: Spirometry was measured every 24 weeks for 3
years. There were 26,539 on-treatment observations. The adjusted rate of decline 
in FEV(1) was 55 ml/year for placebo, 42 ml/year for salmeterol, 42 ml/year for
fluticasone propionate, and 39 ml/year for salmeterol plus fluticasone
propionate. Salmeterol plus fluticasone propionate reduced the rate of FEV(1)
decline by 16 ml/year compared with placebo (95% confidence interval [CI], 7-25; 
P < 0.001). The difference was smaller for fluticasone propionate and salmeterol 
compared with placebo (13 ml/year; 95% CI, 5-22; P = 0.003). Rates of decline
were similar among the active treatment arms. FEV(1) declined faster in current
smokers and patients with a lower body mass index, and varied between world
regions. Patients who exacerbated more frequently had a faster FEV(1) decline.
CONCLUSIONS: Pharmacotherapy with salmeterol plus fluticasone propionate, or the 
components, reduces the rate of decline of FEV(1) in patients with
moderate-to-severe COPD, thus slowing disease progression. Clinical trial (GSK
Study Code SCO30003) registered with www.clinicaltrials.gov (NCT00268216).

DOI: 10.1164/rccm.200712-1869OC 
PMID: 18511702  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Curr Infect Dis Rep. 2008 May;10(3):223-8.

Pneumonia in elderly patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Ernst P(1), Suissa S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical Epidemiology, Royal Victoria Hospital, Ross 4.29, 687
Pine Avenue West, Montreal, Quebec, Canada, H3A 1A1. pierre.ernst@mcgill.ca

This article reviews the association between pneumonia and chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD) and the possible role of inhaled corticosteroids in
increasing the risk of pneumonia in patients with COPD. An increased risk of
pneumonia with inhaled corticosteroids was first reported from the Toward
Revolution in COPD Health (TORCH) study, a large randomized clinical trial
comparing fluticasone, salmeterol, or a combination of the two medications with
placebo. We carried out a large observational study using a health care
administrative database of information on hospitalizations and medication use
among patients older than 65 years of age in Quebec. We found an excess of
pneumonia requiring hospitalization and an excess of pneumonia hospitalizations
leading to death in relation to current use of inhaled corticosteroids,
especially at high doses. Here, we explore the potential mechanisms of this
association and try to weigh the benefits and risks of therapy with inhaled
corticosteroids in patients with COPD.


PMID: 18510885  [PubMed]


304. Gac Sanit. 2008 Mar-Apr;22(2):105-14.

[Impact of new therapeutic products for the treatment of chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease and asthma in primary care in Madrid between 1996 and 2005].

[Article in Spanish]

Rodríguez Escolar C(1), Fidalgo García ML.

Author information: 
(1)Area 5, Servicio Madrileño de Salud, Madrid, Spain.
crodrigueze.gapm05@salud.madrid.org

OBJECTIVES: To analyze the trend of use of new drugs for the treatment of chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease in primary care of Madrid (Spain) between 1996 and 
2005, and to evaluate its impact in terms of supply, use and costs.
METHODS: Drug utilization study of new products of the R03 group (Anatomical
Therapeutic Chemical Classificaction System: drugs for obstructive airway
diseases) prescribed by doctors of primary care of Madrid, during 1996 and 2005. 
Information on drug utilization and cost was obtained from the prescription
database. Date was expressed in daily doses defined by 1,000 inhabitants and day.
RESULTS: The supply experiences few quantitative variations although of great
qualitative interest, when disappearing drugs without therapeutic utility and
commercializing 6 therapeutic new products. In 2005, the use of the 6 new
products generates 28.03% of the total of the consumption and 79% of the costs.
The new drugs of greater impact are salmeterol/fluticasone and tiotropio.
CONCLUSIONS: The supply of medicines qualitatively improves when disappearing
drugs without therapeutic utility. The consumption of therapeutic new products
has a great impact on the total consumption of the R03 group and, mainly, in the 
costs by its elevated price, in spite of contributing only limited therapeutic
advantages. The new drugs have been gotten up at great speed to the prescription.


PMID: 18420007  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2008 Jun 1;177(11):1207-14. doi:
10.1164/rccm.200709-1356OC. Epub 2008 Feb 28.

The effects of fluticasone with or without salmeterol on systemic biomarkers of
inflammation in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Sin DD(1), Man SF, Marciniuk DD, Ford G, FitzGerald M, Wong E, York E, Mainra RR,
Ramesh W, Melenka LS, Wilde E, Cowie RL, Williams D, Gan WQ, Rousseau R; ABC
(Advair, Biomarkers in COPD) Investigators.

Collaborators: Baron J, Lopez G, Mainra A, Hui L, Sigurdson M, Duce K, Edwards J,
Depner A, Barchard J, Cheung H, Rossitter T, Thawer A, Conley D, Wolters G, Gray 
C, Watson T, Waddell J, Hagan G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Respiratory Division, University of British Columbia, 
Vancouver, Canada.

Comment in
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2008 Jun 1;177(11):1177-8.
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2009 Jan 15;179(2):170; author reply 170-1.
    Expert Opin Pharmacother. 2008 Dec;9(18):3271-3.

RATIONALE: Small studies have suggested that inhaled corticosteroids can suppress
systemic inflammation in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
OBJECTIVES: To determine the effect of inhaled corticosteroids with or without
long-acting beta(2)-adrenergic agonist on systemic biomarkers of inflammation.
METHODS: We conducted a double-blind randomized placebo-controlled trial across
11 centers (n = 289 patients with FEV(1) of 47.8 +/- 16.2% of predicted) to
compare the effects of inhaled fluticasone alone or in combination with
salmeterol against placebo on circulating biomarkers of systemic inflammation
over 4 weeks. The primary endpoint was C-reactive protein (CRP) level. Secondary 
molecules of interest were IL-6 and surfactant protein D (SP-D).
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: Neither fluticasone nor the combination of
fluticasone/salmeterol had a significant effect on CRP or IL-6 levels. There was,
however, a significant reduction in SP-D levels with fluticasone and
fluticasone/salmeterol compared with placebo (P = 0.002). Health status also
improved significantly in both the fluticasone and fluticasone/salmeterol groups 
compared with placebo, driven mostly by improvements in the symptom scores.
Changes in the circulating SP-D levels were related to changes in health status
scores. FEV(1) improved significantly only in the fluticasone/salmeterol group
compared with placebo.
CONCLUSIONS: ICS in conjunction with long-acting beta(2)-adrenergic agonist do
not reduce CRP or IL-6 levels in serum of patients with COPD over 4 weeks. They
do, however, significantly reduce serum SP-D levels. These data suggest that
these drugs reduce lung-specific but not generalized biomarkers of systemic
inflammation in COPD.

DOI: 10.1164/rccm.200709-1356OC 
PMID: 18310480  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Pulm Pharmacol Ther. 2008;21(3):540-50. doi: 10.1016/j.pupt.2007.12.004. Epub
2008 Jan 6.

The impact of inhaled corticosteroid and long-acting beta-agonist combination
therapy on outcomes in COPD.

Hanania NA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Section of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Asthma Clinical Research
Center, Baylor College of Medicine, 1504 Taub Loop, Houston, TX 77030, USA.
hanania@bcm.tmc.edu <hanania@bcm.tmc.edu>

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is an under-recognized cause of
morbidity and mortality worldwide that imposes an ever increasing burden on the
patient and society alike. The disease encompasses multiple structural and
functional components of which inflammation is at the core of the disease,
affecting the lungs and other organs. Consequently, current treatment strategies 
are aimed at treating both the symptoms and the pulmonary inflammation underlying
the complex pathophysiology of COPD. Smoking cessation is the only intervention
currently shown to slow disease progression in COPD and decrease all-cause
mortality, aside from lung transplant, lung-volume reduction surgery and oxygen
therapy in selective patients. However, this intervention is difficult to achieve
and sustain because of the addictive and chronic relapsing nature of cigarette
smoking. Pharmacotherapy with bronchodilating agents, including the beta
2-agonists, anticholinergics and methylxanthines, is central to the symptomatic
management of all stages of COPD. While inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) are
employed to reduce inflammation in more severe patients, their role as stand
alone medication in COPD is not well defined. However, increasing evidence
suggests that long-acting beta 2-agonists (LABAs) and ICS have complementary and 
synergistic effects, when delivered as combination therapy from a single inhaler.
In this respect, two preparations comprising combinations of
salmeterol+fluticasone propionate (SFC) and formoterol+budesonide (FBC) are
currently available and employed for treatment of more severe disease. Several
large-scale studies in patients with moderate-to-severe COPD have demonstrated
that treatment with SFC and FBC leads to significantly greater improvements in
lung function, exacerbations, health status and breathlessness, compared with
placebo or monotherapy with the component drugs. In the recently published
landmark study, Towards a Revolution in COPD Health (TORCH), regular treatment
with SFC narrowly missed demonstrating a statistically significant benefit on the
reduction in all-cause mortality over 3 years (17.5% reduction in risk, P=0.052),
further emphasizing the clinical usefulness of LABA+ICS therapy in COPD. In view 
of this increasing evidence for the additional effectiveness of LABA+ICS
combinations compared with the individual components, and the potential benefits 
of LABA+ICS on lung function, disease progression and potentially on all-cause
mortality, initiation of LABA+ICS combination treatment early in the COPD disease
process may be warranted.SEARCH STRATEGY: The studies discussed in this review
were identified from systematic searches of Medline and the Cochrane Database, up
to October 2007, for articles in English or with English abstracts describing
randomized, double-blind, parallel-group/crossover trials of at least 24 weeks'
duration. All searches were performed using the terms: chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease, COPD, chronic obstructive airway disease, or COAD AND either
salmeterol, formoterol, long-acting beta 2-adrenoceptor agonist, fluticasone
propionate, budesonide, inhaled corticosteroids, or inhaled glucocorticosteroids.
Additional relevant references were identified from the reference lists of
selected papers. Only studies that compared a combined LABA+ICS therapy with its 
monotherapy components were selected for inclusion in this manuscript.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pupt.2007.12.004 
PMID: 18280761  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2007;2(4):551-7.

Fixed combination therapies in COPD--effect on quality of life.

Groneberg-Kloft B(1), Fischer A, Welte T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Hannover Medical School, Hannover,
Germany.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) represents a major global cause of
disability and death. COPD is currently the fourth most common global cause of
death and also exerts an enormous toll on patients quality of life. The present
database analysis aimed to identify clinical trials using fixed combination
therapies that have assessed the impact on the patients quality of life. Within
the different studies, questionnaires including the George's Respiratory
Questionnaire (SGRQ) the Chronic Respiratory Disease Questionnaire (CRDQ) and the
Clinical COPD Questionnaire (CCQ) were used and differing results in quality of
life were obtained when combination therapies such as fluticasone/salmeterol or
fluticasone/salmeterol were compared with monotherapies. While there were some
differences in favor of combination therapies reported when the combination
therapy was compared to inhaled steroid monotherapy there were no consistent
differences when combination therapies were compared to bronchodilator
monotherapies. Future trials will lead to a proof-of-principle stage concerning
the use of combination therapies.


PMCID: PMC2699960
PMID: 18268928  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Br J Clin Pharmacol. 2008 Feb;65(2):244-52. doi:
10.1111/j.1365-2125.2007.03013.x.

The use of plethysmography and oscillometry to compare long-acting
bronchodilators in patients with COPD.

Borrill ZL(1), Houghton CM, Tal-Singer R, Vessey SR, Faiferman I, Langley SJ,
Singh D.

Author information: 
(1)Medicines Evaluation Unit, North-west Lung Centre, University of Manchester,
South Manchester University Hospitals NHS Trust, Manchester, UK.
zborrill@meu.org.uk

WHAT IS ALREADY KNOWN ABOUT THIS SUBJECT: Forced expiratory volume in 1 s
(FEV(1)) is the standard measurement used to measure drug effects in chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) clinical trials. Having previously shown
that specific airway conductance (sGaw) measured using body plethysmography and
impulse oscillometry (IOS) are more sensitive than FEV(1) for assessing
short-acting bronchodilator effects in patients with COPD, we conducted the first
randomized, placebo-controlled study to compare long-acting bronchodilators in
COPD patients using these techniques.
WHAT THIS STUDY ADDS: sGaw and IOS sensitively differentiated between the effects
of tiotropium and salmeterol when FEV(1) measurements were similar. sGaw and IOS 
measurements are better than FEV(1) for sensitively assessing bronchodilator
pharmacology and differentiating between treatments in COPD clinical trials.
AIMS: Assessment of bronchodilator pharmacology in chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD) may be improved by using more sensitive methods than spirometry,
such as impulse oscillometry (IOS) and body plethysmography. We sought to compare
salmeterol (S) and tiotropium (Tio) using these methods.
METHODS: In this double-blind, randomized, four-way crossover study, 32 COPD
patients received single doses of Tio (18 microg), S (50 and 100 microg) or
placebo. Specific airway conductance (sGaw), forced expiratory volume in 1 s
(FEV(1)) and IOS were measured pre- and up to 26 h postdose. Comparisons between 
treatments were analysed by weighted means (WM) between 0 and 12 (WM 0-12 h) and 
12-24 h (WM 12-24 h) postdose. Data are expressed as mean difference (or
geometric ratio for nonparametric data) with 95% confidence intervals.
RESULTS: Tio and S100 significantly improved FEV(1), sGaw and IOS parameters up
to 26 h and S50 up to 16 h. WM analysis showed no difference between Tio and S100
in FEV(1) for 0-12 h or 12-24 h. Maximum mid-expiratory flow (-0.06; -0.11,
-0.01) and R35 (0.02; 0.01, 0.03) demonstrated superiority of S100 compared with 
Tio for WM 0-12 h sGaw (1.12; 1.02, 1.23), R5 (-0.06; -0.09, -0.02), R15 (-0.03; 
-0.05, -0.01), and resonant frequency (RF) (-2.30; -3.83, -0.77) showed
superiority of Tio compared with S100 for WM 12-24 h. At 26 h, sGaw, R5, R15, X5 
and RF also showed superiority of Tio compared with S100.
CONCLUSIONS: sGaw and IOS parameters sensitively differentiated between the
effects of Tio and S when FEV(1) measurements were similar. Clinical trials in
patients with COPD should use IOS and sGaw to assess comprehensively
bronchodilator pharmacology.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2125.2007.03013.x 
PMCID: PMC2291209
PMID: 18251761  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Thorax. 2008 Jul;63(7):592-8. doi: 10.1136/thx.2007.087213. Epub 2008 Feb 1.

Superiority of "triple" therapy with salmeterol/fluticasone propionate and
tiotropium bromide versus individual components in moderate to severe COPD.

Singh D(1), Brooks J, Hagan G, Cahn A, O'Connor BJ.

Author information: 
(1)Medicines Evaluation Unit, University Hospital of South Manchester, University
of Manchester, Manchester M33 3TR, UK. dsingh@meu.org.uk

BACKGROUND: The combination of salmeterol and fluticasone propionate (SFC) and
tiotropium bromide (TIO) are commonly used treatments in chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD) but there are few data on their effectiveness when used 
together. We compared the effects of SFC 50/500 microg twice daily in addition to
TIO 18 microg once daily with the individual treatments alone.
METHODS: 41 patients with COPD participated in a randomised, double blind, double
dummy, three way crossover study with 2 week washout periods between treatments. 
Lung function assessment included plethysmography and spirometry. The primary end
point was post-dose specific airways conductance (sGaw) area under the curve
(AUC(0-4 h)) on day 14.
RESULTS: AUC(0-4 h) sGaw was significantly higher on day 14 after SFC+TIO
compared with TIO (22%) or SFC alone (27%) (both p<0.001). SFC+TIO significantly 
improved trough forced expiratory volume in 1 s compared with TIO alone (212 ml, 
p<0.001) and SFC alone (110 ml, p = 0.017) on day 14. Inspiratory capacity
measurements also showed significant benefits for triple therapy over individual 
components on day 14. Subjects receiving SFC+TIO had clinically relevant
improvements in Transition Dyspnoea Index (TDI) total score of 2.2 compared with 
TIO alone (p<0.001) (but not SFC alone, 0.7; NS) and used significantly less
rescue medication (1.0 occasion less daily than TIO (p<0.001) and 0.6 less than
SFC (p = 0.01)).
CONCLUSION: SFC+TIO triple therapy led to greater improvements in bronchodilation
compared with TIO and SFC alone. The advantages of triple therapy are observed
across a range of physiologically important parameters, including airway
conductance and lung volumes. Triple therapy also led to patient related benefits
by improving TDI and use of rescue medication.

DOI: 10.1136/thx.2007.087213 
PMID: 18245142  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Eur Respir J. 2008 May;31(5):927-33. doi: 10.1183/09031936.00098307. Epub 2008
Jan 23.

Methodological issues in therapeutic trials of COPD.

Suissa S(1), Ernst P, Vandemheen KL, Aaron SD.

Author information: 
(1)McGill Pharmacoepidemiology Research Unit, McGill University Health Centre,
Montreal, Québec, Canada. samy.suissa@clinepi.mcgill.ca

Comment in
    Eur Respir J. 2009 Feb;33(2):443-4.
    Eur Respir J. 2008 Aug;32(2):523-4.

The recent Towards a Revolution in COPD Health (TORCH) randomised trial
replicated the findings of previous trials in chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD) on the apparent effectiveness of inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) in 
reducing exacerbation rates, but not so for mortality. In the present article,
the authors review methodological issues in the TORCH and previous trials, such
as patients already receiving ICS before randomisation and the absence of
follow-up after study drug discontinuation, using data from two trials. First,
among previous ICS users in the Canadian Optimal Therapy of COPD Trial, the
hazard ratio of the first exacerbation with ICS relative to bronchodilators was
0.71 (95% confidence interval (CI) 0.53-0.96), while among those not using ICS
prior to randomisation, it was 1.11 (95% CI 0.69-1.79). Secondly, the rate ratio 
of exacerbations with ICS was 0.78 (95% CI 0.61-0.99) prior to drug
discontinuation during follow-up and 1.23 (95% CI 0.78-1.95) thereafter. Finally,
a 2x2 factorial analysis of the TORCH data found a rate ratio of mortality for
the salmeterol component to be 0.83 (95% CI 0.74-0.95), while for the fluticasone
component it was 1.00 (95% CI 0.89-1.13). In conclusion, after proper
consideration of the various methodological shortcomings in the design and
analysis of randomised trials, the effectiveness of inhaled corticosteroids in
treating chronic obstructive pulmonary disease remains doubtful, while the
benefit observed with combination therapy may be due exclusively to the
beneficial effects of the long-acting bronchodilator alone.

DOI: 10.1183/09031936.00098307 
PMID: 18216056  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. J Med Econ. 2008;11(3):555-70. doi: 10.3111/13696990802320908.

Seretide: a pharmacoeconomic analysis.

Fritscher L(1), Chapman KR.

Author information: 
(1)Asthma & Airway Centre, University Health Network, Toronto Western Hospital,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

BACKGROUND: The costs of asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD),
the two most common chronic respiratory illnesses, are substantial and rising.
The fixed-dose combination of fluticasone and salmeterol has been a safe and
effective therapy for these diseases.
OBJECTIVES: To review the pharmacoeconomic impact of the fixed-dose combination
of inhaled fluticasone and salmeterol in asthma and COPD.
METHODS: A systematic review of the literature was carried out to identify
pharmacoeconomic studies with fixed-dose salmeterol and fluticasone (Seretide,
Advair, Viani). In addition, abstracts from recent respiratory meetings were
sought, and any unpublished data were requested from the manufacturer.
RESULTS: For asthma, when compared to treatment with inhaled corticosteroid
monotherapy and antileukotrienes, alone or combined, salmeterol/fluticasone
inhalation produced a higher proportion of successfully treated weeks,
improvement in lung function and quality of life, and fewer treatment failures.
The costs per quality-adjusted life year (QALY) for fluticasone/salmeterol have
been favourable not only in patients with moderate to severe disease but also in 
patients with mild disease or patients not previously treated with a maintenance 
therapy. The excess cost per QALY varied from US$2,670 to US$26,445. For COPD, a 
clear reduction in exacerbation rates and improvement in quality of life has been
demonstrated with salmeterol/fluticasone along with a likely improvement in
survival rates. The incremental cost per QALY ratio for fluticasone/salmeterol
against placebo ranged from US$9,512 to US$64,038.
CONCLUSIONS: The data currently available suggest that the cost effectiveness of 
combination therapy with fluticasone and salmeterol is favourable for asthma and 
COPD in a variety of clinical settings.

DOI: 10.3111/13696990802320908 
PMID: 19450105  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. J Med Econ. 2008;11(2):345-62. doi: 10.3111/13696990802210984.

Symbicort: a pharmacoeconomic review.

Halpin DM(1).

Author information: 
(1)David.Halpin@rdeft.nhs.uk

OBJECTIVE: This systematic review examines the published evidence on the
pharmacoecomonics of Symbicort. Symbicort is a combination inhaler used in asthma
and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) that contains budesonide and
formoterol. In asthma, Symbicort can be used as fixed or adjustable dose
maintenance therapy as well as for both maintenance and reliever therapy (SMART).
METHOD: A literature search of PubMed was carried out to find all publications on
the pharmacoeconomics of Symbicort. Additional studies were searched for in the
reference lists of the papers retrieved and by searching tables of contents of
relevant journals. A total of 13 studies on Symbicort in asthma and 2 studies on 
Symbicort in COPD were found.
RESULTS: Total costs were lower with Symbicort than with separate inhalers
containing budesonide and formoterol. Adjustable dosing maintained control of
asthma using less medication and was associated with lower treatment costs than
fixed dosing with Symbicort or the combination of fluticasone/salmeterol. SMART
improves asthma control, reduces exacerbations and reduces direct and indirect
costs compared to fixed maintenance therapy with either Symbicort or
fluticasone/salmeterol. In COPD, Symbicort offers clinical advantages over
therapy with the monocomponents and these are achieved at little or no extra
cost.

DOI: 10.3111/13696990802210984 
PMID: 19450091  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Prescrire Int. 2007 Dec;16(92):257-8.

COPD: don't use fluticasone + salmeterol. Patients treated with inhaled
fluticasone for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) are more prone to
pneumonia.

[No authors listed]


PMID: 18092426  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Ann Intern Med. 2007 Dec 18;147(12):882; author reply 882-3.

Tiotropium in combination with placebo, salmeterol, or fluticasone salmeterol for
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: possible confounding effect of treatment
withdrawal?

Brown SM.

Comment on
    Ann Intern Med. 2007 Apr 17;146(8):545-55.


PMID: 18087061  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Eur Respir J. 2008 Mar;31(3):579-84. Epub 2007 Dec 5.

Endurance shuttle walking test: responsiveness to salmeterol in COPD.

Brouillard C(1), Pepin V, Milot J, Lacasse Y, Maltais F.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Pneumologie, Hôpital Laval, 2725 Chemin Ste-Foy, Quebec, QC, G1V
4G5, Canada.

Few studies have shown that the endurance shuttle walking test (ESWT) is
responsive to treatment in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD). This exercise test needs to be further investigated because of its
relevance for activity of daily living. The aim of the present study was to
evaluate, in patients with COPD, the responsiveness of the ESWT in detecting
improvement in walking performance after a single dose of salmeterol. In a
randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled crossover trial, 20 patients with
COPD performed two ESWT at 80% of peak capacity 2.5 h after inhaling either a
placebo or 50 microg of salmeterol. Cardiorespiratory parameters were monitored
during each walking test. Inspiratory capacities and Borg ratings for dyspnoea
were obtained every other minute throughout the tests. Compared with placebo,
salmeterol produced a significant change in lung function and a significant
improvement in walking performance (mean+/-sd difference in time: 117+/-20 s;
difference in distance: 160+/-277 m). At isotime (the latest exercise time that
was reached on both ESWT), a significant reduction in dyspnoea was observed after
bronchodilation. Bronchodilation with salmeterol reduced dyspnoea during walking 
and improved walking capacity in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease. These findings provide further support for the use of the endurance
shuttle walking test as an evaluative tool in chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease.

DOI: 10.1183/09031936.00119007 
PMID: 18057052  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2007;2(2):107-16.

Comparison and optimal use of fixed combinations in the management of COPD.

Mensing M(1), Aalbers R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonolgy, Martini Hospital, Groningen, The Netherlands.
m.mensing@mzh.nl

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a leading cause of morbidity and 
mortality worldwide. Indications for the use of long-acting beta-agonists (LABAs)
and inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) in patients with COPD are described in the
various international guidelines, but no special recommendations are made
concerning the use of combination inhalers containing a LABA as well as an ICS.
To determine the place of combination inhalers in the treatment of COPD we
reviewed recent literature concerning this subject. On molecular level ICS/LABA
combination therapy has anti-inflammatory properties which cannot be attributed
to ICS alone. All clinical studies indicate that the two available combinations
(salmeterol/fluticasone and formoterol/budesonide) significantly reduce
exacerbation rate of moderate/severe exacerbations when compared with placebo.
Some studies also showed a significant reduction in exacerbation rate compared
with LABA monotherapy, but not compared with ICS monotherapy. From the patient's 
perspective, ICS/LABA combination inhalers are the first choice when both need to
be prescribed, possibly improving patient compliance for ICS. Currently little
evidence is available to predict if flexible treatment with LABA/ICS combination 
inhalers will improve disease control in COPD. Further studies are needed to
elucidate the clinical benefit of combination inhalers versus the individual
components in different inhalers, and to investigate the clinical benefit of
flexible dosing of combination inhalers in patients with COPD.


PMCID: PMC2695609
PMID: 18044682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Clin Ther. 2007 Oct;29(10):2121-33.

Optimizing maintenance therapy for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease:
strategies for improving patient-centered outcomes.

Hanania NA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Section of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA. hanania@bcm.tmc.edu

BACKGROUND: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is associated with
substantial morbidity and mortality. Published practice guidelines and treatment 
algorithms for COPD are designed to increase awareness of the problem and improve
patient care; however, <40% of subjects diagnosed with COPD are receiving
appropriate maintenance therapy.
OBJECTIVE: This paper reviews the use of maintenance therapy in COPD and examines
the optimal timing for initiating such therapy based on the available literature.
METHODS: Relevant publications were identified through a search of MEDLINE
(1995-May 2007) using the terms COPD, guidelines, treatment, maintenance therapy,
bronchodilator, ipratropium, tiotropium, beta-agonist, salmeterol, and inhaled
corticosteroid. English-language publications discussing pharmacologic
maintenance therapy for COPD, including practice statements/guidelines,
randomized controlled clinical trials, systematic reviews, and meta-analyses,
with a focus on agents currently approved for use in the United States, were
selected for inclusion.
RESULTS: Although guidelines and algorithms agree on the importance of regularly 
scheduled maintenance therapy to reduce symptoms of COPD, minimize activity
limitations, and improve health status, the timing of the initiation of such
therapy is debatable. In most instances, maintenance medications, which include
long-acting beta(2)-agonists, long-acting anticholinergics, and combination
products, are prescribed late in the disease process and mainly for patients with
severe disease. However, there is increasing evidence that the use of maintenance
therapy early in the disease process may be associated with improvements in such 
outcomes as lung function, symptoms, exercise tolerance, exacerbations of COPD,
and quality of life.
CONCLUSION: The high burden associated with COPD highlights the need to initiate 
maintenance therapy before a substantial decline in lung function has occurred.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clinthera.2007.10.006 
PMID: 18042470  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Drug Saf. 2007;30(12):1151-60.

Comparative safety of long-acting inhaled bronchodilators: a cohort study using
the UK THIN primary care database.

Jara M(1), Lanes SF, Wentworth C 3rd, May C, Kesten S.

Author information: 
(1)Boehringer Ingelheim Pharmaceuticals Inc, Ridgefield, CT 06877-0368, USA.
mjara2@rdg.boehringer-ingelheim.com

BACKGROUND: Use of a long-acting inhaled bronchodilator, either an
anticholinergic or a beta-adrenergic receptor agonist (beta-agonist), is
recommended for maintenance treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD). In COPD, the organ system most frequently requiring medical care, other
than the respiratory system, is the cardiac system.
OBJECTIVES: To compare the risk of total mortality and certain respiratory and
cardiac adverse events among users of the two types of recommended long-acting
bronchodilators, we conducted a cohort study. Specifically, the study compared
the safety of the only approved long-acting anticholinergic, tiotropium bromide, 
with the single-ingredient long-acting beta-agonists (LABAs) salmeterol or
formoterol in a broad population of users.
METHODS: We used automated general practitioner data from the UK THIN (The Health
Information Network) database as the data source for this study. We used Cox
proportional hazards models to compute hazard ratio (HR) estimates and 95% CI
controlling for propensity scores comprising various baseline demographic
variables, medical therapies and illnesses.
RESULTS: The 1061 tiotropium users and 1801 LABA users were similar with regard
to risk of total mortality (HR 0.93; 95% CI 0.59, 1.44) and most cardiac events, 
including angina (HR 0.77; 95% CI 0.37, 1.59), atrial fibrillation or flutter (HR
0.60; 95% CI 0.25, 1.42), myocardial infarction (HR 1.29; 95% CI 0.45, 3.66) and 
tachycardia (HR 0.66; 95% CI 0.29, 1.51). Though imprecise, there was evidence of
a decreased risk of heart failure (HR 0.65; 95% CI 0.37, 1.12) in tiotropium
users. As regards respiratory endpoints, the risk of COPD exacerbation (HR 1.15; 
95% CI 0.79, 1.67) and pneumonia (HR 1.11; 95% CI 0.38, 3.26) were similar among 
users of each type of drug, although there was a decreased risk of asthma
exacerbation (HR 0.41; 95% CI 0.26, 0.64) in tiotropium users compared with LABA 
users.
CONCLUSIONS: Users of tiotropium and single-ingredient LABA had similar risk of
total mortality and cardiovascular endpoints. The decreased risk of asthma
exacerbations with tiotropium may be due to residual confounding by indication.
Confidence limits for most events include reduced risks for tiotropium and also
small increases in risk. Nevertheless, the point estimates suggest that
tiotropium was associated with a lower risk of each cardiac event except
myocardial infarction. However, the small number of cases means that further
studies are needed to confirm these results.


PMID: 18035867  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Respir Med. 2008 Feb;102(2):173-88. Epub 2007 Nov 19.

Efficacy and safety of formoterol for the treatment of chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease.

Berger WE(1), Nadel JA.

Author information: 
(1)Allergy and Asthma Associates of Southern California, 27800 Medical Asthma
Associates, Suite 244, Mission Viejo, CA 92691, USA. weberger@uci.edu

Formoterol is a selective long-acting beta2-adrenergic receptor agonist (LABA)
that provides significant and sustained bronchodilatory effect for up to 12h
following a single dose. The onset of effect is significantly faster with
formoterol compared with an alternative LABA, salmeterol, although both have a
similar duration of action. The overall efficacy of formoterol in improving lung 
function and controlling symptoms of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)
is comparable to that of salmeterol and potentially superior to that of
ipratropium or theophylline. Formoterol provides additional benefit when
administered in combination with other bronchodilators or inhaled
corticosteroids. In clinical studies, formoterol was well tolerated and had an
adverse-event profile similar to that of other beta2-adrenergic receptor
agonists. Formoterol is a rapidly acting, well-tolerated, effective
beta2-adrenergic receptor agonist that can be regularly used as a long-acting
bronchodilator for patients with moderate to severe COPD, as per recommendations 
of the current treatment guidelines.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2007.09.011 
PMID: 18023995  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Drugs. 2007;67(16):2383-405.

Salmeterol/fluticasone propionate: a review of its use in the treatment of
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Keating GM(1), McCormack PL.

Author information: 
(1)Wolters Kluwer Health | Adis, Auckland, New Zealand. demail@adis.co.nz

Salmeterol/fluticasone propionate (Seretide, Advair, Viani) administered using a 
multidose dry powder inhaler (Diskus, Accuhaler) is approved for use in the
treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) in numerous
countries.Salmeterol/fluticasone propionate administered twice daily via dry
powder inhaler is effective and generally well tolerated in patients with COPD.
Although not associated with a statistically significant reduction in mortality
versus placebo in the TORCH study (p = 0.052), salmeterol/fluticasone propionate 
reduced the rate of decline in lung function over the 3 years of the trial and
was associated with lower exacerbation rates than the component monotherapies or 
placebo; other trials revealed clinically significant improvements in health
status and dyspnoea scores with salmeterol/fluticasone propionate. Results of the
INSPIRE trial suggest that salmeterol/fluticasone propionate is associated with a
significantly lower mortality rate than tiotropium bromide monotherapy in
patients with COPD; the two treatments had similar effects in terms of
exacerbation rates and lung function. Thus, salmeterol/fluticasone propionate is 
an important option in the treatment of patients with COPD who are appropriate
candidates for combination therapy with a long-acting bronchodilator and an
inhaled corticosteroid.


PMID: 17983257  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2007 Oct 17;(4):CD006829.

Combined corticosteroid and long-acting beta-agonist in one inhaler versus
long-acting beta-agonists for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Nannini LJ(1), Cates CJ, Lasserson TJ, Poole P.

Author information: 
(1)Hospital G. Baigorria, Pulmonary Section, Ruta 11 Y Jm Estrada, G. Baigorria, 
Santa Fe - Rosario, Argentina, 2152. nanninilj@cimero.org.ar

Comment in
    Evid Based Med. 2008 Apr;13(2):56-7.
    ACP J Club. 2008 Mar-Apr;148(2):48-9.

Update in
    Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2012;9:CD006829.

BACKGROUND: The co-administration of inhaled corticosteroids and long-acting
beta-agonists in a combined inhaler is intended to facilitate adherence to
medication regimens, and to improve efficacy in COPD. In this review they are
compared with mono component long-acting beta-agonists.
OBJECTIVES: To assess the efficacy of combined inhaled corticosteroids and
long-acting beta-agonists preparations with mono component long-acting
beta-agonists in adults with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
SEARCH STRATEGY: We searched the Cochrane Airways Group Specialised Register of
trials. The date of the most recent search is April 2007.
SELECTION CRITERIA: Studies were included if they were randomised and
double-blind. Studies could compare a combined inhaled corticosteroids and
long-acting beta-agonist preparation with component long-acting beta-agonist
preparation.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Two reviewers independently assessed trial quality 
and extracted data. The primary outcomes were exacerbations, mortality and
pneumonia, with health-related quality of life (measured by validated scales),
lung function and side-effects as secondary outcomes. Dichotomous data were
analysed as fixed effect odds ratios (OR), and continuous data as mean
differences and 95% confidence intervals (CI). Sensitivity analysis was performed
by combining data with a random effects model.
MAIN RESULTS: Ten studies of good methodological quality met the inclusion
criteria, randomising 7598 participants with severe chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease. Eight studies assessed fluticasone/salmeterol, and two studies
budesonide/formoterol. The exacerbation rates with combined inhalers were reduced
in comparison to long-acting beta-agonists alone (Rate Ratio 0.82, 95% CI 0.78 to
0.88). There was no significant difference in mortality between combined inhalers
and long-acting beta-agonists alone. Pneumonia occurred more commonly with
combined inhalers (OR 1.62; 95% CI 1.35 to 1.94). There was no significant
difference in terms of hospitalisations, although the two studies contributing
data to this outcome may have been drawn from differing populations. Combination 
was more effective than LABA in improving quality of life measured by the St
George Respiratory Questionnaire, and the Chronic Respiratory Questionnaire, and 
predose and post dose FEV1.
AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: Combination therapy was more effective than long-acting
beta-agonists in reducing exacerbation rates, although the evidence for the
effects on hospitalisations was mixed, and requires further exploration. No
significant impact on mortality was found even with additional information from
the TORCH trial. The superiority of combination inhalers should be viewed against
the increased risk of side-effects, particularly pneumonia. Additional studies on
BDF are required and more information would be useful of the relative benefits
and adverse event rates with different doses of inhaled corticosteroids.

DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD006829 
PMID: 17943918  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2007 Oct 17;(4):CD006826.

Combined corticosteroid and long-acting beta-agonist in one inhaler versus
inhaled steroids for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Nannini LJ(1), Cates CJ, Lasserson TJ, Poole P.

Author information: 
(1)Hospital G. Baigorria, Pulmonary Section, Ruta 11 Y Jm Estrada, G. Baigorria, 
Santa Fe - Rosario, Argentina, 2152. nanninilj@cimero.org.ar

Comment in
    Evid Based Med. 2008 Jun;13(3):74.

Update in
    Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2013;8:CD006826.

BACKGROUND: Long-acting beta-agonists and inhaled corticosteroids have both been 
recommended in guidelines for the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease. Their co-administration in a combined inhaler is intended to facilitate 
adherence to medication regimens, and to improve efficacy. Two preparations are
currently available, fluticasone/salmeterol (FPS) and budesonide/formoterol
(BDF).
OBJECTIVES: To assess the efficacy of combined inhaled corticosteroid and
long-acting beta-agonist preparations, compared to inhaled corticosteroids, in
the treatment of adults with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
SEARCH STRATEGY: We searched the Cochrane Airways Group Specialised Register of
trials. The date of the most recent search is April 2007.
SELECTION CRITERIA: Studies were included if they were randomised and
double-blind. Studies compared combined inhaled corticosteroids and long-acting
beta-agonist preparations with the inhaled corticosteroid component.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Two reviewers independently assessed trial quality 
and extracted data. The primary outcome were exacerbations, mortality and
pneumonia. Health-related quality of life (measured by validated scales), lung
function and side-effects were secondary outcomes. Dichotomous data were analysed
as fixed effect odds ratios (OR), and continuous data as mean differences and 95%
confidence intervals (CI).
MAIN RESULTS: Seven studies of good methodological quality met the inclusion
criteria randomising 5708 participants with predominantly poorly reversible,
severe COPD. Exacerbation rates were significantly reduced with combination
therapies (Rate ratio 0.91; 95% confidence interval 0.85 to 0.97, P = 0.0008).
Data from two FPS studies indicated that exacerbations requiring oral steroids
were reduced with combination therapy. Data from one large study suggest that
there is no significant difference in the rate of hospitalisations. Mortality was
also lower with combined treatment (odds ratio 0.77; 95% confidence interval 0.63
to 0.94). Quality of life, lung function and withdrawals due to lack of efficacy 
favoured combination treatment. Adverse event profiles were similar between the
two treatments. No significant differences were found between FPS and BDP in the 
primary outcomes, but the confidence intervals for the BDP results were wide as
smaller numbers of patients have been studied.
AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: Combination ICS and LABA significantly reduces morbidity
and mortality in COPD when compared with mono component steroid. Adverse events
were not significantly different between treatments, although evidence from other
sources indicates that inhaled corticosteroids are associated with increased risk
of pneumonia. Assessment of BDF in larger, long-term trials is required. Dose
response data would provide valuable evidence on whether efficacy and safety
outcomes are affected by different steroid loads.

DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD006826 
PMCID: PMC4069257
PMID: 17943917  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2007 Oct 17;(4):CD003794.

Combined corticosteroid and long-acting beta-agonist in one inhaler versus
placebo for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Nannini L(1), Cates CJ, Lasserson TJ, Poole P.

Author information: 
(1)Hospital G. Baigorria, Pulmonary Section, Ruta 11 Y Jm Estrada, G. Baigorria, 
Santa Fe - Rosario, Argentina, 2152. nanninilj@cimero.org.ar

Update in
    Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2013;11:CD003794.

Update of
    Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2004;(3):CD003794.

BACKGROUND: Long-acting beta-agonists and inhaled corticosteroids have both been 
recommended in guidelines for the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease. Their co-administration in a combined inhaler may facilitate adherence
to medication regimens, and improve efficacy.
OBJECTIVES: To assess the efficacy of combined inhaled corticosteroid and
long-acting beta-agonist preparations, compared to placebo, in the treatment of
adults with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
SEARCH STRATEGY: We searched the Cochrane Airways Group Specialised Register of
trials. The date of the most recent search is April 2007.
SELECTION CRITERIA: Studies were included if they were randomised and
double-blind. Studies could compare any combined inhaled corticosteroids and
long-acting beta-agonist preparation with placebo.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Two authors independently assessed trial quality
and extracted data. One author entered the data.
MAIN RESULTS: Eleven studies met the inclusion criteria (6427 participants
randomised). Two different combination preparations (fluticasone/salmeterol and
budesonide/formoterol) were used. Study quality was good. Fluticasone/salmeterol 
and budesonide/formoterol both reduced the rate of exacerbations. Pooled analysis
of both combination therapies indicated that exacerbations were less frequent
when compared with placebo, Rate Ratio: 0.74 (95% CI 0.7 to 0.8). The clinical
impact of this effect depends on the frequency of exacerbations experienced by
patients. The patients included in these trials had on average 1-2 exacerbations 
per year which means that treatment with combination therapy would lead to a
reduction of one exacerbation every two to four years in these individuals. There
is an overall reduction in mortality, but this outcome is dominated by the
results of TORCH and further studies on budesonide/formoterol are required. The
three year number needed to treat to prevent one extra death is 36 (95% CI 21 to 
258), using a baseline risk of 15.2% from the placebo arm of TORCH. Both
treatments led to statistically significant improvement in health status
measurements, although the clinical importance of the differences observed is
open to interpretation. Symptoms and lung function assessments favoured
combination treatments. There was an increase in the risk of pneumonia with
combined inhalers. The three year number needed to treat for one extra case of
pneumonia is 13 (95% CI 9 to 20), using a baseline risk of 12.3% from the placebo
arm of TORCH. Fewer participants withdrew from studies assessing combined
inhalers due to adverse events and lack of efficacy.
AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: Compared with placebo, combination therapy led to a
significant reduction of a quarter in exacerbation rates. There was a significant
reduction in all-cause mortality with the addition of data from the TORCH trial. 
The increased risk of pneumonia is a concern, and better reporting of this
outcome in future studies would be helpful. In order to draw firmer conclusions
about the effects of combination therapy in a single inhaler more data are
necessary, particularly in relation to the profile of adverse events and benefits
in relation to different doses of inhaled corticosteroids.

DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD003794.pub3 
PMCID: PMC4164185
PMID: 17943798  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Curr Med Res Opin. 2007 Nov;23(11):2887-95.

The effect of fixed combination of fluticasone and salmeterol on asthma drug
utilization, asthma drug cost, and episodes of asthma exacerbations.

Brixner DI(1), Lenhart G, Young DC, Samuelson WM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacotherapy, College of Pharmacy, University of Utah, Salt
Lake City, UT 84108, USA. Diana.Brixner@pharm.utah.edu

OBJECTIVE: This study evaluated the use and drug costs of inhaled corticosteroids
(ICSs), long-acting beta2-agonists (LABAs), and fluticasone propionate and
salmeterol in a fixed-dose combination (FSC) and their relationship to asthma
exacerbations before and after the market introduction of FSC in April 2001.
METHODS: This is a retrospective analysis of employer-sponsored health insurance 
claims filed between January 1, 1998, and December 31, 2003 to detect impact of
introduction of FSC (approved by the US Food and Drug Administration in August
2000) on utilization and cost of FSC, any ICS (excluding FSC), and any LABA
(excluding FSC) along with utilization of medical services related to asthma
exacerbations. Asthma medications were identified using National Drug Codes and
Redbook, whereas asthma exacerbations were identified using ICD-9-CM primary
diagnosis code 493.x. These medical and pharmacy claims were converted to rates
per 100 asthma office visits.
RESULTS: For all ICSs, the average pharmacy claims per 100 office visits
increased from 383 in the year before FSC was introduced to 407 (120 [29.5%] were
for FSC and 287 [70.5%] were for single-entity ICSs) in 2003. LABA prescribing
increased from 72 in the year before FSC to 147 (120 from FSC, 27 single-entity
LABA) in 2003 (p < 0.001). An additional $13,511 per 100 asthma office visits was
spent on the FSC product (p < 0.001). After the introduction of FSC, there was no
significant difference in asthma admissions (p = 0.17), whereas emergency
department (ED) visits increased by 0.92 visits per 100 office visits (p = 0.03).
The diagnosis and severity of asthma was inferred from the pharmacy claims and
patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease could not be excluded. In
addition, the study was not designed to assess the impact of other asthma
medications on the disease and/or associated costs, and patient adherence to
claimed medication could not be monitored.
CONCLUSIONS: The introduction of FSC was associated with increased LABAs/FSC
patient exposure and expenditure with no change in asthma hospitalizations and an
increase in ED visits.

DOI: 10.1185/030079907X242548    
PMID: 17922979  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2008 Jan 1;177(1):19-26. Epub 2007 Oct 4.

The prevention of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease exacerbations by
salmeterol/fluticasone propionate or tiotropium bromide.

Wedzicha JA(1), Calverley PM, Seemungal TA, Hagan G, Ansari Z, Stockley RA;
INSPIRE Investigators.

Author information: 
(1)Academic Unit of Respiratory Medicine, Royal Free & University College Medical
School, University College London, London, UK. j.a.wedzicha@medsch.ucl.ac.uk

Comment in
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2009 Jan 1;179(1):80; author reply 80-1.
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2008 Nov 15;178(10):1090-1; author reply 1091-2.
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2008 Sep 1;178(5):543-4; author reply 544.
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2008 Jul 1;178(1):105; author reply 106-7.
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2008 Jul 1;178(1):105-6; author reply 106-7.
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2008 Jul 1;178(1):106; author reply 106-7.

RATIONALE: Exacerbations are key drivers of morbidity and mortality in chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
OBJECTIVES: We compared the relative efficacy of the long-acting inhaled
bronchodilator/antiinflammatory combination (salmeterol/fluticasone propionate)
50/500 microg twice daily and the long-acting bronchodilator (tiotropium) 18
microg once daily in preventing exacerbations and related outcomes in severe and 
very severe COPD.
METHODS: A total of 1,323 patients (mean age, 64 yr, post-bronchodilator FEV1,
39% predicted) were randomized in this 2-year, double-blind, double-dummy
parallel study.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: Primary endpoint was health care utilization
exacerbation rate. Other endpoints included health status measured by St.
George's Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ), mortality, adverse events, and study
withdrawal. Probability of withdrawing from the study was 29% greater with
tiotropium than salmeterol/fluticasone propionate (P = 0.005). The modeled annual
exacerbation rate was 1.28 in the salmeterol/fluticasone propionate group and
1.32 in the tiotropium group (rate ratio, 0.967; 95% confidence interval [CI],
0.836-1.119]; P = 0.656). The SGRQ total score was statistically significantly
lower at 2 years on salmeterol/fluticasone propionate versus tiotropium
(difference 2.1 units; 95% CI, 0.1-4.0; P = 0.038). Mortality was significantly
lower in the salmeterol/fluticasone propionate group; 21 (3%) of patients in this
group died compared with 38 (6%) in the tiotropium group (P = 0.032). More
pneumonias were reported in the salmeterol/fluticasone propionate group relative 
to tiotropium (P = 0.008).
CONCLUSIONS: We found no difference in exacerbation rate between
salmeterol/fluticasone propionate and tiotropium. More patients failed to
complete the study while receiving tiotropium. A small statistically significant 
beneficial effect was found on health status, with an unexpected finding of lower
deaths in salmeterol/fluticasone propionate-treated patients. Clinical trial
registered with www.clinicaltrials.gov (NCT 00361959).

DOI: 10.1164/rccm.200707-973OC 
PMID: 17916806  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Evid Based Med. 2007 Aug;12(4):114.

Salmeterol and fluticasone propionate did not reduce mortality in chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease.

Schünemann H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Italian National Cancer Institute Regina Elena, Rome, Italy.

Comment on
    N Engl J Med. 2007 Feb 22;356(8):775-89.

DOI: 10.1136/ebm.12.4.114 
PMID: 17885162  [PubMed]


327. Respirology. 2007 Sep;12(5):732-9.

Fast onset of effect of budesonide/formoterol versus salmeterol/fluticasone and
salbutamol in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and reversible 
airway obstruction.

Lindberg A(1), Szalai Z, Pullerits T, Radeczky E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Sunderby Central Hospital of Norrbotten,
Luleå, Sweden. anne.lindberg@nll.se

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Data on the onset of action of COPD medications are
lacking. This study compared the onset of bronchodilation following different
inhaled therapies in patients with moderate-to-severe COPD and reversible airway 
obstruction.
METHODS: In this double-blind, double-dummy, crossover study, 90 patients (aged
>or=40 years; FEV(1) 30-70% predicted) were randomized to a single dose (two
inhalations) of budesonide/formoterol 160/4.5 microg, salmeterol/fluticasone
25/250 microg, salbutamol 100 microg or placebo (via pressurized metered-dose
inhalers) on four visits. The primary end-point was change in FEV(1) 5 min after 
drug inhalation; secondary end-points included inspiratory capacity (IC) and
perception of onset of effect.
RESULTS: Budesonide/formoterol significantly improved FEV(1) at 5 min compared
with placebo (P < 0.0001) and salmeterol/fluticasone (P = 0.0001). Significant
differences were first observed at 3 min. Onset of effect was similar with
budesonide/formoterol and salbutamol. Improvements in FEV(1) following active
treatments were superior to placebo after 180 min (all P < 0.0001); both
combinations were better than salbutamol at maintaining FEV(1) improvements (P
<or= 0.0001) at 180 min. Active treatments improved IC at 15 and 185 min compared
with placebo (P < 0.0001). Maximal IC was greater with budesonide/formoterol than
salmeterol/fluticasone (P = 0.0184) at 65 min. Patients reported a positive
response to the perceptions of the onset of effect question shortly after
receiving active treatments (median time to onset 5 min for active treatments vs 
20 min for placebo), with no significant difference between active treatments.
CONCLUSION: Budesonide/formoterol has an onset of bronchodilatory effect in
patients with COPD and reversible airway obstruction that is faster than
salmeterol/fluticasone and similar to salbutamol.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1440-1843.2007.01132.x 
PMID: 17875063  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Osaka City Med J. 2007 Jun;53(1):25-34.

Effects of tiotropium or combined therapy with salmeterol on hyperinflation in
COPD.

Eguchi Y(1), Tateishi Y, Umeda N, Yoshikawa T, Kamoi H, Kanazawa H, Kudoh S,
Hirata K, Fujimoto S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Sports Medicine, Osaka City University, Graduate School of
Medicine, Japan. m1159783@med.osaka-cu.ac.jp

BACKGROUND: Hyperinflation is widely accepted as an abnormal state affecting
clinical symptoms, activities of daily living and exercise tolerance in chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Reducing hyperinflation is an essential
theme in COPD treatment. In this study, we let patients with COPD hyperventilate 
to evoke hyperinflation, and evaluated the effects of tiotropium alone or in
combination with salmeterol on hyperventilation-evoked hyperinflation.
METHODS: Thirty-eight patients with COPD received pulmonary function tests
including hyperventilation-evoked hyperinflation testing and the St. George's
Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ) before treatment, after tiotropium
administration for 8 weeks, and after combined therapy with salmeterol for 8
weeks.
RESULTS: Before treatment, inspiratory capacity (IC) after hyperventilation
decreased significantly in a breathing frequency-dependent manner. After
tiotropium administration, forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV1)
increased significantly. IC after hyperventilation decreased significantly in a
breathing frequency-dependent manner; however, IC was significantly greater than 
that before treatment (at rest, p=0.001; after hyperventilation at twice the
resting respiratory rate, p=0.0009; and after hyperventilation at three times the
resting respiratory rate, p<0.0001). The SGRQ score also improved significantly. 
After combined therapy with salmeterol, FEV1 increased significantly compared
with after tiotropium alone. However, there was no significant difference between
the IC after tiotropium alone and that after combined therapy, at each stage.
However, after combined therapy the SGRQ score significantly improved compared
with that after tiotropium alone.
CONCLUSIONS: Tiotropium improved airflow obstruction and hyperventilation-evoked 
hyperinflation. In combination with salmeterol, the improvement in airflow
obstruction was greater, but hyperventilation-evoked hyperinflation was not
further improved.


PMID: 17867631  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. COPD. 2007 Sep;4(3):177-83.

Investigating new standards for prophylaxis in reduction of exacerbations--the
INSPIRE study methodology.

Seemungal T(1), Stockley R, Calverley P, Hagan G, Wedzicha JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Medical Sciences, The University of the West Indies,
Mt. Hope, Trinidad and Tobago. TSeemungal@aol.com

Bronchodilators, including long-acting beta(2)-adrenoceptor agonists and
anticholinergic bronchodilators, are effective in the treatment of chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease. Evidence suggests that the addition of a
long-acting beta(2)-agonist to an inhaled corticosteroid is associated with a
reduced rate of exacerbations compared with either treatment alone or placebo.
However, it is not known whether a long-acting beta(2)-agonist/inhaled
corticosteroid combination is more effective than an anticholinergic
bronchodilator alone in reducing exacerbations. The Investigating New Standards
for Prophylaxis In Reduction of Exacerbations (INSPIRE) trial will study
salmeterol (a long-acting beta(2)-agonist) in combination with fluticasone
propionate (an inhaled corticosteroid) compared with tiotropium bromide (an
anticholinergic bronchodilator) in patients with moderate-to-severe chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease. The INSPIRE study is a multicentre, randomised,
double-blind, double dummy, parallel group study conducted over 104 weeks. This
is the first study to use two parallel definitions of an exacerbation; an
event-based exacerbation is defined as one that requires use of healthcare
resources, including additional treatment and hospitalization, whereas a
symptom-based exacerbation is defined as one that satisfies the 1987 Anthonisen
criteria. It is also the first study to compare the long-term effects of
salmeterol/fluticasone propionate with tiotropium bromide on the rate of
event-based exacerbations. Endpoints include rate of exacerbations (primary
endpoint), time to first exacerbation, and duration of exacerbations. Health
outcomes will be assessed via the St George's Respiratory Questionnaire. If the
innovative methodology of utilizing 2 definitions of exacerbation proves
successful, it will set the benchmark for future studies in chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease.

DOI: 10.1080/15412550701407862 
PMID: 17729060  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Clin Ther. 2007 Jun;29(6):1203-13.

Comparison of hospitalizations, emergency department visits, and costs in a
historical cohort of Texas Medicaid patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease, by initial medication regimen.

Rascati KL(1), Akazawa M, Johnsrud M, Stanford RH, Blanchette CM.

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmacy and the Center for Pharmacoeconomic Studies, University of
Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas 78712-0127, USA. krascati@mail.utexas.edu

BACKGROUND: Limited information is available on the relative outcomes and
treatment costs of various pharmacotherapies for chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD) in a Medicaid population.
OBJECTIVE: This study compared the effects of initial medication regimens for
COPD on COPD-related and all-cause events (hospitalizations and/or emergency
department [ED] visits) and COPD-related and all-cause costs.
METHODS: The study population was a historical cohort of Texas Medicaid
beneficiaries aged 40 to 64 years with COPD-related medical costs (International 
Classification of Diseases, Ninth Revision, Clinical Modification codes 491.xx,
492.xx, 496.xx), 24 months of continuous Medicaid enrollment (12 months before
and after the index prescription), and at least 1 prescription claim (index) for 
a combination product containing fluticasone propionate + salmeterol, an inhaled 
corticosteroid, salmeterol, or ipratropium between April 1, 2001, and March 31,
2003. The analyses of events employed Cox proportional hazards regression,
controlling for baseline factors and preindex events. The analyses of costs used 
a 2-part model with logistic regression and generalized linear model to adjust
for baseline characteristics and preindex utilization and costs.
RESULTS: The study population included 6793 patients (1211 combination therapy,
968 inhaled corticosteroid, 401 salmeterol, and 4213 ipratropium). Only
combination therapy was associated with a significantly lower risk for any
COPD-related event (hazard ratio [HR] = 0.733; 95% CI, 0.650-0.826) and any
all-cause event (HR = 0.906; 95% CI, 0.844-0.972) compared with ipratropium.
COPD-related prescription costs were higher in all cohorts compared with the
ipratropium cohort, but COPD-related medical costs were lower, offsetting the
increase in prescription costs. For all-cause costs, prescription costs were
higher in the combination-therapy cohort (+$415; P < 0.05) and the salmeterol
cohort (+$247; P < 0.05) compared with the ipratropium cohort, but significant
reductions in all-cause medical costs in the combination-therapy cohort (-$1735; 
P < 0.05) and salmeterol cohort (-$1547; P < 0.05) more than offset the increase 
in prescription costs.
CONCLUSIONS: In this historical population of Texas Medicaid beneficiaries, the
combination-therapy cohort was 27% less likely to have a COPD-related event than 
the ipratropium cohort, 10% less likely to have any all-cause event, had similar 
COPD-related costs, and had reduced all-cause costs. Thus, compared with the
ipratropium cohort, the combination-therapy cohort had an improvement in outcomes
(based on the decreased time to a hospitalization or ED visit), with similar or
decreased direct medical costs. Future research is needed in other patient
groups.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clinthera.2007.06.006 
PMID: 17692734  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Pulm Pharmacol Ther. 2008;21(2):292-7. Epub 2007 Jul 10.

Fluticasone, but not salmeterol, reduces cigarette smoke-induced production of
interleukin-8 in human airway smooth muscle.

Oltmanns U(1), Walters M, Sukkar M, Xie S, Issa R, Mitchell J, Johnson M, Chung
KF.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Studies, National Heart & Lung Institute, Imperial College,
Dovehouse Street, London SW3 6LY, UK.

Cigarette smoke is the leading risk factor for the development of chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease. We have recently shown that cigarette smoke
extract synergises with tumour necrosis factor alpha (TNFalpha) in the induction 
of interleukin-8 (IL-8) from human airway smooth muscle cells. We have
investigated the effect of fluticasone propionate, a corticosteroid, and
salmeterol, a beta 2-adrenergic receptor agonist, on cigarette smoke
extract-induced IL-8 production by human airway smooth muscle cells. Human airway
smooth muscle cells in primary culture were exposed to cigarette smoke extract
and/or TNFalpha (1 ng ml(-1)) with and without pretreatment with fluticasone
(10(-13)-10(-8)M) and/or salmeterol (10(-11)-10(-6)M). IL-8 was analysed by
ELISA. Fluticasone dose-dependently inhibited IL-8 release induced by cigarette
smoke extract, TNFalpha or combined cigarette smoke extract and TNFalpha.
However, while IL-8 release in the presence of cigarette smoke extract alone was 
completely inhibited by fluticasone, IL-8 production induced by cigarette smoke
extract and TNFalpha was only partially reduced. Salmeterol alone had no effect
on cigarette smoke extract and/or TNFalpha-induced IL-8 production from human
airway smooth muscle cells. Combined fluticasone and salmeterol did not cause
further inhibitory effects compared to fluticasone alone. Fluticasone but not
salmeterol is effective in reducing cigarette smoke extract-induced IL-8
production in human airway smooth muscle cells. The reduced inhibition of
cigarette smoke extract- and TNFalpha-induced IL-8 release by fluticasone may
explain why corticosteroids are less effective in chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease where increased amounts of TNFalpha are present.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pupt.2007.07.001 
PMID: 17692547  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. Expert Rev Respir Med. 2007 Aug;1(1):25-33. doi: 10.1586/17476348.1.1.25.

Salmeterol/fluticasone propionate combination in the treatment of COPD.

Singh SD(1).

Author information: 
(1)University of Manchester, North West Lung Research Centre, South Manchester,
University Hospital Trust, Manchester, M33 3TR, UK. dsingh@meu.org.uk

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is characterized by poorly
reversible airway obstruction and progressive airway inflammation. The
long-acting beta2-agonist salmeterol and the corticosteroid fluticasone
propionate can be administered in a combination inhaler. Four double-blind,
placebo-controlled, randomized clinical trials have demonstrated that
salmeterol/fluticasone propionate improves pulmonary function and health status, 
and also decreases exacerbation rates in COPD patients. The TORCH (Towards a
Revolution in COPD Health) study confirmed that the effects of combined therapy
with salmeterol/fluticasone propionate are greater than the monocomponents. The
TORCH data are also indicative of a beneficial effect of salmeterol/fluticasone
propionate on mortality, although there is much debate about this issue. This
review critically appraises the pharmacology of salmeterol/fluticasone
propionate, the evidence for efficacy in COPD and its potential use in
combination with other drugs.

DOI: 10.1586/17476348.1.1.25 
PMID: 20477262  [PubMed]


333. Eur J Pharmacol. 2007 Sep 24;571(1):55-61. Epub 2007 Jun 5.

Combination of fluticasone propionate and salmeterol potentiates the suppression 
of cigarette smoke-induced IL-8 production by macrophages.

Sarir H(1), Mortaz E, Karimi K, Johnson M, Nijkamp FP, Folkerts G.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pharmacology and Pathophysiology, Utrecht Institute for
Pharmaceutical Sciences, The Netherlands.

Cigarette smoke is the major risk factor for the development of chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Macrophages are suggested to orchestrate
the chronic inflammatory response and tissue destruction associated with COPD by 
secreting interleukin (IL)-8, a major neutrophil chemoattractant. The combination
of inhaled corticosteroids and long-acting beta(2)-adrenoceptor agonists are
increasingly used as maintenance therapy in patients with COPD. The aim of this
study was to determine whether combined fluticasone propionate, a corticosteroid,
and salmeterol, a long-acting beta(2)-adrenoceptor agonist, can suppress IL-8
production by human macrophages. To mimic resident macrophages in the lung, human
monocytes were cultured for 5 days in medium containing Granulocyte Macrophage
Colony Stimulating Factor (GM-CSF) and Macrophage Colony Stimulating Factor
(M-CSF). In human Monocyte-Derived Macrophages, we found that cigarette smoke
medium strongly enhanced IL-8 release in a time- and concentration-dependent
manner. IL-8 release by cigarette smoke was significantly suppressed in a
concentration-dependent manner by fluticasone and salmeterol. Coincubation of the
drugs potentiated the inhibitory effect on cigarette smoke medium-induced IL-8
production and longer preincubation times resulted in more IL-8 inhibition.
Interestingly, preincubation of cells with suboptimal concentration of salmeterol
for 4 h before fluticasone administration for 30 min potentiates the inhibitory
effect of fluticasone on IL-8 release. In conclusion, combination therapy may
provide benefits over monotherapy for the treatment of COPD patients.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2007.05.034 
PMID: 17631879  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Eur Respir J. 2007 Nov;30(5):848-56. Epub 2007 Jun 27.

Anti-inflammatory activity of beta2-agonists in primary lung epithelial cells is 
independent of glucocorticoid receptor.

Lovén J(1), Svitacheva N, Jerre A, Miller-Larsson A, Korn SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, AstraZeneca, 22187, Lund, Sweden.

In patients with asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, the addition
of long-acting beta(2)-agonists (LABA) to glucocorticosteroids (GCS) results in
better control than increasing the dose of GCS alone. In smooth muscle cells and 
fibroblasts, one apparent underlying mechanism involves the ability of LABAs to
activate the glucocorticoid receptor (GR). The present study investigates the
effects of formoterol (FORM), salmeterol (SALM) and budesonide (BUD) on GR
activation in bronchial epithelial cells via tumour necrosis
factor-alpha-stimulated granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF)
release, GR nuclear translocation and GR-regulated reporter gene activity. Both
BUD and FORM inhibited GM-CSF release by < or = 50%. The combination of these two
drugs, in clinically relevant concentrations, inhibited GM-CSF release by 85%
down to unstimulated levels. A similar inhibition was obtained when combining BUD
and SALM. The ability of FORM to inhibit GM-CSF synthesis was not altered by
small interfering RNA-mediated depletion of GR and FORM nor SALM-induced GR
translocation into the cell nucleus. In addition, FORM did not activate
GR-regulated reporter gene activity (SALM was not tested), in contrast to the
clear effect of BUD. It was concluded that in bronchial epithelial cells,
inhibition of granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor synthesis by
formoterol and salmeterol does not act via previously demonstrated glucocorticoid
receptor-related mechanisms, suggesting an alternative pathway in these cells.

DOI: 10.1183/09031936.00129606 
PMID: 17596271  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. Thorax. 2007 Nov;62(11):938-43. Epub 2007 Jun 8.

Effect of salmeterol/fluticasone propionate on airway inflammation in COPD: a
randomised controlled trial.

Bourbeau J(1), Christodoulopoulos P, Maltais F, Yamauchi Y, Olivenstein R, Hamid 
Q.

Author information: 
(1)Respiratory Epidemiology and Clinical Research Unit, Montreal Chest Institute,
McGill University Health Centre, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

Comment in
    Thorax. 2007 Nov;62(11):927-8.

BACKGROUND: Airway inflammation in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)
is characterised by infiltration of CD8+ T cells and CD68+ macrophages and an
increased number of neutrophils, whereas few studies have described the presence 
of eosinophils. Although the anti-inflammatory effects of corticosteroids in
stable COPD are unclear, recent studies suggest that combination therapy could be
beneficial. A study was therefore undertaken to evaluate combined
salmeterol/fluticasone propionate (SFC) and fluticasone propionate (FP) alone on 
inflammatory cells in the airways of patients with COPD.
METHODS: Patients were treated in a randomised, double blind, parallel group,
placebo-controlled trial with either a combination of 50 microg salmeterol and
500 microg FP twice daily (SFC, n = 19, 19 men, mean age 62 years), 500 microg FP
twice daily (n = 20, 15 men, mean age 64 years) or placebo (n = 21, 17 men, mean 
age 66 years) for 3 months. At the start and end of treatment bronchoscopy with
bronchial biopsies was performed and the numbers of CD8+ T lymphocytes, CD68+
macrophages, neutrophils and eosinophils were measured.
RESULTS: CD8+ cells were significantly reduced by SFC compared with placebo
(difference -98.05 cells/mm(2); 95% CI -143.14 to -52.9; p<0.001). Such a marked 
effect was not seen with FP alone (-44.67 cells/mm(2); 95% CI -90.92 to 1.57; p =
0.06). CD68+ macrophages were also reduced by SFC compared with placebo
(difference -31.68 cells/mm(2); 95% CI -61.07 to -2.29; p = 0.03) but not by FP. 
SFC did not significantly change neutrophils and eosinophils compared with
placebo.
CONCLUSIONS: SFC has airway anti-inflammatory effects not seen with inhaled
corticosteroids alone.

DOI: 10.1136/thx.2006.071068 
PMCID: PMC2117108
PMID: 17557771  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. COPD. 2007 Jun;4(2):127-34.

Survival among COPD patients using fluticasone/salmeterol in combination versus
other inhaled steroids and bronchodilators alone.

Mapel DW(1), Nelson LS, Lydick E, Soriano J, Yood MU, Davis KJ.

Author information: 
(1)Lovelace Clinic Foundation, Albuquerque, NM 87106, USA. Doug@LCFResearch.org

Recent retrospective studies have suggested that use of inhaled corticosteroids
(ICS) may improve survival in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD),
particularly when combined with a long-acting beta-agonist (LABA). However, the
study methodologies have been questioned, and no study has examined the survival 
effect of the newer combination ICS/LABA inhalers. The goal of this project was
to further examine the relationship between ICS treatment, with or without LABA, 
and survival in COPD. COPD patients were identified from the administrative
databases of four different integrated health care delivery systems. All patients
who were diagnosed with COPD between September 1, 2000 and August 31, 2001 and
who had at least 3 months treatment with either a combined fluticasone/salmeterol
inhaler (FSI, N=866), any ICS used with a LABA (ICS/LABA, N=525), ICS alone
(N=742), LABA alone (N=531), or a short-acting bronchodilator alone (SABD,
N=1832), were included. Analyses were conducted using three different analysis
approaches that adjust for various biases that may affect the results. In the
basic Cox proportional hazards models, use of FSI, ICS/LABA, ICS alone, and LABA 
alone had significant survival benefits as compared to SABD, after adjustment for
differences in age, gender, comorbidities, asthma status, and disease severity
(HRs 0.61 [0.45-0.83], 0.59 [0.46-0.77], 0.76 [0.61-0.95], 0.75 [0.57-0.98],
respectively). Propensity score matching to reduce the clinical differences
between the treatment groups versus the SABD reference group found very similar
results. Nested case-control analyses, which are based on survival status instead
of treatment, continued to show a significant survival benefit for FSI, ICS/LABA,
and ICS alone. Treatment with FSI or another ICS with or without LABA is
associated with improved survival in COPD. The treatment benefit is reproducible 
and is robust to application of a number of different analysis techniques
designed to adjust for differences in confounding variables and for bias by
indication.

DOI: 10.1080/15412550701341111 
PMID: 17530506  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Mayo Clin Proc. 2007 May;82(5):575-82.

Cost-effectiveness of long-acting bronchodilators for chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease.

Oba Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonary, Critical Care and Environmental Medicine, University 
of Missouri-Columbia, Columbia, MO 65212, USA. obay@health.missouri.edu

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate and compare the cost-effectiveness of long-acting
bronchodilators by estimating incremental costs per quality-adjusted life-year
(QALY) gained in patients with moderate to severe chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease.
METHODS: This cost-effective analysis was conducted from a third-party payer's
perspective. The study was a retrospective pooled analysis, and the effectiveness
evidence was derived from a systematic review of literature published from
January 1, 1980, to April 14, 2006. Incremental QALYs were estimated by
converting the St George's Respiratory Questionnaire scores into EuroQoL-5D
scores and using these combined scores as the summary benefit measure.
RESULTS: The incremental cost per additional QALY was $26,094 (range,
$11,780-$77,214) for tiotropium and $41,000 (range, $23,650-$98,750) for
salmeterol compared with placebo. The cost per QALY gained was lower with
tiotropium compared with salmeterol or ipratropium based on either the pooled
data of available trials or a head-to-head trial. Treatment with tiotropium could
save $391 per year while gaining 13 quality-adjusted days compared with
ipratropium.
CONCLUSION: Tiotropium appears to be more cost-effective than the alternatives
and may be the preferred agent for maintenance therapy in patients with moderate 
to severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Compared with ipratropium,
tiotropium could be cost saving. Because of the wide ranges of cost-effectiveness
ratios for tiotropium and salmeterol and the significant overlap between them, a 
large prospective head-to-head trial would help address the uncertainty and
confirm the results of this analysis.

DOI: 10.4065/82.5.575 
PMID: 17493425  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. Clin Ther. 2007 Feb;29(2):261-78.

Nebulized arformoterol in patients with COPD: a 12-week, multicenter, randomized,
double-blind, double-dummy, placebo- and active-controlled trial.

Baumgartner RA(1), Hanania NA, Calhoun WJ, Sahn SA, Sciarappa K, Hanrahan JP.

Author information: 
(1)Sepracor Inc., Marlborough, Massachusetts 01752, USA.

OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to assess the efficacy and tolerability of
nebulized arformoterol tartrate (a selective, long-acting beta(2)-adrenergic
agonist that is the [R,R] isomer of formoterol) and salmeterol xinafoate versus
placebo in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
METHODS: This 12-week, multicenter, randomized, double-blind, double-dummy,
placebo- and active-controlled trial was conducted at 60 centers across the
United States. Male and female patients aged >or=35 years with
physician-diagnosed COPD received arformoterol (15 microg BID, 25 microg BID, or 
50 microg QD via nebulizer), salmeterol (42 microg BID via metered dose inhaler),
or placebo. Pulmonary function was assessed by spirometry; dyspnea, by the
Transitional Dyspnea Index (TDI); and health status, by the St. George's
Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ). Adverse events (AEs) were assessed by site
personnel at all clinic visits (screening, first dose at week 0, and at weeks 3, 
6, 9, 12, and follow-up). COPD exacerbations were defined as worsening
respiratory status requiring a change in medication or an unscheduled provider
visit.
RESULTS: A total of 717 patients received study medication. The demographic
composition of all treatment arms was similar. The mean age was 62.9 years, 58%
were men, and mean baseline forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV(1)) was 1.2
L (41% predicted). Mean improvement in trough FEV(1) over 12 weeks was
significantly greater with all 3 arformoterol doses (15 microg BID, +16.9%; 25
microg BID, +18.9%; 50 microg QD, +14.9%) and for salmeterol (+17.4%) relative to
placebo (+6.0%; P < 0.001). There were significantly greater improvements in the 
mean percentage change in FEV(1) AUC(0-12h) from the predose value over 12 weeks 
(15 microg BID, 12.7%, 25 microg BID, 13.9%, 50 microg QD, 18.9%; salmeterol,
9.8%) versus placebo (2.7%; P <or= 0.001); all doses of arformoterol were
statistically different from salmeterol for this end point (P <or= 0.024). At
week 12, TDI focal scores were significantly greater with all arformoterol doses 
compared with placebo (mean [95% CI]: 15 microg BID, 0.97 [0.25-1.69]; 25 microg 
BID, 1.08 [0.3-1.86]; 50 microg QD, 1.04 [0.32-1.771), suggesting
treatment-associated improvement in dyspnea, however, the difference between
salmeterol and placebo was not statistically significant (0.36 [-0.40 to 1.12]). 
Improvements in health status, as measured using SGRQ total scores, were -2.6 to 
-3.6 U in the arformoterol groups, -4.4 U for salmeterol, and -1.2 U for placebo;
95% CI of differences versus placebo suggested significant improvement for the
arformoterol 25 microg BID and salmeterol groups. There was a similar frequency
of AEs and COPD exacerbations across all groups, including placebo.
CONCLUSIONS: In this trial, patients with moderate to severe COPD administered
nebulized arformoterol over 12 weeks were observed to have significant and
sustained improvements in airway function and dyspnea compared with placebo. The 
results also suggest that all doses of arformoterol, including the lowest dose
(15 microg BID), were effective. Overall, nebulized arformoterol was well
tolerated.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clinthera.2007.02.009 
PMID: 17472819  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Expert Rev Clin Immunol. 2007 May;3(3):365-81. doi: 10.1586/1744666X.3.3.365.

Protease inhibitors in respiratory disease: focus on asthma and chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease.

Venkatasamy R(1), Spina D.

Author information: 
(1)King's College London, Sackler Institute of Pulmonary Pharmacology, School of 
Biomedical and Health Science, Pharmaceutical Science Research Division, Guy's
Campus, London SE1 1UL, UK. radhakrishnan.venkatasamy@kcl.ac.uk

Respiratory diseases, such as asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD), are a major health burden on society and current treatment modalities for
these diseases have not significantly changed over the past 40 years. The only
major pharmacological advancement for the treatment of these diseases has been to
increase the duration of action of bronchodilators (asthma: salmeterol; COPD:
tiotropium bromide) and glucocorticosteroids (asthma: fluticasone propionate)
and, increasingly, to formulate these agents in the same delivery device. Despite
our increasing understanding of the cell and molecular biology of these diseases,
the development of novel treatments remains beyond the reach of the scientific
community. Proteases are a family of proteins with diverse biological activity,
which are found in abundance within the airways of asthma and COPD, and have been
implicated in the pathogenesis of these diseases. The targeting of proteases,
including mast cell tryptase, neutrophil elastase and matrix metalloprotease with
low-molecular-weight inhibitors, has highlighted the potential role of these
enzymes in mediating certain aspects of the disease process in preclinical
studies. Several challenges remain regarding the development of protease
inhibitors, including the synthesis of highly potent and specific inhibitors, and
target validation in man.

DOI: 10.1586/1744666X.3.3.365 
PMID: 20477680  [PubMed]


340. Respir Med. 2007 Aug;101(8):1798-803. Epub 2007 Mar 30.

Tiotropium is less likely to induce oxygen desaturation in stable COPD patients
compared to long-acting beta2-agonists.

Santus P(1), Centanni S, Morelli N, Di Marco F, Verga M, Cazzola M.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Respiratory Medicine, University of Milan, S. Paolo Hospital, Milan,
Italy.

In a three-way crossover pilot study, the acute effects of tiotropium 18 microg
inhalation on the respiratory function and arterial blood gas tensions of 30
patients with stable chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) were compared
with those of salmeterol 50 microg and formoterol 12 microg. In each study day,
lung function and arterial blood gas analyses were performed before and up to 180
min after inhalation. All treatments significantly improved lung function,
increased DLco, decreased PaO2, and increased P(A-a)O2, with no change in PaCO2. 
The effects of salmeterol and tiotropium on PaO2 were slower in onset and more
prolonged than those of formoterol but PaO2AUC0-180 min was significantly greater
for formoterol and salmeterol than for tiotropium. It is likely that the
significant but small decreases in PaO2 and increases in P(A-a)O2 have been
caused by pulmonary vasodilator effects. Since the three agents were similar in
inducing bronchodilation, we believe that tiotropium is preferable in patients
with hypoxemia caused by stable COPD because it seems to carry a smaller risk of 
worsening systemic hypoxemia.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2007.02.007 
PMID: 17399972  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. J Biol Chem. 2007 May 25;282(21):15366-75. Epub 2007 Mar 29.

Corticosteroids and beta2 agonists differentially regulate rhinovirus-induced
interleukin-6 via distinct Cis-acting elements.

Edwards MR(1), Haas J, Panettieri RA Jr, Johnson M, Johnston SL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, National Heart and Lung Institute and
Wright Fleming Institute of Infection and Immunity, Imperial College London,
London W2 1PG, United Kingdom. michael.edwards@ic.ac.uk

Interleukin-6 (IL-6) is a proinflammatory cytokine up-regulated by rhinovirus
infection during acute exacerbations of asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease. The role of IL-6 during exacerbations is unclear; however, it is
believed IL-6 could contribute to airway and systemic inflammation. In this study
we investigate the effects of common asthma treatments fluticasone propionate and
beta(2) agonists salmeterol and salbutamol on IL-6 production in BEAS-2B and
primary bronchial epithelial cells. Salmeterol and salbutamol enhanced
rhinovirus- and IL-1beta-induced IL-6 production; however, fluticasone treatment 
caused a reduction of IL-6 protein and mRNA. Combined activity of salmeterol and 
fluticasone at equimolar concentrations had no effect on rhinovirus or IL-1beta
induction of IL-6. The induction of IL-6 by salmeterol was dependent upon the
beta(2) receptor and could also be induced by cAMP or cAMP-elevating agents
forskolin and rolipram. Using transfection of IL-6 promoter reporter constructs, 
dominant negative mutants, and electromobility shift assays, it was found that
NF-kappaB was the only transcription factor required for rhinovirus induction of 
IL-6 gene expression. Salmeterol caused an augmentation of rhinovirus-induced
promoter activation via a mechanism dependent upon the c/EBP and/or CRE (cyclic
AMP response element) cis-acting sites. The suppressive effect of FP was
dependent upon distinct glucocorticoid response element sequences proximal to the
transcriptional start site within the IL-6 promoter. The data demonstrate that
beta(2) agonists can augment IL-6 expression by other stimuli in an additive
manner via cyclic AMP and that the negative effect of steroids is mediated by
glucocorticoid response elements within the IL-6 promoter.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M701325200 
PMID: 17395587  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. Eur J Health Econ. 2007 Jun;8(2):123-35. Epub 2007 Mar 17.

Modelling the 5-year cost effectiveness of tiotropium, salmeterol and ipratropium
for the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease in Spain.

Rutten-van Mölken MP(1), Oostenbrink JB, Miravitlles M, Monz BU.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Medical Technology Assessment, Erasmus MC, P.O. Box 1738, 3000
DR, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. m.rutten@bmg.eur.nl

Our objective was to assess the 5-year cost effectiveness of bronchodilator
therapy with tiotropium, salmeterol or ipratropium for chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD) from the perspective of the Spanish National Health
System (NHS). A probabilistic Markov model was designed wherein patients moved
between moderate, severe or very severe COPD and had the risk of exacerbation and
death. Probabilities were derived from clinical trials. Spanish healthcare
utilisation, costs and utilities were estimated for each COPD and exacerbation
state. Outcomes were exacerbations, exacerbation-free months, quality-adjusted
life years (QALYs), and cost(-effectiveness). The mean (SE) 5-year number of
exacerbations was 3.50 (0.14) for tiotropium, 4.16 (0.40) for salmeterol and 4.71
(0.54) for ipratropium. The mean (SE) number of QALYs was 3.15 (0.08), 3.02
(0.15) and 3.00 (0.20), respectively. Mean (SE) 5-year costs were 6,424 euro (305
euro) for tiotropium, 5,869 euro (505 euro) for salmeterol, and 5,181 euro (682
euro) for ipratropium (2005 values). Ipratropium and tiotropium formed the
cost-effectiveness frontier, with tiotropium being preferred when willingness to 
pay (WTP) exceeded 639 euro per exacerbation-free month and 8,157 euro per QALY. 
In Spain, tiotropium demonstrated the highest expected net benefit for ratios of 
the willingness to pay per QALY, well within accepted limits.

DOI: 10.1007/s10198-007-0039-4 
PMCID: PMC1913175
PMID: 17370096  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. COPD. 2006 Dec;3(4):233-42.

Is airway inflammation in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) a risk
factor for cardiovascular events?

Calverley PM(1), Scott S.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Science Centre, University Hospital Aintree, Liverpool, UK.
pmacal@liverpool.ac.uk

Cardiovascular disease (CVD) is a very common cause of death in patients with
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Smoking is a well-described risk
factor for both COPD and CVD, but CVD in patients with COPD is likely to be due
to other factors in addition to smoking. Inflammation may be an important common 
etiological link between COPD and CVD, being well described in both diseases. It 
is hypothesized that in COPD a "spill-over" of local airway inflammation into the
systemic circulation could contribute to increased CVD in these patients. Inhaled
corticosteroids (ICS) have well-documented anti-inflammatory effects and are
commonly used for the treatment of COPD, but their effects on cardiovascular
endpoints and all-cause mortality have only just started to be examined. A recent
meta-analysis has suggested that ICS may reduce all-cause mortality in COPD by
around 25%. A case-controlled study specifically examined the effects of ICS on
myocardial infarction and suggested that ICS may decrease the incidence of MI by 
as much as 32%. A large multicenter prospective randomized trial (Towards a
Revolution in COPD Health [TORCH]) is now ongoing and will examine the effect of 
fluticasone propionate in combination with salmeterol on all-cause mortality.


PMID: 17361504  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Can Respir J. 2007 Jan-Feb;14(1):25-9.

Treatment persistence and compliance with medications for chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease.

Cramer JA(1), Bradley-Kennedy C, Scalera A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven,
Connecticut 06516-2770, USA. joyce.cramer@yale.edu

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Inhaled beta-agonist, anticholinergic and
glucocorticoid medications are used to treat asthma and chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD). The present study assessed the patterns of persistence 
with the above mentioned inhaled medications.
METHODS: Prescription claims data from the Ontario Drug Benefit Program were
analyzed to assess persistence (time to discontinuation) and compliance
(percentage of days with doses available divided by days to last refill) of
patients prescribed inhaled medications. Patients were grouped as naive (no
inhaled medication in the previous year) or experienced (previous or current
treatment), and by age (18 to 65 years of age and older than 65 years of age).
Medications included ipratropium, ipratropium plus salbutamol, formoterol,
formoterol plus budesonide, salmeterol, salmeterol plus fluticasone, and
tiotropium.
RESULTS: The database included 31,368 patients (4888 naive and 26,480
experienced) who were prescribed at least one of these medications. Fifteen per
cent to 63% of patients continued on the index drug for more than six months,
which decreased to 7% to 53% at 12 months, and 5% to 47% at 18 months. At 12
months, patients taking tiotropium had significantly longer persistence compared 
with other therapies (53% versus 7% to 30%; all P<0.0001), and fewer switches to 
alternative medications. Most naive patients had significantly shorter treatment 
persistence than experienced patients for all drugs (all P<0.0001), including
tiotropium (27% versus 55%, P<0.0001). Compliance rates were similar for all
drugs (ie, 76% to 94%) but were highest for tiotropium.
CONCLUSIONS: These data demonstrated that persistence with inhaled treatment was 
low overall, but patients treated with tiotropium remained on therapy
significantly longer than when treated with other medications, and patients naive
to inhaled treatment had shorter treatment persistence than experienced patients.


PMCID: PMC2690446
PMID: 17315055  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. N Engl J Med. 2007 Feb 22;356(8):775-89.

Salmeterol and fluticasone propionate and survival in chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease.

Calverley PM(1), Anderson JA, Celli B, Ferguson GT, Jenkins C, Jones PW, Yates
JC, Vestbo J; TORCH investigators.

Author information: 
(1)University Hospital Aintree, Liverpool, United Kingdom. pmacal@liverpool.ac.uk

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2007 Feb 22;356(8):867.
    Evid Based Med. 2007 Aug;12(4):114.
    Can Fam Physician. 2008 May;54(5):740-1.
    N Engl J Med. 2007 Feb 22;356(8):851-4.
    N Engl J Med. 2007 May 24;356(21):2212-3; author reply 2213-4.
    N Engl J Med. 2007 May 24;356(21):2211; author reply 2213-4.
    N Engl J Med. 2007 May 24;356(21):2211-2; author reply 2213-4.
    N Engl J Med. 2007 May 24;356(21):2212; author reply 2213-4.

Republished in
    Ugeskr Laeger. 2007 Sep 17;169(38):3198-201.

BACKGROUND: Long-acting beta-agonists and inhaled corticosteroids are used to
treat chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), but their effect on survival 
is unknown.
METHODS: We conducted a randomized, double-blind trial comparing salmeterol at a 
dose of 50 microg plus fluticasone propionate at a dose of 500 microg twice daily
(combination regimen), administered with a single inhaler, with placebo,
salmeterol alone, or fluticasone propionate alone for a period of 3 years. The
primary outcome was death from any cause for the comparison between the
combination regimen and placebo; the frequency of exacerbations, health status,
and spirometric values were also assessed.
RESULTS: Of 6112 patients in the efficacy population, 875 died within 3 years
after the start of the study treatment. All-cause mortality rates were 12.6% in
the combination-therapy group, 15.2% in the placebo group, 13.5% in the
salmeterol group, and 16.0% in the fluticasone group. The hazard ratio for death 
in the combination-therapy group, as compared with the placebo group, was 0.825
(95% confidence interval [CI], 0.681 to 1.002; P=0.052, adjusted for the interim 
analyses), corresponding to a difference of 2.6 percentage points or a reduction 
in the risk of death of 17.5%. The mortality rate for salmeterol alone or
fluticasone propionate alone did not differ significantly from that for placebo. 
As compared with placebo, the combination regimen reduced the annual rate of
exacerbations from 1.13 to 0.85 and improved health status and spirometric values
(P<0.001 for all comparisons with placebo). There was no difference in the
incidence of ocular or bone side effects. The probability of having pneumonia
reported as an adverse event was higher among patients receiving medications
containing fluticasone propionate (19.6% in the combination-therapy group and
18.3% in the fluticasone group) than in the placebo group (12.3%, P<0.001 for
comparisons between these treatments and placebo).
CONCLUSIONS: The reduction in death from all causes among patients with COPD in
the combination-therapy group did not reach the predetermined level of
statistical significance. There were significant benefits in all other outcomes
among these patients. (ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT00268216
[ClinicalTrials.gov].).

Copyright 2007 Massachusetts Medical Society.

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa063070 
PMID: 17314337  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Thorax. 2007 May;62(5):411-5. Epub 2007 Feb 20.

Ascertainment of cause-specific mortality in COPD: operations of the TORCH
Clinical Endpoint Committee.

McGarvey LP(1), John M, Anderson JA, Zvarich M, Wise RA; TORCH Clinical Endpoint 
Committee.

Author information: 
(1)The Queen's University of Belfast, Grosvenor Road, Belfast BT12 6BJ, UK.
l.mcgarvey@qub.ac.uk

Comment in
    Thorax. 2007 May;62(5):378-9.

BACKGROUND: TORCH (Towards a Revolution in COPD Health) is an international
multicentre, randomised, placebo-controlled clinical trial of inhaled fluticasone
propionate/salmeterol combination treatment and its monotherapy components for
maintenance treatment of moderately to severely impaired patients with chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). The primary outcome is all-cause mortality.
Cause-specific mortality and deaths related to COPD are additional outcome
measures, but systematic methods for ascertainment of these outcomes have not
previously been described.
METHODS: A Clinical Endpoint Committee (CEC) was tasked with categorising the
cause of death and the relationship of deaths to COPD in a systematic, unbiased
and independent manner. The key elements of the operation of the committee were
the use of predefined principles of operation and definitions of cause of death
and COPD-relatedness; the independent review of cases by all members with
development of a consensus opinion; and a substantial infrastructure to collect
medical information.
RESULTS: 911 deaths were reviewed and consensus was reached in all.
Cause-specific mortality was: cardiovascular 27%, respiratory 35%, cancer 21%,
other 10% and unknown 8%. 40% of deaths were definitely or probably related to
COPD. Adjudications were identical in 83% of blindly re-adjudicated cases (kappa 
= 0.80). COPD-relatedness was reproduced 84% of the time (kappa = 0.73). The CEC 
adjudication was equivalent to the primary cause of death recorded by the site
investigator in 52% of cases.
CONCLUSION: A CEC can provide standardised, reliable and informative adjudication
of COPD mortality that provides information which frequently differs from data
collected from assessment by site investigators.

DOI: 10.1136/thx.2006.072348 
PMCID: PMC2117197
PMID: 17311843  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Ann Intern Med. 2007 Apr 17;146(8):545-55. Epub 2007 Feb 19.

Tiotropium in combination with placebo, salmeterol, or fluticasone-salmeterol for
treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: a randomized trial.

Aaron SD(1), Vandemheen KL, Fergusson D, Maltais F, Bourbeau J, Goldstein R,
Balter M, O'Donnell D, McIvor A, Sharma S, Bishop G, Anthony J, Cowie R, Field S,
Hirsch A, Hernandez P, Rivington R, Road J, Hoffstein V, Hodder R, Marciniuk D,
McCormack D, Fox G, Cox G, Prins HB, Ford G, Bleskie D, Doucette S, Mayers I,
Chapman K, Zamel N, FitzGerald M; Canadian Thoracic Society/Canadian Respiratory 
Clinical Research Consortium.

Author information: 
(1)The Ottawa Health Research Institute and University of Ottawa, Ottawa,
Ontario, Canada.

Comment in
    Ann Intern Med. 2007 Dec 18;147(12):882; author reply 882-3.
    Ann Intern Med. 2007 Apr 17;146(8):606-8.

Summary for patients in
    Ann Intern Med. 2007 Apr 17;146(8):I12.

BACKGROUND: Treatment of moderate or severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD) with combinations of inhaled corticosteroids, long-acting beta-agonists,
and long-acting anticholinergic bronchodilators is common but unstudied.
OBJECTIVE: To determine whether combining tiotropium with salmeterol or
fluticasone-salmeterol improves clinical outcomes in adults with moderate to
severe COPD compared with tiotropium alone.
DESIGN: Randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial conducted from October
2003 to January 2006.
SETTING: 27 academic and community medical centers in Canada.
PATIENTS: 449 patients with moderate or severe COPD.
INTERVENTION: 1 year of treatment with tiotropium plus placebo, tiotropium plus
salmeterol, or tiotropium plus fluticasone-salmeterol.
MEASUREMENTS: The primary end point was the proportion of patients who
experienced an exacerbation of COPD that required treatment with systemic
steroids or antibiotics.
RESULTS: The proportion of patients in the tiotropium plus placebo group who
experienced an exacerbation (62.8%) did not differ from that in the tiotropium
plus salmeterol group (64.8%; difference, -2.0 percentage points [95% CI, -12.8
to 8.8 percentage points]) or in the tiotropium plus fluticasone-salmeterol group
(60.0%; difference, 2.8 percentage points [CI, -8.2 to 13.8 percentage points]). 
In sensitivity analyses, the point estimates and 95% confidence bounds shifted in
the direction favoring tiotropium plus salmeterol and tiotropium plus
fluticasone-salmeterol. Tiotropium plus fluticasone-salmeterol improved lung
function (P = 0.049) and disease-specific quality of life (P = 0.01) and reduced 
the number of hospitalizations for COPD exacerbation (incidence rate ratio, 0.53 
[CI, 0.33 to 0.86]) and all-cause hospitalizations (incidence rate ratio, 0.67
[CI, 0.45 to 0.99]) compared with tiotropium plus placebo. In contrast,
tiotropium plus salmeterol did not statistically improve lung function or
hospitalization rates compared with tiotropium plus placebo.
LIMITATIONS: More than 40% of patients who received tiotropium plus placebo and
tiotropium plus salmeterol discontinued therapy prematurely, and many crossed
over to treatment with open-label inhaled steroids or long-acting beta-agonists.
CONCLUSIONS: Addition of fluticasone-salmeterol to tiotropium therapy did not
statistically influence rates of COPD exacerbation but did improve lung function,
quality of life, and hospitalization rates in patients with moderate to severe
COPD. International Standard Randomised Controlled Trial registration number:
ISRCTN29870041.


PMID: 17310045  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Fam Pract. 2007 Apr;24(2):181-8. Epub 2007 Jan 23.

Lower inhaled steroid requirement with a fluticasone/salmeterol combination in
family practice patients with asthma or COPD.

Schermer TR(1), Albers JM, Verblackt HW, Costongs RJ, Westers P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Family Medicine, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre,
Nijmegen, The Netherlands. T.Schermer@hag.umcn.nl

BACKGROUND: Previous studies on inhaled steroid and long-acting beta2-agonist
combination products may not be representative for the asthma and chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) patients in family practice.
OBJECTIVES: To compare in a group of doctor-diagnosed patients with asthma or
COPD, the effects of a lower dose of fluticasone in a combination product with
salmeterol with conventional treatment (i.e. a higher dose of fluticasone), both 
supplemented with as-needed use of a short-acting bronchodilator.
METHODS: The study was a 12-week multicentre, randomized controlled, double-blind
trial. In all, 41 family practices recruited 137 patients diagnosed with asthma
and 40 patients diagnosed with COPD. Primary outcome was the forced expiratory
volume in 1 second (FEV1) as percentage of predicted. Morning peak expiratory
flow (PEF), symptom-free days, health status [Asthma Quality of Life
Questionnaire (AQLQ) and St. George's Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ)],
exacerbations, use of short-acting bronchodilators and adverse events were
secondary outcomes.
RESULTS: FEV1% predicted increased 2.6% (SD 8.3) in fluticasone/salmeterol- and
0.01% (SD 6.6) in fluticasone-treated patients (overall: P=0.036, asthma: P=0.025
and COPD: P=0.700). PEF increased in favour of fluticasone/salmeterol in asthma
patients only (P=0.016). Fluticasone/salmeterol-treated asthma patients had 1.1
more symptom-free days per week (P=0.044); no such effect was observed for COPD
(P=0.769). There were no differences in total AQLQ and SGRQ scores,
exacerbations, use of reliever puffs or adverse effects.
CONCLUSIONS: In family practice patients diagnosed with asthma, several treatment
goals were better achieved with a lower dose of fluticasone and salmeterol in a
combination product than with a higher dose of fluticasone. We found no
differences between the two approaches for patients with COPD.

DOI: 10.1093/fampra/cml076 
PMID: 17251178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Nihon Kokyuki Gakkai Zasshi. 2006 Feb;44(2):122-7.

[A case of severe airflow limitation markedly improved by inhalation therapy in
non-smoking woman with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease].

[Article in Japanese]

Yamazoe M(1), Tanaka H, Takezawa C, Yamada Y, Abe S.

Author information: 
(1)Third Department of Internal Medicine, Sapporo Medical University, School of
Medicine.

A 67-year old woman who had never smoked presented with dyspnea on effort and
general fatigue, which had first appeared 4 years ago. She had lived for 35 years
with her husband who was a heavy smoker. Chest roentgenogram showed pulmonary
over-inflation, but chest CT scans didn't demonstrate emphysematous changes.
Neutrophil-dominant sputum cytology, a PaO2 of 69.5 Torr, and combined
ventilatory impairment on respiratory function test were revealed. FEV1.0
improved 80 ml after beta2-agonist inhalation. Although the respiratory symptoms 
were improved by inhaled anti-cholinergic drug, residual volume increased
minimally. After the use of inhaled steroid drug (HFA-BDP) and salmeterol, the
symptoms and residual volume were markedly improved. One year later, FEV1.0
increased by 450 ml. The low attenuation area detected by CT scans decreased,
mainly in the lower lung field. Passive smoking might have contributed to her
airflow limitation.


PMID: 17228806  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Respir Res. 2006 Dec 29;7:147.

Improved outcomes in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease treated 
with salmeterol compared with placebo/usual therapy: results of a meta-analysis.

Stockley RA(1), Whitehead PJ, Williams MK.

Author information: 
(1)Queen Elizabeth Hospital, Birmingham, UK. r.a.stockley@bham.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: Several studies have demonstrated that long-acting beta2-agonists
such as salmeterol are beneficial in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD). A meta-analysis was therefore conducted to review studies in COPD to
provide pooled estimates of the effect of salmeterol 50 mcg taken twice daily in 
addition to usual therapy on several clinically relevant endpoints, when compared
with placebo/usual therapy.
METHODS: An extensive search of literature and clinical trial databases was
conducted using the terms salmeterol, COPD, chronic, obstructive, bronchitis and 
emphysema. Nine randomized, double-blind, parallel-group, placebo-controlled
trials of > or =12 week duration with salmeterol 50 mcg bid treatment in COPD
were included (>3500 patients), with a further 14 trials excluded due to study
design or reporting timelines. All patients were included, and a sub-group of
subjects (84%) with poorly reversible COPD were considered separately.
Statistical testing was carried out at the 5% level, except for interaction
testing which was carried out at the 10% level.
RESULTS: Patients treated with salmeterol over 12 months were less likely to
withdraw early from the studies (19% patients compared with 25% on their current 
usual therapy, p < 0.001), less likely to suffer a moderate/severe exacerbation
(34% compared with 39%, p < 0.0001) and had a greater increase in average FEV1
(73 mL difference vs placebo/usual therapy, p < 0.0001). Similar differences were
found at 3 and 6 months. At all time points, more patients experienced an
improvement in health status and also a greater change with salmeterol than with 
placebo/usual therapy (p < 0.002). There was no evidence of tachyphylaxis to
salmeterol over 12 months.
CONCLUSION: The meta-analysis confirmed clinically and statistically significant,
sustained and consistent superiority of salmeterol 50 mcg bid over placebo/usual 
therapy on a broad range of outcome measures.

DOI: 10.1186/1465-9921-7-147 
PMCID: PMC1779294
PMID: 17196106  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Eur Respir J. 2007 Mar;29(3):575-81. Epub 2006 Nov 29.

Effect of indacaterol, a novel long-acting beta2-agonist, on isolated human
bronchi.

Naline E(1), Trifilieff A, Fairhurst RA, Advenier C, Molimard M.

Author information: 
(1)Research Unit EA220, Faculty of Medicine, Versailles University, Hospital
Foch, Suresnes, France.

Indacaterol is a novel beta2-adrenoceptor agonist in development for the
once-daily treatment of asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. The
present study evaluated the relaxant effect of indacaterol on isolated human
bronchi obtained from lungs of patients undergoing surgery for lung carcinoma.
Potency (-logEC50), maximal relaxant effect (Emax) and onset of action were
determined at resting tone. Duration of action was determined against cholinergic
neural contraction induced by electrical field stimulation (EFS). At resting
tone, -logEC50 and Emax values were 8.82+/-0.41 and 77+/-5% for indacaterol,
9.84+/-0.22 and 94+/-1% for formoterol, 8.36+/-0.16 and 74+/-4% for salmeterol,
and 8.43+/-0.22 and 84+/-4% for salbutamol, respectively. In contrast to
salmeterol, indacaterol did not antagonise the isoprenaline response.
Indacaterol's onset of action (7.8+/-0.7 min) was not significantly different
from that of formoterol (5.8+/-0.7 min) or salbutamol (11.0+/-4.0 min), but it
was significantly faster than that of salmeterol (19.4+/-4.3 min). EFS-induced
contractions were inhibited with -logIC50 values of 6.96+/-0.13 (indacaterol),
8.96+/-0.18 (formoterol), 7.18+/-0.34 (salmeterol) and 6.39+/-0.26 (salbutamol). 
Duration of action was >12 h for indacaterol and salmeterol, and 35.3+/-8.8 and
14.6+/-3.7 min for formoterol and salbutamol, respectively. In isolated human
bronchi, indacaterol behaved as a long-acting beta2-adrenoceptor agonist with
high intrinsic efficacy and fast onset of action.

DOI: 10.1183/09031936.00032806 
PMID: 17135231  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. Pulm Pharmacol Ther. 2008;21(1):20-5. Epub 2006 Oct 13.

Comparable spirometric efficacy of tiotropium compared with salmeterol plus
fluticasone in patients with COPD: a pilot study.

Bateman ED(1), van Dyk M, Sagriotis A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonology, Department of Medicine, Faculty of Health Sciences,
University of Cape Town, PO Box 34560, Groote Schuur 7937, Cape Town, South
Africa. ebateman@uctgsh1.uct.ac.za <ebateman@uctgsh1.uct.ac.za>

BACKGROUND: International guidelines recommend the long-acting anticholinergic,
tiotropium, or long-acting beta 2-agonists as maintenance therapy in patients
with moderate-to-very severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). The
efficacy of long-acting beta(2)-agonists combined with inhaled corticosteroids
(ICS) in the treatment of COPD has also been confirmed for severe and very severe
COPD, but data comparing tiotropium with the combination of a long-acting beta
2-agonist and an ICS are lacking.
METHODS: This 6-week multicentre, randomised, double-blind, triple-dummy pilot
study compared the bronchodilator effects of tiotropium 18 microg once daily
(n=56) vs. the combination of salmeterol 50 microg plus fluticasone 250 microg
twice daily (n=51) in patients with moderate-to-very severe COPD. Serial
spirometry was performed over 12h after 6 weeks of treatment. The primary
endpoint was forced expiratory volume in 1s (FEV1) area under the curve from 0 to
12h (AUC0-12h) on Day 43.
RESULTS: Randomization failed to provide treatment groups with comparable
baseline characteristics for smoking history, current smokers, duration of COPD, 
FEV1, forced vital capacity (FVC) and reversibility. Mean+/-SD FEV1 was
1.31+/-0.47 l in the tiotropium group vs. 1.46+/-0.53 l in the salmeterol plus
fluticasone group. Fewer patients in the tiotropium showed a 12% and 200 ml acute
increase to short-acting bronchodilators at baseline. However, treatment with
tiotropium alone resulted in comparable bronchodilation compared with salmeterol 
plus fluticasone, as measured by all the spirometric parameters at the end of the
6-week study period. FEV1 AUC0-12h was 1.55+/-0.03 l in the tiotropium group vs. 
1.57+/-0.04 l in the salmeterol plus fluticasone groups (p=0.63). Trough
(predose) FEV1 was 1.54+/-0.03 l in the tiotropium group vs. 1.46+/-0.03 l in the
combination group (p=0.07), and peak FEV(1) was 1.68+/-0.04 l vs. 1.66+/-0.04 l, 
respectively, (p=0.77). FVC AUC0-12h, trough and peak were also comparable
between groups at study end (p>0.05, for all). Further, rescue salbutamol use was
similar in the tiotropium and combination groups and both treatment regimens were
well tolerated.
CONCLUSIONS: Six weeks of treatment with tiotropium resulted in comparable
bronchodilation compared with salmeterol plus fluticasone in patients with
moderate-to-very severe COPD, despite tiotropium patients having lower lung
function and fewer patients considered reversible at baseline. The results of
this pilot study will aid planning for further large-scale comparative studies.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pupt.2006.10.001 
PMID: 17118684  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2007 Jan 15;175(2):144-9. Epub 2006 Oct 19.

Impact of salmeterol/fluticasone propionate versus salmeterol on exacerbations in
severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Kardos P(1), Wencker M, Glaab T, Vogelmeier C.

Author information: 
(1)Group Practice and Center for Respiratory and Sleep Medicine, Allergy, Maingau
Hospital, Scheffelstrasse 2, 60318 Frankfurt am Main, Germany. pkardos@aol.com

Comment in
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2007 Jun 1;175(11):1207; author reply 1207-8.
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2007 Jun 15;175(12):1347; author reply 1347-8.
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2007 Sep 1;176(5):522; author reply 522-3.
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2007 Jan 15;175(2):103-4.

RATIONALE: Exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) greatly 
contribute to declining health status and the progression of the disease, thereby
incurring significant direct and indirect health care costs. The prevention of
exacerbations, therefore, is an important treatment goal.
OBJECTIVES: To assess the impact of combination therapy with
salmeterol/fluticasone propionate compared with salmeterol alone on moderate and 
severe exacerbations in patients with severe COPD and a history of repeated
exacerbations.
METHODS: Randomized, double-blind, parallel-group study. After a 4-wk run-in
period, 994 clinically stable patients were randomized to one of two treatment
groups: 507 patients received the salmeterol/fluticasone combination 50/500 micro
g twice daily and 487 received salmeterol 50 micro g twice daily for 44 wk.
MAIN RESULTS: The total number of exacerbations was 334 in the combination
therapy and 464 in the salmeterol group (p < 0.0001). The annualized rate of
moderate and severe exacerbations per patient was 0.92 in the combination therapy
and 1.4 in the salmeterol group, corresponding to a 35% decrease. In addition,
the mean time to first exacerbation in the combination therapy group was
significantly longer compared with that of the salmeterol group (128 vs. 93 d, p 
< 0.0001). Other endpoints, including health-related quality of life, peak
expiratory flow, and use of rescue medication, were significantly improved in the
combination therapy group. Both treatments were well tolerated.
CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrates that combination therapy with
salmeterol/fluticasone compared with salmeterol monotherapy significantly reduces
the frequency of moderate/severe exacerbations in patients with severe COPD.

DOI: 10.1164/rccm.200602-244OC 
PMID: 17053207  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Lung. 2006 Jul-Aug;184(4):217-22.

Inhaled fluticasone and salmeterol suppress eosinophilic airway inflammation in
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: relations with lung function and
bronchodilator reversibility.

Perng DW(1), Wu CC, Su KC, Lee YC, Perng RP, Tao CW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chest Medicine, Taipei Veterans General Hospital, Taipei,
Taiwan. dwperng@vghtpe.gov.tw

The aim of this study was to determine whether combined inhaled corticosteroids
and long-acting beta(2) agonists can suppress eosinophilic inflammation in
chronic dostructive plumonary disease (COPD) and to investigate the association
between the level of eosinophilia and the degree of bronchodilator reversibility.
Sixty-two patients with stable COPD (forced expiratory volume in 1 [FEV(1)] of
30%-70% predicted before bronchodilation) were enrolled from our outpatient
clinic. Patients received inhaled fluticasone (100 microg)/salmeterol (50 microg)
twice daily for two months. Lung function measurements, bronchodilator tests, and
sputum induction were performed. The number of inflammatory cells and mediators, 
including interleukin-8 (IL-8), tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha), and
eosinophilic cationic protein (ECP), were measured. Treatment with inhaled
fluticasone and salmeterol significantly suppressed eosinophilic inflammation in 
COPD patients with sputum eosinophilia (mean 8.9% +/- 2.0% vs. 1.6% +/- 0.5%, p =
0.003), but insignificant differences in FEV(1) and FVC between patients with and
without eosinophilia suggested that suppression of eosinophilic inflammation had 
no effect on FEV(1) or FVC. Reduction in the percentage of eosinophils was
significantly correlated with decreased levels of ECP (r = 0.48, p < 0.001).
Levels of neutrophils, IL-8, and TNF-alpha were not affected. Sputum eosinophilia
was not related to the degree of bronchodilator reversibility. The degree of
bronchodilator reversibility did not predict the increase in FEV(1) and FVC after
treatment with inhaled corticosteroids/long-acting beta(2) agonists. Suppression 
of eosinophilic inflammation and bronchodilator responsiveness indices were not
correlated with clinical outcomes in COPD patients treated with inhaled
corticosteroids/long-acting beta(2) agonists.

DOI: 10.1007/s00408-005-2586-8 
PMID: 17006748  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Am J Med. 2006 Oct;119(10 Suppl 1):63-72.

The role of patient-centered outcomes in the course of chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease: how long-term studies contribute to our understanding.

Tashkin DP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Medicine,
David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, University of California-Los Angeles,
Los Angeles, California 90095-1690, USA. dtashkin@mednet.ucla.edu

In chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), the rate of decline in forced
expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1) and progression to disability and death are 
accelerated. COPD management goals include preventing or slowing the progressive 
loss of lung function, relieving symptoms, improving exercise tolerance and the
patient's health status, preventing and treating exacerbations and complications,
minimizing side effects of treatment, and reducing mortality. Although lung
function is important for diagnosis of COPD and classification of its severity,
clinicians and patients are also very interested in symptoms, ability to
function, and general well-being (health status). Consequently, increasing
attention is being given to these patient-centered outcomes. It is possible to
modify patient-centered outcomes; however, it remains to be seen whether doing so
can also alter the natural course of the disease and reduce mortality. Two
long-term clinical trials--Towards a Revolution in COPD Health (TORCH) and
Understanding the Potential Long-Term Impacts on Function with Tiotropium
(UPLIFT)--will help to answer the question of whether pharmacologic interventions
are effective in changing the clinical course of COPD. The TORCH study examines
the long-term effects of combination therapy with an inhaled long-acting
beta-agonist (salmeterol) and a corticosteroid (fluticasone) on reduction of
all-cause mortality over 3 years. The 4-year UPLIFT study examines the effects of
maintenance treatment with the once-daily anticholinergic bronchodilator
tiotropium on the yearly rate of decline in trough FEV1 and the yearly rate of
decline in FEV1 90 minutes after maximal or near-maximal bronchodilator
administration. This article examines the rationale for each of these studies and
provides an overview of study methodology as well as preliminary demographic
data.

DOI: 10.1016/j.amjmed.2006.08.009 
PMID: 16996901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. Int J Clin Pract. 2006 Oct;60(10):1218-24.

Fluticasone propionate/salmeterol hydrofluoroalkane via metered-dose inhaler with
integrated dose counter: Performance and patient satisfaction.

Sheth K(1), Wasserman RL, Lincourt WR, Locantore NW, Carranza-Rosenzweig J, Crim 
C.

Author information: 
(1)Lafayette Allergy and Asthma Clinic, Lafayette, IN 47905, USA.
ksheth@unityhc.com

Currently, patients have to keep track of doses to determine when to replace
their metered-dose inhalers (MDIs). This study evaluated the performance and
patient satisfaction of a novel MDI with an integrated dose counter. In an
open-label study at 38 outpatient centres, patients > or =12 years old with
asthma or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) received two actuations of
fluticasone propionate/salmeterol 125/25 microg (115/21 microg ex-actuator)
hydrofluoroalkane (ADVAIR) HFA) via MDI with counter twice a day until all 120
actuations were completed. Concordance between counter and diary recordings in
patients who reported use of > or =90% of labelled actuations (completer
population, n = 228) was high (discrepancy rate of 0.94%) and the incidence of
device firing without changes in counter readings was low (0.13%). Mean expected 
actuations based on canister weights (114) were slightly lower than mean counter 
(121) and diary reported actuations (120). Upon study completion, 95% of patients
were satisfied with the dose counter and 92% agreed it would help prevent them
from running out of medication. Safety assessments (intent-to-treat population, n
= 237) indicated that the drug was well tolerated. This integrated MDI counter
may help patients maintain better disease control by enabling them to accurately 
track their medication supply.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1742-1241.2006.01138.x 
PMID: 16981966  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2007 Feb;36(2):254-61. Epub 2006 Sep 15.

Salmeterol stimulation dissociates beta2-adrenergic receptor phosphorylation and 
internalization.

Moore RH(1), Millman EE, Godines V, Hanania NA, Tran TM, Peng H, Dickey BF, Knoll
BJ, Clark RB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA. 
rmoore@bcm.tmc.edu

Salmeterol is a long-acting beta(2)-adrenergic receptor (beta(2)AR) agonist
commonly used in the treatment of asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease. It differs from other beta-agonists in that it has a very low intrinisic
efficacy, especially when compared with the other available long-acting
beta-agonist, formoterol. Receptor desensitization and down-regulation has been
described with the chronic use of beta-agonists. This effect may not be the same 
with all beta-agonists and may be related to their stabilization of altered
receptor states. The extreme hydrophobicity and high-affinity quasi-irreversible 
binding of salmeterol have rendered studies examining the mechanisms by which it 
mediates receptor desensitization, down-regulation, and internalization
difficult. We determined the capacity of salmeterol to induce beta(2)AR
endocytosis, G protein-coupled receptor kinase (GRK)-site phosphorylation,
degradation, and beta-arrestin2 translocation in HEK293 cells as compared with
other agonists of varying intrinsic efficacies. Despite stimulating GRK-mediated 
phosphorylation of Ser355,356 after 30 min and 18 h to an extent similar to that 
observed with agonists of high intrinsic efficacy, such as epinephrine and
formoterol, salmeterol did not induce significant beta(2)AR internalization or
degradation and was incapable of stimulating the translocation of enhanced green 
fluorescent protein-beta-arrestin2 chimera (EGFP-beta-arrestin2) to the cell
surface. Salmeterol-induced receptor endocytosis was rescued, at least in part,
by the overexpression of EGFP-beta-arrestin2. Our data indicate that salmeterol
binding induces an active receptor state that is unable to recruit beta-arrestin 
or undergo significant endocytosis or degradation despite stimulating
considerable GRK-site phosphorylation. Defects in these components of
salmeterol-induced receptor desensitization may be important determinants of its 
sustained bronchodilation with chronic use.

DOI: 10.1165/rcmb.2006-0158OC 
PMCID: PMC1899312
PMID: 16980556  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. Proc Am Thorac Soc. 2006 Sep;3(7):624-9.

Pharmacotherapy for mortality reduction in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Sin DD(1), Man SF.

Author information: 
(1)The James Hogg iCAPTURE Center for Cardiovascular and Pulmonary Research, St. 
Paul's Hospital, Room 368A, 1081 Burrard Street, Vancouver, BC, V6Z 1Y6 Canada.
dsin@mrl.ubc.ca

Despite rapid advances in our understanding of its pathophysiology, chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) remains incurable. Although bronchodilators 
and theophyllines are commonly used to treat symptoms of dyspnea and cough and to
acutely improve lung function, they do not modify the long-term decline in
FEV(1). The principal goals of current COPD pharmacotherapy are to reduce
exacerbations, improve health status, and prolong survival. There is strong
evidence, including data from randomized clinical trials, that indicates inhaled 
corticosteroids alone, or in combination with a long-acting beta(2)-adrenoceptor 
agonist, improve patient symptoms, reduce morbidity, and perhaps even prolong
survival in COPD. A recent individual patient-based meta-analysis of randomized, 
placebo-controlled trials of inhaled corticosteroids in COPD indicated that
mortality over 3-4 yr was 27% lower in the group that received inhaled
corticosteroids compared with the group that received placebo. Several short-term
follow-up trials have also suggested a reduction in mortality with a combination 
of long-acting beta(2)-agonist and inhaled corticosteroids, and a large,
long-term study that is currently ongoing (the Toward a Revolution in COPD Health
[TORCH] study) will provide data on the effects of fluticasone propionate and
salmeterol in combination on all-cause mortality. This article reviews some of
the relevant epidemiologic and pathophysiologic processes that affect mortality
in COPD and critically examines the effect of current COPD therapies on
mortality.

DOI: 10.1513/pats.200603-096SS 
PMID: 16963545  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. MedGenMed. 2006 Mar 29;8(1):86.

Management of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease associated with chronic
bronchitis with inhaled fluticasone propionate/salmeterol (ADVAIR DISKUS) 250/50:
results of a patient experience trial.

Stoloff S(1), Samuels S, Kerney D, Brown CP.

Author information: 
(1)The University of Nevada School of Medicine, Reno, Nevada, USA.

CONTEXT: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is recognized as a major
healthcare problem in the United States and around the world.
OBJECTIVE: This survey regarding initial experience in patients with COPD
collected feedback about newly initiated therapy with fluticasone
propionate/salmeterol (FSC; ADVAIR DISKUS).
DESIGN: Three telephone surveys were conducted; Survey 1 prior to initiating
therapy with FSC 250/50, and Surveys 2 and 3 at 2 weeks and 30 days after
initiating therapy with FSC 250/50, respectively.
SETTING: One thousand primary care physicians recruited outpatients into the
trial.
PATIENTS: Patients were either newly diagnosed with COPD associated with chronic 
bronchitis or were still experiencing breathing difficulties on an
anticholinergic medication.
INTERVENTIONS: Patients initiated FSC 250/50 and received a 1-month supply of FSC
250/50 with an albuterol inhaler for rescue use.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Outcome measures were patient perceptions of satisfaction,
compliance, and convenience and changes in breathing on 1 (negative) to 9
(positive) point scales.
RESULTS: Five hundred sixteen patients completed all 3 surveys. The mean age was 
61 years, 63% were female, and 62% had been diagnosed with COPD associated with
chronic bronchitis for 3 years or less (Table 1).
CONCLUSION: Patients reported high satisfaction, compliance, and convenience with
FSC 250/50 within 2 weeks of initiating therapy, all maintained over the trial
period. Additionally, patients had positive changes in breathing, including
improvements in the ability to breathe upon awakening in the morning.


PMCID: PMC1681960
PMID: 16915216  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. Value Health. 2006 Jul-Aug;9(4):227-35.

Estimating the cost-effectiveness of fluticasone propionate for treating chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease in the presence of missing data.

Briggs AH(1), Lozano-Ortega G, Spencer S, Bale G, Spencer MD, Burge PS.

Author information: 
(1)Public Health & health Policy, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, UK.
a.briggs@clinmed.gla.ac.uk

OBJECTIVES: To explore the cost-effectiveness of fluticasone propionate (FP) for 
the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), we estimated costs
and quality-adjusted life-years (QALYs) over 3 years, based on an economic
appraisal of a previously reported clinical trial (Inhaled Steroids in
Obstructive Lung Disease in Europe [ISOLDE]).
METHODS: Seven hundred forty-two patients enrolled in the ISOLDE trial who
received either FP or placebo had data available on health-care costs and quality
of life over the period of the study. The SF-36-based utility scores for quality 
of life were used to calculate QALYs. A combined imputation and bootstrapping
procedure was employed to handle missing data and to estimate statistical
uncertainty in the estimated cumulative costs and QALYs over the study period.
The imputation approach was based on propensity scoring and nesting this approach
within the bootstrap ensured that multiple imputations were performed such that
statistical estimates included imputation uncertainty.
RESULTS: Complete data were available on mortality within the follow-up period of
the study and a nonsignificant trend toward improved survival of 0.06 (95%
confidence interval [CI]-0.01 to 0.15) life-years was observed. In an analysis
based on a propensity scoring approach to missing data we estimated the
incremental costs of FP versus placebo to be 1021 sterling pound(95% CI 619-1338 
sterling pound) with an additional effect of 0.11 QALYs (CI 0.04-0.20).
Cost-effectiveness estimates for the within-trial period of 17,700 sterling pound
per life-year gained (6900 sterling pound to infinity) and 9500 sterling pound
per QALY gained (CI 4300-26,500 sterling pound) were generated that include
uncertainty due to the imputation process. An alternative imputation approach did
not materially affect these estimates.
CONCLUSIONS: Previous analyses of the ISOLDE study showed significant improvement
on disease-specific health status measures and a trend toward a survival
advantage for treatment with FP. This analysis shows that joint considerations of
quality of life and survival result in a substantial increase in QALYs favoring
treatment with FP. Based on these data, the inhaled corticosteroid FP appears
cost-effective for the treatment of COPD. Confirmation or refutation of this
result may be achieved once the Towards a Revolution in COPD Health (TORCH) study
reports, a large randomized controlled trial powered to detect mortality changes 
associated with the use of FP alone, or in combination with salmeterol, which is 
also collecting resource use and utility data suitable for estimating
cost-effectiveness.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1524-4733.2006.00106.x 
PMID: 16903992  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. Curr Med Res Opin. 2006 Aug;22(8):1599-607.

Economic evaluation of tiotropium and salmeterol in the treatment of chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) in Greece.

Maniadakis N(1), Tzanakis N, Fragoulakis V, Hatzikou M, Siafakas N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Management, University Hospital of Heraklion, PC 71100, 
Crete, Greece. mmaniadakis@yahoo.com

OBJECTIVE: The objective of the study was to assess the cost-effectiveness of two
therapeutic alternatives for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease in the Greek
National Health Service (NHS) setting.
METHODS: A Markov probabilistic model was used to compare tiotropium with
salmeterol. A Monte Carlo simulation with 5000 cases was run in the probabilistic
analysis. The model was designed to compute the expected time spent in each
state, the expected number of exacerbations occurring and the expected treatment 
cost per patient. Probabilities were extracted from clinical trials, resource
utilisation and cost data from a Greek university hospital.
RESULTS: Quality adjusted life years were 0.70 (95% Uncertainty Interval [UI]:
0.63 to 0.77) in the tiotropium arm and 0.68 (95% UI: 0.60 to 0.75) in the
salmeterol arm; a difference of 0.02 (95% UI: -0.08 to 0.13). Exacerbations
reached 0.85 (95% UI: 0.80 to 0.91) in the tiotropium arm and 1.02 (95% UI: 0.84 
to 1.21) in the salmeterol arm, a difference of -0.17 (95% UI: -0.37 to 0.02).
Estimates of the mean annual cost per patient were euro2504 (euro2122 to
euro2965) in the tiotropium arm and euro2655 (euro2111 to euro3324) in the
salmeterol arm, a difference of -euro151 (-euro926 to euro580). Stochastic
analysis showed that tiotropium may have an advantage in reducing exacerbations. 
The probability that tiotropium is cost-effective was 65% at a ceiling value of
euro0 and reached 77% at a ceiling ratio of euro1000. Results stay fairly
constant in various sensitivity analyses.
CONCLUSION: Even though tiotropium is more expensive to buy than salmeterol in
the Greek NHS (using Greek costs there was no statistically significant
difference in total costs between tiotropium and salmeterol), overall, during the
course of a year, it is actually associated with a lower prevalence of
exacerbations and lower treatment costs and thus may represent a viable and
cost-effective alternative in the Greek NHS setting.

DOI: 10.1185/030079906X112778 
PMID: 16870084  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2006 Jul 19;(3):CD006101.

Ipratropium bromide versus long-acting beta-2 agonists for stable chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease.

Appleton S(1), Jones T, Poole P, Pilotto L, Adams R, Lasserson TJ, Smith B,
Muhammad J.

Author information: 
(1)Queen Elizabeth Hospital, Dept. of Medicine, Woodville Rd., Woodville,
Adelaide, Australia 5011. sappleto@medicine.adelaide.edu au

BACKGROUND: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a condition
associated with high morbidity, mortality and cost to the community. Patients
often report symptomatic improvement with long acting beta-2 agonists (LABAs) and
anticholinergic bronchodilator medications, both of which are recommended in COPD
guidelines. These medications have different mechanisms of action and therefore
theoretically could have an additive effect when combined. As these medications
are prescribed in COPD as long term therapy, it is important to assemble reliable
evidence on their relative and additive effects.
OBJECTIVES: To compare the relative efficacy and safety of regular long term use 
(at least four weeks) of ipratropium bromide and LABA in patients with stable
COPD. Comparisons were made between single agents and in combination versus LABAs
alone.
SEARCH STRATEGY: We searched the Cochrane Airways Group Specialised Register of
Trials (August 2005) and reference lists of articles. We also contacted drug
companies for relevant trial data.
SELECTION CRITERIA: All randomised controlled trials comparing treatment for at
least four weeks with an anticholinergic agent (ipratropium bromide) alone or in 
combination with LABA versus LABA alone, delivered via metered dose inhaler or
nebuliser, in non-asthmatic adult subjects with stable COPD.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Three review authors independently performed data
extraction and study quality assessment. We contacted study authors and
pharmaceutical companies for missing data.
MAIN RESULTS: Seven studies met the inclusion criteria of the review (2652
participants). Monotherapy comparison (six studies): There was a significantly
greater change in favour of salmeterol in morning PEF and FEV1. There were no
significant differences in quality of life, exacerbations, or symptoms.
Formoterol appeared to confer some benefits over ipratropium treatment in terms
of morning peak flow. Combination comparison (three studies): There was a
significant improvement in post-bronchodilator lung function, supplemental
short-acting beta-agonist use and HRQL in favour of combination therapy compared 
with salmeterol alone.
AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: The available data from the trials suggest that there is
little difference between regular long term use of IpB alone and salmeterol if
the aim is to improve COPD symptoms and exercise tolerance. However, salmeterol
was more effective in improving lung function variables. In terms of
post-bronchodilator lung function, combination therapy conferred modest benefits 
and a significant improvement in HRQL, and reduced supplemental short-acting
beta-agonist requirement, although this effect was not consistent. Additional
studies are needed to assess the relative effects of combining therapies, using
validated subjective measurements, and should consider concordance and the
convenience of people having to use different inhaler devices.

DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD006101 
PMID: 16856113  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2006 Jul 19;(3):CD001104.

Long-acting beta2-agonists for poorly reversible chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease.

Appleton S(1), Poole P, Smith B, Veale A, Lasserson TJ, Chan MM.

Author information: 
(1)Queen Elizabeth Hospital, Dept. of Medicine, Woodville Rd., Woodville,
Adelaide, Australia 5011. sappleto@medicine.adelaide.edu au

Comment in
    Evid Based Med. 2007 Feb;12(1):12.
    ACP J Club. 2007 Jan-Feb;146(1):18.

Update of
    Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2002;(3):CD001104.

BACKGROUND: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is characterised by
partially reversible airflow limitation. Many patients have little reversibility 
to short acting bronchodilators, but long acting bronchodilators are frequently
advocated.
OBJECTIVES: To determine the effectiveness of long acting beta-2 adrenoceptor
agonists (LABAs) in COPD patients demonstrating poor reversibility to
short-acting bronchodilators.
SEARCH STRATEGY: The Cochrane Airways Group Specialised Register was searched
('all years' to 2005) along with the reference lists from identified randomised
controlled trials (RCTs).
SELECTION CRITERIA: All RCTs comparing inhaled LABAs (salmeterol or formoterol)
with placebo in the treatment of patients with stable, poorly reversible COPD.
Studies were a minimum of four weeks in duration.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Two authors independently performed data extraction
and study quality assessment. If we required additional data, we contacted
authors and pharmaceutical companies sponsoring the identified RCTs.
MAIN RESULTS: Twenty-three published and unpublished studies (6061 participants) 
were included in the review. There was a significant change in forced expiratory 
volume in 1 second (FEV1) in favour of salmeterol 50 mcg twice daily (BID) of 51 
mls (95% confidence intervals (CI) 32 to 70), end of study morning peak
expiratory flow (PEF) 14.89 L/min (95% CI 10.86 to 18.91). Supplemental
short-acting bronchodilator usage was reduced by just under one puff per day.
There were significant differences in the total, activity and impact domain
scores of the St George's respiratory questionnaire in favour of salmeterol 50
mcg BID. Findings from other health status measurements and symptom scores were
conflicting. There was no significant difference in exercise tolerance. The
number of participants experiencing exacerbations was significantly reduced with 
salmeterol 50 mcg treatment compared with placebo (numbers needed to treat to
benefit 21).
AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: This review shows that the treatment of patients with COPD 
with salmeterol 50 mcg produces modest increases in lung function. There were
varying effects for other important outcomes such as health related quality of
life or reduction in symptoms. However, there was a consistent reduction in
exacerbations which may help people with COPD who suffer frequent deterioration
of symptoms prompting healthcare utilisation. The strength of evidence for the
use of salmeterol 100 mcg, formoterol 12 mcg, 18 mcg, 24 mcg was insufficient to 
provide clear indications for practice.

DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD001104.pub2 
PMID: 16855959  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Eur Respir J. 2006 Nov;28(5):920-8. Epub 2006 Jun 28.

Phosphodiesterase 4 inhibition of beta2-integrin adhesion caused by leukotriene
B4 and TNF-alpha in human neutrophils.

Meliton AY(1), Muñoz NM, Lambertino A, Boetticher E, Learoyd J, Zhu X, Leff AR.

Author information: 
(1)Dept of Medicine, MC6076, The University of Chicago, 5841 S. Maryland Avenue, 
Chicago, IL 60637, USA.

Phosphodiesterase (PDE)4 inhibition attenuates neutrophilic inflammation in
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. The objective of the present study was to 
examine the efficacy and mechanism by which PDE4 inhibition blocks adhesion of
beta(2)-integrin to an endothelial counterligand. Neutrophils (polymorphonuclear 
leukocytes (PMNs)) were isolated from humans receiving no medication. Adhesion
was analysed by myeloperoxidase activity. The effects of cilomilast+/-salmeterol 
on the following were determined: 1) surface CD11b expression; 2) adhesion; 3)
intracellular cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) concentration; and 4)
extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK)-1/2-mediated group IVA-phospholipase 
A(2) (gIVA-PLA(2)) phosphorylation caused by leukotriene (LT)B(4) or tumour
necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha activation. Either cilomilast or
rolipram+/-salmeterol caused concentration-related blockade of LTB(4)-induced
adhesion to counterligand, but had no effect on TNF-alpha-activated PMNs. A
comparable increase in intracellular cAMP concentration for PMNs activated with
LTB(4) and TNF-alpha was caused by 1 muM cilomilast and 0.1 microM salmeterol.
Upregulation of surface CD11b expression and ERK-1/2 phosphorylation were blocked
by cilomilast or rolipram+/-salmeterol for PMNs activated by LTB(4), but not for 
cells stimulated by TNF-alpha. Cilomilast+/-salmeterol also blocked gIVA-PLA(2)
phosphorylation caused by LTB(4) but not TNF-alpha. In conclusion, the current
study demonstrates that both leukotriene B(4) and tumour necrosis factor-alpha
upregulate cyclic adenosine monophosphate. However, cyclic adenosine
monophosphate does not block beta(2)-integrin adhesion caused by tumour necrosis 
factor-alpha. It was concluded that tumour necrosis factor-alpha prevents
inhibition of extracellular signal-regulated kinase-1/2-mediated group
IVA-phospholipase A(2) activation, which is essential for beta(2)-integrin
adhesion in polymorphonuclear leukocytes.

DOI: 10.1183/09031936.06.00028406 
PMID: 16807266  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. Pulm Pharmacol Ther. 2006;19(6):419-24. Epub 2006 May 10.

Additional clinical benefit of enoxaparin in COPD patients receiving salmeterol
and fluticasone propionate in combination.

Brown RA(1), Allegra L, Matera MG, Page CP, Cazzola M.

Author information: 
(1)Sackler Institute of Pulmonary Pharmacology, King's College London, Guy's
Campus, London, UK.

It is now well recognised that heparin possesses numerous anti-inflammatory
properties in addition to its anticoagulant properties. Thus, the aim of this
study was to investigate the effects of the low molecular weight heparin,
enoxaparin (ENX), as an add-on therapy for a period of 12 weeks, to inhaled
salmeterol/fluticasone propionate (SLM/FP) combination in patients with stable
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Forty-six patients were randomised 
to receive 12 weeks of treatment in one of two treatment groups: (1) fixed
combination of SLM 50 microg and FP 500 microg Diskus, one inhalation twice
daily; or (2) as group 1 plus 20 mg ENX administered subcutaneously once daily
for 12 weeks. Patients attended the clinic before and after 4, 8 and 12 weeks of 
treatment for evaluations of lung function, blood gas tensions, dyspnoea and
supplemental salbutamol use. Thirty-six patients completed the 12-week treatment 
period, 20 from group 1 and 16 from group 2. A significant increase in forced
expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1) over baseline was observed after 12 weeks of
treatment in group 1 (0.145 L, 95% CI: 0.994-1.406, p<0.01), whilst significant
increases in FEV1 over baseline were observed in group 2 after 4, 8 and 12 weeks 
of treatment with a maximum increase at 12 weeks of 0.244 L (95% CI: 1.175-1.596,
p<0.01). Both treatment groups experienced similar improvements in blood gas
tensions, dyspnoea and supplemental salbutamol use. Our results suggest that
addition of ENX to conventional therapy of COPD may provide additional clinical
benefit and must be further investigated as a treatment for COPD.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pupt.2006.04.004 
PMID: 16807023  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. Prim Care Respir J. 2004 Dec;13(4):185-97.

Patient-centred outcomes in primary care management of COPD - what do recent
clinical trial data tell us?

Haughney J(1), Gruffydd-Jones K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Practice and Primary Care, University of Aberdeen,
Foresterhill Health Centre, Westburn Road, Aberdeen AB25 2AY, UK.
j.haughney@abdn.ac.uk

Comment in
    Prim Care Respir J. 2004 Dec;13(4):177-8.

Traditionally, the severity of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and
effectiveness of interventions have been determined using measures of lung
function. However, a relatively small reduction or change in lung function - such
as those observed in mild to moderate COPD - may not always reflect the impact of
the disease or intervention on patients' physical and psychological well-being.
This paper examines the utility of various outcome measures that can be used in
primary care to monitor and manage COPD. In particular, it demonstrates the
importance of measuring patient-centred outcomes, such as health-related quality 
of life and exacerbations, which may reflect more accurately the effects of the
disease and treatment on patients' everyday lives. Recent large-scale clinical
trials of budesonide/formoterol and fluticasone/salmeterol combination therapies 
and tiotropium have utilised these outcome measures to show the significant
benefits these treatments bestow to patients in the presence of relatively modest
gains in lung function.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pcrj.2004.06.006 
PMID: 16701668  [PubMed]


367. Int J Clin Pract. 2006 Apr;60(4):415-21.

Evidence of tachyphylaxis associated with salmeterol treatment of chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease patients.

Tsagaraki V(1), Amfilochiou A, Markantonis SL.

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmacy, Laboratory of Biopharmaceutics and Pharmacokinetics,
University of Athens, Athens, Greece.

Bronchodilator therapy is lifelong mandatory for chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease patients. There is evidence of loss of bronchodilator effectiveness over 
time with beta2-agonists but not with anticholinergics. The aim of this study was
to examine the development of tachyphylaxis to the long-acting beta2-agonist
salmeterol using as a control therapeutic regimen the combination of ipratropium 
bromide and salbutamol sulphate. Fifty-six subjects participated in a 20-week,
crossover randomised clinical trial. The parameters forced expiratory volume at 1
s (FEV1), peak expiratory flow rate (PEFR) and FEV1/forced vital capacity were
measured via spirometry and the parameters triangle DeltaFEV1%pre, triangle
DeltaPEFR%pre and triangle DeltaAUC(0-2 h) were calculated. FEV1 increased
significantly after two weeks of treatment with the combination treatment but not
with the salmeterol. The observed diminished increase could be attributed to the 
development of tolerance to the long acting beta2-agonist. Salmeterol seems to be
an effective bronchodilator, however, its duration of action over time and its
peak effect might be subject to tachyphylaxis.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1368-5031.2006.00849.x 
PMID: 16620353  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. Pol Merkur Lekarski. 2006 Jan;20(115):5-7.

[Tiotropium as new quality medication in the COPD management].

[Article in Polish]

Lubiński W(1), Płusa T.

Author information: 
(1)Wojskowy Institut Medyczny w Warszawie, Klinika Chorób Wewnetrznych,
Pneumonologii i Alergologii CSK MON.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is heterogenous syndrome
characterised by irreversible progressive airflow limitation caused mainly by
tobacco smoking. In the continous bronchomotor tone of normal airways has a
cholinergic component mediated via muscarinic cholinergic receptors. Cholinolitic
bronchodilators act by blocking muscarinic receptors participate. Tiotropium
bromide is an cholinolitic bronchodilatator that antagonises muscarinic receptors
and dissociates more slowly from M1 and M3 than from M2 and subsequently has a
long duration of action. Tiotropium reduces the number of exacerbations,
increases time to first exacerbation and improves lung function significant
compared with ipratiopium. Tiotropium produces superior bronchodilation,
improvements in dyspnea, health related quality of life compared to ipratropium
and salmeterol in patients with COPD. The use of tiotropium is associated with
sustained reduction of lung hyperinflation at rest and during exercise.
Tiotropium in combination with pulmonary rehabilitation produces clinically
improvement in dyspnea, health status endurance of constant work compared to
pulmonary rehabilitation alone. Many studies support the use of tiotropium
once-daily as first line maintenance treatment in patients with COPD.


PMID: 16617725  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Pulm Pharmacol Ther. 2007;20(3):258-64. Epub 2006 Mar 6.

Doppler echocardiographic assessment of the effects of inhaled long-acting
beta2-agonists on pulmonary artery pressure in COPD patients.

Cazzola M(1), Mantero A, Santus P, Carlucci P, Mondoni M, Bosotti L, Centanni S.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Pneumology and Allergology, A. Cardarelli Hospital, Via del Parco
Margherita 24, 80121 Napoli, Italy. mcazzola@qubisoft.it

Increase in pulmonary artery pressure (PAP), which is common in severe chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), is a predictor of mortality independent of 
airflow limitation. beta-agonists might slightly attenuate this increase because 
they exert a vasodilating effect on pulmonary circulation when systematically
administered. We have investigated the acute effects of salmeterol and formoterol
on echocardiographic systolic pulmonary artery pressure (sPAP) in 20 patients
with COPD and a sPAP greater than 20mmHg at rest. Acute haemodynamic responses to
inhaled formoterol or salmeterol were assessed in all patients, in a randomized, 
double-blind double-dummy fashion. On two consecutive days, patients received, in
a randomized order, formoterol 12microg via Turbuhaler plus placebo via Diskus or
salmeterol 50microg via Diskus plus placebo via Turbuhaler. Transthoracic Doppler
echocardiography measurements of sPAP were made before and 15, 30, 60 and 180min 
after bronchodilator inhalation. Lung function, pulse oximetry and heart rate
were also monitored at the same times. Mean sPAP significantly (p<0.05) decreased
in comparison with baseline at 15, 30, and 60min post inhalation but returned
towards control levels at 180min after both salmeterol and formoterol. There was 
no correlation between the maximum increase in FEV(1) and maximum decrease in
sPAP either after inhalation of salmeterol (r(2)=0.071) or after that of
formoterol (r(2)=0.0006). The increases in FEV(1) in comparison with baseline
were always significant (p<0.05) from 15 to 180min post inhalation after either
salmeterol or formoterol. Neither pulse oximetry nor heart rate changed in a
significant manner (p>0.05). This study demonstrated that salmeterol and
formoterol were equally beneficial for pulmonary haemodynamics in patients with
COPD. A direct vasodilatation due to the activation of beta-adrenoceptors that
are present in pulmonary vessels is a likely mechanism of their action in
inducing the decrease in sPAP.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pupt.2006.02.002 
PMID: 16600647  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. Respir Res. 2006 Apr 4;7:57.

Inhalation of beta 2 agonists impairs the clearance of nontypable Haemophilus
influenzae from the murine respiratory tract.

Maris NA(1), Florquin S, van't Veer C, de Vos AF, Buurman W, Jansen HM, van der
Poll T.

Author information: 
(1)Center of Infection and Immunity Amsterdam (CINIMA), Academic Medical Center, 
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. namaris@yahoo.com

BACKGROUND: Nontypable Haemophilus influenzae (NTHi) is a common bacterial
pathogen causing human respiratory tract infections under permissive conditions
such as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Inhalation of beta2-receptor
agonists is a widely used treatment in patients with chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease. The aim of this study was to determine the effect of
inhalation of beta2 agonists on the host immune response to respiratory tract
infection with NTHi.
METHODS: Mouse alveolar macrophages were stimulated in vitro with NTHi in the
presence or absence of the beta2 receptor agonists salmeterol or salbutamol. In
addition, mice received salmeterol or salbutamol by inhalation and were
intranasally infected with NTHi. End points were pulmonary inflammation and
bacterial loads.
RESULTS: Both salmeterol and salbutamol inhibited NTHi induced tumor necrosis
factor-alpha (TNFalpha) release by mouse alveolar macrophages in vitro by a beta 
receptor dependent mechanism. In line, inhalation of either salmeterol or
salbutamol was associated with a reduced early TNFalpha production in lungs of
mice infected intranasally with NTHi, an effect that was reversed by concurrent
treatment with the beta blocker propranolol. The clearance of NTHi from the lungs
was impaired in mice treated with salmeterol or salbutamol, an adverse effect
that was prevented by propranolol and independent of the reduction in TNFalpha.
CONCLUSION: These data suggest that inhalation of salmeterol or salbutamol may
negatively influence an effective clearance of NTHi from the airways.

DOI: 10.1186/1465-9921-7-57 
PMCID: PMC1456968
PMID: 16595015  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. BMC Pulm Med. 2006 Feb 6;6:3.

Can inhaled fluticasone alone or in combination with salmeterol reduce systemic
inflammation in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease? Study protocol for a
randomized controlled trial [NCT00120978].

Sin DD(1), Man SF, Marciniuk DD, Ford G, FitzGerald M, Wong E, York E, Mainra RR,
Ramesh W, Melenka LS, Wilde E, Cowie RL, Williams D, Rousseau R; ABC (Advair,
Biomarkers in COPD) Investigators.

Author information: 
(1)Respiratory Division, Department of Medicine, University of British Columbia, 
Vancouver, Canada. dsin@mrl.ubc.ca

BACKGROUND: Systemic inflammation is associated with various complications in
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease including weight loss, cachexia,
osteoporosis, cancer and cardiovascular diseases. Inhaled corticosteroids
attenuate airway inflammation, reduce exacerbations, and improve mortality in
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Whether inhaled corticosteroids by
themselves or in combination with a long-acting beta2-adrenoceptor agonist
repress systemic inflammation in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease is
unknown. The Advair Biomarkers in COPD (ABC) study will determine whether the
effects of inhaled corticosteroids alone or in combination with a long-acting
beta2-adrenoceptor agonist reduce systemic inflammation and improve health status
in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
METHODS/DESIGN: After a 4-week run-in phase during which patients with stable
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease will receive inhaled fluticasone (500
micrograms twice daily), followed by a 4-week withdrawal phase during which all
inhaled corticosteroids and long acting beta2-adrenoceptor agonists will be
discontinued, patients will be randomized to receive fluticasone (500 micrograms 
twice daily), fluticasone/salmeterol combination (500/50 micrograms twice daily),
or placebo for four weeks. The study will recruit 250 patients across 11 centers 
in western Canada. Patients must be 40 years of age or older with at least 10
pack-year smoking history and have chronic obstructive pulmonary disease defined 
as forced expiratory volume in one second to vital capacity ratio of 0.70 or less
and forced expiratory volume in one second that is 80% of predicted or less.
Patients will be excluded if they have any known chronic systemic infections,
inflammatory conditions, history of previous solid organ transplantation,
myocardial infarction, or cerebrovascular accident within the past 3 months prior
to study enrollment. The primary end-point is serum C-reactive protein level.
Secondary end-points include circulating inflammatory cytokines such as
interleukin-6 and interleukin-8 as well as health-related quality of life and
lung function.
DISCUSSION: If inhaled corticosteroids by themselves or in combination with a
long-acting beta2-adrenoceptor agonist could repress systemic inflammation, they 
might greatly improve clinical prognosis by reducing various complications in
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2466-6-3 
PMCID: PMC1373664
PMID: 16460562  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand. 2006 Jan;50(1):120-2.

Angioedema from angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitor treated with
complement 1 (C1) inhibitor concentrate.

Nielsen EW(1), Gramstad S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, Nordland Hospital and University of Tromsø,
Tromsø, Norway. erikwn@fagmed.uit.no

BACKGROUND: Up to seven in every 1000 patients experience angioedema from
angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors, even after many years of use. In 
2003, every 20th Norwegian used an ACE inhibitor.
CASE REPORT: A 61-year-old woman with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and a
past acute myocardial infarction had used 7.5 mg of ramipril daily for the past 7
years. She also used acetylsalicylic acid, simvastatin, theophylline and
salmeterol. One night she woke up with edema of the tongue. On hospital arrival, 
250 mg of hydrocortisone and 5 mg of dexchlorpheniramine were given intravenously
(i.v.) and 0.3 mg of epinephrine was given subcutaneously (s.c.). The edema of
the tongue progressed over the next 8 h and made the tongue protrude. Fiberscopy 
revealed glassy edema of the arytenoids. Inspiratory stridor was heard and the
patient could not speak. She became increasingly uneasy and restless. Berinert
complement 1 (C1) inhibitor concentrate (1500 units) was administered i.v. Over
the following 20 min, stridor gradually subsided, the patient calmed and she was 
able to talk.
DISCUSSION: ACE inhibitor-provoked angioedema shares many clinical features with 
hereditary angioedema (HAE), including a limited effect of steroids,
antihistamines and epinephrine. HAE, caused by excess bradykinin formation as a
result of C1 inhibitor deficiency, usually has its laryngeal edema effectively
reversed by C1 inhibitor in less than 0.5 h. Although patients experiencing ACE
inhibitor-provoked angioedema have normal C1 inhibitor values, as in our patient,
excess bradykinin is probably important as ACE breaks down bradykinin. It is
unknown why ACE inhibitor-provoked angioedema appears in some and sometimes after
many years of use.
CONCLUSION: We believe that C1 inhibitor was effective in reversing the ACE
inhibitor-induced angioedema in our patient.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1399-6576.2005.00819.x 
PMID: 16451161  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. Thorax. 2006 Feb;61(2):122-8.

Addition of salmeterol to existing treatment in patients with COPD: a 12 month
study.

Stockley RA(1), Chopra N, Rice L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Queen Elizabeth Hospital, Birmingham B15 2HT, UK.
r.a.stockley@bham.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: This study investigated the addition of salmeterol to existing
treatment for exacerbations in patients with poorly reversible chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
METHODS: 634 patients aged >40 years with a history of COPD exacerbations
(including at least two in the previous year) and poor reversibility of airflow
obstruction (< or =10% predicted forced expiratory volume in 1 second) received
either salmeterol 50 mug or placebo twice daily from a Diskus inhaler for 12
months. The primary outcome was the number of moderate and severe exacerbations.
RESULTS: The median rate of moderate or severe exacerbations in the
intent-to-treat (ITT) population was lower in the salmeterol group (0.00, range
0.0-9.8, n = 316) than in the placebo group (0.93, range 0.0-13.0, n = 318), but 
the difference was not statistically significant (p = 0.27). The median rate of
exacerbations in the per protocol population (>90% compliance) was also found to 
be lower in the salmeterol group (0.00, range 0.0-5.0, n = 206) than in the
placebo group (0.93, range 0.0-5.6, n = 195) and did reach statistical
significance (p = 0.007). For secondary end points, patients receiving salmeterol
had significant improvement in lung hyperinflation measured by inspiratory
capacity which was evident at 4 weeks and maintained over 12 months (p = 0.035), 
and a significant improvement in health status measured by the St George's
Respiratory Questionnaire at 12 months (p = 0.002).
CONCLUSION: Salmeterol has a positive effect on symptoms and health status of
patients with COPD when added to usual treatment. Exacerbations are only reduced 
in patients who comply with treatment.

DOI: 10.1136/thx.2004.033266 
PMCID: PMC2104567
PMID: 16443706  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2006 Apr 1;173(7):736-43. Epub 2006 Jan 19.

Antiinflammatory effects of salmeterol/fluticasone propionate in chronic
obstructive lung disease.

Barnes NC(1), Qiu YS, Pavord ID, Parker D, Davis PA, Zhu J, Johnson M, Thomson
NC, Jeffery PK; SCO30005 Study Group.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, London Chest Hospital, London, UK.

RATIONALE: No currently available treatment is reported to reduce the exaggerated
airway wall inflammation of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
OBJECTIVES: We tested the hypothesis that inhaled combined long-acting
beta2-agonist (salmeterol) and corticosteroid (fluticasone propionate) will
reduce inflammation.
METHODS: Bronchial biopsies and induced sputum were taken from 140 current and
former smokers (mean age, 64 yr) with moderate to severe disease, randomized in a
13-wk double-blind study to placebo (n = 73) or salmeterol/fluticasone propionate
50/500 microg (n = 67) twice daily. Biopsies were repeated at 12 wk and sputa at 
8 and 13 wk. After adjustment for multiplicity, comparisons between active and
placebo were made for median change from baseline in the numbers of biopsy CD8+
and CD68+ cells/mm2 and sputum neutrophils.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: Combination therapy was associated with a
reduction in biopsy CD8+ cells of -118 cells/mm2 (95% confidence interval [CI],
-209 to -42; p = 0.02), a reduction of 36% over placebo (p = 0.001). CD68+ cells 
were unaffected by combination treatment. Sputum differential (but not total)
neutrophils reduced progressively and, at Week 13, significantly with combination
treatment (median treatment difference, 8.5%; 95% CI, 1.75%-15.25%; p = 0.04).
The combination also significantly reduced biopsy CD45+ and CD4+ cells and cells 
expressing genes for tumor necrosis factor-alpha and IFN-gamma and sputum total
eosinophils (all p < or = 0.03). These antiinflammatory effects were accompanied 
by a 173-ml (95% CI, 104-242; p < 0.001) improvement in prebronchodilator FEV1.
CONCLUSIONS: The combination of salmeterol and fluticasone propionate has a broad
spectrum of antiinflammatory effects in both current and former smokers with
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, which may contribute to clinical efficacy.

DOI: 10.1164/rccm.200508-1321OC 
PMID: 16424444  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2006 May;34(5):616-24. Epub 2006 Jan 19.

Combination therapy: Synergistic suppression of virus-induced chemokines in
airway epithelial cells.

Edwards MR(1), Johnson MW, Johnston SL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, National Heart Lung Institute, Imperial
College London, Norfolk Place, W2 1PG, London, UK. michael.edwards@ic.ac.uk

Viruses are associated with the majority of exacerbations of asthma and chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease. Virus induction of neutrophil and lymphocyte
chemokines in bronchial epithelium is important in exacerbation pathogenesis.
Combined corticosteroid/beta2 agonists synergistically suppress airway smooth
muscle chemokine production. Because bronchial epithelium expresses
glucocorticoid and beta2 receptors, we investigated whether combination therapy
can synergistically suppress rhinovirus-induced bronchial epithelial cell
neutrophil (CXCL5, CXCL8) and lymphocyte (CCL5, CXCL10) chemokine production. We 
investigated modulation of rhinovirus- and IL-1beta-induced bronchial epithelial 
cell chemokine production by salmeterol and fluticasone propionate, used at
therapeutic concentrations, alone and in combination. After 1 h pretreatment,
combined treatment significantly inhibited rhinovirus 16, 1B, and
IL-1beta-induced CCL5 and CXCL8 protein and mRNA production in BEAS-2B cells
compared with fluticasone alone. When used 4 h after treatment, the combination
significantly reduced virus-induced CCL5 but not CXCL8. Salmeterol alone had no
effect; therefore, this inhibition was synergistic. Kinetic analysis demonstrated
that combination therapy reduced by 5-fold the concentration of corticosteroid
required to inhibit CXCL8 mRNA expression. In primary cells, salmeterol alone
reduced rhinovirus-induced CCL5 and CXCL10 and increased CXCL5 production in a
dose-dependent manner but had no effect on CXCL8. Fluticasone alone reduced CCL5,
CXCL8, and CXCL10 but had no effect on CXCL5. Combination therapy augmented
inhibition of CXCL8, CCL5, and CXCL10 but had no effect on CXCL5. Corticosteroids
and beta2 agonists suppress rhinovirus-induced chemokines in bronchial epithelial
cells through synergistic and additive mechanisms. This effect was greater for
lymphocyte- than for neutrophil-related chemokines.

DOI: 10.1165/rcmb.2005-0385OC 
PMID: 16424382  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. Praxis (Bern 1994). 2005 Nov 16;94(46):1803-10.

[Economic value of tiotropium in the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease].

[Article in German]

Schramm W(1), Haake D, Brandt A.

Author information: 
(1)Rudolf Virchow Institut Basel. wendelin.schramm@rvi-institut.org

The economic value of tiotropium in patients with moderate to severe COPD was
analysed in a cost-effectiveness study for the Swiss public health insurance
system. The results show a drop in COPD exacerbations in comparison to
Ipratropium, Salmeterol and standard care (without use of anticholinergics and
beta-adrenergics). The numbers-needed-to-treat of tiotropium in comparison to the
other medications in order to avoid severe exacerbations amounted to 8 patients
(ipratropium versus tiotropium), 13 patients (standard care versus tiotropium)
and 33 patients (salmeterol versus tiotropium) during 12 months. As a result
fewer episodes of hospitalisations and shorter hospital stays can be expected.
The direct yearly total cost for COPD therapy is CHF 4788 for tiotropium and CHF 
5820 for ipratropium. Furthermore, they amount to CHF 4881 and CHF 4920 for
salmeterol and standard care. The higher acquisition cost for tiotropium is
compensated by fewer exacerbations. No other medication was similarly
cost-effective with regard to total cost and number of exacerbations.

DOI: 10.1024/0369-8394.94.46.1803 
PMID: 16329401  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. Proc Am Thorac Soc. 2005;2(4):320-5; discussion 340-1.

Corticosteroids: potential beta2-agonist and anticholinergic interactions in
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Johnson M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Respiratory Science, GlaxoSmithKline, Greenford Road, Greenford, Middlesex UB6
0HE, UK. malcolm.w.johnson@gsk.com

Corticosteroids are often used in combination with beta2-agonist and
anticholinergic bronchodilators in the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD). Corticosteroids activate the beta2-receptor gene, increasing
receptor number and decreasing desensitization. Long-acting beta2-agonists prime 
the glucocorticoid receptor and enhance nuclear translocation via activation of
CCAAT enhancer binding protein-alpha. Corticosteroids can also increase
prejunctional auto-inhibitory M2-receptor gene expression in airway smooth
muscle. There is evidence of a synergistic inhibition of cytokine and chemokine
release from alveolar macrophages, epithelial cells, and mucosal glands and
enhanced respiratory cytoprotection against viral and bacterial infection when a 
corticosteroid is combined with salmeterol. In airway smooth muscle,
corticosteroids inhibit the contractile effects of acetylcholine, whereas
M2-receptor antagonism increases the relaxant activity of isoproterenol.
Complementary interactions between corticosteroids and long-acting beta2-agonists
and between corticosteroids and anticholinergic bronchodilators may be important 
if these drugs are combined in the treatment of COPD.

DOI: 10.1513/pats.200504-040SR 
PMID: 16267356  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. Proc Am Thorac Soc. 2005;2(4):272-81; discussion 290-1.

Combination therapy for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: clinical aspects.

Donohue JF(1).

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary & Critical Care Medicine, University of North Carolina School of
Medicine, 4125 Bioinformatics Building, CB#7020, Chapel Hill, NC 27599-7020, USA.
jdonohue@med.unc.edu

Anticholinergics and beta-agonists reduce bronchoconstriction through different
mechanisms, and there is a long history of combination therapy with short-acting 
agents in these classes for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Such
combinations may allow lower doses and thereby improve safety. Oral theophylline 
has also been combined with short-acting bronchodilators for many years. Most
studies, however, show only mild improvements in bronchodilation at the expense
of increased adverse effects. Professional society guidelines recommend that as
the symptoms of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease progress, the patient
should receive regular treatment with one or more long-acting bronchodilators,
and an inhaled corticosteroid if the patient has repeated exacerbations. The
combination of a short-acting anticholinergic with a long-acting beta-agonist, or
the combination of a long-acting anticholinergic with a short- or long-acting
beta-agonist, has been shown in most studies to improve lung function versus
monotherapy with the individual components. Systematic reviews have concluded
that fluticasone and salmeterol, and budesonide and formoterol, are superior to
placebo and lead to clinically meaningful improvements in lung function,
exacerbation rate, and quality of life. Effects on survival are less clear. Some 
of the other issues to be resolved are the safety of combination therapy, its
pharmacoeconomic impact, and the role of newer agents.

DOI: 10.1513/pats.200505-047SR 
PMID: 16267348  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Respiration. 2005 Sep-Oct;72(5):466-70.

An acute bronchodilator test with tiotropium or salmeterol does not allow a
subdivision of patients according to responses.

Matera MG(1), Sanduzzi A, Ponticiello A, Vatrella A, Salzillo A, Cazzola M.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Pharmacology, Department of Experimental Medicine, Second University
of Naples, Naples, Italy.

BACKGROUND: The possibility that individual chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD) patients respond better to either tiotropium or salmeterol has been
suggested and an acute bronchodilator test might help to guide the choice of
therapy.
OBJECTIVES: We explored the responses to tiotropium and salmeterol within the
first 3 h using the recommended dosages (18 microg for tiotropium and 50 microg
for salmeterol) in order to verify whether there are differences in the
short-term bronchodilator effects between these two long-acting bronchodilators
in patients with stable COPD. Moreover, we investigated whether these differences
could discriminate between the two agents.
METHODS: Forty consecutive patients with COPD, but in a stable phase of the
disease, participated in this double-blind, double-dummy, randomized crossover
study. The study involved a screening visit and 2 study days separated by at
least 1 week. For determination of the onset of action, we measured FEV1 at 10,
20, 30, 60 and 90 min, and again 2 and 3 h after inhalation of single study drug.
RESULTS: At all time points, both tiotropium and salmeterol caused significant
(p< 0.001) changes from baseline. A mean increase of 12% above baseline was
reached 66 min (95% CI: 45-87) after tiotropium and 59 min (95% CI: 41-77) after 
salmeterol. Nine patients after tiotropium and 5 patients after salmeterol did
not have this type of improvement. A mean increase of 200 ml above baseline was
reached 76 min (95% CI: 52-101) after tiotropium and 76 min (95% CI: 52-100)
after salmeterol. Eighteen patients after tiotropium and 15 patients after
salmeterol did not have this improvement. Twenty-one patients after tiotropium
and 24 patients after salmeterol reached an improvement that was at the same time
12% and 200 ml greater than baseline.
CONCLUSIONS: These data clearly show that the bronchodilator effects of
tiotropium and salmeterol within the first hours after their acute administration
are similar in patients with stable COPD when they are evaluated as mean changes 
from baseline in FEV1. Therefore, they question the direct therapeutic relevance 
of a subdivision of patients according to bronchodilator responses to tiotropium 
or salmeterol.

Copyright (c) 2005 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000087669 
PMID: 16210884  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. Proc (Bayl Univ Med Cent). 2004 Jul;17(3):366-73.

Tiotropium (Spiriva): a once-daily inhaled anticholinergic medication for chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease.

Durham MC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy Services, Baylor University Medical Center, Dallas,
Texas 75246, USA. marthadu@baylorhealth.edu

Tiotropium represents a new generation of inhaled therapy. No other inhaled
product has demonstrated effectiveness with once-daily dosing. Treatment has been
associated with improved lung function, decrease in the number of exacerbations, 
increase in the time to first exacerbation, and improved quality of life. Adverse
effects appear to be mild in nature, and the only significant adverse effect is
dry mouth. Clinical trials show that tiotropium is more effective than placebo.
When compared with current treatment for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease,
tiotropium is at least as effective as salmeterol and more effective than
ipratropium; moreover, the once-a-day dosing increases the likelihood of patient 
compliance. The guidelines of the Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung 
Disease recommend bronchodilator medications as first-line therapy in the
symptomatic management of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Tiotropium, an
anticholinergic bronchodilator, should be considered a first-line agent for
patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.


PMCID: PMC1200675
PMID: 16200123  [PubMed]


381. Pulm Pharmacol Ther. 2005;18(6):397-404. Epub 2005 Apr 25.

Improved daytime spirometric efficacy of tiotropium compared with salmeterol in
patients with COPD.

Briggs DD Jr(1), Covelli H, Lapidus R, Bhattycharya S, Kesten S, Cassino C.

Author information: 
(1)University of Alabama at Birmingham, 459 Boshell Diabetes Building, 1808 7th
Avenue South, Birmingham, AL, USA. dbriggs@chairdom.dom.uab.edu

BACKGROUND: The Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease (GOLD)
recommends long-acting bronchodilators as first-line maintenance treatment for
patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). A study was conducted
comparing the long-acting anticholinergic tiotropium with the long-acting
beta-agonist salmeterol to confirm the significant improvements in daytime
bronchodilator efficacy seen with tiotropium in previous studies.
METHODS: Randomized, double-blind, double-dummy, parallel-group study, comparing 
daytime bronchodilator efficacy of tiotropium 18 mcg once daily with salmeterol
50 mcg twice daily in patients with COPD. Serial spirometry was performed over 12
h after 12 weeks of treatment. Co-primary endpoints were average (over 12 h) and 
peak FEV1 at 12 weeks.
RESULTS: 653 patients were randomized (328 tiotropium, 325 salmeterol): mean age 
64 years; 66% male; mean baseline FEV1 1.05 l (37.7% predicted). After 12 weeks, 
the average post-dose FEV1 over 12 h was significantly higher with tiotropium
compared with salmeterol (167 vs. 130 mL, respectively, p=0.03), as was peak FEV1
(262 vs. 216 ml, respectively, p=0.01). The average FEV1 responses from 0-6 h and
6-12 h were higher in the tiotropium group compared with salmeterol (p<0.05).
Peak and average FVC were significantly higher with tiotropium compared with
salmeterol (p<0.01). Morning pre-dose FEV1 responses were not significantly
different; however, tiotropium demonstrated a significantly higher pre-dose FVC
than salmeterol (p<0.05).
CONCLUSION: Tiotropium demonstrated significantly greater post-dose improvements 
in spirometric parameters compared with salmeterol. These improvements were
sustained over 12 h.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pupt.2005.02.013 
PMID: 16179215  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci. 2005 Jul-Aug;9(4):209-15.

Combination therapy in COPD: different response of COPD stages and predictivity
of functional parameters.

Terzano C(1), Petroianni A, Ricci A, Allegra L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular & Respiratory Sciences, Respiratory Diseases
Unit, Fondazione E. Lorillard Spencer Cenci, La Sapienza University--Rome, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Inhaled corticosteroids reduce exacerbations in patients with chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) but they do not affect disease progression. 
FEV1, as single parameter, showed limits in describing the heterogeneity of COPD 
population. Combination therapy, with long-acting Beta2-agonist and
corticosteroid, showed a more beneficial effect on lung function, exacerbations, 
and health status than single inhaled drug. The aim of this study was to assess, 
in stable COPD, which stage (mild, moderate, severe) shows the best response
after 12 weeks inhaled treatment, and which starting functional parameters show a
correlation with the response.
METHODS: 170 stable COPD patients (38 mild, 66 moderate, 66 severe) were
enrolled. Patients received salmeterol/fluticasone 50/500 microg Metered Dose
Inhaler (MDI) bid for 12 weeks. Pulmonary function tests and clinical data were
performed. Results were subdivided, on functional and clinical data, in
"responders (R)" and "no-responders (NR)".
RESULTS: A FEV1 improvement (+ 12% and 200 ml) was achieved in 21 mild, 28
moderate and 17 severe COPD patients, respectively 55.3%, 45.9%, and 30.9% of
each group. Statistical analysis of starting functional parameters showed a
correlation with the therapeutic response for FEV1/FVC, MEF50 and DLCO/VA% (p <
0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Salmeterol/fluticasone improves FEV1% in mild and moderate more than
in severe COPD patients. The study confirmed the difference in response between
early and advanced stage. Starting FEV1/FVC and MEF50 were significant predictors
in mild and moderate stages, and starting DLCO/VA% resulted a significant
predictor in moderate and severe stages.


PMID: 16128040  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. Proc Am Thorac Soc. 2004;1(3):152-60.

Effects of corticosteroids on lung function in asthma and chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease.

Donohue JF(1), Ohar JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, University of North
Carolina at Chapel Hill, 4125 Bioinformatics Bldg., CB 7020, Chapel Hill, NC
27599-7020, USA. jdonohue@med.unc.edu

Both oral and inhaled corticosteroids have clinically significant effects on
symptoms, exacerbations, health status, and lung function in asthma, and to a
lesser extent in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Change in FEV(1)
does not correlate well with functional tests in COPD and may not be the best
measure of response to treatment. Inhaled corticosteroids may be beneficial when 
added to a beta-agonist for treatment of acute asthma, and the efficacy of oral
corticosteroids in this setting is well established. Oral corticosteroids
inconsistently improve lung function in stable outpatients with COPD. Individual 
inhaled corticosteroids do not have a marked effect, but the combination of
fluticasone propionate and salmeterol and the combination of budesonide plus
formoterol seem to improve FEV(1) over treatment with the individual components. 
In addition, there is convincing evidence for the use of systemic corticosteroids
during acute exacerbations of COPD. Some evidence suggests that patients with
COPD who respond to corticosteroids have eosinophilic inflammation and other
attributes of an asthma phenotype.

DOI: 10.1513/pats.200402-003MS 
PMID: 16113428  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. Proc Am Thorac Soc. 2004;1(2):121-4.

Reducing the frequency and severity of exacerbations of chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease.

Calverley PM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University Hospital Aintree, Clinical Sciences Centre,
Longmoor Lane, Liverpool L9 7AL, UK. pmacal@liverpool.ac.uk

Exacerbations contribute significantly to impaired health status in chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), but current therapy can prevent these
episodes. Immunization against, for example, influenza offers specific
prophylaxis for a minority of episodes. Pulmonary rehabilitation reduces hospital
attendance, but its effect wanes. Inhaled bronchodilators such as tiotropium
produce similar reductions in exacerbation frequency. Database studies show an
association between prescription of inhaled corticosteroids and reduced
hospitalization in the older population, a finding confirmed by randomized trials
in patients with an FEV(1) of less than 50% predicted. Three 1-year randomized
clinical trials studied the effect of combining a long-acting beta-agonist with
an inhaled corticosteroids. In these studies, exacerbation frequency was lower
with therapy than placebo. Combination therapy had a similar effect to its
monocomponents in the trial of inhaled steroids and long-acting beta agonists
study using salmeterol and fluticasone. However, when patients with more severe
COPD (an FEV(1) of less than 36% predicted) were studied using a combination of
budesonide and formoterol, a clear improvement was seen in the overall
exacerbation rate compared with the beta-agonist alone. In addition, the time to 
first exacerbation was increased compared with either drug alone. Health status
changes mirrored these effects. In summary, combination therapy can effectively
prevent exacerbations in patients with more advanced COPD.

DOI: 10.1513/pats.2306031 
PMID: 16113424  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. Ann Pharmacother. 2005 Sep;39(9):1467-75. Epub 2005 Jul 19.

Tiotropium: a bronchodilator for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Somand H(1), Remington TL.

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmacy, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-0008, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To review the scientific literature evaluating the efficacy and
tolerability of tiotropium bromide, a new bronchodilator indicated for treatment 
of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
DATA SOURCES: Articles were identified through searches of MEDLINE (1966-January 
2005) using the key words tiotropium, BA 679 BR, chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease, and anticholinergic agents. Additional citations were identified from
bibliographies of publications cited.
STUDY SELECTION AND DATA EXTRACTION: Experimental and observational studies of
tiotropium bromide were selected. Trials of the efficacy of the drug in humans
were the focus of the review.
DATA SYNTHESIS: Tiotropium bromide is an effective bronchodilator for patients
with COPD. It produces clinically important improvements in lung function,
symptoms of dyspnea, quality of life, and exacerbation rates compared with
placebo. In comparative studies, tiotropium does not appear to be more
efficacious than salmeterol or ipratropium.
CONCLUSIONS: Tiotropium is an effective inhaled anticholinergic agent that is
recommended among preferred long-acting bronchodilators for the chronic
management of moderate to very severe COPD. Although similar to ipratropium in
efficacy and tolerability, it has the advantage of once-daily dosing.

DOI: 10.1345/aph.1E469 
PMID: 16030078  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. Expert Opin Investig Drugs. 2005 Jul;14(7):775-83.

Ultra long-acting beta 2-agonists in development for asthma and chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease.

Cazzola M(1), Matera MG, Lötvall J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, A. Cardarelli Hospital, Via del Parco
Margherita 24, 80121 Naples, Italy. mcazzola@qubisoft.it

After the discovery of formoterol and salmeterol, new candidates for long-acting 
beta2-adrenoceptor agonists (LABAs) have emerged from various companies. In
particular, once-daily beta2-adrenoceptor agonists such as arformoterol,
carmoterol, indacaterol, GSK-159797, GSK-597901, 159802, 642444 and 678007 are
under development for the treatment of asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease. The majority of these compounds are (R,R)-isomers in order to control
desensitisation and accumulation. Several options for combination products are
currently being evaluated in parallel with the development of these ultra LABAs. 
Once-daily dosing of an ultra LABA would be a significant convenience and
probably a compliance-enhancing advantage leading to improved overall clinical
outcomes in patients with asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. The
only limits set for the development of a LABA with a new product profile are
medical needs and marketing opportunities.

DOI: 10.1517/13543784.14.7.775   
PMID: 16022567  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. J Manag Care Pharm. 2005 Jul;11(6 Suppl A):S12-9; quiz S20-2.

New treatment options in COPD.

Hilleman DE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Creighton University School of Pharmacy, 2500 California St., Omaha, NE 68178,
USA. hilleman@creighton.edu

OBJECTIVE: To review the role of long-acting bronchodilators in the treatment of 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), including the importance of
treatment adherence.
SUMMARY: Overall, clinical trials show that compared with placebo and
ipratropium, tiotropium significantly improves spirometric measures, increases
quality-of-life scores, and is associated with fewer exacerbations. In addition, 
compared with salmeterol, tiotropium is associated with greater improvements in
spirometric measures and clinically meaningful increases in quality-of-life
measures. In comparison with either fluticasone or salmeterol alone, the
fluticasone/salmeterol combination is associated with statistically greater
improvement in spirometric and dyspnea measures; however, the combination is not 
associated with fewer exacerbations than either fluticasone or salmeterol used by
itself.
CONCLUSIONS: The 2003 update to the Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive
Lung Disease (GOLD) guidelines recommends regular treatment with long-acting
bronchodilators for maintenance COPD therapy because of superior effectiveness
and convenience compared with short-acting bronchodilators. The results from
trials presented in this article demonstrate that inhaled tiotropium is effective
in treating COPD and might be considered as a first-line agent for maintenance
therapy in view of its outcomes data. The convenience of once-daily
administration would probably contribute to patient adherence and thus to the
overall efficacy of this agent.


PMID: 15998172  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. Clin Ther. 2005 May;27(5):531-42.

The efficacy and safety of inhaled fluticasone propionate/salmeterol and
ipratropium/albuterol for the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease:
an eight-week, multicenter, randomized, double-blind, double-dummy,
parallel-group study.

Make B(1), Hanania NA, ZuWallack R, Kalberg C, Emmett A, Brown CP, Knobil K.

Author information: 
(1)National Jewish Medical and Research Center, Denver, Colorado 80206, USA.
makeb@njc.org

BACKGROUND: The pathology of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)
includes both obstructive and inflammatory components.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to confirm the findings of a previous study 
that compared the efficacy of a combination of 2 short-acting bronchodilators
with the use of an inhaled corticosteroid and a long-acting beta-agonist in the
treatment of COPD.
METHODS: We conducted an 8-week, multicenter, randomized, double-blind,
double-dummy, parallel-group study of subjects with moderate to severe COPD to
compare fluticasone propionate/salmeterol 250/50 microg BID (FSC) with
ipratropium/albuterol 36/206 microg QID (IB/ALB). The primary efficacy measure
was morning preadministration forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV(1)).
Secondary measures were morning peak expiratory flow (PEF), 6-hour FEV(1) AUC,
percentage of symptom-free nights, Transition Dyspnea Index (TDI) score, and
overall daytime symptom score. Additional measures included sleep symptoms,
supplemental albuterol use, and nighttime awakenings due to respiratory symptoms.
Safety evaluations were based on clinical adverse events and COPD exacerbations.
RESULTS: Baseline characteristics were similar between the FSC (n = 180) and
IB/ALB (n = 181) groups, including mean age (63.7 and 65.4 years, respectively), 
mean body weight (81 and 79 kg, respectively), screening pulmonary function (mean
[SD], 43.7% [14.2%] and 41.6% [13.4%] of predicted FEV(1)), race (82% and 91%
white), and sex (64% and 62% male). FSC resulted in greater improvements in
morning preadministration FEV(1), morning PEF, and 6-hour FEV(1) AUC (all, P <
0.001), TDI score (P = 0.026), overall daytime symptom score (P = 0.024),
percentage of symptom-free nights (P = 0.010), nighttime awakenings due to
respiratory symptoms (P = 0.002), sleep symptom score (P = 0.003), and percentage
of days and nights without rescue albuterol use compared with IB/ALB (P = 0.021
and P < 0.001, respectively). Compared with day 1, the FEV(1) AUC at week 8
increased by 0.38 L-h with FSC and decreased by 0.18 L-h with IB/ALB (P < 0.001
between groups). The type and incidence of adverse events were similar between
the 2 groups. One or more adverse event was reported for 81 (45%) and 85 (47%)
subjects in the FSC and IB/ALB groups, respectively.
CONCLUSION: In this 8-week study, subjects with moderate to severe COPD
experienced greater improvements in lung function and symptom measures with FSC
than with IB/ALB.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clinthera.2005.05.009 
PMID: 15978302  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. Med Clin (Barc). 2005 Jun 11;125(2):65-74.

[New treatments for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease].

[Article in Spanish]

Miravitlles M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Neumología, Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i
Sunyer, Red Respira RTIC 03/11 ISCIII, Hospital Clínic, Barcelona, Spain.
marcm@clinic.ub.es

Treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) has underwent a very
important advance in the last five years. It has been developed a new
long-lasting anticholynergic drug, tiotrope bromure, which has been found to
improve lung function and exercise capacity and to decrease relapses. Also the
combined treatment of long lasting beta 2 adrenergics with inhaled steroids
(salmeterol/fluticasone and formoterol/budesonide) has proven similar results.
However, the response to these new drugs is not the same in all patients.
Individual characteristics such as gravity, degree of bronchial
hyperresponsiveness, frequency of relapses, comorbidity, etc will determine the
response to several agents. Thus, it is necessary to perform a detailed
diagnostic study in COPD patients in order to select the best treatment in an
individualized form. In the future, new specific antiinflammatories such as
phosphodiesterase 4 inhibitors or agents with a potential action in tissue
regeneration could lead to new perspectives, as well as to new questions, in COPD
treatment.


PMID: 15970187  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. Pharmacoeconomics. 2005;23(6):619-37.

Development of an economic model to assess the cost effectiveness of treatment
interventions for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Spencer M(1), Briggs AH, Grossman RF, Rance L.

Author information: 
(1)Global Health Outcomes, GlaxoSmithKline Research & Development, Greenford,
Middlesex, UK. michael.d.spencer@gsk.com

OBJECTIVE: To develop a Markov model that allows the cost effectiveness of
interventions in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) to be
estimated, and to apply the model to investigate the cost effectiveness of an
inhaled corticosteroid/long-acting beta(2)-adrenoceptor agonist (beta(2)-agonist)
combination (salmeterol/fluticasone propionate) versus usual care.
METHODS: A Markov model consisting of four mutually exclusive disease states was 
constructed (mild, moderate and severe disease, and death). The transition
probabilities of disease progression (for smokers and ex-smokers) and death were 
derived from the published medical literature. The model outputs were costs,
exacerbations, survival, QALYs and cost effectiveness. The model was made fully
probabilistic to reflect the joint uncertainty in the model parameters. Efficacy 
data for the combination of inhaled salmeterol/fluticasone propionate
50/500microg twice daily in poorly reversible COPD patients with a history of
exacerbations were obtained from the 1-year TRISTAN (TRial of Inhaled STeroids
ANd long-acting beta-agonists) study and applied to the model, based on patient
profiles representative of COPD clinical trials.
RESULTS: According to the model, the mean life expectancy with usual care alone
(placebo group) was 8.95 years, which decreased to 4.08 QALYs once adjusted for
quality and discounted, at a lifetime discounted cost of Can 16,415 dollars per
patient (year 2002 values). Assuming that salmeterol/fluticasone propionate
reduced exacerbation frequency only (base case analysis), the estimated mean
survival time remained unchanged but there was an increase in the number of QALYs
(4.21) for an estimated lifetime cost of Can 25,780 dollars, resulting in a
cost-effectiveness ratio of Can 74,887 dollars per QALY (95% CI 21,985, 128,671) 
versus usual care. If a survival benefit was assumed for salmeterol/fluticasone
propionate, the incremental cost per QALY was Can11,125 dollars (95% CI 8710,
dominated) versus usual care. If the combination achieved around a 10%
improvement in forced expiratory volume in 1 second, leading to delayed
progression to more severe disease states, the benefits translated into an
incremental cost per QALY of Can 49,928 dollars (95% CI 37 269, 66,006) versus
usual care.
CONCLUSIONS: This Markov model allows, for the first time, a means of estimating 
the long-term cost effectiveness and cost utility of interventions for COPD.
Initial evidence suggests that for patients with poorly reversible COPD and a
documented history of frequent COPD exacerbations, the addition of salmeterol (a 
long-acting beta(2)-agonist) to fluticasone propionate (an inhaled
corticosteroid) is potentially cost effective from the Canadian healthcare
payer's perspective. However, the precision of this estimate will be improved
when additional data are available from clinical trials such as the ongoing TORCH
(TOwards a Revolution in COPD Health) study.


PMID: 15960557  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. Am J Health Syst Pharm. 2005 Jun 15;62(12):1263-9.

Tiotropium: an inhaled anticholinergic for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Olin JL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Ernest Mario School of Pharmacy, Department of Pharmacy Practice and
Administration, Rutgers University, Piscataway, NJ, USA. jlolin@rci.rutgers.edu

Comment in
    Am J Health Syst Pharm. 2006 Mar 15;63(6):509.

PURPOSE: The pharmacology, pharmacokinetics, clinical efficacy, adverse effects, 
drug interactions, dosage and administration, and formulary considerations of
tiotropium are discussed.
SUMMARY: Tiotropium, a long-acting inhaled anticholinergic, recently received
approval from the Food and Drug Administration for the management of chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). In patients with COPD, increased
parasympathetic nervous system activity leads to bronchoconstriction and mucus
secretion. Tiotropium induces relaxation of the airway smooth muscle, as does
ipratropium, but differs in receptor association and dissociation rates, allowing
for once-daily administration. After inhalation, tiotropium reaches maximal
plasma concentrations within five minutes, but clinical improvements in forced
expiratory volume in one second (FEV(1)) are maintained over 24 hours. Clinical
trials of tiotropium with placebo, ipratropium, and salmeterol have demonstrated 
the efficacy of tiotropium in improving FEV(1) and forced vital capacity values
and health-related quality of life. The most commonly observed adverse effect is 
dry mouth. No increase in adverse effects was observed when tiotropium was
administered concomitantly with other drugs for COPD, including sympathomimetic
bronchodilators and oral and inhaled corticosteroids. The combination of
tiotropium and other anticholinergics has not been studied and is not
recommended. The recommended dosage of tiotropium is the inhalation of an 18-mug 
capsule with a HandiHaler breath-actuated inhalation device once daily.
CONCLUSION: Tiotropium appears to be at least as effective as currently available
alternatives in the treatment of patients with COPD who require daily
bronchodilator treatment. Its simplified dosing and tolerable adverse-effect
profile can potentially lead to enhanced patient compliance.


PMID: 15947126  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. J Manag Care Pharm. 2005 Jun;11(5 Suppl A):S2-13; quiz S14-6.

Contemporary issues in the care of patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease.

Urbano FL(1), Pascual RM.

Author information: 
(1)Mount Laurel Primary Care Physicians, PC, 1000 Birchfield Dr., Suite 1004,
Mount Laurel, NJ 08054, USA. F.urbano@primeinc.org

OBJECTIVE: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is the fourth leading
cause of death in the United States and is estimated to be responsible for
119,000 deaths in the year 2000 alone. Additionally, COPD places a tremendous
burden on the health care system, with estimated annual costs of US 24 billion
dollars in 2000, and it is generally expected that costs will continue to rise as
more individuals are diagnosed. COPD was responsible for approximately 8 million 
physician outpatient visits, 1.5 million emergency department visits and 726,000 
hospitalizations, also in the year 2000. The objective of this article is to
review current, pertinent clinical issues in the management of patients with
COPD, with estimates of their relative utility and efficacy.
SUMMARY: COPD is a disease characterized by airflow limitation that is not fully 
reversible. Patients with COPD may frequently experience symptoms of chronic
cough with sputum production, dyspnea, and reduced exercise capacity. They may
frequently experience exacerbations characterized by increased symptoms that
often require medical intervention. The diagnosis of COPD is usually fairly
straightforward and made in a cigarette smoker, with the aforementioned symptoms 
and airflow obstruction measured by spirometry. Spirometry should be performed in
all patients in whom COPD is suspected, as it provides useful prognostic
information and may be used to stage the disease. The Global Initiative for
Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease (GOLD) has provided evidenced-based management
guidelines for COPD. GOLD guidelines advocate staging COPD by spirometry and make
specific treatment recommendations based on COPD stage. The most important risk
factor for the development of COPD is cigarette smoking, and smoking cessation
has been shown to reduce all-cause mortality and to alter the natural history of 
COPD. Smoking cessation strategies that employ both counseling and medications
like buproprion and nicotine replacement are most effective, but relapse rates
remain high. It has not been shown that medications like bronchodilators or
inhaled steroids change the natural history of COPD, nor do they reduce
mortality, but they can affect other important outcomes. Long-acting
bronchodilators, including beta- 2-adrenergic agonists such as salmeterol and
formoterol, and the anticholinergic agent tiotropium, improve lung function and
exercise tolerance, reduce symptoms, and modestly reduce exacerbation rates.
Long-acting bronchodilators are indicated for all COPD patients with chronic
symptoms. Short-acting bronchodilators are indicated for rescue when acute
symptoms occur. Inhaled corticosteroids minimally improve lung function, but,
importantly, reduce exacerbation rates and are indicated in severe COPD or when
exacerbations are frequent. Continuous oxygen therapy has been shown to reduce
mortality when severe hypoxemia is present and can improve quality of life when
moderate hypoxia is present. Finally, well-designed, multidisciplinary disease
management programs and pulmonary rehabilitation can improve important disease
outcomes in a cost-effective manner.
CONCLUSION: COPD is a common, preventable disease that affects a significant
number of people. It may be managed by utilizing various readily available
medical therapies, as well as other nonpharmacologic interventions, such as
pulmonary rehabilitation. Proper coordination of care is important in this
disease, and efforts should be focused on improving quality of life and reduction
of symptoms.


PMID: 15934804  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. Thorax. 2005 Jun;60(6):480-7.

Withdrawal of fluticasone propionate from combined salmeterol/fluticasone
treatment in patients with COPD causes immediate and sustained disease
deterioration: a randomised controlled trial.

Wouters EF(1), Postma DS, Fokkens B, Hop WC, Prins J, Kuipers AF, Pasma HR,
Hensing CA, Creutzberg EC; COSMIC (COPD and Seretide: a Multi-Center Intervention
and Characterization) Study Group.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, University Hospital Maastricht, The
Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Guidelines recommend inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) as maintenance
treatment for patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) with a
post-bronchodilator forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1) <50% predicted
and frequent exacerbations, although they have only a small preventive effect on 
the accelerated decline in lung function. Combined treatment with ICS and long
acting beta2 agonists (LABA) may provide benefit to the stability of COPD, but it
is unknown if withdrawal of ICS will result in disease deterioration.
METHODS: The effects of 1 year withdrawal of the ICS fluticasone propionate (FP) 
after a 3 month run-in treatment period with FP combined with the LABA salmeterol
(S) (500 microg FP + 50 microg S twice daily; SFC) were investigated in patients 
with COPD in a randomised, double blind study. 497 patients were enrolled from 39
centres throughout the Netherlands; 373 were randomised and 293 completed the
study.
RESULTS: The drop out rate after randomisation was similar in the two groups.
Withdrawal of FP resulted in a sustained decrease in FEV1: mean (SE) change from 
baseline -4.4 (0.9)% (S) v -0.1 (0.9)% (SFC); adjusted difference 4.1 (95% CI 1.6
to 6.6) percentage points (p<0.001). Corresponding figures for the FEV1/FVC ratio
were -3.7 (0.8)% (S) v 0.0 (0.8)% (SFC) (p = 0.002). The annual moderate to
severe exacerbation rate was 1.6 and 1.3 in the S and SFC groups, respectively
(adjusted rate ratio 1.2; 95% CI 0.9 to 1.5; p = 0.15). The mean annual incidence
rate of mild exacerbations was 1.3 (S) v 0.6 (SFC), p = 0.020. An immediate and
sustained increase in dyspnoea score (scale 0-4; mean difference between groups
0.17 (0.04), p<0.001) and in the percentage of disturbed nights (6 (2) percentage
points, p<0.001) occurred after withdrawal of fluticasone.
CONCLUSIONS: Withdrawal of FP in COPD patients using SFC resulted in acute and
persistent deterioration in lung function and dyspnoea and in an increase in mild
exacerbations and percentage of disturbed nights. This study clearly indicates a 
key role for ICS in the management of COPD as their discontinuation leads to
disease deterioration, even under treatment with a LABA.

DOI: 10.1136/thx.2004.034280 
PMCID: PMC1747438
PMID: 15923248  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. Clin Ther. 2005 Apr;27(4):377-92.

Tiotropium bromide: a new long-acting bronchodilator for the treatment of chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease.

Koumis T(1), Samuel S.

Author information: 
(1)International Drug Information Center, Arnold & Marie Schwartz College of
Pharmacy and HealthSciences, Long Island University, Brooklyn, New York 11201,
USA. tina.koumis@liu.edu

BACKGROUND: Tiotropium bromide is a new inhaled anticholinergic agent approved
for once-daily, long-term maintenance treatment of bronchospasm associated with
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
OBJECTIVE: This article reviews the pharmacology, pharmacokinetic and
pharmacodynamic properties, clinical efficacy, tolerability, and cost of
tiotropium therapy in patients with COPD.
METHODS: The MEDLINE (1966-October 2004), Iowa Drug Information Service
(1966-October 2004), and International Pharmaceutical Abstracts (1970-November
2004) databases were searched for original research and review articles published
in English. The search terms were tiotropium, Ba 679 BR, and HandiHaler.
Reference lists from these articles were also consulted, as was selected
information provided by the manufacturer of tiotropium. All relevant identified
studies were included in the review, with preference given to Phase II/III
trials. Pharmacoeconomic studies were limited to those conducted in the United
States.
RESULTS: Tiotropium is a nonselective anticholinergic agent that exhibits kinetic
receptor selectivity for the muscarinic M1 and M3 receptors. After inhalation,
tiotropium has an onset of action within 30 minutes, a peak effect within 3 to 4 
hours, and a > or = 24-hour duration of action that allows once-daily dosing. In 
clinical trials, patients receiving tiotropium 18 microg QD had significant
improvements in trough, peak, and mean forced expiratory volume in 1 second
(FEV1), dyspnea, and health-related quality of life, as well as fewer COPD
exacerbations and hospitalizations, compared with patients receiving placebo and 
ipratropium (all, P < 0.05). Improvement in FEV1 was also significantly greater
in patients who received tiotropium compared with those who received salmeterol
(P < 0.05), although the number of exacerbations and extent of health resource
use were comparable between groups. Dry mouth was the most commonly reported
adverse effect. One analysis found tiotropium to be cost-effective compared with 
ipratropium.
CONCLUSIONS: Tiotropium offers several advantages over ipratropium in the
management of COPD. Long-term (> 1 year) studies are necessary to determine the
impact of tiotropium on disease progression and life expectancy.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clinthera.2005.04.006 
PMID: 15922812  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. Arch Bronconeumol. 2005 May;41(5):242-8.

[Cost-effectiveness analysis of tiotropium compared to ipratropium and
salmeterol].

[Article in Spanish]

García Ruiz AJ(1), Leiva Fernández F, Martos Crespo F.

Author information: 
(1)Unidad de Farmacoeconomía e IRS. Departamento de Farmacología y Terapéutica
Clínica. Universidad de Málaga. Málaga. España. ajgr@uma.es

OBJECTIVE: The constant increase in health care costs, in a context of limited
resources and the appearance of more costly though more effective drugs,
justifies an assessment of the pharmacoeconomics of these drugs. The objective of
this study was to evaluate the cost-effectiveness of one of the newest drugs for 
the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)-tiotropium.
MATERIAL AND METHOD: A cost-effectiveness analysis (costs and outcomes) within
the framework of the Spanish National Health System was done. The alternatives to
tiotropium analyzed were ipratropium and salmeterol. Direct health care costs
associated with hospital treatment were calculated. Forced expiratory volume in 1
second, quality of life (with the Saint George's Respiratory Questionnaire),
dyspnea transitional index, mean stay in hospital, and exacerbations were the
variables used to measure effectiveness. Values for these variables were taken
from the main reviews and randomized clinical trials published for tiotropium.
RESULTS: For COPD patients, treatment with tiotropium leads to a greater
reduction in exacerbations (37% compared to ipratropium and 25% compared to
salmeterol 25%), and a reduction in the number of days in hospital (33% compared 
to ipratropium and 14% compared to salmeterol). Therefore, use of tiotropium
could save ;100 000 for the current rates of admission and lengths of hospital
stay in Spain.
CONCLUSIONS: Tiotropium was more effective than ipratropium and salmeterol as
measured by objective clinical variables (forced expiratory volume in 1 second)
and subjective ones (the Saint George's Respiratory Questionnaire and dyspnea
transitional index). Hospital stays were shorter and exacerbations fewer with
tiotropium. In all cases, tiotropium was more cost-effective than the
alternatives, thus use of tiotropium could help hospitals to save money.


PMID: 15919004  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Med Klin (Munich). 2005 May 13;100(5):246-54.

[Bronchodilators in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)].

[Article in German]

Gillissen A(1), Buhl R, Rabe KF, Vogelmeier C, Welte T.

Author information: 
(1)Robert-Koch-Klinik, Klinikum "St. Georg", Leipzig.
adrian.gillissen@sanktgeorg.de

Bronchodilators form the foundation of the pharmacotherapy of patients with
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Scores of information from numerous
large-scale clinical trials, mechanistic differences between classes of
bronchodilators, and anti-inflammatory/bronchodilator fixed combinations make the
decision what compound primarily to prefer in COPD treatment a challenge. In this
review of large, double-blind, clinical trials with anticholinergic drugs, long- 
and short-acting beta(2)-agonists, xanthines and different application forms and 
combination of these compounds will be examined for clinical efficacy. The
following practical objectives were accepted to define effective disease
management: improvement of lung function, physical parameters such as 6-min
walking distance, reduction of exacerbation rate and severity, improvement of
quality of life and dyspnea score. Based on this review, inhalation therapy with 
a long-acting bronchodilator such as tiotropium, formoterol or salmeterol is
proposed for early treatment algorithm. The combination of an anticholinergic
compound and a long-acting bronchodilator may have an additive effect on
bronchodilatation. The addition of inhaled corticosteroids is only recommended in
stages III and IV. Besides, pharmacotherapy of COPD should always be flanked by
smoking prevention programs, and supportive therapy, if indicated in severe
disease stages.

DOI: 10.1007/s00063-005-1031-3 
PMID: 15902378  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. Clin Ther. 2005 Mar;27(3):346-54.

A comparison of the risk of hospitalizations due to chronicobstructive pulmonary 
disease in medicaid patients with various medication regimens, including
ipratropium, inhaled corticosteroids, salmeterol, or their combination.

Rascati KL(1), Stanford RH, Borker R.

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmacy, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas 78712-0127, 
USA. krascati@mail.utexas.edu

OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to compare the risk of hospitalizations
related to chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) among Medicaid patients
prescribed various medication regimens.
METHODS: This was an observational, retrospective study set in the Texas Medicaid
program. Eligible patients were aged 40 to 65 years, had a primary or secondary
diagnosis of COPD, and had >/=1 prescription for ipratropium (IPR), inhaled
corticosteroids (ICS), or salmeterol (SAL) between January 1, 1998, and August
31, 2000. Five index therapy groups were included in the risk analysis: IPR
alone, ICS alone, SAL alone, ICS + IPR, and ICS + SAL.
RESULTS: A total of 4447 patients were included in the study (IPR alone, n =
2435; ICS alone, n = 1088; SAL alone, n = 299; ICS + IPR, n = 410; and ICS + SAL,
n = 215). After adjusting for baseline characteristics, ICS + SAL was associated 
with a 35% lower risk of COPD-related hospitalization (hazard ratio [HR], 0.653
[95% CI, 0.428-0.997]) versus IPR alone. ICS alone was associated with a 16%
lower risk (HR, 0.844 [95% CI, 0.693-1.028]) and SAL alone was associated with a 
24% lower risk (HR, 0.756 [95% CI, 0.539-1.060]) versus IPR alone, but neither of
these was statistically significant. There was no decrease in risk with ICS + IPR
versus IPR alone (HR, 1.111 [95% CI, 0.870-1.420]). Variables that indicated
increased risk were as follows: increasing age (HR, 1.015 [95% CI, 1.003-1.027]);
number of preindex emergency department visits (HR, 1.189 [95% CI, 1.080-1.309]);
number of preindex hospitalization visits (HR, 1.342 [95% CI, 1.220-1.477] );
number of nonrespiratory comorbid diagnoses (HR, 1.046 [95% CI, 1.012-1.081]);
and having a diagnosis of influenza/pneumonia (HR, 1.276 [95% CI, 1.062-1.533])
or other respiratory diseases (HR, 1.356 [95% CI, 1.134-1.622]). Comorbid asthma 
was not associated with increased risk.
CONCLUSIONS: ICS + SAL was associated with a significantly lower risk of
COPD-related hospitalization compared with IPR alone during the initial 12 months
of therapy in a Medicaid population. Additional studies are needed to confirm
these findings across different populations.


PMID: 15878389  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. Value Health. 2005 Jan-Feb;8(1):32-46.

Probabilistic Markov model to assess the cost-effectiveness of bronchodilator
therapy in COPD patients in different countries.

Oostenbrink JB(1), Rutten-van Mölken MP, Monz BU, FitzGerald JM.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Medical Technology Assessment, Erasmus MC Rotterdam, PO Box
1738, 3000 DR Rotterdam, The Netherlands. oostenbrink@bmg.eur.nl

Comment in
    Value Health. 2005 Jan-Feb;8(1):1-2.

OBJECTIVES: The development of a probabilistic Markov model with a time horizon
of 1 year to compare the cost-effectiveness of three bronchodilators: 1) the new 
long-acting anticholinergic tiotropium; 2) the short-acting anticholinergic
ipratropium; and 3) the long-acting beta 2-agonist salmeterol, for the treatment 
of patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) in different
countries. In this article we compare The Netherlands and Canada.
METHODS: The Markov model was structured along disease severity states and
exacerbations. Transition probabilities between disease states and exacerbation
probabilities were derived from patient-level data from six randomized controlled
trials assessing the efficacy and safety of tiotropium. Resource utilization
during exacerbations and maintenance treatment for The Netherlands were derived
from two clinical trials, whereas for Canada these data were obtained from a
countrywide observational study that used similar inclusion criteria as the
trials. Second-order Monte Carlo simulations were undertaken in which values were
randomly drawn from distributions of these parameters. Outcomes of the model are 
yearly treatment costs, exacerbations, and quality-adjusted life months.
RESULTS: The mean difference in the number of exacerbations was 0.17 (95%
uncertainty interval: -0.02-0.37) in favor of tiotropium when compared with
salmeterol and the difference between salmeterol and ipratropium was 0.12
(-0.17-0.44) in favor of salmeterol. The number of quality-adjusted life months
did not substantially differ between treatment groups and varied from 8.42 (SE
0.41) in the tiotropium group to 8.17 (0.46) in the salmeterol group and 8.11
(0.50) in the ipratropium group. In The Netherlands, costs in the tiotropium
group were 42 Euros (-484-353) lower than in the salmeterol group, whereas costs 
in the salmeterol group were 128 Euros (-795-457) lower than in the ipratropium
group. In Canada, costs were consistently lower than in The Netherlands and
nearly the same in all treatment groups. Differences between the two countries
were primarily a result of a higher length of hospital stay in case of an
exacerbation in The Netherlands. The cost-effectiveness acceptability frontier of
exacerbations showed that tiotropium was associated with the maximum expected net
benefit for all values of the ceiling ratio above 0 Euros (The Netherlands) and
10 Euros (Canada) in the base case analysis.
CONCLUSIONS: This probabilistic model-based economic evaluation demonstrates how 
clinical trial data can be combined and integrated with country-specific
information about resource utilization and unit cost to assess the
cost-effectiveness of bronchodilators in COPD patients. Quality-adjusted life
months did not substantially differ between treatment groups. In terms of
exacerbations, tiotropium was associated with maximum expected net benefit for
plausible values of the ceiling ratio. In sensitivity analyses, this outcome was 
most sensitive to changes in exacerbation rates.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1524-4733.2005.03086.x 
PMID: 15841892  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. Thorax. 2005 Apr;60(4):301-4.

Early onset of effect of salmeterol and fluticasone propionate in chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease.

Vestbo J(1), Pauwels R, Anderson JA, Jones P, Calverley P; TRISTSAN study group.

Author information: 
(1)North West Lung Centre, Wythenshawe Hospital, Manchester M23 9LT, UK.
jorgen.vestbo@manchester.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: Combined treatment with inhaled corticosteroids and long acting beta2
agonists is approved for the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD), but little is known about the onset of effect of the combination.
METHODS: Data were used from 1465 patients with COPD entered into a large 1 year 
double blind trial with daily measurements of peak expiratory flow (PEF) and
symptom scores.
RESULTS: PEF was significantly higher after 1 day in patients treated with
salmeterol 50 microg twice daily or the salmeterol/fluticasone propionate
combination 50/500 microg twice daily than placebo. In patients treated with
fluticasone propionate 500 microg twice daily alone, PEF differed from placebo
after 2 days. The differences after 2 weeks compared with placebo were 16 l/min
(95% confidence interval (CI) 11 to 21), 11 l/min (95% CI 6 to 16), and 27 l/min 
(95% CI 22 to 33) for salmeterol, fluticasone propionate, and the
salmeterol/fluticasone propionate combination, respectively. For all treatments
the effect on PEF after 2 weeks was comparable to that seen at the end of the
study. The difference between the salmeterol/fluticasone propionate combination
and placebo after 2 weeks as a percentage of baseline was similar for PEF and
clinic forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1). Differences in breathlessness
scores were statistically significant after 1 day for the group treated with
salmeterol alone and after 2 days for the combination group. The 2 week change in
FEV1 was only partly indicative of a long term response in individual patients.
CONCLUSIONS: The effects of salmeterol and fluticasone propionate, alone or in
combination, on PEF and breathlessness are seen within days and most of the
obtainable effect on these parameters is reached within 2 weeks.

DOI: 10.1136/thx.2004.025411 
PMCID: PMC1747357
PMID: 15790985  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. Respir Med. 2005 Apr;99 Suppl A:S1-S10. Epub 2005 Jan 26.

Salmeterol HFA is as effective as salmeterol CFC in children and adults with
persistent asthma.

Chopra N(1), Williams M, Rimmer M, Kahl L, Jenkins M; SMO30006 and SMO30007
International Study Teams.

Author information: 
(1)GlaxoSmithKline Research and Development, Global Commerical Strategy,
Respiratory Building 38, 1 floor, Greenford Road, Greenford, Middlesex UB6 0HE,
UK.

In accordance with the Montreal Protocol 1987, initiatives to phase out and
replace ozone-depleting chlorofluorocarbon (CFC) propellants with
non-ozone-depleting propellants in metered-dose inhalers (MDIs) in the treatment 
of asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease are underway. In view of
this, two multi-centre, randomised, parallel-group, double-blind studies were
conducted to compare the safety and efficacy of salmeterol xinafoate delivered by
an MDI using the hydrofluoroalkane (HFA) 134a propellant with the licensed CFC
formulation (Serevent) in asthmatic populations of children (4-11 years) and
adults (12 years). Patients on a stable dose of inhaled corticosteroids with a
scope for improvement based on mean morning peak expiratory flow (PEF) and
symptoms were randomised to receive salmeterol HFA MDI 50 microg twice daily or
salmeterol CFC MDI 50 microg twice daily for 12 weeks. The primary efficacy
variable was mean morning PEF and secondary variables included other lung
function parameters, symptom scores, use of relief medication and safety
assessments. The difference between the treatments in adjusted mean morning PEF
(salmeterol HFA-salmeterol CFC) were 2.5 and -3.2 L/min for per-protocol
populations of children and adults, respectively. The lower limit of 95%
confidence intervals for both populations was within the pre-defined limit (-15
L/min) set for non-inferiority. Similar results were observed in intent-to-treat 
(ITT) populations. In children, the two formulations resulted in a lack of any
statistically significant difference in secondary efficacy parameters. A
significant difference at endpoint in clinic forced expiratory volume in 1s was
reported in favour of the HFA formulation in the adult population, although the
magnitude of this effect was not considered clinically significant. The
incidences of adverse events (AEs) were similar for both formulations and
populations, and no safety concerns were generated. Together these data
demonstrate salmeterol HFA MDI to be as effective as salmeterol CFC MDI in adults
and children.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2004.11.002 
PMID: 15777603  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. Arch Bronconeumol. 2005 Mar;41(3):130-4.

[Bronchodilator efficacy of combined salmeterol and tiotropium in patients with
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease].

[Article in Spanish]

Baloira Villar A(1), Vilariño Pombo C.

Author information: 
(1)Sección de Neumología, Complexo Hospitalario de Pontevedra, Mourente,
Pontevedra, España. adolfobalo@eresmas.com

OBJECTIVE: Bronchodilators are still the most effective drugs for controlling the
symptoms of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Tiotropium bromide, a
long-acting anticholinergic drug, has recently been added to the therapeutic
arsenal for the disease. To date, there have been no studies combining 2
long-acting bronchodilators. The aim of the present trial was to determine
whether the combination of salmeterol and tiotropium improved lung function in
COPD patients more than either of them alone.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Twenty-two patients (20 men) diagnosed with COPD, with a
mean age of 64 years, were enrolled in this cross-over trial. Active smokers were
excluded. Mean (SD) forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1) was 43% (14%) of 
predicted. All patients were experienced in the use of inhalers. The following 3 
therapeutic combinations were randomly assigned to be administered for a 1-week
period: a) fluticasone (500 microg/12 h), salmeterol (50 microg/12 h) and
placebo; b) fluticasone, tiotropium (18 microg/24 h), and placebo; and c)
fluticasone, salmeterol, and tiotropium. At the end of each period, forced
spirometry was performed before inhalation of the therapeutic combination
(between 8:30 am and 9:30 am) and 2 hours after inhalation. Throughout the week, 
morning peak flow rates measured immediately before inhalation were recorded, and
there was a 48-hour wash-out period between each therapeutic combination.
RESULTS: All the patients completed the protocol. There were no significant
differences in preinhalation or postinhalation FEV1 with salmeterol compared to
tiotropium (preinhalation FEV1, 1.17 [0.55] L compared to 1.19 [0.49] L;
postinhalation FEV1, 1.32 [0.65] L compared to 1.29 [0.61] L). In all cases
postinhalation FEV1 was significantly higher than preinhalation FEV1. The
combination of fluticasone, salmeterol, and tiotropium proved superior to the
other 2 combinations with respect to both preinhalation FEV1 and postinhalation
FEV1 (preinhalation FEV1, 1.32 [0.56] L, [P<.03 in both comparisons];
postinhalation FEV1, 1.49 [0.68] L [P<.001 in both comparisons]). Peak flow rate 
was also significantly higher with the combination of the 2 bronchodilators (345 
L/min compared to 291 L/min and 311 mL, respectively [P <.04 in both cases]).
There were no notable side effects.
CONCLUSIONS: In terms of improvement in lung function, the combination of
salmeterol and tiotropium together with fluticasone is more effective in patients
with moderate-to-severe COPD than either of the 2 bronchodilators administered
alone.


PMID: 15766465  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. Curr Opin Pulm Med. 2005 Mar;11(2):121-8.

Is a long-acting inhaled bronchodilator the first agent to use in stable chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease?

Tashkin DP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, David Geffen School of
Medicine, University of California-Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California
90095-1690, USA. dtashkin@mednet.ucla.edu

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: This article reviews findings from recently published
randomized controlled clinical trials to address the question whether a
long-acting inhaled bronchodilator should be the initial choice for maintenance
therapy in patients with stable, symptomatic chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD).
RECENT FINDINGS: Results of recent clinical trials suggest that a long-acting
inhaled bronchodilator, either once-daily tiotropium or twice-daily salmeterol or
formoterol, has advantages over a regularly-scheduled short-acting
anticholinergic inhaled bronchodilator (ipratropium) as initial maintenance
therapy in patients with at least moderate, stable, symptomatic COPD (forced
expired volume in 1 second </= 60-70% predicted; mean, approximately 37-45%
predicted). For tiotropium, these advantages encompass several important
outcomes, including lung function, rescue inhaler use, dyspnea, frequency of
exacerbations, and hospitalization for COPD, in addition to greater convenience
and therefore potentially better adherence to prescribed therapy, whereas side
effects are similar except for a greater incidence of dry mouth.
SUMMARY: Current evidence supports the recommendation of the Global Initiative
for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease guidelines of at least one of the two
classes of long-acting inhaled bronchodilators as initial maintenance therapy for
symptomatic COPD. In patients who do not respond satisfactorily to tiotropium or 
a long-acting inhaled beta-agonist as the initially prescribed single maintenance
agent, the Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease guidelines
recommend the addition of the alternate class of long-acting inhaled
bronchodilator as the next step. Further clinical trials are required to
investigate whether this recommendation is preferable to that of adding an
inhaled corticosteroid, which has been shown to have additive benefits to those
of a long-acting beta-agonist with respect to bronchodilation and, variably,
dyspnea, rescue bronchodilator use, and quality of life. The choice of agents
will depend ultimately on how well the patient responds to a trial of the drug in
terms of both efficacy and side effects, and patient preference and cost.


PMID: 15699783  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Pulm Pharmacol Ther. 2005;18(2):103-8. Epub 2005 Jan 7.

A comparison between inhaled salmeterol and theophylline in the short-term
treatment of stable chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Broseghini C(1), Testi R, Polese G, Tosatto R, Rossi A.

Author information: 
(1)Unità Operativa di Pneumologia, Azienda Ospedaliera, Ospedale Maggiore di
Borgo Trento, Verona.

BACKGROUND: International guidelines indicate that the long-acting
bronchodilators play a key role in the treatment of patients with chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). The aim of this study was to assess the
short term efficacy and safety of 50 and 100 microg bid inhaled salmeterol,
compared with placebo and orally dose titrated slow-release theophylline in
patients with stable COPD.
METHODS: Thirteen patients (67+/-7 years, three females) with moderate-to-severe 
COPD (FEV1<70% predicted and >30% predicted) and with poor reversibility
(post-bronchodilator FEV1<12% and <200 ml from pre-bronchodilator values)
completed this single centre randomised, double-blind, double-dummy, four-phase
cross-over clinical trial. Patients were randomised to treatment after a 2-week
oral corticosteroid trial and a theophylline titration phase. Each treatment
lasted 2 week with a 2-week washout period. Values at the end of treatments were 
compared.
RESULTS: Inhaled salmeterol at both tested doses was better than placebo in
improving lung function (FEV1, FVC, and morning PEF) of stable patients with
moderate COPD over a period of 2 weeks. Although slight (about 170 ml, 150 ml,
and 120 ml/min on average, for FEV1, FVC, and PEF, respectively) the improvement 
was significant. The effects seem to improve only slightly with the higher dose. 
Salmeterol appeared to be more effective than theophylline treatment when
compared to placebo, as theophylline improved significantly, but less, the FEV1
(about 80 ml, on average) without affecting any of the other lung function
variables. Salmeterol 100 microg was significantly better than theophylline in
improving morning PEF. Four patients reported five adverse events while receiving
placebo and 2 and 3 patients reported 2 and 3 adverse events, respectively,
during salmeterol 50 microg and salmeterol 100 microg phases. None was considered
drug related. Five patients experienced 13 adverse events with theophylline
treatment, four of which were considered drug related.
CONCLUSION: Inhaled salmeterol improves lung function in stable patients with
moderate-to-severe and poorly reversible COPD. The magnitude of improvement in
FEV1 observed in this study is similar to that found in longer and larger studies
on similar populations of patients. In those studies, that improvement was
associated with a better quality of life and less symptoms. Theophylline
determined a smaller improvement in FEV1 with more unpleasant side effects that
both doses of inhaled salmeterol, though there was no significant difference. It 
is concluded that salmeterol is an effective and well tolerated therapy,
potentially preferable to theophylline, at least in the short-term management of 
stable COPD.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pupt.2004.10.006 
PMID: 15649852  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. Pol Merkur Lekarski. 2004 Sep;17(99):208-11.

[Lung function and exercise tolerance after treatment with salmeterol or
ipratropium bromide in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease].

[Article in Polish]

Grzanka A(1), Pitsch T, Krzywiecki A, Rogala B.

Author information: 
(1)Katedra i Klinika Chorób Wewnetrznych, Alergologii i Immunologii Klinicznej w 
Zabrzu SI AM w Katowicach.

The aim of this study was to compare the effects of 6 months therapy with
salmeterol or ipratropium bromide on lung function (resting and dynamic
parameters), exercise tolerance in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD). In open, randomised study patients at visit 1 were included into 
trial, at visit 2 and, after 6 months therapy, at visit 3 lung function measured 
by a pressure body plethysmography, exercise tolerance was investigated by 6
minute walking test and dyspnoea was analysed by the means of Borg scale. We
studied 24 patients (18 males, 6 females, range age 45-76 yrs, mean:
60.2+/-10.46) with stable COPD. 13 subjects (mean FEV1 = 63.61% predicted, SD =
15.66%) received salmeterol (2 x 50 microg/day) and 11 subjects (mean FEV1 =
62.52% predicted, SD = 12.39%) received ipratropium bromide (4 x 40 microg/day). 
There were no significant changes in lung function parameters (FEV1, VC, Rtot,
TLC, RV and RV%TLC) after 6 months therapy with both drugs, but the treatment
with salmeterol significantly improves exercise tolerance in 6 minute walking
test (p=0.048) and Borg dyspnea ratings (p=0.008).


PMID: 15628041  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Saf. 2005 Mar;14(3):203-9.

Changes in prescribing of inhaled corticosteroids (1999-2002) in Scotland.

Boyter AC(1), Steinke DT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Strathclyde, John
Arbuthnott Building, Glasgow, Scotland, UK. anne.boyter@strath.ac.uk

PURPOSE: To investigate the trend in prescribing of inhaled corticosteroids and
general practitioner (GP) consultations for respiratory diseases.
METHODS: A longitudinal observation study of all prescriptions, from primary
care, for inhaled corticosteroids dispensed in Scotland from January 1999 to May 
2002 was undertaken. The main outcome measures were the trends in prescribing of 
inhaled corticosteroids and GP consultations for respiratory diseases.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS: The prescribing of all inhaled corticosteroids has risen
over the study period. The rise in prescribing of the combination product
containing fluticasone and salmeterol appears not to have been at the expense of 
the prescribing of fluticasone alone while the prescribing of the
budesonide/eformoterol combination may be at the expense of budesonide (BUD)
alone. GP consultations for both asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD) have declined over a similar period. The increased prescribing of inhaled 
corticosteroids over this period is associated with the increased use of the
fluticasone/salmeterol combination rather than an increase in the use of all
inhaled corticosteroids. The accompanying fall in number of consultations with
GPs may be due to this increased prescribing or a move to nurse led clinics.

Copyright 2004 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/pds.1054 
PMID: 15624197  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. Can Respir J. 2004 Nov-Dec;11(8):581-5.

The Canadian Optimal Therapy of COPD Trial: design, organization and patient
recruitment.

Aaron SD(1), Vandemheen K, Fergusson D, Fitzgerald M, Maltais F, Bourbeau J,
Goldstein R, McIvor A, Balter M, O'donnell D.

Author information: 
(1)The Ottawa Health Research Institute, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Canada.
saaron@ottawahospital.on.ca

BACKGROUND: There are no published studies that have assessed whether adding
long-acting beta 2-agonist bronchodilators and/or inhaled steroids to chronic
therapy with tiotropium would provide additional clinical benefit to patients
with moderate to severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
METHODS: The Canadian Optimal Therapy of COPD Trial is a randomized, prospective,
double-blind, placebo-controlled, multicentre trial funded by the Canadian
Institutes of Health Research that has been designed to determine which
combination of inhaled medications will most effectively prevent exacerbations
and optimize disease-specific quality of life in patients with COPD. The trial is
the first to evolve from the Canadian Thoracic Society Clinical Trials Group. The
study will randomize 432 patients with moderate to severe COPD to one of three
parallel treatment arms for 52 weeks: tiotropium and fluticasone/salmeterol;
tiotropium and salmeterol; or tiotropium and placebo inhaler. The participants
will be allowed to use salbutamol as required throughout the trial period.
OUTCOMES: The primary outcome measure is the proportion of patients in the three 
treatment groups who experienced a respiratory exacerbation within 52 weeks of
randomization. Other outcomes that will be assessed over the 52-week trial period
will include: changes in disease-specific quality of life and changes in dyspnea,
health care use and changes in lung function. A pharmacoeconomic analysis will
also be performed to evaluate the cost of these therapies.
RESULTS: The study commenced recruitment in October 2003. It is currently
operating at 22 centres across Canada and has randomized 137 patients during the 
first four months of recruitment. Recruitment is scheduled to continue until
April 2005 or until 432 patients have been randomized.
CONCLUSION: The present randomized, placebo-controlled trial offers a unique
opportunity to answer the question, what is the best combination of inhaled
medications to use for COPD patients? It is hoped that optimal use of inhaled
medications will improve patient health and quality of life, reduce patient
respiratory exacerbations, and ultimately, reduce health care resource use.


PMID: 15611808  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. Pulm Pharmacol Ther. 2005;18(1):19-22.

The bronchodilator response to salmeterol is maintained with regular, long-term
use in patients with COPD.

Hanania NA(1), Kalberg C, Yates J, Emmett A, Horstman D, Knobil K.

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Baylor College of Medicine, 1504 Taub
Loop, Houston, TX 77030, USA. hanania@bcm.tmc.edu

Long-acting beta(2)-agonists (LABAs) are recommended in the management of
patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Previous studies have
demonstrated that the LABA, salmeterol, improves lung function, symptoms and
quality of life in patients with COPD. In this study, we have performed
additional analyses of the combined data from two previous double-blind,
placebo-controlled, parallel studies of salmeterol (50 microg, b.i.d) in patients
with COPD. The new analyses reveal that the significant improvements seen in
pre-dose and 2-h post-dose forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV(1)) compared to
placebo, occur early in the treatment period, and are sustained for at least 24
weeks. Moreover, improvements in peak expiratory flow rate occur as early as Day 
1, and are sustained throughout the 24-week period. Additional analyses of 12-h
FEV(1) data also show that salmeterol is associated with an increase in the area 
under the curve at Week 12 compared with Day 1, adding further support to
evidence that it results in a sustained bronchodilator response, with no evidence
of tolerance.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pupt.2004.07.005 
PMID: 15607123  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. Respir Med. 2004 Nov;98(11):1045-50.

Gender does not influence the response to the combination of salmeterol and
fluticasone propionate in COPD.

Vestbo J(1), Soriano JB, Anderson JA, Calverley P, Pauwels R, Jones P; TRISTAN
Study Group.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Hvidovre University Hospital, Kettegaard
Alle 30, Hvidovre DK 2650, Copenhagen, Denmark. jvestbo@man.ac.uk

The prevalence of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) in women is
increasing worldwide. Women may have greater susceptibility to COPD progression
than men, and differences in efficacy and safety of respiratory medications by
gender are largely unexplored. We aimed to determine whether the response to
treatment in women with COPD differed from men in a large, 1-year double-blind
trial ('TRISTAN'). In a sensitivity analysis, we compared 539 male and 180 female
COPD patients, who were randomized to the saLmeterol/fluticasone combination
50/500mcg bid or placebo for 12 months. Combination therapy improved
pre-treatment FEV1 significantly more than placebo in women by 152 ml (95%
confidence interval 95-208) and in men by 127 ml (94-159). Similarly, a reduction
in COPD exacerbation rates of 31% in women (9-48%) and of 23% in men (8-35%) was 
observed. Combination therapy reduced COPD exacerbations requiring treatment with
oral corticosteroids by 36% in women and by 41% in men. Finally, combination
treatment produced a better improvement in health status than placebo with a
decrease in the SGRQ scores in women by -2.3 (-4.6 - 0.1) and in men by -2.1
(-3.5 to -0.8). No gender interaction was found for any outcome. Treatments were 
well tolerated with no difference in the frequency of adverse events in women and
men. In this trial, therapy with the salmeterol/fluticasone combination produced 
significant improvements compared to placebo on all main endpoints and the
magnitude of these improvements was similar for both men and women.


PMID: 15526804  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. Ned Tijdschr Geneeskd. 2004 Jul 31;148(31):1550-4.

[Periorbital swelling caused by carbasalate calcium].

[Article in Dutch]

Vodegel RM(1), Kardaun SH.

Author information: 
(1)Academisch Ziekenhuis, afd. Dermatologie, Postbus 30.001, 9700 RB Groningen.

A 61-year-old man presented with visual problems due to a marked two-sided
periorbital swelling that had started three years earlier. There was no obvious
underlying cause and he had persistent rhinoconjunctival symptoms. At the time
the swelling started he was already suffering from xanthelasmata palpebrarum and 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. He had been taking simvastatin and
salmeterol-fluticason for a year and carbasalate calcium for two years. There was
marked periorbital swelling accompanied by xanthelasmata palpebrarum and slight
chemosis and erythema of the eyelids. After exclusion of other potential causes
for the swelling, acenocoumarol was prescribed in place of carbasalate calcium.
This resulted in a quick recovery from the swelling and rhinoconjunctival
symptoms. Provocation with acetyl salicylic acid led to renewed swelling of both 
eyelids. Periorbital angio-oedema, a relatively uncommonly reported side effect
of acetyl salicylic acid and its derivates, can occur even after previous
long-term medication use.


PMID: 15366727  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. Drug Saf. 2004;27(10):689-715.

A benefit-risk assessment of inhaled long-acting beta2-agonists in the management
of obstructive pulmonary disease.

Sovani MP(1), Whale CI, Tattersfield AE.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Respiratory Medicine, City Hospital, Nottingham, UK.

The two inhaled long-acting beta2-adrenoceptor agonists, salmeterol and
formoterol, have been studied extensively since their introduction in the early
1990s. In this review we consider the evidence for their efficacy and safety in
adults with asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), by reviewing
long-term prospective studies in which these drugs have been compared with
placebo or an alternative bronchodilator. We have also assessed safety, including
data from postmarketing surveillance studies and case-control studies using large
databases. In patients with asthma, salmeterol and formoterol increase lung
function, reduce asthmatic symptoms and improve quality of life when compared
with placebo. Both drugs protect against exercise-induced asthma, although some
tolerance develops with regular use. Tolerance to the bronchodilator effects of
formoterol has also been seen, although this is small and most of the beneficial 
effects are maintained long-term. Both drugs have been shown to reduce asthma
exacerbations but only in studies in which most patients were taking an inhaled
corticosteroid. Adding a long-acting beta2-agonist provided better control than
increasing the dose of inhaled corticosteroid in several studies. Long-acting
beta2-agonists also provide better asthma control than use of regular
short-acting beta2-agonists and theophylline. Their relative efficacy compared
with leukotriene antagonists is uncertain as yet. Formoterol appears to be at
least as safe and effective as a short-acting beta2-agonist when used on an 'as
required' basis. In patients with COPD, both salmeterol and formoterol offer
improved lung function and reduced COPD symptoms compared with placebo, and
quality of life has been improved in some studies. Some tolerance to the
bronchodilating effect of salmeterol was seen in one study. Most studies have not
found a significant reduction in exacerbations in COPD. Both drugs have provided 
greater benefit than ipratropium bromide or theophylline; there are limited data 
on tiotropium bromide. The long-acting beta2-agonists cause predictable adverse
effects including headache, tremor, palpitations, muscle cramps and a fall in
serum potassium concentration. Salmeterol can also cause paradoxical
bronchospasm. There is some evidence that serious adverse events including
dysrhythmias and life-threatening asthma episodes can occur; however, the
incidence of such events is very low but may be increased in patients not taking 
an inhaled corticosteroid. Salmeterol 50 microg twice daily and formoterol 12
microg twice daily are effective and safe in treating patients with asthma and
COPD. Higher doses cause more adverse effects, although serious adverse events
are rare.


PMID: 15350154  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. BMC Pulm Med. 2004 Aug 31;4:7.

Long acting beta2 agonists for stable chronic obstructive pulmonary disease with 
poor reversibility: a systematic review of randomised controlled trials.

Husereau D(1), Shukla V, Boucher M, Mensinkai S, Dales R.

Author information: 
(1)Canadian Coordinating Office for Health Technology Assessment (CCOHTA),
600-865 Carling Avenue, Ottawa ON K1S 5S8, Canada. donh@ccohta.ca

BACKGROUND: The long acting beta2-agonists, salmeterol and formoterol, have been 
recommended, by some, as first line treatment of stable chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD). We reviewed evidence of efficacy and safety when
compared with placebo or anticholinergic agents in patients with poorly
reversible COPD.
METHODS: After searching MEDLINE, EMBASE, HealthSTAR, BIOSIS Previews, PASCAL,
ToxFile, SciSearch, the Cochrane Library, and PubMed, as well as Web sites,
selected journals, reference lists, and contacting drug manufacturers, two
reviewers independently screened reports of randomised controlled trials of
parallel or crossover design lasting four weeks or longer and including patients 
with a forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV1) < or = 75% of predicted, a
ratio of FEV1 to forced vital capacity (FVC) < or = 88% of predicted, and < 15%
improvement from baseline FEV1 after a dose of a beta2 agonist. We included
trials comparing salmeterol or formoterol with placebo or with ipratropium
bromide and reporting one of these outcomes: lung function; exercise capacity;
quality of life scores; dyspnea; exacerbations; rescue inhaler use; incidence of 
tachycardia, hypokalemia, or dry mouth. Two reviewers assessed the quality of
included reports using the Jadad scale and allocation concealment, and abstracted
data.
RESULTS: Twelve trials satisfied our inclusion criteria; eight were high quality 
(Jadad score >2) and four were low quality (< or = 2). The adequacy of allocation
concealment was unclear in all of them. We did not perform a meta-analysis due to
differences in trial design and how outcomes were reported.Two trials comparing
salmeterol with ipratropium did not detect differences; one trial comparing
formoterol and ipratropium described greater improvement with formoterol in
morning PEFR (15.3 versus 7.1 l/min, p = 0.040). Of twelve trials comparing long 
acting beta2 agonists with placebo, six reported no improvement in exercise
capacity, eleven reported improvements in FEV1 lung function (one reported no
improvement), six reported less rescue inhaler usage (one reported no difference)
and five reported improved dyspnea scores (two reported no improvement).
Differences in quality of life were detected in one salmeterol trial; however,
two salmeterol, and one formoterol trial reported no differences. Adverse effects
of interest were not reported.
CONCLUSION: In terms of clinical outcomes and safety, we could not find
convincing evidence that salmeterol and formoterol have demonstrated advantages
to ipratropium, a less expensive drug, for patients with stable COPD and poor
reversibility. Compared to placebo, we found evidence of reduced rescue inhaler
usage and improved spirometric outcomes without a significant impact on quality
of life or exercise capacity.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2466-4-7 
PMCID: PMC517721
PMID: 15339337  [PubMed]


412. Eur Respir J. 2004 Aug;24(2):206-10.

The TORCH (towards a revolution in COPD health) survival study protocol.

Vestbo J(1); TORCH Study Group.

Author information: 
(1)North West Lung Research Centre, Wythenshawe Hospital, Manchester, UK.
jvestbo@man.ac.uk

Only long-term home oxygen therapy has been shown in randomised controlled trials
to increase survival in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). There have 
been no trials assessing the effect of inhaled corticosteroids and long-acting
bronchodilators, alone or in combination, on mortality in patients with COPD,
despite their known benefit in reducing symptoms and exacerbations. The "TOwards 
a Revolution in COPD Health" (TORCH) survival study is aiming to determine the
impact of salmeterol/fluticasone propionate (SFC) combination and the individual 
components on the survival of COPD patients. TORCH is a multicentre, randomised, 
double-blind, parallel-group, placebo-controlled study. Approximately 6,200
patients with moderate-to-severe COPD were randomly assigned to b.i.d. treatment 
with either SFC (50/500 microg), fluticasone propionate (500 microg), salmeterol 
(50 microg) or placebo for 3 yrs. The primary end-point is all-cause mortality;
secondary end-points are COPD morbidity relating to rate of exacerbations and
health status, using the St George's Respiratory Questionnaire. Other end-points 
include other mortality and exacerbation end-points, requirement for long-term
oxygen therapy, and clinic lung function. Safety end-points include adverse
events, with additional information on bone fractures. The first patient was
recruited in September 2000 and results should be available in 2006. This paper
describes the "TOwards a Revolution in COPD Health" study and explains the
rationale behind it.


PMID: 15332386  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. Drugs. 2004;64(17):1975-96.

Inhaled salmeterol/fluticasone propionate: a review of its use in chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease.

Fenton C(1), Keating GM.

Author information: 
(1)Adis International Limited, Auckland, New Zealand. demail@adis.co.nz

The salmeterol/fluticasone propionate dry powder inhaler (DPI) [Advair Diskus,
Seretide Accuhaler] contains the long-acting beta2-adrenoceptor agonist
salmeterol and the inhaled corticosteroid fluticasone propionate. In the US,
twice-daily salmeterol/fluticasone propionate 50/250 microg is approved for use
in adults with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) associated with
chronic bronchitis, and in the EU, the twice-daily 50/500 microg dosage is
approved for use in patients with severe COPD, repeat exacerbations and
significant symptoms despite bronchodilator therapy. In patients with
moderate-to-severe COPD, twice-daily inhaled salmeterol/fluticasone propionate
50/250 or 50/500 microg for 24-52 weeks improves predose forced expiratory volume
in 1 second (FEV1) significantly more than salmeterol monotherapy, improves
postdose or postbronchodilator FEV1 significantly more than fluticasone
propionate monotherapy and results in clinically significant improvements in
health-related quality of life. Salmeterol/fluticasone propionate 50/500 microg
significantly reduced annual COPD exacerbations, especially in severe COPD. Some 
corticosteroid-related adverse events were increased in recipients of fluticasone
propionate with or without salmeterol versus salmeterol monotherapy or placebo;
withdrawal from fluticasone propionate, including combination therapy, needs
careful management to minimise COPD exacerbations. The DPI combining a
corticosteroid and long-acting beta2-agonist provides benefits over monotherapy
and may encourage patient compliance in COPD.


PMID: 15329047  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. Eur Respir J. 2004 Jul;24(1):86-94.

Effect of salmeterol on the ventilatory response to exercise in chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease.

O'Donnell DE(1), Voduc N, Fitzpatrick M, Webb KA.

Author information: 
(1)Respiratory Investigation Unit, Dept of Medicine, Queen's University,
Kingston, Canada. odonnell@post.queensu.ca

This study examined the effects of bronchodilator-induced reductions in lung
hyperinflation on breathing pattern, ventilation and dyspnoea during exercise in 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Quantitative tidal flow/volume loop
analysis was used to evaluate abnormalities in dynamic ventilatory mechanics and 
their manipulation by a bronchodilator. In a randomised double-blind crossover
study, 23 patients with COPD (mean +/- SEM forced expiratory volume in one second
42 +/- 3% of the predicted value) inhaled salmeterol 50 microg or placebo twice
daily for 2 weeks each. After each treatment period, 2 h after dose, patients
performed pulmonary function tests and symptom-limited cycle exercise at 75% of
their maximal work-rate. After salmeterol versus placebo at rest,
volume-corrected maximal expiratory flow rates increased by 175 +/- 52%,
inspiratory capacity (IC) increased by 11 +/- 2% pred and functional residual
capacity decreased by 11 +/- 3% pred. At a standardised time during exercise,
salmeterol increased IC, tidal volume (VT), mean inspiratory and expiratory
flows, ventilation, oxygen uptake (VO2) and carbon dioxide output. Salmeterol
increased peak exercise endurance, VO2 and ventilation by 58 +/- 19, 8 +/- 3 and 
12 +/- 3%, respectively. Improvements in peak VO2 correlated best with increases 
in peak VT; increases in peak VT and resting IC were interrelated. The reduction 
in dyspnoea ratings at a standardised time correlated with the increased VT.
Mechanical factors play an important role in shaping the ventilatory response to 
exercise in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Bronchodilator-induced lung
deflation reduced mechanical restriction, increased ventilatory capacity and
decreased respiratory discomfort, thereby increasing exercise endurance.


PMID: 15293609  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2004;(3):CD003794.

Combined corticosteroid and long acting beta-agonist in one inhaler for chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease.

Nannini L(1), Cates CJ, Lasserson TJ, Poole P.

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary Section, Hospital G. Baigorria, Ruta 11 Y Jm Estrada, G. Baigorria, 
Santa Fe - Rosario, Argentina, 2152. nanninilj@cimero.org.ar

Update in
    Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2007;(4):CD003794.

Update of
    Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2003;(4):CD003794.

BACKGROUND: Long-acting beta-agonists and inhaled corticosteroids have both been 
recommended in guidelines for the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease. Their co-administration in a combined inhaler is intended to facilitate 
adherence to medication regimens, and to improve efficacy.
OBJECTIVES: To assess the efficacy of combined inhaled corticosteroid and
long-acting beta-agonist preparations, compared to placebo or the individual
components, in the treatment of adults with chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease.
SEARCH STRATEGY: We searched the Cochrane Airways Group chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD) trials register. Date of last search April 2004.
SELECTION CRITERIA: Studies were included if they were randomised and
double-blind. Studies could compare a combined inhaled corticosteroids and
long-acting beta-agonist preparation with either component preparation or
placebo.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Two reviewers independently assessed trial quality 
and extracted data. The primary outcome was exacerbations.
MAIN RESULTS: Six randomised trials with 4118 participants were included. Two
different combination preparations (fluticasone/salmeterol and
budesonide/formoterol) were used. Combination treatment was more effective than
placebo for mean exacerbation rates, quality of life and lung function. No trials
were found comparing the combination of drugs in a single inhaler with the same
drugs both given in separate inhalers. Exacerbations: Fluticasone/salmeterol did 
not significantly reduce exacerbations compared with either of its component
treatments in one large study. There was no significant difference when
budesonide/formoterol was compared with budesonide. Budesonide/formoterol was
more effective than formoterol in reducing exacerbations (Rate ratio: 0.78 [0.68 
to 0.90], two studies). A pooled analysis of both combination therapies indicated
that exacerbations were less frequent when compared with either placebo or
long-acting beta-agonist (versus placebo Rate ratio: 0.76 [0.68, 0.84], three
studies, versus beta-agonist, Rate ratio: 0.85 [0.77, 0.95], three studies), but 
not when compared with steroid. The clinical impact of this effect depends on the
frequency of exacerbations experienced by patients. One full exacerbation was
prevented for every two to four years of treatment in the type of patients
included in the trials. Quality of Life: There were conflicting findings in
quality of life and symptoms when fluticasone/salmeterol was compared with
inhaled steroids alone (three studies). There was no significant difference
between fluticasone/salmeterol and long-acting beta-agonist in quality of life
scores (three studies). Budesonide/formoterol improved symptoms when compared
with budesonide but not with formoterol. There were conflicting findings in
quality of life scores when budesonide/formoterol was compared with component
inhaled corticosteroid or beta-agonist. These may be accounted for by different
study design. Lung Function: Treatment with either combination led to small,
significant differences in lung function compared with component steroid
medication. Fluticasone/salmeterol led to small improvements in FEV1 compared
with salmeterol, but budesonide/formoterol treatment did not increase FEV1
significantly when compared with formoterol.
REVIEWERS' CONCLUSIONS: Compared with placebo, combination therapy led to
clinically meaningful differences in quality of life, symptoms and exacerbations.
However, there were conflicting results when the different combination therapies 
were compared with the mono-components alone. In order to draw firmer conclusions
about the effects of combination therapy in a single inhaler more data are
necessary, including the assessment of the comparative effects with separate
administration of the two drugs in double-dummy trials.

DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD003794.pub2 
PMID: 15266502  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. Expert Opin Pharmacother. 2004 Aug;5(8):1827-35.

Tiotropium bromide, a new, once-daily inhaled anticholinergic bronchodilator for 
chronic-obstructive pulmonary disease.

ZuWallack AR(1), ZuWallack RL.

Author information: 
(1)St. Francis Hospital and Medical Center, Hartford, CT 06105, USA.
rzuwalla@stfranciscare.org

Erratum in
    Expert Opin Pharmacother. 2004 Sep;5(9):2051.

Tiotropium bromide is a quaternary ammonium compound structurally related to
ipratropium and has recently been approved in the US for the long-term,
once-daily, maintenance treatment of bronchospasm associated with
chronic-obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). It is available in a dry powder
form, where 18 microg [corrected] of the drug is inhaled once-daily through a
device, the HandiHaler). The potency and long duration of effect of this
anticholinergic bronchodilator result primarily from a prolonged blockade of the 
M1 and M3 muscarinic receptors in the airways and a relatively more rapid
dissociation from the M2 receptor (which provides inhibitory feedback). Multiple 
studies of up to a duration of 1 year have demonstrated its effectiveness as a
bronchodilator for COPD, with a trough increase (measured approximately 24 h
after administration of the drug) in forced expiratory volume in 1 s of
approximately 0.12 l and a peak increase of approximately 0.25 l. Tiotropium
inhalation also leads to a significant reduction in static lung volumes in
hyperinflated patients with COPD; this probably contributes to the reduction in
dyspnoea that is associated with long-term use of this maintenance
bronchodilator. Regular use of the drug was associated with clinically meaningful
increases in the Transitional Dyspnoea Index, which indicate reductions in
dyspnoea associated with daily activities. Improvement in the
respiratory-specific health status questionnaire, the St George's Respiratory
Questionnaire component and total scores was also documented. Finally, pooled
data from two 1-year studies and two 6-month studies documented 20 and 28%
reductions in the number of exacerbations per patient per year. Side effects have
been relatively minimal, with dry mouth the most common symptom, ranging 6 - 16% 
of patients and rarely leading to discontinuation of the study drug. Limited
comparisons of efficacy with other bronchodilators are available. Once-daily
tiotropium has been demonstrated to be clearly superior to ipratropium four times
daily as a bronchodilator for COPD. Combined results from two studies comparing
once-daily tiotropium to twice-daily inhalation of standard doses of salmeterol, 
indicate a magnitude of the bronchodilator response similar in the two drugs
early in the study. However, by 6 months, the bronchodilator effect of tiotropium
was somewhat greater than that of the long-acting beta-agonist. Preliminary data 
suggest that combining tiotropium with long-acting beta-agonists may produce
additional bronchodilator action in COPD.

DOI: 10.1517/14656566.5.8.1827   
PMID: 15264997  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. Expert Opin Pharmacother. 2004 Aug;5(8):1815-26.

Fluticasone propionate/salmeterol for the treatment of chronic-obstructive
pulmonary disease.

Dransfield MT(1), Bailey WC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary, Allergy and Critical Care Medicine, University of
Alabama at Birmingham, 215 THT, 1900 University Blvd, Birmingham, AL 35294, USA. 
mdransfield99@msn.com

Chronic-obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a global public health problem
and its impact is increasing. Although only smoking cessation has been shown to
alter the natural history of the disease, current treatment guidelines recommend 
the use of inhaled bronchodilators to decrease symptoms, improve lung function
and quality of life and to prevent exacerbations. For a subset of patients with
more severe disease, inhaled corticosteroids may also have a role in achieving
these goals. Fluticasone propionate/salmeterol (Advair) or Seretide),
GlaxoSmithKline) is a combination inhaled steroid and long-acting bronchodilator 
that is delivered by a dry-powder inhaler and was recently approved for use in
COPD in the US. Fluticasone propionate/salmeterol is a potent bronchodilator and 
also appears to have important effects on the frequency of exacerbations and
overall quality of life for some patients with COPD. Issues of patient selection 
as well as the pharmacology, efficacy and safety of the drug are discussed.

DOI: 10.1517/14656566.5.8.1815   
PMID: 15264996  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. Thorax. 2004 Jun;59(6):471-6.

Effect of salmeterol on respiratory muscle activity during exercise in poorly
reversible COPD.

Man WD(1), Mustfa N, Nikoletou D, Kaul S, Hart N, Rafferty GF, Donaldson N,
Polkey MI, Moxham J.

Author information: 
(1)Respiratory Muscle Laboratory, Guy's, King's and St Thomas' School of
Medicine, King's College Hospital, London, UK. william.man@kcl.ac.uk

Comment in
    Thorax. 2004 Jun;59(6):455-7.

BACKGROUND: Some patients with irreversible chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD) experience subjective benefit from long acting bronchodilators without
change in forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV(1)). Dynamic hyperinflation
is an important determinant of exercise induced dyspnoea in COPD. We hypothesised
that long acting bronchodilators improve symptoms by reducing dynamic
hyperinflation and work of breathing, as measured by respiratory muscle
pressure-time products.
METHODS: Sixteen patients with "irreversible" COPD (<10% improvement in FEV(1)
following a bronchodilator challenge; mean FEV(1) 31.1% predicted) were recruited
into a randomised, double blind, placebo controlled, crossover study of
salmeterol (50 micro g twice a day). Treatment periods were of 2 weeks duration
with a 2 week washout period. Primary outcome measures were end exercise isotime 
transdiaphragmatic pressure-time product and dynamic hyperinflation as measured
by inspiratory capacity.
RESULTS: Salmeterol significantly reduced the transdiaphragmatic pressure-time
product (294.5 v 348.6 cm H(2)O/s/min; p = 0.03), dynamic hyperinflation (0.22 v 
0.33 litres; p = 0.002), and Borg scores during endurance treadmill walk (3.78 v 
4.62; p = 0.02). There was no significant change in exercise endurance time.
Improvements in isotime Borg score were significantly correlated to changes in
tidal volume/oesophageal pressure swings, end expiratory lung volume, and
inspiratory capacity, but not pressure-time products.
CONCLUSIONS: Despite apparent "non-reversibility" in spirometric parameters, long
acting bronchodilators can cause both symptomatic and physiological improvement
during exercise in severe COPD.


PMCID: PMC1747047
PMID: 15170026  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. Curr Med Res Opin. 2004 May;20(5):581-6.

Effects of formoterol and salmeterol on resting inspiratory capacity in COPD
patients with poor FEV(1) reversibility.

Bouros D(1), Kottakis J, Le Gros V, Overend T, Della Cioppa G, Siafakas N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Medicine, University Hospital, Alexandroupolis, Greece.
bouros@med.duth.gr

BACKGROUND: Recent studies suggest that inspiratory capacity (IC) measured at
rest can be used to predict improvements in dyspnea and exercise tolerance in
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) patients. In this study we compared 
the effect of formoterol (Foradil, Aerolizer) and salmeterol (Serevent, Diskus)
in terms of IC in patients with COPD.
METHODS: This was a multicentre, randomized, placebo-controlled, single-dose,
double-dummy, crossover study conducted in five secondary care centres in four
European countries. A total of 47 patients with Stage II and III COPD, as defined
by ATS criteria, with an increase in forced expiratory volume in 1s (FEV(1)) of
<or= 12% from the patient's predicted normal value after salbutamol inhalation
were included. Patients inhaled single doses of formoterol (12 and 24 microg),
salmeterol (50 and 100 microg) or matching placebo. IC was recorded before dosing
and at 5, 10, 15 and 30 min and 1, 2, 3 and 4 h post-dose.
RESULTS: Formoterol was significantly superior to salmeterol during the first
hour post-dose as indicated by notable differences at all times during the first 
hour post-dose and by the ANCOVA analysis of the Area Under the IC Curve (AUC(0-1
h)).
CONCLUSIONS: Both formoterol and salmeterol increase IC in patients with COPD,
with formoterol 12 microg showing a significantly greater increase in IC over the
first hour post-dose than salmeterol 50 microg, consistent with a more rapid
onset of action.

DOI: 10.1185/030079904125003368 
PMID: 15140323  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. Pulm Pharmacol Ther. 2004;17(3):141-5.

Salmeterol/fluticasone propionate in a Single Inhaler Device versus
theophylline+fluticasone propionate in patients with COPD.

Cazzola M(1), Noschese P, Centanni S, Santus P, Di Marco F, Spicuzza L, Di Maria 
GU.

Author information: 
(1)Respiratory Medicine and Allergology Unit, A. Cardarelli Hospital, Via del
Parco Margherita 24, 80121 Naples, Italy. mcazzola@qubisoft.it

STUDY OBJECTIVES: The aim of this study was to compare the relative efficacy in
terms of improvement in symptoms and lung function of salmeterol/fluticasone
propionate (SLM/FP) combination administered through the Diskus inhaler versus
theophylline (THEO) added to FP Diskus in patients with stable chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
METHODS AND MEASUREMENTS: Eighty patients were randomized to receive 4 months of 
treatment in one of two treatment groups: (1) fixed combination of SLM 50 microg 
and FP 500 microg Diskus, 1 inhalation twice daily; or (2) FP Diskus 500 microg, 
1 inhalation twice daily, plus oral titrated THEO twice daily. Patients attended 
the clinic before and after 4, 8, 12 and 16 weeks of treatment for evaluations of
pulmonary function, and dyspnea, which was assessed using an analogic visual
scale. Also the supplemental salbutamol use was measured.
RESULTS: . Sixty-six patients completed the 4-month treatment period: 37 patients
receiving SLM/FP and 29 patients receiving THEO+FP. Patients were withdrawn for
various reasons, the most common of which were poor compliance with the protocol,
exacerbation and GI events. A gradual increase in FEV(1) was observed with each
treatment. Maximum significant increases in FEV(1) over baseline values that were
observed after 4 months of treatment were as follows: SLM/FP 0.172 l (95% CI:
0.084-0.260) and THEO+FP 0.155 l (95% CI: 0.054-0.256). SLM/FP experienced
significantly (p<0.05) greater improvements in dyspnea, and required
significantly fewer supplemental salbutamol treatments than the THEO+FP group.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that SLM/FP combination may provide substantial 
benefits in both physiologic and clinical outcomes in symptomatic patients with
COPD. It also causes a more effective control than THEO+FP.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pupt.2004.01.004 
PMID: 15123223  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. Drug Ther Bull. 2004 Mar;42(3):18-21.

Are Seretide and Symbicort useful in COPD?

[No authors listed]

Seretide (fluticasone + salmeterol--Allen & Hanburys) and Symbicort (budesonide +
formoterol--AstraZeneca) inhalers have recently been licensed in the UK for the
symptomatic treatment of patients with severe chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD) and a history of repeated exacerbations. Advertising for Seretide 
depicts a man and states that the drug "has improved his ability to breathe and
reduced his risk of exacerbations", while promotional claims for Symbicort
include benefits in "reducing symptoms" and "improving quality of life". Here we 
assess the place of these fixed-dose combination inhalers containing a
corticosteroid and a long-acting beta 2 agonist in the management of patients
with COPD.


PMID: 15038079  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. Br J Clin Pharmacol. 2004 Apr;57(4):388-92.

The presence of emphysema does not affect the systemic bioactivity of inhaled
fluticasone in severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Lee DK(1), Lipworth BJ.

Author information: 
(1)Asthma & Allergy Research Group, Department of Clinical Pharmacology,
Ninewells Hospital & Medical School, University of Dundee, Dundee DD1 9SY,
Scotland, United Kingdom.

AIMS: To assess the systemic bioactivity of fluticasone proprionate (FP) 2000
micro g daily on sensitive adrenal and bone markers in severe chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD) patients with or without significant emphysema.
METHODS: Ten patients without emphysema (COPD group: age 55 years, FEV(1) 51%
predicted and DL(CO) 83% predicted) and 10 patients with emphysema (COPDE group: 
age 59 years, FEV(1) 43% predicted and DL(CO) 49% predicted) received FP 2000
micro g daily via a spacer for 2 weeks. There was a 1-week washout period prior
to FP treatment where patients were given salmeterol and oxitropium, after
stopping their usual inhaled corticosteroids for the duration of the study.
Measurements including overnight 10 h urinary cortisol excretion corrected for
creatinine (OUCC) and serum osteocalcin concentrations were performed at baseline
following washout and after 2 weeks of FP.
RESULTS: Values for OUCC and serum osteocalcin concentrations pre- and post-FP
were not significantly different between the COPD and COPDE groups. There was
significant suppression of OUCC (nmol mmol(-1)) by FP treatment within the COPD
group (P = 0.03): 7.86 vs 4.64 (95% CI on the difference 0.47, 5.98), and within 
the COPDE group (P = 0.006): 7.13 vs 4.27 (95% CI on the difference: 1.03, 4.69).
Likewise, there was significant suppression of osteocalcin concentration (nmol
l(-1)) by FP treatment within the COPD group (P = 0.04): 7.24 vs 6.34 (95% CI on 
the difference: 0.01, 1.78), and within the COPDE group (P = 0.03): 6.92 vs 5.72 
(95% CI on the difference: 0.12, 2.29).
CONCLUSIONS: Severe COPD patients who are receiving high dose FP are susceptible 
to the development of systemic adverse effects, irrespective of the presence of
emphysema.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2125.2003.02026.x 
PMCID: PMC1884482
PMID: 15025735  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. Ugeskr Laeger. 2004 Jan 19;166(4):271-4.

[Combined salmeterol and fluticasone in the treatment of chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease].

[Article in Danish]

Vestbo J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Wythenshawe Hospital, North West Lung Centre, Manchester, UK.
jvestbo@man.ac.uk


PMID: 14964108  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. Am J Respir Med. 2002;1(4):273-82; discussion 283-4.

Inhaled salmeterol/fluticasone propionate combination in chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease.

Lyseng-Williamson KA(1), Keating GM.

Author information: 
(1)Adis International Inc, Langhorne, Pennsylvania 19047, USA. demail@adis.com

Salmeterol/fluticasone propionate is a fixed-dose combination of the long-acting 
beta2-adrenoceptor agonist salmeterol and the corticosteroid fluticasone
propionate and is inhaled via the Diskus powder inhaler. In three randomized,
double-blind, 24-week or 52-week studies in >2850 patients with chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), administration of salmeterol/fluticasone
propionate 50/250 microg twice daily (in one study) and salmeterol/fluticasone
propionate 50/500 microg twice daily (in the other studies) provided greater
improvement in lung function than placebo or either component alone at the same
nominal dosage. Both strengths of the combination product administered twice
daily resulted in clinically meaningful increases in scores in health-related
quality-of-life questionnaires that were specific for respiratory disease.
Improvements in this and almost all other secondary measures of efficacy,
including symptomatic outcomes, were significantly greater with the combination
product than with placebo. Administration of salmeterol/fluticasone propionate as
a combination product did not result in any untoward interactions that affected
the pharmacodynamic, pharmacokinetic or tolerability profiles of the individual
components. Candidiasis, hoarseness/dysphonia, throat irritation and headache
occurred more frequently with salmeterol/fluticasone propionate than with placebo
in patients with COPD.


PMID: 14720047  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2003;(4):CD003794.

Combined corticosteroid and longacting beta-agonist in one inhaler for chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease.

Nannini L(1), Lasserson TJ, Poole P.

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary Section, Hospital G. Baigorria, Ruta 11 Y Jm Estrada, G. Baigorria, 
Santa Fe - Rosario, Argentina, 2152. nanninilj@cimero.org.ar

Update in
    Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2004;(3):CD003794.

BACKGROUND: Long-acting beta-agonists and inhaled corticosteroids have been
recommended in guidelines for the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease. However, they have only been available until recently via separate
administration. They have been developed in order to facilitate adherence to
medication regimens, and to improve efficacy.
OBJECTIVES: To assess the efficacy of combined inhaled corticosteroid and
long-acting beta-agonist preparations in the treatment of adults with chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease.
SEARCH STRATEGY: We searched the Cochrane Airways Group chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD) trials register (March 2003), the Cochrane Central
Register of Controlled Trials (The Cochrane Library Issue 1, 2003), LILACS (all
years to March 2003) and reference lists of articles. We also contacted
manufacturers and researchers in the field.
SELECTION CRITERIA: Studies were included if they were randomised, with adequate 
blinding procedures in place. Studies could compare a combined inhaled
corticosteroids and long-acting beta-agonist preparation with either component
preparation or placebo. Studies comparing different members of each class of
combined therapies were included
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Two reviewers independently assessed trial quality 
and extracted data.
MAIN RESULTS: Four randomised trials with 2986 participants were included. Two
different combination preparations (fluticasone/salmeterol and
budesonide/formoterol) were studied in the trials. No meta-analysis on clinical
outcomes was possible due to different outcome assessment across studies. All
studies demonstrated a reduction in exacerbation rates versus placebo.
Budesonide/formoterol was more effective than formoterol in reducing
exacerbations in one study from 1.84 to 1.42 exacerbations per year.
Fluticasone/salmeterol did not significantly reduce exacerbations compared with
either of its component treatments. Fluticasone/salmeterol led to better quality 
of life compared with placebo (two studies), although there were conflicting
results when compared with inhaled corticosteroid alone (two studies). There was 
no significant difference between fluticasone/salmeterol and long-acting
beta-agonist (two studies). Budesonide/formoterol led to statistically
significant differences in quality of life compared with placebo, but not when
compared with component inhaled corticosteroid or beta-agonist (one study).
REVIEWER'S CONCLUSIONS: For the primary outcome of exacerbations,
budesonide/formoterol had a modest advantage over a component medication,
formoterol, in a single trial, but fluticasone/salmeterol did not result in a
significant reduction in exacerbations compared to either of its components. The 
combination of steroids and long-acting beta-agonist in one inhaler was effective
in improving symptoms compared with placebo and on certain clinical outcomes
compared with one of the individual components alone. In order to draw firmer
conclusions about the effects of combination therapy in a single inhaler more
data are necessary, including the assessment of the comparative effects with
separate administration of the two drugs in double-dummy trials.

DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD003794 
PMID: 14583994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. Ann Pharmacother. 2003 Sep;37(9):1247-55.

Long-acting inhaled beta 2-agonists for stable COPD.

Dougherty JA(1), Didur BL, Aboussouan LS.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Services, Pharmacy Department, Florida Hospital, Orlando, FL
32803-1248, USA. john.dougherty@flhosp.org

Erratum in
    Ann Pharmacother. 2004 Mar;38(3):513.

OBJECTIVE: To describe the pathogenesis of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
(COPD) and mechanisms of benefit, formulations available, drug costs,
pharmacokinetic profiles, and pertinent clinical studies for long-acting
beta(2)-agonists.
DATA SOURCES: A MEDLINE search was conducted from July 1966 through October 2002.
STUDY SELECTION AND DATA EXTRACTION: Pertinent articles related to COPD and
long-acting beta(2)-agonists.
DATA SYNTHESIS: The incidence and subsequent morbidity and mortality of COPD have
increased during the last 4 decades, prompting worldwide initiatives to formulate
guidelines to decrease the burden of this disease. COPD is a progressive,
irreversible disease state characterized by chronic cough, dyspnea, sputum
production, and wheezing, in which no medication has been shown to decrease
mortality, excluding oxygen supplementation. Bronchodilators have been a mainstay
of COPD treatment through their ability to work by both smooth- and
non-smooth-muscle mechanisms. Long-acting beta(2)-agonists (i.e., formoterol,
salmeterol) dosed twice daily provide more convenient dosing than 4-times-daily
regimens of traditional short-acting bronchodilators. Both formoterol and
salmeterol have acceptable adverse event profiles when used at recommended doses.
There have been no direct clinical outcome studies comparing formoterol and
salmeterol, but both have shown some benefits over ipratropium and theophylline
in improving the symptoms, spirometric indices, exacerbations, and quality of
life of patients with COPD.
CONCLUSIONS: Based on current evidence, long-acting beta(2)-agonists are
acceptable first-line agents for patients with COPD.

DOI: 10.1345/aph.1C436 
PMID: 12921509  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. Pulm Pharmacol Ther. 2003;16(4):241-6.

Salmeterol & fluticasone 50 microg/250 microg bid in combination provides a
better long-term control than salmeterol 50 microg bid alone and placebo in COPD 
patients already treated with theophylline.

Dal Negro RW(1), Pomari C, Tognella S, Micheletto C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Lung, Orlandi General Hospital, Bussolengo, Verona, Italy.
rdalnegro@ulss22.ven.it

Bronchodilator agents are central to the symptomatic management of Chronic
Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD), and long-acting inhaled bronchodilators are
regarded as more convenient. The role of inhaled corticosteroids still remains
controversial, but there is increasing evidence that they may improve FEV(1) and 
symptoms in the long-term.AIM: of the present small pilot study was to compare
Salmeterol & Fluticasone (SM&FP) 50/250 microg bid via a single Diskus inhaler
with SM 50 microg bid alone, and with placebo (P) in the treatment of moderate
COPD.
METHODS: Eighteen moderate COPD patients (53-77 yr, mean basal FEV(1)=49.1%
pred.+/-5.0 s.d.; mean FEV(1) reversibility=3.6% bsln+/-3.8 s.d.) treated with
theophylline 400 mg/day and beta(2) short acting prn, were divided into three
matched groups of six subjects according to a double-blind design, and treated
with SM&FP 50/250 microcg, or SM 50 microcg alone, or P via Diskus inhaler bid
for 52 weeks. In bsln, after 4, 12, 24, 36 and 52 weeks, FEV(1) (% pred), morning
PEF (l/s), the daily symptom score, and the number of exacerbations (compared
with the previous year) were considered. Statistics. t-test, anova in each
treatment group, and anova among basal values and among the 52 week values were
used, being p<0.05 accepted. Also changes (DeltaFEV(1)) from baseline were
compared at different control times.
RESULTS: The mean number of exacerbations/yr decreased from 3.5+/-0.8 to
1.16+/-0.75 s.d. exacerbation/yr in the SM&FP group (t-test p<0.001); from
3.0+/-0.89 to 2.3+/-0.81 s.d. in the SM group (t-test p=ns); and from 3.16+/-1.16
to 4.16+/-0.75 s.d. in the P group (t-test p=ns). Patients receiving SM&FP showed
the highest mean improvement in FEV(1) (+7.3%+/-3.3 s.d.) over the baseline
pre-treatment value after 36 weeks of treatment (anova p<0.001), being FEV(1)
unchanged after 52 weeks of treatment in SM group (+0.33%+/-2.4 s.d.) and with a 
substantial decrease following P (-2.6%+/-1.2 s.d.) (anova p<0.001). Morning PEF 
(l/min) increased in subjects treated with SM&FP (anova p<0.001), while it
remained unchanged in SM and P group (in both, anova p=ns). After 52 weeks of
treatment, only subjects treated with SM&FP showed a reduction of the daily
symptoms score from 3.6+/-0.7 to 2.0+/-0.2 s.d. (anova p=0.008). Daily beta(2)
short acting prn consumption was reduced only in SM&FP group from 4.2+/-0.81 to
2.2+/-1.2 s.d. after 52 weeks (anova p<0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: SM&FP 50/250 microcg regularly assumed in combination via a single
Diskus inhaler for a 52 week period improves respiratory function (such as
FEV(1), morning PEF), and and symptom score significantly in moderate COPD
previously treated with theophylline, and at an higher extent than SM alone or P.
The use of beta(2) short acting prn is also reduced, together with the number of 
exacerbations.


PMID: 12850128  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. Curr Opin Pharmacol. 2003 Jun;3(3):270-6.

Long-acting beta 2-adrenoceptor agonists or tiotropium bromide for patients with 
COPD: is combination therapy justified?

Tennant RC(1), Erin EM, Barnes PJ, Hansel TT.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Studies Unit, National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College,
London, UK.

Bronchodilators are the mainstay of therapy for patients with established chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) but, at present, the majority of patients
use short-acting agents. There is increasing evidence that long-acting agents,
such as the beta(2)-adrenoceptor agonists salmeterol and formeterol, and the new 
anticholinergic tiotropium bromide provide a better therapeutic option. In the
treatment of COPD, long-acting beta(2)-adrenoceptor agonists (LABAs) given twice 
daily cause the same degree of bronchodilation as tiotropium bromide given once
daily. Combined use of an inhaled LABA with tiotropium bromide should provide
important therapeutic benefits, as these drugs have distinct and complementary
pharmacological actions in the airways. Although clinical trials of this
combination have not been performed, clinical experience with Combivent, a
combination of a short-acting beta(2)-adrenoceptor agonist (salbutamol) and a
short-acting anticholinergic (ipratropium bromide), in COPD is encouraging
because the bronchodilation produced is of a magnitude greater than that of
either component alone. However, because LABAs are given twice daily but
tiotropium bromide is required only once daily, the challenge is to develop a
combined inhaler that can be employed on a daily basis.


PMID: 12810191  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. Respir Med. 2003 May;97(5):458-62.

A single high dose of formoterol is as effective as the same dose administered in
a cumulative manner in patients with acute exacerbation of COPD.

Cazzola M(1), Santus P, Matera MG, Carlucci P, Belloli E, Di Marco F, Centanni S.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Medicina Respiratoria, Azienda Ospedaliera di Rilevanza
Nazionale A. Cardarelli, Unità Complessa di Pneumologia e Allergologia, Napoli,
Italy. mcazzola@qubisoft.it

Several clinical trials have shown that the inhaled beta2-agonists with
long-acting properties, formoterol and salmeterol, may be effective in acute
exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). However, there is 
a great deal of controversy regarding the timing and optimal dose of inhaled
beta2-agonists in this pathologic condition. In this double-blind, randomised,
crossover study, we have compared the bronchodilating effect and the safety of
inhaled formoterol administered via Turbuhaler using either a cumulative dose
regimen or the equivalent single dose in 16 patients with acute exacerbations of 
COPD. On the two consecutive days, the patients received, in a randomised order, 
each of the following active dose regimens: (A): 9 + 9 + 18 microg of formoterol 
via Turbuhaler (36 microg cumulative delivered dose) or (B): 36 + 0 + 0 microg of
formoterol via Turbuhaler. The three doses on each treatment day were
administered at 30-mm intervals, with measurements being made 5 and 30 min after 
each dose. Contemporaneously, we also measured oxygen saturation by pulse
oximetry (SpO2) and pulse rate. Both the high dose and the cumulative one induced
a significant bronchodilation expressed as change in FEV1. The difference between
the two regimens was significant (P=0.0332) only 60 min after the first
inhalation. The trend of FVC and IC was similar to that of FEV1. All treatment
regimens were well tolerated and no adverse events were reported. Neither the
administration ofthe high dose nor that of the cumulative one modified heart rate
in a significant manner. Also they did not influence SpO2. This study indicates
that a single high dose offormoterol is as effective as the same dose
administered in a cumulative manner in patients with acute exacerbation of COPD.


PMID: 12735660  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. Expert Rev Pharmacoecon Outcomes Res. 2003 Apr;3(2):121-4. doi:
10.1586/14737167.3.2.121.

Salmeterol/fluticasone combination in COPD: is together better?

Antoniu SA(1), Mititiuc I.

Author information: 
(1)Clinic of Pulmonary Disease, University of Medicine and Pharmacy 'Gr.T.Popa'
Iasi, 30 Dr I Cihac Str., 6600 Iasi, Romania. sabinaantoniu@excite.com

Comment on
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2002 Oct 15;166(8):1084-91.
    Lancet. 2003 Feb 8;361(9356):449-56.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease represents one of the chronic conditions
for which many therapies have become available during the last few decades. They 
are aimed at reducing symptoms such as dyspnea, cough and sputum and many of them
are given on inhalatory route. Among them, bronchodilators, such as; salmeterol
or formoterol and inhaled steroids, such as budesonide or fluticasone have each
proven their effectiveness in improving many clinical outcomes such as dyspnea,
exacerbations number, lung function decline or health status. Currently
combinations of these two classes are available in an attempt to make the
inhalatory therapy more effective. These studies analyse the effectiveness of
salmeterol/fluticasone combination from a clinical point of view and for a short 
period of time.

DOI: 10.1586/14737167.3.2.121 
PMID: 19807359  [PubMed]


431. Eur Respir J. 2003 Feb;21(2):267-72.

Minimal important difference of the transition dyspnoea index in a multinational 
clinical trial.

Witek TJ Jr(1), Mahler DA.

Author information: 
(1)Respiratory Development and Operations, Boehringer Ingelheim GmbH. Ingelheim
am Rhein, Germany. witek@ing.boehringer-ingelheim.com

Dyspnoea is a primary symptom of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
The baseline (BDI) and transition (TDI) dyspnoea indices are commonly used
instruments to assess breathlessness and the impact of intervention. Its validity
and pattern of response in multinational clinical trials has not been
established. In a retrospective analysis of a cohort of 997 COPD patients who
received tiotropium, salmeterol or placebo, in addition to usual care, the
validity and pattern of response of the BDI and TDI were examined. The BDI was
significantly correlated with the dyspnoea diary (DD) score and the symptom and
activity components of the St. George's respiratory questionnaire (SGRQ),
establishing concurrent validity. Furthermore, the TDI was also correlated with
the changes in DD, SGRQ symptom and activity scores. Construct validity was
established by the association between baseline forced expiratory volume in one
second (FEV1) and BDI and AFEVI with TDI. Physician's global evaluation (PGE) was
significantly associated with BDI as well as APGE with TDI. Significant
correlations have also been observed when the cohorts were classified according
to native English and native non-English speaking countries. A change in PGE of 1
category (i.e. 2 units on an 8-point scale) was associated with a mean TDI of
approximately 1 unit (0.9-1.3 mean focal score), lending further support to the
clinical significance of this change inherent in the instrument's descriptors.
TDI responders (i.e. focal score < or = 1 unit) used less supplemental
salbutamol, had fewer exacerbations and had significantly improved health status 
as measured by impacts and total SGRQ scores compared with nonresponders. In
conclusion, the transition dyspnoea index is a valid instrument when used in a
multinational clinical trial and the patterns of response confirm a 1-unit change
in the transition dyspnoea index focal score as being clinically important.


PMID: 12608440  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. Lancet. 2003 Feb 8;361(9356):449-56.

Combined salmeterol and fluticasone in the treatment of chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease: a randomised controlled trial.

Calverley P(1), Pauwels R, Vestbo J, Jones P, Pride N, Gulsvik A, Anderson J,
Maden C; TRial of Inhaled STeroids ANd long-acting beta2 agonists study group.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Clinical Sciences Centre, University Hospital Aintree,
Liverpool, UK. pmacal@liverpool.ac.uk

Erratum in
    Lancet. 2003 May 10;361(9369):1660.

Comment in
    Lancet. 2003 May 10;361(9369):1650-1; author reply 1652-3.
    Lancet. 2003 May 10;361(9369):1651; author reply 1652-3.
    Lancet. 2003 May 10;361(9369):1651; author reply 1652-3.
    Lancet. 2003 May 10;361(9369):1652; author reply 1652-3.
    Expert Rev Pharmacoecon Outcomes Res. 2003 Apr;3(2):121-4.
    Lancet. 2003 May 10;361(9369):1652; author reply 1652-3.
    Lancet. 2003 Feb 8;361(9356):444-5.
    Lancet. 2003 May 10;361(9369):1652; author reply 1652-3.

BACKGROUND: Inhaled long-acting beta2 agonists improve lung function and health
status in symptomatic chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), whereas
inhaled corticosteroids reduce the frequency of acute episodes of symptom
exacerbation and delay deterioration in health status. We postulated that a
combination of these treatments would be better than each component used alone.
METHODS: 1465 patients with COPD were recruited from outpatient departments in 25
countries. They were treated in a randomised, double-blind, parallel-group,
placebo-controlled study with either 50 microg salmeterol twice daily (n=372),
500 microg fluticasone twice daily (n=374), 50 microg salmeterol and 500 microg
fluticasone twice daily (n=358), or placebo (n=361) for 12 months. The primary
outcome was the pretreatment forced expiratory volume in 1s (FEV1) after 12
months treatment' and after patients had abstained from all bronchodilators for
at least 6h and from study medication for at least 12h. Secondary outcomes were
other lung function measurements, symptoms and rescue treatment use, the number
of exacerbations, patient withdrawals, and disease-specific health status. We
assessed adverse events, serum cortisol concentrations, skin bruising, and
electrocardiograms. Analysis was as predefined in the study protocol.
FINDINGS: All active treatments improved lung function, symptoms, and health
status and reduced use of rescue medication and frequency of exacerbations.
Combination therapy improved pretreatment FEV1 significantly more than did
placebo (treatment difference 133 mL, 95% CI 105-161, p<0.0001), salmeterol (73
mL, 46-101, p<0.0001), or fluticasone alone (95 mL, 67-122, p<0.0001).
Combination treatment produced a clinically significant improvement in health
status and the greatest reduction in daily symptoms. All treatments were well
tolerated with no difference in the frequency of adverse events, bruising, or
clinically significant falls in serum cortisol concentration.
INTERPRETATION: Because inhaled long-acting beta2 agonists and corticosteroid
combination treatment produces better control of symptoms and lung function, with
no greater risk of side-effects than that with use of either component alone,
this combination treatment should be considered for patients with COPD.

DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(03)12459-2 
PMID: 12583942  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. Drugs Today (Barc). 2002 Sep;38(9):585-600.

Tiotropium bromide: a novel once-daily anticholinergic bronchodilator for the
treatment of COPD.

Hansel TT(1), Barnes PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Medicine, National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial
College, London, UK. t.hansel@ic.ac.uk

Tiotropium bromide (Spiriva, BA679BR, Boehringer Ingelheim) is a novel inhaled,
long-acting anticholinergic bronchodilator that is employed as a once-daily
maintenance treatment for patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD). Like ipratropium bromide, tiotropium bromide is a quaternary ammonium
derivative that binds to muscarinic receptors. However, although tiotropium binds
with high affinity to muscarinic receptors of M1-, M2- and M3-subtypes, it
dissociates very slowly from M1- and M3-receptors but more rapidly from
M2-receptors, thereby giving it a unique kinetic selectivity. To date, the
short-acting anticholinergic agents ipratropium and oxitropium bromide have been 
extensively employed as bronchodilator therapy for patients with COPD. Indeed,
the Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease (GOLD) strategy
emphasises the role of bronchodilators in symptomatic management of all stages of
COPD. It is encouraging that tiotropium given once daily from a dry powder
inhaler at 18 g has been shown to cause greater improvement in lung function and 
reduction in symptoms than ipratropium bromide given four times daily.
Furthermore, clinical studies over a 1-year period have demonstrated that
tiotropium has impressive and maintained effects on lung function, symptoms and
health-related quality of life, and may also reduce exacerbations. In a recent
large scale comparative study over 6 months, tiotropium has been shown to cause
superior bronchodilation and symptomatic improvement when compared to twice daily
salmeterol in COPD. The only significant reported adverse event is dry mouth,
which is found in approximately 10%-15% of subjects, but this is reversible and
rarely causes discontinuation of therapy. Based on these promising features, it
is likely that tiotropium used alone or in combination with other bronchodilators
will emerge as first-line maintenance treatment for patients with airway
obstruction due to COPD.

Copyright 2002 Prous Science


PMID: 12582447  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. Drugs Aging. 2003;20(3):209-28.

Treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease in older patients: a practical
guide.

Yohannes AM(1), Hardy CC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of the School of Physiotherapy, Manchester Royal Infirmary,
Manchester, UK. Ayohannes@fs3.scg.man.ac.uk

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a common disability, largely
encountered in the elderly population, in whom it causes significant morbidity
and mortality. The general perception of health professionals is that COPD is
often a self-inflicted disorder affecting the more socio-economically
disadvantaged segment of the population with significant comorbidity. COPD is the
least funded in terms of research in relation to illness burden compared with
other chronic diseases. However, recently published guidelines of both the
British Thoracic Society and the Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung
Disease have highlighted best management strategies both of chronic symptoms and 
acute exacerbations in this patient group. The chronic management of COPD should,
like asthma, involve a stepwise approach with smoking cessation being pivotal for
all severities of COPD, regardless of patient age. The mainstay of therapeutic
treatment remains regular bronchodilators, both beta(2)-adrenoreceptor agonists
and anticholinergic agents. Current evidence suggests that long-acting
beta(2)-adrenoreceptor agonists such as salmeterol and the new long-acting
anticholinergic agent tiotropium bromide are more efficacious than their shorter 
acting equivalents such as salbutamol and ipratropium bromide in terms of
bronchodilation, improved well-being and a reduction in acute exacerbation rates.
Additionally since they are taken once or twice daily compliance should be
improved. The role of long-term inhaled corticosteroids in the chronic management
of COPD is contentious. Only those patients with COPD who have been shown to
respond to a formal corticosteroid trial, preferably with a 2-week course of oral
corticosteroid, should receive long-term inhaled corticosteroids. In the
management of acute exacerbations in acidotic patients nasal ventilation is the
treatment of choice in addition to conventional treatment with bronchodilators
and oral corticosteroids. Antibacterials need not be prescribed universally in
all exacerbations of COPD. Pulmonary rehabilitation classes either individually
or in groups have been shown to be beneficial in the management of patients with 
COPD and their use in secondary care is to be encouraged. Most treatment
modalities do not improve pulmonary function in patients with severe COPD.
Therefore, pulmonary function including spirometry should be used to make the
diagnosis of COPD but not as a monitor of efficacy of treatment. Assessment of
severity of COPD and improvement with treatment modalities is best done with
dynamic exercise testing such as 6-minute walk tests and incremental shuttle walk
tests or with the administration of disease-specific physical disability and
quality-of-life questionnaires. Most COPD research does not specifically target
the older COPD patients and these patients may merit special consideration for
their optimum assessment and management.


PMID: 12578401  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. Eur Respir J. 2003 Jan;21(1):86-94.

Effect of inhaled bronchodilators on inspiratory capacity and dyspnoea at rest in
COPD.

Di Marco F(1), Milic-Emili J, Boveri B, Carlucci P, Santus P, Casanova F, Cazzola
M, Centanni S.

Author information: 
(1)University of Milan, San Paolo Hospital, Respiratory Unit, Milan, Italy.

It has been shown that patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)
develop dynamic hyperinflation (DH), which contributes to dyspnoea and exercise
intolerance. Formoterol, salmeterol and oxitropium have been recommended for
maintenance therapy in COPD patients, but their effect on DH has only been
assessed for salmeterol. The aim of the present study was to compare the acute
effect of four inhaled bronchodilators (salbutamol, formoterol, salmeterol and
oxitropium) and placebo on forced expiratory volume in one second, inspiratory
capacity, forced vital capacity and dyspnoea in COPD patients. A cross-over,
randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled study was carried out on 20 COPD
patients. Patients underwent pulmonary function testing and dyspnoea evaluation, 
in basal condition and 5, 15, 30, 60 and 120 min after bronchodilator or placebo 
administration. The results indicate that in chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease patients with decreased baseline inspiratory capacity, there was a much
greater increase of inspiratory capacity after bronchodilator administration,
which correlated closely with the improvement of dyspnoea sensation at rest. For 
all bronchodilators used, inspiratory capacity reversibility should be tested at 
30 min following the bronchodilator. On average, formoterol elicited the greatest
increase in inspiratory capacity than the other bronchodilators used, though the 
difference was significant only with salmeterol and oxitropium. The potential
advantage of formoterol needs to be tested in a larger patient population.


PMID: 12570114  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. Respir Med. 2003 Jan;97 Suppl A:S35-43.

Symptoms are an important outcome in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
clinical trials: results of a 3-month comparative study using the Breathlessness,
Cough and Sputum Scale (BCSS).

Celli B(1), Halpin D, Hepburn R, Byrne N, Keating ET, Goldman M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, St Elizabeth's Medical Center, Boston, MA,
USA. Bartolome_Celli@cchcs.org

The need to manage the key symptoms of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD) (breathlessness, cough and sputum) is an important treatment objective.
Viozan (sibenadet HCl, AR-C68397AA) is a novel dual D2 dopamine receptor,
beta2-adrenoceptor agonist, which combines conventional bronchodilatory activity 
with the sensory nerve modulation afforded by dopamine agonism. The efficacy of
this agent in relieving patient symptoms has been determined in a series of
large-scale clinical studies; the results of a 3-month, placebo-controlled
multi-centre study are reported. Effect on patient symptoms was determined using 
a novel patient-reported assessment instrument, the Breathlessness, Cough and
Sputum Scale (BCSS). Patients with smoking-related COPD were required to complete
a 2-week baseline period before being randomized to one of three treatment
groups; sibenadet (500 microg three times daily) plus placebo (twice daily);
salmeterol (50 microg twice daily) plus placebo (three times daily); placebo
(twice daily) plus a second placebo (three times daily). All treatments were
delivered via pressurized metered dose inhaler (pMDI) for 12 weeks. From
enrolment, patients were required to complete daily diary cards to record
symptoms of breathlessness, cough and sputum, medication use and adverse events. 
The primary outcome measure was the difference between the mean BCSS total score 
measured over the baseline period and the mean BCSS total score in the final 4
weeks of the treatment period. Secondary measures included assessment of lung
function, rescue medication use, exacerbations, health-related quality of life,
opinion of efficacy and safety. Although an initial reduction in BCSS total score
(indicating symptom improvement) was seen with sibenadet therapy, this effect was
not maintained for the study duration. Salmeterol therapy, however, resulted in a
sustained reduction in BCSS total score. No notable benefit over placebo was seen
in lung function, exacerbations or health-related quality of life with either
active treatment. While the results of this study failed to demonstrate sustained
efficacy with sibenadet therapy, they do indicate the value of symptom assessment
in the clinical evaluation of new drugs for the treatment of COPD.


PMID: 12564609  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. Respir Med. 2003 Jan;97(1):20-6.

Cost-effectiveness of salmeterol in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease: an economic evaluation.

Jones PW(1), Wilson K, Sondhi S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Physiological Medicine, St George's Hospital Medical School,
London, UK. pjones@sghms.ac.uk

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is associated with a large economic 
and social burden. Few economic studies have examined the benefits of inhaled
therapy for patients with COPD. This 16-week study examined the
cost-effectiveness of salmeterol in this patient group. Patients with a history
of COPD were randomised to treatment with salmetrol 50 mcg (229 patients) or
placebo (227 patients) twice daily administered by metered-dose inhaler in
addition to normal therapy. Forced expiratory volume (FEV1) was measured and
patients recorded the impact of their symptoms in a daily diary. Health status
was assessed using the St Georges Respiratory Questionnaire. A significantly
higher proportion of salmeterol-treated patients had an increase of >15% in FEV1.
Salmeterol patients had a higher mean proportion of symptom-free days and nights 
than those in the placebo group. More salmeterol patients had a clinically
significant improvement in health status. Total healthcare costs were increased
in the salmeterol group, but hospital and GP visit costs and concurrent COPD
medication costs were lower. The reduction in hospital costs was sufficient to
offset a substantial portion of the acquisition cost of salmeterol. Addition of
salmeterol to COPD patients' current therapy improved lung function, health
status at the expense of a modest increase in costs compared with usual therapy.


PMID: 12556006  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2002 Dec;110(6 Suppl):S298-303.

The effect of inhaled beta2-agonists on clinical outcomes in chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease.

Mahler DA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Section of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical
Center, Lebanon, NH 03756, USA.

The major clinical outcomes measured in evaluating the responses to
pharmacotherapy in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)
include the severity of dyspnea, exercise capacity, exacerbations, and health
status. Various studies have demonstrated that testing for acute bronchodilator
reversibility in the pulmonary function laboratory does not predict the clinical 
responses to a trial of bronchodilator therapy in patients with COPD. Separate
studies have shown that inhaled albuterol, both a single dose (300 microg) and 2 
weeks of therapy (200 microg/4x/day), reduces dyspnea. There is more published
information available about the effects of long-acting (>/=12 hours' duration of 
action) inhaled beta(2)-agonists because of greater interest in considering
clinical outcomes at the time of drug testing. In one randomized clinical trial, 
formoterol reduced symptoms (as recorded in a home diary) and improved health
status. Nine clinical studies have examined the effects of salmeterol on clinical
outcomes. Salmeterol reduced the perception of breathlessness (in 6 of 9 studies)
and improved health status (in 3 of 4 studies). These results collectively
demonstrate that long-acting inhaled beta(2)-agonists not only relax bronchial
smooth muscle but also provide important clinical benefits in symptomatic
patients with COPD.


PMID: 12464939  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. Respir Med. 2002 Oct;96(10):790-5.

Acute effects of higher than customary doses of salmeterol and salbutamol in
patients with acute exacerbation of COPD.

Cazzola M(1), Califano C, Di Perna F, D'Amato M, Terzano C, Matera MG, D'Amato G,
Marsico SA.

Author information: 
(1)A Cardarelli Hospital, Department of Respiratory Medicine, Naples, Italy.
mcazzola@qubisoft.it

Worsening of underlying bronchospasm may be associated with acute exacerbations
of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). As airway obstruction becomes
more severe, the therapeutic option is to add salbutamol, but not salmeterol, as 
needed to cause rapid relief of bronchospasm. Unfortunately the most effective
dosage of beta2-agonists may increase above that recommended during acute
exacerbations. In this study, we compared the acute effects of higher than
customary doses of salmeterol and salbutamol in 20 patients with acute
exacerbation of COPD. A dose-response curve to salmeterol pMDI, 25 microg/puff or
salbutamol pMDI, 100 microg/puff, was constructed using 1, 1, and 2 puff' i.e., a
total cumulative dose of 100 microg salmeterol or 400 microg salbutamol on 2
consecutive days. After baseline measurements, dose increments were given at
30-min intervals with measurements being made 25 min after each dose. Hear rate
(HR) and pulse-oximetry (SpO2) measurements were then taken. Both salmeterol and 
salbutamol induced a larg and significant (P < 0.05) dose-dependent increase in
FEV1 [mean differences from baseline (L) = after 100 microg salmeterol 0.174 (95%
CI: 0.112 to 0.237); after 400 microg salbutamol: 0.165 (95% CI: 0.080 to
0.249)], in IC [mean differences from baseline (L) = after 100 microg salmeterol:
0.332 (95% CI: 0.165 to 0.499); after 400 microg salbutamol: 0.281 (95% CI: 0.107
to 0.456)] (Fig. 2), and in FVC mean differences from baseline (L) = after 100
microg salmeterol: 0.224 (95% CI: 0.117 to 0.331); after 400 microg salbutamol:
0.242 (95% CI: 0.090 to 0.395)]. There was no significant difference between the 
FEV1 values (P=0.418), the ICvalues (P=0.585), and the FVCvalue (P=0.610) after
100 microg salmeterol and 400 microg salbutamol. HR [mean differences from
baseline (beats/min) = after 100 microg salmeterol: 3.15 (95% CI: -0.65 to 6.96);
after 400 microg salbutamol: 2.30 (95% CI: -0.91 to 5.51)] and SpO2 [mean
differences from baseline (%) = after 100 microg salmeterol: -0.20 (95% CI: -1.00
to 0.60); after 400 microg salbutamol: -0.11 (95% CI: -1.00 to 0.79)] did not
change significantly from baseline (P > 0.05). These data indicate that
salmeterol is effective and safe in the treatment of acute exacerbation of COPD
and support its use in this clinical condition.


PMID: 12412978  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. Eur Respir J. 2002 Oct;20(4):819-25.

Survival in COPD patients after regular use of fluticasone propionate and
salmeterol in general practice.

Soriano JB(1), Vestbo J, Pride NB, Kiri V, Maden C, Maier WC.

Author information: 
(1)Worldwide Epidemiology Dept, GlaxoSmithKline Research and Development,
Greenford, Middlesex, UK. joan.b.soriano@gsk.com

Comment in
    Eur Respir J. 2003 Feb;21(2):202-3.
    Eur Respir J. 2002 Oct;20(4):797-8.
    Eur Respir J. 2003 Mar;21(3):559-60; author reply 560.

Despite substantial evidence regarding the benefits of combined use of inhaled
corticosteroids and long-acting beta2-agonists in asthma, such evidence remains
limited for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Observational data may 
provide an insight into the expected survival in clinical trials of fluticasone
propionate (FP) and salmeterol in COPD. Newly physician-diagnosed COPD patients
identified in primary care during 1990-1999 aged > or = 50 yrs, of both sexes and
with regular prescriptions of respiratory drugs were identified in the UK General
Practice Research Database. Three-year survival in 1,045 COPD patients treated
with FP and salmeterol was compared with that in 3,620 COPD patients who
regularly used other bronchodilators but not inhaled corticosteroids or
long-acting beta2-agonists. Standard methods of survival analysis were used,
including adjustment for possible confounders. Survival at year 3 was
significantly greater in FP and/or salmeterol users (78.6%) than in the reference
group (63.6%). After adjusting for confounders, the survival advantage observed
was highest in combined users of FP and salmeterol (hazard ratio (HR) 0.48 (95%
confidence interval 0.31-0.73)), followed by users of FP alone (HR 0.62
(0.45-0.85)) and regular users of salmeterol alone (HR 0.79 (0.58-1.07)) versus
the reference group. Mortality decreased with increasing number of prescriptions 
of FP and/or salmeterol. In conclusion, regular use of fluticasone propionate
alone or in combination with salmeterol is associated with increased survival of 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease patients managed in primary care.


PMID: 12412670  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. J Appl Physiol (1985). 2002 Dec;93(6):2053-8. Epub 2002 Sep 6.

Effects of exercise and beta 2-agonists on lung function in chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease.

Corsico A(1), Fulgoni P, Beccaria M, Zoia MC, Barisione G, Pellegrino R, Brusasco
V, Cerveri I.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio di Fisiopatologia Respiratoria, Clinica Malattie Apparato
Respiratorio, Università di Pavia, Istituto di Ricovero e Cura a Carattere
Scientifico Policlinico S. Matteo, 27100 Pavia, Italy.

The effects of inhaled bronchodilators at rest and during exercise were studied
in 15 subjects with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. In a crossover study
against placebo, albuterol caused a significant increase in expiratory flow and
reduced lung hyperinflation and dyspnea at rest, but this was not associated with
differences in symptoms with exercise or any relevant parameter of physical
performance. Dynamic hyperinflation occurred during exercise similarly after
placebo or albuterol and was associated with a reduction of forced expiratory
flows. This, in turn, was correlated with the bronchoconstrictor effect of deep
inhalation determined at rest. In a parallel group study, expiratory flow was
increased by 3-wk treatment with salmeterol (n = 9) but not with placebo (n = 6).
However, in neither group was the response to exercise different from baseline.
These results suggest that in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease effective
pharmacological bronchodilation at rest may not be predictive of benefits of
exercise tolerance. This may be related to the occurrence of airway narrowing
during exercise, particularly when a deep inhalation at rest is followed by a
decrease in expiratory flow.

DOI: 10.1152/japplphysiol.00490.2002 
PMID: 12391117  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2002 Oct 15;166(8):1084-91.

Effectiveness of fluticasone propionate and salmeterol combination delivered via 
the Diskus device in the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Mahler DA(1), Wire P, Horstman D, Chang CN, Yates J, Fischer T, Shah T.

Author information: 
(1)Dartmouth Hitchcock Medical Center, Section of Pulmonary and Critical Care
Medicine, 1 Medical Center Drive, Lebanon, NH 03756-0001, USA.
donald.a.mahler@hitchcock.org

Comment in
    Expert Rev Pharmacoecon Outcomes Res. 2003 Apr;3(2):121-4.

This randomized controlled trial examined the benefits of combining an inhaled
corticosteroid, fluticasone propionate (F), with an inhaled long-acting
beta(2)-agonist, salmeterol (S), to treat the inflammatory and
bronchoconstrictive components of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). A
total of 691 patients with COPD received the combination of F and S (FSC), S (50 
mcg), F (500 mcg), or placebo twice daily via the Diskus device for 24 weeks. A
significantly greater increase in predose FEV(1) at the endpoint was observed
after FSC (156 ml) compared with S (107 ml, p = 0.012) and placebo (-4 ml, p <
0.0001). A significantly greater increase in 2-hour postdose FEV(1) at the
endpoint was observed after treatment with FSC (261 ml) compared with F (138 ml, 
p < 0.001) and placebo (28 ml, p < 0.001). There were greater improvements in the
Transition Dyspnea Index with FSC (2.1) compared with F (1.3, p = 0.033), S (0.9,
p < 0.001), and placebo (0.4, p < 0.0001). The incidence of adverse effects
(except for an increase in oral candidiasis with FSC and F) was similar among the
treatment groups. We conclude that FSC improved lung function and reduced the
severity of dyspnea compared with individual components and placebo.

DOI: 10.1164/rccm.2112055 
PMID: 12379552  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. Pharmacotherapy. 2002 Sep;22(9):1129-39.

Formoterol therapy for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: a review of the
literature.

Friedman M(1), Della Cioppa G, Kottakis J.

Author information: 
(1)Tulane University School of Medicine, New Orleans, Louisiana, USA.

Numerous clinical trials have investigated the use of formoterol, a long-acting
beta2-agonist, for the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
Formoterol provides bronchodilation as rapidly as albuterol, yet its efficacy and
duration of action are similar to those of salmeterol. It demonstrates better
spirometric efficacy than either ipratropium or theophylline alone, and its
efficacy improves when administered in combination with ipratropium. Formoterol
improves patients' quality of life and has a good safety profile. It is better
tolerated than theophylline and has a similar tolerability to albuterol,
salmeterol, and ipratropium. In short, formoterol is a bronchodilator with rapid 
onset of action and prolonged duration of action with a favorable efficacy,
safety, and tolerability profile when used in patients with COPD. It provides a
valid therapeutic option in the pharmacologic treatment of this disease.


PMID: 12222549  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. Indian J Chest Dis Allied Sci. 2002 Jul-Sep;44(3):165-72.

An evaluation of salmeterol in the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary
diseases.

Gupta RK(1), Chhabra SK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiorespiratory Physiology, Vallabhbhai Patel Chest Institute,
University of Delhi.

BACKGROUND: Salmeterol has been shown a useful drug for the treatment of chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). However, its positioning in the current
treatment of COPD remains to be defined. The present study was carried out to
evaluate its role as an add-on drug to the current first-line drug, ipratropium.
METHODS: A double-blind randomized, parallel group, placebo-controlled design was
used in an outpatient setting. Thirty-three patients with moderate or severe COPD
were included. After a run-in period of two weeks on 40 microg four-times-daily
ipratropium and 400 microg twice-daily beclomethasone dipropionate, they were
randomized into two groups to receive either salmeterol (50 microg twice daily)
or placebo for eight weeks. The outcome parameters were: (i) spirometry, (ii)
six-minute walking test, (iii) SF-36 health-related quality of life (HRQoL)
questionnaire score, (iv) baseline dyspnoea index (BDI), (v) patient's
self-assessment and (vi) supplemental use of salbutamol.
RESULTS: The mean FEV1 and FVC increased significantly over the initial values in
the salmeterol group but not in the placebo group. Salmeterol produced greater
improvements in almost all the dimensions of HRQoL as well as in the BDI and the 
supplemental use of salbutamol was lower in this group. However, the six-minute
walk distance was similar in the two groups.
CONCLUSIONS: The present study shows that eight weeks treatment with salmeterol
50 microg twice-daily added to the existing regimen of ipratropium bromide and
beclomethasone dipropionate provides greater symptomatic relief and improvement
in lung function than placebo. This is accompanied by an improvement in the
health-related quality of life.


PMID: 12206475  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2002;(3):CD001104.

Long-acting beta2-agonists for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease patients
with poorly reversible airflow limitation.

Appleton S(1), Poole P, Smith B, Veale A, Bara A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, The Queen Elizabeth Hospital, Woodville Rd.,
Woodville, Adelaide, Australia. sappleto@medicine.adelaide.edu.au

Update in
    Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2006;(3):CD001104.

Update of
    Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2000;(2):CD001104.

BACKGROUND: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is characterised by
partially reversible airflow limitation. Many patients have little reversibility 
to short acting bronchodilators, but long acting bronchodilators are frequently
advocated.
OBJECTIVES: To determine the effectiveness of long acting beta-2 adrenoceptor
agonists in COPD patients with low reversibility to short-acting bronchodilators.
SEARCH STRATEGY: The Cochrane Airways Group register was searched. Bibliographies
of identified randomised controlled trials (RCTs) were also searched. Authors of 
identified RCTs were contacted for other published and unpublished studies and
unpublished studies were obtained from pharmaceutical companies.
SELECTION CRITERIA: All RCTs over four weeks in duration comparing treatment with
long-acting beta-2 adrenoceptor agonists (salmeterol or formoterol) with placebo 
in patients with stable poorly-reversible COPD.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Data extraction and study quality assessment was
performed independently by two reviewers. Where further or missing data were
required, authors of studies were contacted.
MAIN RESULTS: Eight RCTs met the inclusion criteria review. Six were parallel
group studies of 12-16 weeks in duration and two were cross-over studies with
four week treatment arms. All eight assessed the efficacy of salmeterol in COPD
compared to placebo. Few of the results could be combined in meta-analyses
because of differences in methods of reporting data. Isolated trials reported an 
improvement in one or other outcome in favour of salmeterol, but the only
possible meta-analysis of FEV1 showed no overall benefit (Standardised mean
difference 0.14 (95% Confidence Interval -0.16, 0.44, n=4). There was no
consistent effect on Health Related Quality of LIfe or symptoms scores. Overall, 
breathlessness was not reduced, but in one study more subjects in the salmeterol 
group had low Borg dyspnoea scores compared to placebo (Peto Odds Ratio = 0.60,
95% CI: 0.40; 0.88). There was no effect on COPD exacerbations over the short
period of the studies.
REVIEWER'S CONCLUSIONS: In the few studies that could be included in this review,
treatment of patients with COPD with long acting beta-2 agonists produces only
small increases in FEV1. The improvement in airways function does not seem to be 
associated with a consistent effect on other outcomes such as health related
quality of life or reductions in breathlessness.

DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD001104 
PMID: 12137617  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. Respir Med. 2002 Jun;96(6):439-43.

Addition of an extra dose of salmeterol Diskus to conventional dose of salmeterol
Diskus in patients with COPD.

Cazzola M(1), Santus P, Castagna F, Di Marco F, Terzano C, Matera MG, Centanni S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, A. Cardarelli Hospital, Naples, Italy.
mcazzola@qubisoft.it

Patients experiencing dyspnoea can request an additional dose of salmeterol
during the dose interval for the control of their symptoms, although under
treatment with salmeterol. In this study we have explored the effects on
respiratory function of an additive dose of salmeterol Diskus in 15 chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) patients in regular treatment with a
conventional dose of 50 microg salmeterol. On two different days, patients
inhaled 50 microg Diskus. After 240 min, they inhaled additional 50 microg
salmeterol Diskus (salmeterol arm) or placebo Diskus (placebo arm). Lung function
was controlled before first drug administration and 0.5, 1, 2, 3, 4, 4.5, 6, 8,
10, and 12 h thereafter. The mean (95% CI) peak increase in FEV1 from baseline
was reached after 4 h in the salmeterol arm (0.174 L; 0.144-0204) and after 5 h
(0.141 L; 0.115-0.168) inthe placebo arm; after 12 h, the mean (95% Cl) increase 
in FEV1 from basal values was still 0.149 L (0.119-0.179) in salmeterol arm, but 
only 0.041 L (0.017-0.064) in placebo arm. The mean (95% CI) FEV1 AUC0-12h for
all patients were 2.01 (1.72-2.30) L when salmeterol was added and 1.30
(1.03-1.58) L when placebo was inhaled. The difference (mean; 95% CI) between the
FEV1 AUC0-12h of the two arms (0.71 L; 0.47-0.95) was statistically significant
(P<0.0001), although the difference (mean; 95% CI) between the FEV1 AUC0-4h of
the two treatments (0.08 L; -0.02-0.18) was notstatistically significant
(P=0.126). The addition of an extra dose of salmeterol did not significantly
increase the heart rate or decrease the SpO2. This study suggests that the
addition of an extra dose of salmeterol does not give room for further increase
in peak FEV1, but the effect of adding salmeterol to salmeterol is largely
additive when considering the duration of action and safe.


PMID: 12117044  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. Can Respir J. 2002 May-Jun;9(3):178-85.

The addition of salmeterol 50 microg bid to anticholinergic treatment in patients
with COPD: a randomized, placebo controlled trial. Chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease.

Chapman KR(1), Arvidsson P, Chuchalin AG, Dhillon DP, Faurschou P, Goldstein RS, 
Kuipers AF; International study group.

Author information: 
(1)Toronto Western Hospital, Ontario. kchapman@ca.inter.net

BACKGROUND: In the past, the role of long-acting beta(2-) agonists in chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) relative to other agents has been unclear.
OBJECTIVES: To compare the effect of adding salmeterol (50 microg bid) or placebo
to concurrent anticholinergic therapy on symptom scores, quality of life,
prebronchodilator lung function and exacerbations in patients with moderately
severe COPD.
METHODS: This was a double-blind, randomized, parallel-group study in patients
aged 40 years or older receiving anticholinergic medication. Patients were
randomly assigned to treatment with placebo (n=207) or salmeterol (n=201) via a
Diskus/Accuhaler inhaler for 24 weeks.
RESULTS: The morning trough (prestudy drug) forced expiratory volume in 1 s
(FEV(1)) increased significantly above baseline levels among the
salmeterol-treated patients. Improvement in FEV(1) was greater in the salmeterol 
group than in the placebo group at four weeks (difference 0.06 L, P<0.005), eight
weeks (0.06 L, P<0.005) and 16 weeks (0.05 L, P<0.05) after the start of
treatment. There was a nonsignificant trend in favour of salmeterol after 24
weeks of treatment (P=0.198). Improvements in morning peak flow were
significantly greater in the salmeterol group over 24 weeks (P<0.01). Although
symptom scores were numerically higher in the salmeterol group than in the
placebo group and there was less requirement for rescue bronchodilator use, these
differences were not statistically significant. In the salmeterol group, fewer
patients had exacerbations of COPD, and there was a trend toward an improved
quality of life. The safety profile of the two groups was similar.
CONCLUSIONS: Salmeterol has a beneficial effect when added to existing
anticholinergic therapy in patients with COPD. The regular use of salmeterol for 
six months was not associated with worsening of the underlying airflow
obstruction; rather, there was a tendency for the trough FEV1 to improve above
the baseline levels over the treatment period.


PMID: 12068339  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. Drugs. 2002;62(8):1195-203; discussion 1204-5.

Tiotropium bromide.

Hvizdos KM(1), Goa KL.

Author information: 
(1)Adis International Limited, Auckland, New Zealand.

Tiotropium bromide is an anticholinergic bronchodilator that antagonises
muscarinic M(1), M(2) and M(3) receptors. It dissociates more slowly from M(1)
receptors and, importantly, from M(3) receptors (which are located in bronchial
smooth muscle) than from M(2) receptors and subsequently has a long duration of
action permitting once-daily administration. In patients with chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD), tiotropium 18microg once daily significantly improved
lung function compared with placebo and ipratropium 40microg four times daily in 
1-year trials or salmeterol 50microg twice daily in a 6-month study. The
incidence of COPD exacerbations decreased and use of rescue medication was lower 
with tiotropium compared with placebo or ipratropium. There was no evidence of
tachyphylaxis during 1-year treatment with tiotropium. Compared with placebo,
salmeterol and ipratropium, tiotropium produced significant improvements in
patients' perception of dyspnoea and health-related quality of life. Tiotropium
is generally well tolerated; dry mouth is the most common drug-related adverse
event, occurring in about 10 to 16% of patients in clinical trials.


PMID: 12010082  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. Can Respir J. 2002 Mar-Apr;9(2):107-15.

Faster onset of bronchodilation with formoterol than with salmeterol in patients 
with stable, moderate to severe COPD: results of a randomized, double-blind
clinical study.

Kottakis J(1), Cioppa GD, Creemers J, Greefhorst L, Lecler V, Pistelli R, Overend
T, Till D, Rapatz Gn, Le Gros V, Bouros D, Siafakas N.

Author information: 
(1)Novartis Horsham Research Centre, Horsham, United Kingdom.
ioannis.kottakis@pharma.novartis.com

OBJECTIVES: To compare the onset and magnitude of bronchodilation after dry
powder inhalations of formoterol fumarate (Foradil Aerolizer) versus salmeterol
xinofoate (Serevent Diskus) with respect to normalized (*) forced expiratory
volume in 1 s area under the curve 0 to 1 h after inhalation (FEV1 AUC*0-1 h).
DESIGN: A double-blind, double-dummy, multicentre, randomized, placebo
controlled, single-dose, five-period crossover study.
SETTING: Five centres in four countries - one centre each in France, Greece and
Italy, and two centres in the Netherlands.
PATIENTS: Forty-seven patients aged 42 to 80 years (mean age 63.5 years) with
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) stage II and III, and mean baseline 
FEV1 1.17 L (range 0.56 to 1.77 L).
INTERVENTIONS: Patients inhaled single doses of formoterol dry powder (12 and 24 
mg), single doses of salmeterol (50 and 100 mg) and matching placebo on five
separate days.
MAIN RESULTS: The estimates of treatment difference in absolute terms (0.086 L)
and percentage change from predose baseline (7.8%) for the primary end point,
FEV1 AUC*0-1 h, showed that formoterol 12 mg was statistically significantly
superior to salmeterol 50 mg (P=0.0044 and P=0.0021, respectively). In addition, 
both doses of formoterol were statistically superior to placebo for both absolute
improvement and percentage change (P=0.0001). The analysis of secondary variables
also confirmed the superiority of formoterol over salmeterol.
CONCLUSIONS: Formoterol is associated with a faster onset of bronchodilation than
salmeterol in patients with COPD.


PMID: 11972164  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. Sleep Breath. 1999;3(4):125-130.

Obstructive Sleep Apnea and Hypopnea Efficacy and Safety of a Long-Acting
beta2-Agonist.

Rasche K(1), Duchna HW, Lauer J, Orth M, Kotterba S, Bauer TT, Gillissen A,
Schultze-Werninghaus G.

Author information: 
(1)Berufsgenossenschaftliche Kliniken Bergmannsheil, Klinikum der
Ruhr-Universität Bochum, Medizinische Klinik und Poliklinik, Abteilung für
Pneumologie Allergologie und Schlafmedizin, and Neurologische Klinik und
Poliklinik, Bochum, Germany.

The effect of inhaled long-acting beta2-agonists in obstructive sleep apnea
syndrome (OSAS) is unknown, although from the pharmacological point of view both 
therapeutic and adverse effects need to be considered. The purpose of this study 
was to obtain data on the efficacy and safety of salmeterol in patients with
OSAS. In a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, cross-over study,
effects of salmeterol on respiration during sleep and sleep quality were
investigated in 20 patients with OSAS. Of these, 4 patients were female, 16 male;
the average age was 53.0 +/- 7.8 years, with average body mass index 28.0 +/- 3.0
kg small middle dot m(-2) and average apnea hypopnea index 35.6 +/- 17.8 h(-1).
Patients with asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), and left
heart failure were excluded. Placebo or verum (50 &mgr;g salmeterol) was
administered at 7 pm by meter dose inhaler and spacer device. All patients
underwent full polysomnography during baseline, placebo, and verum night.
Statistical analysis was performed by StudentOs t-test (p > 0.05). Between the
placebo and verum there were no differences in total sleep time, sleep stages,
apnea index (AI), apnea hypopnea index (AHI), and nadir oxygen saturation. There 
was, however, 1) a significant deterioration of mean oxygen saturation (SaO2m;
placebo 93.1 +/- 2.0 vs. verum 92.5 +/- 2.2%; p = 0.01), 2) of percent of time
spent with an oxygen saturation (SaO2) </= 90% (placebo 13.1 +/- 14.5 vs. verum
19.5 +/- 20.8%; p = 0.02), and 3) a significant increase in heart rate (placebo
63.1 +/- 9.2 vs. verum 65.6 +/- 9.3 h(-1); p = 0.01). In patients with OSAS,
salmeterol had no adverse effect on quality of sleep, AI or AHI. The slight
increase in heart rate and the deterioration of oxygen saturation probably have
no clinical relevance; the latter condition might be due to
ventilation-perfusion-mismatch. This study excluded any influence of salmeterol
on obstructive sleep apnea and hypopnea; on the other hand, salmeterol turned out
to be safe in terms of OSAS. This might be of special importance in patients
suffering from both OSAS and obstructive airway disease.

DOI: 10.1007/s11325-999-0125-1 
PMID: 11898120  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


451. Expert Opin Pharmacother. 2002 Mar;3(3):341-50.

Seretide for obstructive lung disease.

Chapman KR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Asthma Centre and Pulmonary Rehabilitation Program, Toronto Western Hospital, 
University Health Network, Suite 4-011 ECW, 399 Bathurst Street, Toronto,
Ontario, M5T 2S8, Canada. kchapman@ca.inter.net

Seretide (Advair [North America], GlaxoSmithKline) is an inhaler combination
formulation intended for the maintenance therapy of obstructive airways disease. 
Seretide was developed and made available initially as three multi-dose, dry
powder inhaler formulations delivering 50 microg/puff of the long acting beta(2) 
agonist salmeterol and either 100, 250 or 500 microg/puff of the inhaled
corticosteroid fluticasone propionate. In addition to the initial multi-dose dry 
powder inhaler system (Diskus or Accuhaler), a chlorofluorocarbon (CFC)-free
pressurised aerosol formulation has become available. Studied mostly extensively 
as a maintenance therapy for patients with persistent asthma, the combination
inhaler is at least equivalent to its components administered separately and is
superior to monotherapy with salmeterol or inhaled corticosteroid in both
paediatric and adult populations. The combination has a logical role in the
treatment of moderate-to-severe asthma, offering the advantage of increased
convenience and possibly improved compliance. In addition to improvements in lung
function, symptom scores and quality of life, the combination therapy reduces
exacerbation rates, an outcome that contributes to favourable cost-effectiveness.
A role as initial maintenance therapy in all forms of persistent asthma is also
plausible but there are fewer data concerning the impact of Seretide in milder
forms of persistent asthma. Clinical trials are underway to examine the potential
role of Seretide in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
Salmeterol has been shown to be an effective first-line bronchodilator in COPD
and fluticasone has been shown to reduce the frequency and or severity of
exacerbations in COPD patients in two key trials. At a time when the prevalence
of both asthma and COPD is increasing, Seretide is a valuable step in the
management of these common obstructive lung diseases.

DOI: 10.1517/14656566.3.3.341    
PMID: 11866683  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol. 2001 Dec;87(6):465-73.

Salmeterol 100 microg: an analysis of its tolerability in single- and
chronic-dose studies.

Shrewsbury S(1), Hallett C.

Author information: 
(1)GlaxoSmithKline UK Limited, Uxbridge, Middlesex, United Kingdom.
sbs40926@gsk.com

Comment in
    Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol. 2001 Dec;87(6):445-6.

BACKGROUND: A combination product containing fluticasone propionate 100 or 250
microg and salmeterol 50 microg has recently been made available in the United
States. Some patients, if previously instructed to double their inhaled
corticosteroids, may double this product, inadvertently receiving higher doses of
salmeterol, potentially causing systemic beta2-agonist-related effects.
OBJECTIVES: To examine the systemic effects of single and chronic doses of
salmeterol 100 microg.
METHODS: Forty-four studies including a salmeterol 100 microg treatment arm were 
identified. Data on predictable systemic effects were available in 10 single-dose
and 9 chronic-dose studies lasting more than 7 days, in patients with asthma (6
adult, 2 pediatric) or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (1 study), which
were included in a weighted, pooled analysis.
RESULTS: Single 100-microg dose studies: mean change from baseline in heart rate 
was +2.3 beats per minute and systolic blood pressure +0.4 mm Hg. Tremor and
palpitations were reported in 5.7% and 2.8%. Other systemic effects included a
decrease in serum potassium for 3 subjects (2.1%); an increase in serum glucose, 
1 subject (0.7%); and electrocardiographic (ECG) events, 24 cases (17.0%).
Twenty-three of these were from one crossover study which reported 27 ECG events 
after placebo. Chronic dose studies (salmeterol 100 microg): mean change in heart
rate and systolic blood pressure were +1.8 beats per minute and -0.2 mm Hg.
Tremor and palpitations were reported in 5.6% and 1.7% of 1,504 patients.
Thirteen recorded a decrease in serum potassium (0.9%) and 5 an increase in serum
glucose (0.3%). Nine patients had ECG events (0.6%). Eight of these were
"arrhythmia" from one study, which also reported 12 events before treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: The mean systemic effects of salmeterol 100 microg are small and of 
doubtful clinical relevance. Patients (and their caregivers) can be reassured
that inadvertently taking double doses of the new combination product are
unlikely to affect them adversely.


PMID: 11770693  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. Respiration. 2001;68(5):452-9.

Comparison of the bronchodilating effect of salmeterol and zafirlukast in
combination with that of their use as single treatments in asthma and chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease.

Cazzola M(1), Centanni S, Boveri B, Di Marco F, Santus P, Matera MG, Allegra L.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pneumology and Allergology and Unit of Respiratory Clinical
Pharmacology, A. Cardarelli Hospital, Naples, Italy. mcazzola@qubisoft.it

BACKGROUND: It has been suggested that the effect of a beta2-agonist is additive 
with that of a cysteinyl leukotriene 1 receptor antagonist.
OBJECTIVES: The present study was designed to answer the question of whether
combined administration of inhaled salmeterol and oral zafirlukast at the
standard doses would result in greater bronchodilation in patients with chronic
airway obstruction than the use of either drug alone.
METHODS: The study was performed using a double-blind, double-dummy, crossover,
randomised design, and was conducted on 4 non-consecutive days. Sixteen patients 
with moderate to severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and 10
non-smoker asthmatic patients received 40 mg of oral zafirlukast, 50 microg of
inhaled salmeterol, 50 microg of inhaled salmeterol plus 40 mg of oral
zafirlukast of placebo. Lung function was assessed before drug administration and
30, 60, 120, 180 and 240 min thereafter. At the end of the 4-hour period, each
patient received 400 microg of inhaled salbutamol and spirometric testing was
performed 30 min later.
RESULTS: In both asthmatic and COPD patients, the overall effect of salmeterol
and zafirlukast on the forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1) was considered
extremely significant (p < 0.0001), with a maximum bronchodilation above baseline
after 180 min (20.7 and 11.0%, respectively) in asthmatics and after 2 h (21.7
and 11.2%, respectively) in COPD subjects. Zafirlukast did not produce any
further significant acute bronchodilation in addition to that achieved with
salmeterol alone in either asthmatic or COPD patients. Nevertheless, 7 out of 16 
COPD patients and 7 out of 10 asthmatic patients had a further improvement after 
the combination of salmeterol and zafirlukast. The mean difference in pre- and
post-salbutamol FEV1 values in both asthmatic and COPD patients after zafirlukast
was significant (p < 0.05), but that after salmeterol and the combination of the 
two drugs was not significant (p > 0.05). The difference between placebo and
zafirlukast was not significant following inhaled salbutamol given 4 h after each
treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: Both salmeterol and zafirlukast induced a significant increase in
FEV1, although salmeterol elicited a greater improvement in both asthmatic and
COPD patients. Apparently, zafirlukast at the clinically recommended dose did not
produce any further significant acute bronchodilation in addition to that
achieved with salmeterol alone, either in asthma or COPD. In any case, evaluation
of the effect of the combination over a 12-hour period is mandatory.

Copyright 2002 S. Karger AG, Basel

DOI: 50550 
PMID: 11694805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. Eur Respir J. 2001 Jun;17(6):1132-7.

Effectiveness of salmeterol versus ipratropium bromide on exertional dyspnoea in 
COPD.

Ayers ML(1), Mejia R, Ward J, Lentine T, Mahler DA.

Author information: 
(1)Dept of Medicine, Dartmouth Medical School, Lebanon, NH, USA.

The hypothesis of the study was that salmeterol and ipratropium would have
similar dyspnoea ratings during steady-state cycle ergometry at 1 h, but that
salmeterol would reduce dyspnoea at 6 h after administration in patients with
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). The study design was a randomized, 
double-blind trial in 16 patients (aged 63 +/- 11 yrs) with symptomatic COPD. Two
days after familiarization with testing procedures, patients were randomly
assigned to receive either two puffs (42 microg) of salmeterol and two puffs of
placebo inhaler, or two puffs (36 microg) of ipratropium from each of two
inhalers (total, 72 microg). Two days later, patients received the alternative
medication. During exercise at 60% of peak oxygen consumption patients rated
dyspnoea and performed inspiratory capacity manoeuvres each minute. Forced
expiratory volume in one second was 1.13+/-0.48 L (37+/-13% predicted). Dyspnoea 
ratings were similar for salmeterol and ipratropium at 1 and 6 h. Inspiratory
capacity was similar for salmeterol and ipratropium at 1 h, but significantly
higher for salmeterol at 6 h (delta = 120 mL; p = 0.03). It is concluded that
with the doses used, salmeterol and ipratropium provided similar dyspnoea ratings
during exercise at 1 and 6 h after administration.


PMID: 11491155  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. Drugs Aging. 2001;18(6):441-72.

Inhaled salmeterol: a review of its efficacy in chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease.

Jarvis B(1), Markham A.

Author information: 
(1)Adis International Limited, Mairangi Bay, Auckland, New Zealand.
demail@adis.co.nz

Inhaled salmeterol is a long-acting, selective beta2-adrenoceptor agonist
bronchodilator. The drug has been compared with placebo, ipratropium bromide and 
oral theophylline in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)
in randomised, clinical trials. Inhaled salmeterol 50 microg twice daily produced
significant improvement in forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1),
equivalent to that obtained with inhaled ipratropium bromide 40 microg 4 times
daily and greater than that obtained with placebo or oral theophylline in
randomised trials. Use of as-needed salbutamol (albuterol) was significantly
reduced during treatment with inhaled salmeterol or ipratropium bromide compared 
with placebo or oral theophylline. The time to first COPD exacerbation was
significantly longer during 12 weeks of treatment with inhaled salmeterol 50
microg twice daily than ipratropium bromide 40 microg 4 times daily. Compared
with baseline and placebo, patients treated for 16 weeks with salmeterol 50
microg (but not 100 microg) twice daily reported significant improvement in total
St George's Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ) scores. Similarly, more patients
treated with inhaled salmeterol 50 microg twice daily or ipratropium bromide 40
microg 4 times daily experienced an increase of > or = 10 points in Chronic
Respiratory Disease Questionnaire (CRQ) scores, the minimum clinically
significant increment. Compared with placebo, inhaled salmeterol 50 microg twice 
daily alone, or concurrent with ipratropium bromide 40 microg 4 times daily
improved lung function and reduced symptoms in patients with stable COPD in a
12-week, randomised, double-blind study. Clinically meaningful improvement in CRQ
scores was documented in significantly more patients treated with the combination
of the 2 drugs than either salmeterol monotherapy or placebo. Inhaled salmeterol 
50 microg twice daily plus oral theophylline had additive effects on lung
function, increased the proportion of symptom-free days and decreased
requirements for as-needed salbutamol compared with either agent alone according 
to a pooled analysis of 2 multicentre, randomised, double-blind
studies.CONCLUSION: When used at the optimal dosage, 50 microg twice daily,
salmeterol provides symptomatic relief and improves lung function and
health-related quality of life in patients with COPD. Available evidence suggests
that the drug is as effective as ipratropium bromide and more effective than oral
theophylline in patients with COPD. Moreover salmeterol has additive effects when
used in combination with inhaled ipratropium bromide or oral theophylline. These 
qualities make the drug suitable for first-line use in patients with COPD who
require regular bronchodilator therapy to manage symptoms.


PMID: 11419918  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2001 Apr;163(5):1087-92.

Use of a long-acting inhaled beta2-adrenergic agonist, salmeterol xinafoate, in
patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Rennard SI(1), Anderson W, ZuWallack R, Broughton J, Bailey W, Friedman M,
Wisniewski M, Rickard K.

Author information: 
(1)University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, Nebraska, USA.
srennard@mail.unmc.edu

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a condition in which continuous
bronchodilation may have clinical advantages. This study evaluated salmeterol, a 
beta-agonist bronchodilator with a duration of action substantially longer than
that of short-acting beta-agonists, compared with ipratropium, an anticholinergic
bronchodilator, and placebo in patients with COPD. Four hundred and five patients
with COPD received either salmeterol 42 microg twice daily, ipratropium bromide
36 microg four times daily, or placebo for 12 wk in this randomized,
double-blind, parallel-group study. Patients were stratified on the basis of
bronchodilator response to albuterol (> 12% and > 200-ml improvement) and were
randomized within each stratum. Bronchodilator response was measured over 12 h
four times during the treatment period. Salmeterol provided similar maximal
bronchodilatation to ipratropium but had a longer duration of action and a more
constant bronchodilatory effect with no evidence of bronchodilator tolerance.
Both active treatments were well tolerated. Salmeterol was an effective
bronchodilator with a consistent effect over this 12-wk study in patients with
COPD, including those "unresponsive" to albuterol. The long duration of action of
salmeterol offers the advantage of twice daily dosing compared with the required 
four times a day dosing with ipratropium.

DOI: 10.1164/ajrccm.163.5.9903053 
PMID: 11316640  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. Pharmacoeconomics. 2001;19(3):245-54.

Economic burden of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Impact of new treatment
options.

Friedman M(1), Hilleman DE.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Pulmonary Disease, Critical Care Medicine, and Environmental
Medicine, Tulane University Medical Center, School of Medicine, New Orleans, LA, 
USA. mfriedm@tulane.edu

The incidence, morbidity and mortality of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD) is rising throughout the world. The total economic cost of COPD in the US 
in 1993 was estimated to be over $US15.5 billion, with $US6.1 billion for
hospitalisation, $US4.4 billion for physician and other fees, $US2.5 billion for 
drugs, $US1.5 billion for nursing home care and $US1.0 billion for home care.
Office visits, hospital outpatient visits and emergency department visits
accounted for 17.3% of the direct costs for COPD in the US. When stratified by
severity, COPD treatment costs strongly correlate with disease severity. The
American Thoracic Society, the European Respiratory Society and the British
Thoracic Society have developed guidelines for the pharmacological treatment of
COPD. However, the guidelines establish inhaled bronchodilators (anticholinergic 
agents and beta 2-adrenergic agonists) as the mainstay of therapy for patients
with COPD. The guidelines were not based on cost analyses and thus are not a
priori cost-effective guidelines. Since the publication of these guidelines,
several new pharmacological products have been approved for use in patients with 
COPD including a combination of an anticholinergic and selective beta
2-adrenergic agonist [ipratropium/salbutamol (albuterol)] and a long-acting beta 
2-adrenergic agonist (salmeterol). Both products are effective bronchodilators in
COPD. The purpose of this report is to place these new agents in an updated
pharmacological guideline scheme, utilising recently published data on clinical
efficacy as well as pharmacoeconomics. The annualised healthcare costs were
computed to be $US788/patient/year for the combination ipratropium/salbutamol
inhaler and $US1059/patient/year for salmeterol (1999 values). Based upon an
improved understanding of the complexity of COPD, the response of patients to
newer bronchodilators (given individually or in combination), and recent
pharmacoeconomic data for COPD treatment, a new treatment algorithm with
associated costs is proposed. The use of an algorithm, based on medical and
pharmacoeconomic data, will improve lung function in patients with COPD, improve 
patient satisfaction (e.g. quality of life, dyspnoea) and outcomes (e.g.
exacerbations). It will also result in a positive effect on healthcare costs.


PMID: 11303413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. Drugs. 2000 Aug;60(2):307-20.

Long-acting beta2 agonists in the management of stable chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease.

Cazzola M(1), Donner CF.

Author information: 
(1)A. Cardarelli Hospital, Division of Pneumology and Allergology, Naples, Italy.
mcazzola@qubisoft.it

Long-acting beta2 agonist bronchodilators (e.g. formoterol, salmeterol) are a new
interesting therapeutic option for patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD). In the short term, both salmeterol and formoterol appear to be
more effective than short-acting beta2 agonists, and in patients with stable COPD
they are more effective than anticholinergic agents and theophylline. Regular
treatment of patients with COPD with long-acting beta2 agonists can induce an
improvement in the respiratory function and certain aspects of quality of life.
Moreover, salmeterol seems to be better than ipratropium and theophylline in
improving lung function at the recommended doses after a long term treatment. Use
of combination therapy of a long-acting inhaled beta2 agonist and an
anticholinergic agent or theophylline in patients with COPD has not been
sufficiently studied. Combination of usual doses of ipratropium or oxitropium
with usual doses of salmeterol or formoterol does not appear to improve pulmonary
function, but this lack of improvement with the combination should not, in
itself, prevent implementation of further therapeutic steps in patients
responsive to an anticholinergic agent and/or salmeterol or formoterol
administered singly. Neither formoterol nor salmeterol elicit significant
cardiovascular effects in healthy individuals and patients with reversible airway
obstruction. However, adverse cardiac events might occur in patients with COPD
with pre-existing cardiac arrhythmias and hypoxaemia if they use long-acting 12
agonists, although the recommended single dose of salmeterol 50 microg or
formoterol 12 microg ensures a relatively higher safety margin than formoterol 24
microg. The bronchodilatory effect of long-acting beta2 agonists seems to be
fairly stable after regular treatment with these bronchodilators. Moreover,
pre-treatment with a conventional dose of formoterol or salmeterol does not
preclude the possibility of inducing further bronchodilation with salbutamol in
patients with partially reversible COPD. All these findings support the use of
long-acting beta2 agonist bronchodilators as first-line bronchodilator therapy
for the long term treatment of airflow obstruction in patients with COPD.
However, since physicians must always choose a drug that is highly efficacious,
well tolerated and inexpensive, the cost-effectiveness analysis in relation to
other bronchodilators will determine the proper place of long-acting beta2
agonists in the long term therapy of stable COPD.


PMID: 10983735  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. Pneumologie. 2000 Jun;54(6):225-31.

[efficacy and safety of salmeterol in long-term therapy in patients with chronic 
obstructive airway diseases].

[Article in German]

Beeh KM(1), Wiewrodt R, Salem AE, Buhl R.

Author information: 
(1)Schwerpunkt Pneumologie, III. Medizinische Klinik und Poliklinik, Klinikum der
Johannes Gutenberg-Universität, Mainz. k.beeh@3-med.klinik.uni-mainz.de

BACKGROUND: Salmeterol is a long-acting inhaled beta 2-agonist with a
bronchodilating effect lasting over 10 to 12 hours.
METHODS: A prospective, open, multi-centre study was performed to evaluate the
efficacy and safety of inhaled salmeterol (50 micrograms BID) over a mean
treatment period of 29 months (range: 4-1145 days) in 634 patients (54% male, age
45 +/- 15 years) with mild to moderate asthma or chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD). Peak expiratory flow rates, rescue use of short acting beta
2-agonists and safety were study objectives. Patients were critically monitored
for a possible loss of bronchodilator efficacy of salmeterol during long-term
treatment.
RESULTS: During the first month of salmeterol therapy, morning peak flow improved
from 384 +/- 104 l/min to 413 +/- 112 l/min (p < 0.001), and use of rescue
salbutamol was significantly reduced (21 +/- 21 to 8 +/- 14 puffs/week during
daytime and 9 +/- 12 to 4.5 +/- 9 puffs/week during nighttime, p < 0.001 both
comparisons). Peak flow improvement and reduction of short-acting beta 2-agonist 
use was maintained during the whole study period. Frequent adverse events were
exacerbations of the underlying airway disease (24%) and infections (12%), while 
typical pharmacological side-effects like tremor or tachycardia where reported in
less than 1% of all patients.
CONCLUSIONS: These results confirm the persistent efficacy and favourable safety 
profile of salmeterol during long-term therapy over more than two years. No
clinical signs of a decreasing bronchodilator potency indicating tachyphylaxis
were observed. Salmeterol treatment provides a therapeutic option to further
improve the management and care of patients with moderate obstructive airway
diseases.

DOI: 10.1055/s-2000-8992 
PMID: 10934892  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. Eur Respir J. 2000 May;15(5):878-85.

Long-term treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease with salmeterol and 
the additive effect of ipratropium.

van Noord JA(1), de Munck DR, Bantje TA, Hop WC, Akveld ML, Bommer AM.

Author information: 
(1)Dept of Respiratory Diseases, Atrium medisch centrum, Heerlen, The
Netherlands.

The efficacy and safety of salmeterol alone was compared with the combination of 
salmeterol plus ipratropium and with placebo during long-term treatment in
patients with stable chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. In addition, the
single-dose effect in response to the first dose of treatment was studied over 12
h. The patients (n=144; age 64+/-7 yrs, forced expiratory volume in one second
(FEV1) 44+/-11% pred) participated in a three-centre double-blind double-placebo 
parallel group study and were randomized after a run-in period of 2 weeks to
receive either salmeterol 50 microg b.i.d., salmeterol 5 microg b.i.d. plus
ipratropium 40 microg q.i.d. or placebo for a period of 12 weeks. The single-dose
study demonstrated that salmeterol produced a significant increase in FEV1 (peak 
of 7% pred) and specific airway conductance (sGaw) (maximum of 60% baseline) for 
> or =12 h. The combination of salmeterol plus ipratropium elicited a greater
bronchodilator response (11% and 94% increases respectively) than salmeterol
alone during the first 6 h after inhalation. During treatment there were
significant improvements in daytime symptom scores and morning peak expiratory
flow in both the salmeterol and the salmeterol plus ipratropium groups (p<0.001),
with an associated decrease in the use of rescue salbutamol. Improvements in FEV1
and sGaw were greater in the salmeterol plus ipratropium group than in the
patients receiving only salmeterol. Thirty-five patients had an exacerbation; 11 
(23%) in the salmeterol group (versus placebo NS), six (13%) in the salmeterol
plus ipratropium group (versus placebo p<0.01) and 18 (36%) in the placebo group.
In conclusion, in patients with severe stable chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease, long-term treatment with either salmeterol alone or salmeterol plus
ipratropium is safe and effective. There was added benefit from the combination
therapy in terms of improvement in airways obstruction, but not for improvement
in symptom control or need for rescue salbutamol.


PMID: 10853852  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2000;(2):CD001104.

Long-acting beta2-agonists for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Appleton S(1), Smith B, Veale A, Bara A.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Medicine, The Queen Elizabeth Hospital, Woodville Rd., Woodville,
Adelaide, AUSTRALIA, 5011. sappleto@medicine.adelaide.edu.au

Update in
    Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2002;(3):CD001104.

BACKGROUND: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is characterised by
airflow limitation which is only partially reversible. Long acting
beta2-agonists, effective in the management of asthma,are also recommended for
COPD management so it is important to establish whether these drugs are effective
in reducing COPD symptoms in view of the potential side effect and cost burden.
OBJECTIVES: To determine the effectiveness of long acting beta2-adrenoceptor
agonists in improving lung function and quality of life and reducing dyspnoea in 
patients with COPD.
SEARCH STRATEGY: A search was carried out using the Cochrane Airways Group
register. Bibliographies of identified RCTs were searched for additional relevant
RCTs. Authors of identified RCTs were contacted for other published and
unpublished studies. In addition, unpublished studies were also obtained from the
pharmaceutical companies that manufacture long acting beta2- adrenoceptor
agonists.
SELECTION CRITERIA: All randomised controlled trials over four weeks in duration 
comparing treatment with long-acting beta2-adrenoceptor agonists (salmeterol and 
formoterol) with placebo in patients with stable non-reversible COPD. Outcome
measures included forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV1), peak expiratory 
flow rate (PEFR), symptom scores, six minute walk distance, quality of life
scores, Borg scores for dyspnoea and rescue bronchodilator use.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Data extraction and study quality assessment was
performed independently by two reviewers. Where further or missing data were
required, authors of studies were contacted.
MAIN RESULTS: Thirty three abstracts were identified as potentially relevant. Of 
these, four randomised controlled trials (RCTs) were included in this review. Two
were parallel group studies of 16 week duration and two were cross-over studies
with four week treatment arms. All four RCTs assessed the efficacy of salmeterol 
in COPD. In a 16 week study of salmeterol 50 mcg and 100 mcg twice daily
treatment, a significant increase in FEV1 was seen in both treatment groups. The 
weighted mean difference (WMD) for the increase in FEV1 for the 50 mcg group was 
0.10 litre (95% CI: 0.05;0. 15) and in the 100 mcg group the WMD was 0.12 litre
(95% CI: 0.06; 0. 17 ). In the two cross-over studies of four weeks treatment,
salmeterol 50 mcg twice daily treatment did not show significant increases in
FEV1 (WMD = 0.04 litre, 95% CI: -0.06; 0.15). Similarly, morning and night time
PEFR was not significantly improved with salmeterol treatment. In a 16 week
study, disease-specific quality of life, measured using the St. George's
Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ), showed a significant improvement after 50 mcg
twice daily, but not after 100 mcg twice daily. This improvement exceeded the
threshold for a clinically significant change with this questionnaire. General
health status, as measured by the Medical Outcomes Short Form 36, did not improve
in any of the eight components with either salmeterol dose. No significant
difference was demonstrated in the mean change from baseline in the six minute
walk distance (WMD = 1.9 metres, 95% CI: -15.4;19.3). Breathlessness was reduced 
in one study in patients receiving salmeterol 50 mcg twice daily group.
Significantly more patients in this group had Borg scores for breathlessness less
than three (a score of three indicating moderate dyspnoea) compared to the
placebo treated group (Peto Odds Ratio = 0.60, 95% CI: 0.40; 0.88). Neither dose 
of salmeterol influenced the incidence of COPD exacerbations, (50 mcg: Peto Odds 
Ratio = 0.74, 95% CI: 0.47, 1.15) and (100 mcg: Peto Odds Ratio = 0.98, 95% CI:
0.64, 1.52).
REVIEWER'S CONCLUSIONS: Treatment of patients with COPD with long acting
beta2-agonists produces only small increases in FEV1. In one study, a dose of
salmeterol 50 mcg twice daily produced a reduction in breathlessness and a
clinically significant improvement in quality of life. (ABSTRACT TRUNCATED)

DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD001104 
PMID: 10796594  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. Curr Opin Pulm Med. 2000 Mar;6(2):99-103.

Bronchodilator therapy in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Manning HL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary Section, Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical Center, Lebanon, NH 03756, USA.

This paper reviews new developments in bronchodilator therapy for chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Most patients with COPD respond to
bronchodilators, but we have no reliable way to predict which patients will
respond. When responsiveness is assessed, changes in lung volume as well as
improvements in FEV1 should be considered. The combination of a beta-agonist and 
an anticholinergic agent produces greater improvement than either agent alone.
Anticholinergic agents have few adverse side effects in patients with COPD, but
concern remains about the possible cardiac side effects of beta-agonists. No
clear answer exists about whether new, long-acting beta-agonists, such as
salmeterol, should supplant anticholinergic agents as "first-line" therapy in
COPD.


PMID: 10741767  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. Indian J Chest Dis Allied Sci. 1999 Oct-Dec;41(4):207-12.

Effectiveness of salmeterol in stable COPD.

Kaushik ML(1), Kashyap S, Bansal SK, Sharma A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Indira Gandhi Medical College, Shimla, H.P.

Thirty patients of stable chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) were
studied for evaluation of effectiveness of inhaled salmeterol in a double blind, 
randomised, placebo controlled trial for seven days. Baseline spirometery and
breathlessness score after 6 minutes walk test were assessed in all patients.
Bronchial asthma was excluded in each patient by reversibility test with 200 ug
of salbutamol inhalation. After inhalation of two puffs from a given inhaler
through spacer device in the morning, spirometery was carried out 1, 3, 6 and 12 
hrs after inhalation on day 1, 3 and 7 of trial. Six minutes walk test and
breathlessness score were assessed after 3 hrs of inhalation on days 1, 3 and 7. 
The maximum bronchodilator response to salmeterol was observed on 7th day at
three hours after inhalation. The mean increase in FEV1 was 29.2% of baseline
value, which was significant as compared to placebo where the mean increase in
FEV1 was 3.3% of the baseline value. The peak rise in FEV1 was observed at three 
hours after inhalation on all the three days. The bronchodilator effect of
salmeterol persisted for upto 12 hours. The mean maximum increase in walking
distance in 6 minutes walk test was observed on 7th day in salmeterol group,
which was 50.7 metres whereas in placebo group it was 12.2 meters. The patients
in salmeterol group perceived less breathlessness after the six minutes walk
test. The study concluded that salmeterol 50 micrograms twice a day is effective 
in improving lung functions in patients with stable COPD and can be recommended
as maintenance therapy for stable COPD patients.


PMID: 10661008  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. Thorax. 1999 Dec;54(12):1083-6.

Acute effect of pretreatment with single conventional dose of salmeterol on
dose-response curve to oxitropium bromide in chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease.

Cazzola M(1), Di Perna F, Centanni S, Califano C, Donner CF, D'Amato M, D'Amato
G.

Author information: 
(1)A. Cardarelli Hospital, Division of Pneumology and Allergology, Naples, Italy.

BACKGROUND: An earlier study documented that, in patients with chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), addition of ipratropium bromide at the
clinically recommended dose (40 microg) does not produce any further
bronchodilation than that achieved with salmeterol 50 microg alone. However, the 
dose of ipratropium bromide needed to produce near maximal bronchodilation is
several times higher than the customary dosage. The full therapeutic potential of
combined salmeterol plus an anticholinergic drug can therefore only be
established using doses higher than those currently recommended in the marketing 
of these agents. A study was undertaken to examine the possible acute effects of 
higher than conventional doses of an anticholinergic agent on the single dose
salmeterol induced bronchodilation in patients with stable and partially
reversible COPD.
METHODS: Thirty two outpatients received 50 microg salmeterol or placebo. Two
hours after inhalation a dose-response curve to inhaled oxitropium bromide (100
microg/puff) or placebo was constructed using one puff, one puff, two puffs, and 
two puffs-that is, a total cumulative dose of 600 microg oxitropium bromide. Dose
increments were given at 20 minute intervals with measurements being made 15
minutes after each dose. On four separate days all patients received one of the
following: (1) 50 microg salmeterol + 600 microg oxitropium bromide; (2) 50
microg salmeterol + placebo; (3) placebo + 600 microg oxitropium bromide; (4)
placebo + placebo.
RESULTS: Salmeterol induced a good bronchodilation (mean increase 0.272 l; 95% CI
0.207 to 0.337) two hours after its inhalation. Oxitropium bromide elicited an
evident dose-dependent increase in forced expiratory volume in one second
(FEV(1)) and this occurred also after pretreatment with salmeterol with a further
mean maximum increase of 0.152 l (95% CI of differences 0.124 to 0.180).
CONCLUSIONS: This study shows that acute pretreatment with 50 microg salmeterol
does not block the possibility of inducing more bronchodilation with an
anticholinergic agent when a higher than normal dosage of the muscarinic
antagonist is used.


PMCID: PMC1763760
PMID: 10567627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. Monaldi Arch Chest Dis. 1999 Aug;54(4):302-6.

Salmeterol versus slow-release theophylline in patients with reversible
obstructive pulmonary disease.

Taccola M(1), Bancalari L, Ghignoni G, Paggiaro PL.

Author information: 
(1)Dept of Cardiology, Angiology and Pneumology, University of Pisa, Italy.

A 1-yr multicentre two-tailed randomized open study was conducted in 15 centres
in Italy, with the aim of comparing the clinical efficacy (over 3 months) and
tolerability (over 1 yr) of salmeterol with those of oral theophylline in
patients with reversible chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Patients
with reversible COPD (forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV1) 50-80%, FEV1 
after bronchodilator > 12%, n = 138) were randomized to receive salmeterol powder
(50 micrograms b.i.d. with Diskhaler, n = 66) or individually dose-titrated
slow-release oral theophylline capsules so as to obtain a serum concentration of 
theophylline ranging 10-20 micrograms.mL-1 (n = 72). During the 2-week run-in
period, nonadmitted medications were discontinued and patients had to present
with respiratory symptoms on at least four of the last seven days. Following
randomization, patients were required to monitor daytime and night-time symptoms,
additional use of as-required salbutamol, and morning and evening peak expiratory
flow (PEF) for 3 months. Spirometric measurements and assessment of the quality
of life were performed every 3 months for 1 yr. Salmeterol was proven to be
statistically more effective than theophylline in: 1) increasing the maximum
value of morning PEF; 2) increasing the percentages of days and nights without
symptoms; 3) reducing the need for additional salbutamol during daytime and
night-time; and 4) increasing quality of life in terms of physical and social
activities, mental health and psychophysical energy, assessed 3 months after the 
beginning of treatment. Salmeterol was no more effective than theophylline in
increasing: 1) forced vital capacity and FEV1 at the various measurements; 2)
maximum evening PEF value; and 3) quality of life after the first 3 months of
treatment. Neither treatment induced significant side-effects over the 1-yr
treatment. This study confirms that inhaled salmeterol is more effective than
oral theophylline in long term treatment of reversible obstructive pulmonary
disease.


PMID: 10546469  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. Med Arh. 1999;53(3 Suppl 1):19-22.

[Treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease].

[Article in Croatian]

Bakran I(1).

Author information: 
(1)Zavod za klinicku farmakologiju, Medicinski fakultet Sveucilista u Zagrebu.

American, British and European guidelines on the management and treatment of
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) were issued in last years. In
October 1998 Croatian guidelines were presented. They are very similar to British
guidelines. The treatment of COPD depends on the severity of the disease and
reversibility of bronchoconstriction. The drug of first choice is ipratropium
bromide, but useful are also beta2-agonists of short (albuterol) and long action 
(salmeterol) and theophylline. Inhalation of corticosteroids is also indicated.
The prerequisite of successful treatment is to stop smoking.


PMID: 10546463  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. Thorax. 1999 Nov;54(11):995-1003.

An empirical comparison of the St George's Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ) and
the Chronic Respiratory Disease Questionnaire (CRQ) in a clinical trial setting.

Rutten-van Mölken M(1), Roos B, Van Noord JA.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Medical Technology Assessment, Erasmus University Rotterdam,
3000 DR Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

Comment in
    Thorax. 2000 May;55(5):441.

BACKGROUND: The Chronic Respiratory Questionnaire (CRQ) and the St George's
Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ) are the two most widely used quality of life
questionnaires in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). A study was
undertaken to compare directly the self-administered version of the CRQ and the
SGRQ with respect to feasibility, internal consistency, validity, and sensitivity
to changes resulting from bronchodilator therapy.
METHODS: One hundred and forty four patients with moderate or severe COPD were
randomly assigned to receive three months of treatment with either salmeterol,
salmeterol + ipratropium bromide, or placebo. Quality of life was measured at
baseline and after 12 weeks of treatment.
RESULTS: The proportions of missing values per patient were low for both
questionnaires (0.54% for the CRQ and 2% for the SGRQ). The internal consistency 
was good for both questionnaires (Cronbach's alpha coefficients >/= 0.84 for the 
CRQ and >/= 0.76 for the SGRQ). Factor analysis confirmed the original domain
structure of the CRQ but not of the SGRQ. Correlations with forced expiratory
volume in one second (FEV(1)) % predicted and peak expiratory flow rate (PEFR)
were low for both questionnaires but better for the SGRQ than for the CRQ. The
ability to discriminate between subjects with different levels of FEV(1) was
somewhat better for the SGRQ. The correlations with symptom scores were
comparable for both questionnaires. Cross sectionally, the scores of the two
questionnaires were moderately to highly correlated (coefficients ranged from
0.35 to 0.72). Longitudinally, these correlations were lower (coefficients ranged
from 0.17 to 0.54) but were still significant. The CRQ total and emotions score
and the SGRQ symptoms score were the most responsive to change. The SGRQ symptoms
domain was the only domain where the improvement in patients receiving
combination treatment crossed the threshold for clinical relevance.
CONCLUSIONS: Since this analysis of reliability, validity, and responsiveness to 
change did not clearly favour one instrument above the other, the choice between 
the CRQ and the SGRQ can be based on other considerations such as the required
sample size or the availability of reference values.


PMCID: PMC1745382
PMID: 10525558  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. Respiration. 1999;66(5):434-9.

Formoterol and salmeterol in partially reversible chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease: A crossover, placebo-controlled comparison of onset and duration of
action.

Celik G(1), Kayacan O, Beder S, Durmaz G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chest Diseases, Ankara University Faculty of Medicine, Ankara,
Turkey. fcelik@dialup.ankara.edu.tr

BACKGROUND: In contrast to the well-known activity profile in asthma, the precise
efficacy and optimum dose schedules of long-acting beta(2)-agonists in chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) are not clear.
OBJECTIVE: In this study, we aimed to compare the onset and the duration of
action of a single inhalation of formoterol and salmeterol in COPD patients
having partially reversible airway obstruction.
METHODS: In a double-blind, randomized, crossover and placebo-controlled study
design, the respiratory functions of 22 patients (mean age 57.3+/-5.4 years)
having mild to severe COPD (5 mild, 8 moderate and 9 severe) and partially
reversible airway obstruction [mean baseline reversibility of forced expiratory
volume in 1 s (FEV(1)) 19.3+/-3.1%] were evaluated after inhalation of 12 microg 
formoterol and 50 microg salmeterol.
RESULTS: Regarding the onset of bronchodilator action, the mean absolute increase
of 0.20 liters in FEV(1) 10 min after inhalation of formoterol was significantly 
higher than baseline and that of placebo (0.04 liters), whereas that of
salmeterol (0.11 liters) did not reach statistical significance. At 20 min, both 
formoterol (0.25 liters) and salmeterol (0.20 liters) produced a significant
increase in FEV(1) compared with baseline and with that of placebo (0.04 liters).
The peak bronchodilator effects occurring at 60 and 120 min following formoterol 
(0.39 liters) and salmeterol (0.40 liters) inhalation, respectively, were
significantly higher than the corresponding levels of placebo (0.02 and -0.12
liters, respectively). Concerning the duration of action, the 12-hour values of
both formoterol (0.25 liters) and salmeterol (0.22 liters) were significantly
higher than that of placebo (-0.12 liters). The area under the curve values of
FEV(1) of formoterol (3.5+/-1.3 l.h) and salmeterol (3.2+/-1.2 l x h) averaged
over 12 h were comparable and higher than placebo values (1.2+/-0.5 l x h). After
formoterol inhalation 2 patients experienced tremor and 1 had palpitation; 1
tremor and 1 headache attack were noted after salmeterol. For the
pharmacologically predictable side effects, there was no difference between the
drugs.
CONCLUSIONS: In conclusion, this study revealed that a single dose of 12 microg
formoterol and 50 microg salmeterol provided comparable bronchodilation within 12
h and had tolerable side effects in patients with mild to severe COPD having
partially reversible airway obstruction.

DOI: 29427 
PMID: 10516540  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 1999 Sep;160(3):1028-30.

Effects of salmeterol on arterial blood gases in patients with stable chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease. Comparison with albuterol and ipratropium.

Khoukaz G(1), Gross NJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary Medicine, Hines Veterans Affairs Hospital, Hines, IL
60141, USA.

Administration of beta-adrenergic agonist bronchodilators to patients with
airways obstruction commonly results in transient decreases in Pa(O(2)) levels
despite bronchodilation, an effect that has been attributed to these drugs'
pulmonary vasodilator action. We compared the acute effects on gas exchange of
salmeterol with those of albuterol and the anticholinergic agent ipratropium in
20 patients with stable chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Each agent 
was given in recommended dosage on separate days in a double-blind, crossover
format, and the patients' arterial blood gases (ABGs) were measured at baseline
and at intervals to 120 min. Small but statistically significant declines in
Pa(O(2)), the primary outcome variable, were found after administration of both
salmeterol and albuterol. The decline in PaO2 after salmeterol was of lesser
magnitude but was more prolonged than that after albuterol, the greatest mean
change being -2.74 +/- 0.89 mm Hg (mean +/- SEM) at 30 min after salmeterol, and 
-3.45 +/- 0.92 mm Hg at 20 min after albuterol. Following ipratropium, the
corresponding change was -1.32 +/- 0.85 mm Hg at 20 min. These declines, which
were almost entirely attributable to increases in the alveolar-arterial
difference in oxygen tension Delta(A-a)DO2 tended to be more marked in subjects
with higher baseline PaO2 values. No subject experienced a decline in PaO2 to
levels below 59 mm Hg. There were no significant differences among the three
drugs studied. We conclude that despite small decreases in PaO2 after each of the
three drugs, the declines were small transient, and of doubtful clinical
significance.

DOI: 10.1164/ajrccm.160.3.9812117 
PMID: 10471636  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. Eur J Clin Pharmacol. 1999 Jan;54(11):829-33.

Oral bambuterol compared to inhaled salmeterol in patients with partially
reversible chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Cazzola M(1), Calderaro F, Califano C, Di Pema F, Vinciguerra A, Donner CF,
Matera MG.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Pharmacology Unit and Respiratory Pharmacology Centre, S. Maugeri
Foundation, IRCCS, Rehabilitation Institute, Veruno (NO), Italy.

OBJECTIVE: There is now good evidence that inhaled salmeterol is an effective
agent in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD),but, at the present time,
data on the effects of bambuterol, which is an oral tarbutaline pro-drug, in
patients with COPD are scarce. Moreover, no comparative study between bambuterol 
and salmeterol in patients with chronic obstructive airway disorders has been
published. The objective of this research was, consequently, to compare the
efficacy and safety of 20 mg oral bambuterol and 50 microg inhaled salmeterol in 
patients with partially reversible COPD.
METHODS: The speed and length of bronchodilation with 20 mg bambuterol and 50
microg inhaled salmeterol were compared in 16 patients with partially reversible 
COPD. The investigation and designed as a double-blind, double-dummy, cross-over,
placebo controlled and randomised study. Lung function (FEV1, FVC) and systemic
variables (subjective tremor, heart rate, blood pressure) were monitored prior to
the administration of the drug and for 12 h after each agent on 3 non-consecutive
days.
RESULTS: Inhalation of salmeterol induced a significant (P < 0.05) increase of
lung function when compared with placebo. In addition, oral bambuterol elicited
good bronchodilation, with its maximum slightly later than for salmeterol. The
mean (+/- SE) AUC(0-12h)S for all patients were 3.134 1 +/- 0.553 for salmeterol 
and 1963 1 +/- 0.573 for bambuterol. Both AUC(0-12h)S were significantly greater 
than for placebo (P < 0.05), but there was no significant difference (P = 0.077) 
between the salmeterol and bambuterol AUC(0-12h)S. Bambuterol, but not
salmeterol, caused tremor in four patients. Moreover, it induced a higher heart
rate when compared with salmeterol at each considered time after the
administration of the drug; differences after 9 and 12 h were statistically
significant (P < 0.05).
CONCLUSION: Both oral bambuterol and inhaled salmeterol resulted in good
bronchodilation in patients with stable COPD. However, bambuterol, but not
salmeterol, caused tremor in several subjects and elicited a more pronounced
tachycardia.


PMID: 10027655  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. Respir Med. 1998 Sep;92(9):1116-21.

Comparison of the effects of salmeterol and ipratropium bromide on exercise
performance and breathlessness in patients with stable chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease.

Patakas D(1), Andreadis D, Mavrofridis E, Argyropoulou P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Greece.

Comment in
    Respir Med. 1999 Mar;93(3):222-3.

To compare the effects of salmeterol, an adrenergic drug, and ipratropium
bromide, an anticholinergic drug, on breathlessness and gas exchange during
exercise in patients with chronic obstructive lung disease (COPD), we performed a
progressive treadmill exercise test on 15 patients on 3 days (24 h apart), after 
inhalation placebo, ipratropium bromide (120 micrograms) or salmeterol (50
micrograms) in a randomized fashion. Dyspnoea during exercise was evaluated from 
the regression slope between Borg scale (BS) scores and distance walked each
minute on the treadmill. The regression was expressed as the distance walked at
BS score 5, the threshold load of dyspnoea (TLD) and breakpoint load of dyspnoea.
During and after the exercise, oxygen saturation was monitored by pulse oxymeter 
and we measured the lower SaO2 during exercise and the recovery time of SaO2
after exercise. In comparison to placebo inhalation we found the same small but
significant improvement in airflow limitation after salmeterol or ipratropium
inhalation, also the distance walked on treadmill increased after
bronchodilators. After bronchodilators the magnitude of oxyhaemoglobin
desaturation with exercise was similar to that observed after placebo but the
duration of the recovery from sustained SaO2 desaturation after exercise was
shorter to the same extent as after ipratropium or salmeterol. Dyspnoeic
sensation, when assessed by the TLD and by the distance walked at BS score 5, was
decreased after salmeterol and after ipratropium bromide to a similar extent. We 
conclude that the salmeterol, when given in conventional doses, produces
significant improvement in the airway obstruction in the recovery of postexercise
HbO2 desaturation and in dyspnoeic sensation in patients with COPD, effects which
were similar to those observed after inhalation of the anticholinergic agent
ipratropium bromide.


PMID: 9926165  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. Clin Ther. 1998 Nov-Dec;20(6):1130-48.

Efficacy, tolerability, and effects on quality of life of inhaled salmeterol and 
oral theophylline in patients with mild-to-moderate chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease. SLMT02 Italian Study Group.

Di Lorenzo G(1), Morici G, Drago A, Pellitteri ME, Mansueto P, Melluso M, Norrito
F, Squassante L, Fasolo A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Internal Medicine and Geriatrics, University of Palermo, Italy.

The aims of management in mild-to-moderate stable chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD) are to improve symptoms and quality of life (QOL), reduce decline 
in lung function, prevent and treat complications, increase survival while
maintaining QOL, and minimize the adverse effects of treatment. Bronchodilator
therapy is the keystone of improving COPD symptoms and functional capacity. The
primary objective of this open-label study was to compare the efficacy and
tolerability of salmeterol 50 microg BID administered by metered-dose inhaler
versus oral, titrated, sustained-release theophylline BID, both given for 3
months to patients with a clinical history of chronic bronchitis. The secondary
objectives of the study were to evaluate the safety profile of the two drugs for 
an additional 9-month period and to assess changes in QOL both within and between
treatment groups, using the 36-Item Short Form (SF-36) Health Survey. One hundred
seventy-eight outpatients (122 men, 56 women; mean age, 56 +/- 12.9 years; mean
body weight, 76.1 +/- 11.8 kg) were randomized to the two treatment groups.
Patients receiving salmeterol showed significant improvement in mean morning peak
expiratory flow rate (16.56 L/min) over the 3-month period compared with patients
receiving theophylline (P = 0.02). Salmeterol also significantly increased the
percentage of symptom-free days and nights with no additional salbutamol
requirement (P < 0.01). A significant difference was found between increases in
forced expiratory volume in 1 second compared with baseline for salmeterol
compared with theophylline throughout the initial 3-month period (0.13, 0.16, and
0.16 L at months 1, 2, and 3, respectively) and during the additional 9 months.
The incidence of adverse events was similar in the two groups (salmeterol, 49.5%;
theophylline, 49.4%), with a lower percentage of pharmacologically predictable
adverse events in patients receiving salmeterol (4%) compared with those
receiving theophylline (14.8%). Both drugs improved QOL, as measured by effects
on the eight aspects of life experience analyzed by the SF-36 questionnaire.
Salmeterol therapy was effective in more aspects, and the improvements seen in
each were numerically greater than those seen with theophylline therapy.
Statistically different changes between the two treatment groups were reported
for physical functioning, changes in health perception, and social functioning (P
= 0.02, P = 0.03, and P = 0.004, respectively). These data suggest that inhaled
salmeterol 50 microg BID was more effective and better tolerated than oral,
titrated theophylline and allowed better long-term control of airways obstruction
and symptoms with improved lung function in patients with COPD.


PMID: 9916607  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. Respir Med. 1998 Aug;92(8):1012-6.

Early reversibility to salbutamol does not always predict bronchodilation after
salmeterol in stable chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Cazzola M(1), Vinciguerra A, Di Perna F, Matera MG.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pneumology and Allergology, A. Cardarelli Hospital, Naples, Italy.

The assessment of reversibility is recognized as being an essential part of the
management of airways obstruction, but testing for reversibility of airways
obstruction may not be useful for identifying patients with chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD) who are likely to benefit from bronchodilator treatment.
We studied 100 patients with stable COPD. Early reversibility of airways
obstruction to 200 mg salbutamol and peak bronchodilation to 50 micrograms
salmeterol or 200 micrograms salbutamol were evaluated in four different sessions
(two for salbutamol and two for salmeterol), using a double-blind, cross-over,
randomized study. Fifteen minutes after inhalation of salbutamol, 47 patients
presented an increase in FEV1 greater than 15% of baseline, whereas 48 showed an 
increase of FEV1 of at least 160 ml from basal value and 33 an increase in FEV1
greater than both 15% of baseline and 200 ml. On the contrary, 69 patients
presented an increase in FEV1 greater than 15% of baseline, 65 an increase of
FEV1 of at least 160 ml from basal value and 60 an increase in FEV1 greater than 
both 15% of baseline and 200 ml as maximum increase over baseline usually 2-4 h
after inhalation of salmeterol. Twenty-seven other subjects defined as
irreversible by the lack of acute improvement in FEV1 after salbutamol, showed an
increase in FEV1 greater than 15% of baseline, 20 showed an increase of FEV1 of
at least 160 ml from basal value, and 18 showed an increase in FEV1 greater than 
both 15% of baseline and 200 ml; all had the maximum degree of bronchodilation
usually 1-2 h after salbutamol administration. These findings clearly demonstrate
that many patients suffering from stable COPD show early reversibility to a
short-acting beta 2-agonist and patients who do not manifest early reversibility 
to salbutamol can still benefit from salbutamol or salmeterol. Therefore,
treatments with beta 2-agonists must always be tried.


PMID: 9893768  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


474. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 1998 Sep;158(3):857-61.

Risk of emergency care, hospitalization, and ICU stays for acute asthma among
recipients of salmeterol.

Lanes SF(1), Lanza LL, Wentworth CE 3rd.

Author information: 
(1)Epidemiology Resources Inc., Newton Lower Falls, Massachusetts, USA.

We used automated health insurance claims records of a New England insurer to
assess the relation between salmeterol and severe nonfatal asthma. We identified 
61,712 members who received a beta-agonist from January 1, 1993 to August 31,
1995, including 2, 708 recipients of salmeterol. Compared with recipients of
other beta-agonists, future salmeterol recipients had higher rates of asthma
hospitalization and dispensings of asthma medications during the year before they
received salmeterol. We selected as a comparison group 3,825 recipients of
sustained-release theophylline. We defined a baseline period as the year before
the start of the follow-up period, and we characterized patients according to
age, sex, calendar period, presence of baseline hospitalizations for asthma,
presence of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), and baseline
dispensings of asthma medications. After adjusting for baseline factors,
incidence rates of severe asthma in the salmeterol group were not elevated for
emergency care (rate ratio estimate [RR] = 0.69, 95% confidence intervals [CI] = 
0.42, 1.11), hospitalization (RR = 1.09, 95% CI = 0.60, 1.98), or intensive care 
unit (ICU) stays (RR = 0.81, 95% CI = 0.25, 2.62). We conclude that salmeterol
was prescribed preferentially to high-risk patients and, after adjusting for
baseline risk, salmeterol recipients did not have a greater risk than
theophylline recipients of severe nonfatal asthma.

DOI: 10.1164/ajrccm.158.3.9803047 
PMID: 9731017  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. Eur Respir J. 1998 Jun;11(6):1337-41.

Effects of formoterol, salmeterol or oxitropium bromide on airway responses to
salbutamol in COPD.

Cazzola M(1), Di Perna F, Noschese P, Vinciguerra A, Calderaro F, Girbino G,
Matera MG.

Author information: 
(1)Divisione di Pneumologia e Allergologia e Settore di Farmacologia Clinica
Respiratoria, Ospedale A. Cardarelli, Napoli, Italy.

Comment in
    Eur Respir J. 1999 Feb;13(2):473-5.

We examined whether a pretreatment with formoterol, oxitropium bromide, or
salmeterol might modify the dose-response curves to inhaled salbutamol in
patients with stable and partially reversible chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD). Sixteen outpatients with partially reversible, stable COPD
received 24 microg formoterol, 50 microg salmeterol, 200 microg oxitropium
bromide, or placebo on four non-consecutive days. Spirometric testing was
performed immediately before inhalation of treatment and after 2 h. A
dose-response curve to inhaled salbutamol was then constructed using doses of
100, 100, 200 microg and 400 microg--that is, a total cumulative dose of 800
microg. Dose increments were given at 20 min intervals with measurements being
made 15 min after each dose. Formoterol, salmeterol, or oxitropium bromide
elicited a significant increase in forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV1) 
compared with placebo (mean differences (L) = placebo 0.05; formoterol 0.34;
salmeterol 0.27; oxitropium bromide 0.23). Dose-dependent increases in FEV1 were 
seen (mean values (L) before salbutamol and after a cumulative dose of 100, 200, 
400, and 800 microg = placebo: 1.06, 1.28, 1.35, 1.39, 1.41; formoterol: 1.33,
1.37, 1.41, 1.44, 1.44; salmeterol: 1.30, 1.33, 1.36, 1.39, 1.42; oxitropium
bromide: 1.27, 1.34, 1.37, 1.41, 1.40). Statistical analysis revealed no
significant differences in FEV1 and forced vital capacity (FVC) responses to
salbutamol after therapy with formoterol, salmeterol, or oxitropium bromide
compared with placebo. This study clearly shows that a pretreatment with a
conventional dose of formoterol, salmeterol, or oxitropium bromide does not
preclude the possibility of inducing a further bronchodilation with salbutamol in
patients suffering from partially reversible chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease.


PMID: 9657576  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. Respir Med. 1998 Feb;92(2):354-7.

A comparison of bronchodilating effects of salmeterol and oxitropium bromide in
stable chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Cazzola M(1), Matera MG, Di Perna F, Calderaro F, Califano C, Vinciguerra A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pneumology and Allergology, A. Cardarelli Hospital, Naples, Italy.

Anti-cholinergic agents are generally regarded as the bronchodilator therapy of
first choice in the treatment of stable chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD), considering that they may be more effective than in inhaled beta
2-agonist. However, results of the authors' recent studies conflict to some
extent with this suggestion because they demonstrate that this is true only for
short acting beta 2-agonists but not for long-acting beta 2-agonists. Oxitropium 
bromide is an anti-cholinergic drug that has been shown to produce a similar
degree of bronchodilation to that obtained with ipratropium bromide, but with a
longer-lasting effect. In the present study, the time course of inhaled
oxitropium bromide bronchodilation in comparison to that of inhaled salmeterol in
a group of patients with partially reversible COPD was evaluated. Twelve male
patients with moderate to severe COPD participated in the study. The study had a 
single-bind, cross-over, randomized design. The bronchodilator activity of 50
micrograms salmeterol hydroxynaphthoate, 200 and 400 micrograms oxitropium
bromide and placebo, which were all inhaled from a metered-dose inhaler, was
investigated on several non-consecutive days. The highest FVC and FEV1, obtained 
from one or the other of the reproducible curves, were kept for analysis.
Measurements were performed at the following times: immediately before inhalation
of treatment, and at 15, 30, 60, 120, 180, 240, 300, 360, 480, 600 and 720 min
after inhalation of the individual treatment. Salmeterol tended to have a delayed
time to peak effect, but had a longer duration of effect than oxitropium. The
response to salmeterol exceeded the response to 200 micrograms oxitropium for 12 
h, but its responses were significantly (P < 0.05) greater than those to 200
micrograms oxitropium from 10 to 12 h. From 3 to 12 h, salmeterol also surpassed 
400 micrograms oxitropium but differences were not significant (P < 0.05). The
mean FEV1 area under the curve was significantly (P < 0.05) larger after
salmeterol when compared to 200 micrograms oxitropium bromide, but there was no
significant difference (P < 0.05) between salmeterol and 400 micrograms
oxitropium bromide. No significant changes in pulse rate, blood pressure or
electrocardiograms were found among the four groups as compared with placebo
group. These findings confirm and extend what has been demonstrated by the
authors' previous studies, and show that salmeterol compares conveniently with
anti-cholinergic drugs in terms of effects on lung function at clinically
recommended doses.


PMID: 9616538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. Pol Merkur Lekarski. 1998 Feb;4(20):72-4.

[The effect of selective agonist beta-adrenergic receptors on lung ventilation
function in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease].

[Article in Polish]

Szczegielniak J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Ze Szpitala Specjalistycznego MSW w Glucholazach.

The aim of the research was to show the influence of Salmeterol on the
ventilatory parameters in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(bronchitis chronica spastica). In all the patients full lung function test was
made with the MasterLab-Transfer of the firm Jaeger contains spirometry,
flow-volume and airway resistance. The examination have shown that the average
values off all analysed indices were higher in the particular examinations than
in the initial one. Estimating these differences with the test "t Student" it has
been demonstrated that referring to basic indices the differences were
statistically essential. We can observe from the comparison of the obtained data 
that the growth of the indices took place in the substantial majority of
patients.


PMID: 9591437  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. Pneumologie. 1998 Jan;52(1):11-3.

[Effect of salmeterol in obstructive sleep apnea syndrome].

[Article in German]

Rasche K(1), Duchna HW, Orth M, Bauer TT, Lauer J, Podbregar D,
Schultze-Werninghaus G.

Author information: 
(1)Abteilung für Pneumologie, Allergologie und Schlafmedizin,
Berufsgenossenschaftliche Kliniken Bergmannsheil,
Universitäts-klinik/Ruhr-Universität Bochum.

The effect of inhaled long-acting beta 2-agonists on obstructive sleep apnoea
syndrome (OSAS) is unknown, though from the pharmacological point of view both
therapeutic and adverse effects might be discussed. The purpose of this study was
to obtain data on the efficacy and safety of Salmeterol in patients with OSAS. In
a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover study effects of
Salmeterol were investigated in 20 patients with OSAS: 4 female, 16 male; age
53.0 +/- 7.8 years, body mass index (BMI) 28.0 +/- 3.0 kg.m-2; apnoea hypopnoea
index (AHI) 35.6 +/- 17.8 h-1. Patients with asthma, chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD), and left heart failure were excluded. Placebo or verum 
(50 micrograms Salmeterol) were administered at 7 p.m. by metered dose inhaler
and spacer device. All patients underwent full polysomnography during baseline,
placebo, and verum night. Statistical analysis was performed by Student's t-test 
(p < 0.05). Between placebo and verum there were no differences in total sleep
time, sleep stages, apnoea index (AI), AHI, and nadir SaO2. There was, however, a
significant deterioration of mean SaO2 (placebo 93.1 +/- 2.0 vs Salmeterol 92.5
+/- 2.2%) and of relative time spent with SaO2 < or = 90% (placebo 13.1 +/- 14.5 
vs Salmeterol 19.5 +/- 20.8%), as well as a significant increase in heart rate
(placebo 63.1 +/- 9.2 vs Salmeterol 65.6 +/- 9.3 h-1). Thus, in patients with
OSAS Salmeterol had no adverse effect on quality of sleep, AI or AHI. The slight 
increase in heart rate and the deterioration of oxygen saturation are clinically 
irrelevant. The latter might be due to ventilation-perfusion-mismatch. This study
demonstrates that Salmeterol has no influence on obstructive sleep apnoea and
hypopnoea, but on the other hand provides an acceptable safety profile in OSAS.
This might be of special importance in patients suffering from both OSAS and
obstructive airway disease.


PMID: 9540364  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. Thorax. 1997 Jul;52(7):612-7.

Drug use and pulmonary death rates in increasingly symptomatic asthma patients in
the UK.

Meier CR(1), Jick H.

Author information: 
(1)Boston Collaborative Drug Surveillance Program, Boston University Medical
Center, Lexington, Massachusetts 02173, USA.

BACKGROUND: There is concern about an increase in deaths from respiratory causes 
in asthma patients using long acting beta agonists. According to the guidelines
of the British Thoracic Society, long acting beta agonists, ipratropium bromide, 
and theophylline should be used to treat patients with increasing asthma severity
who are already receiving treatment with short acting beta agonists and inhaled
steroids. A study was therefore undertaken to compare the characteristics and
short term respiratory mortality rates in first time users of one of these three 
drugs.
METHODS: An open cohort study with a nested case-control analysis was performed
on the UK based General Practice Research Database (GPRD). First time users of
either salmeterol (n = 8386), ipratropium bromide (n = 4305), or theophylline (n 
= 4228) between 1 January 1992 and 30 April 1995 were identified and followed for
16 weeks. Drug usage patterns, predictors for respiratory mortality, and the
number of deaths at 16 weeks in the three drug groups were compared.
RESULTS: The three asthma drugs were most often prescribed to patients with
severe asthma. Age, a concomitant diagnosis of chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease or emphysema, number of asthma drug prescriptions, number of visits to
the general practitioner, and whether or not the patient had been admitted to
hospital due to the respiratory disease in the 12 months prior to the start of
the new drug therapy were strong predictors for asthma mortality. After adjusting
for several risk factors, the relative risk estimates of a respiratory death for 
ipratropium bromide and theophylline users compared with salmeterol users were
1.8 (95% CI 0.4 to 9.6) and 3.0 (95% CI 0.4 to 22.4), respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: In the UK population studied, salmeterol, ipratropium bromide and
theophylline are regularly used to treat patients with asthma of increasing
severity. Salmeterol use was not associated with an increase in short term
mortality compared with ipratropium bromide and theophylline.


PMCID: PMC1758606
PMID: 9246132  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. Eur Respir J. 1997 Apr;10(4):815-21.

An evaluation of salmeterol in the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD)

Boyd G(1), Morice AH, Pounsford JC, Siebert M, Peslis N, Crawford C.

Author information: 
(1)Dept of Respiratory Medicine, Stobhill Hospital, Glasgow, UK.

Erratum in
    Eur Respir J 1997 Jul;10(7):1696.

The objectives of this study were to compare the efficacy and safety of
salmeterol xinafoate (50 and 100 microg b.i.d.) with that of placebo, when added 
to existing therapy, in the treatment of patients with chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD). Six hundred and seventy four patients were randomized
to receive either salmeterol 50 microg b.i.d., salmeterol 100 microg b.i.d., or
placebo treatment for a period of 16 weeks. The results showed a significant
improvement in daily symptom scores noted for patients taking either 50 microg
(p=0.043) or 100 microg b.i.d. salmeterol (p=0.01) compared with placebo, with a 
corresponding decrease in additional daytime salbutamol requirements for both
salmeterol groups. The same pattern was reflected for night-time symptoms and
additional salbutamol use. During treatment, forced expiratory volume in one
second (FEV1) measurements improved significantly in each salmeterol group, with 
up to a 7% improvement observed at the end of the study. Although no difference
was observed between treatment groups for the distance walked in 6 min, patients 
treated with salmeterol 50 microg b.i.d. were significantly less breathless than 
those treated with placebo after their 6 min walk, after 8 weeks (p=0.024) and 16
weeks (p=0.004) of therapy. Adverse events were similar in all three groups
except for tremor, which was significantly higher in the 100 microg b.i.d.
salmeterol group (p=0.005) compared both with 50 microg b.i.d. salmeterol and
placebo. Salmeterol offered further positive improvement to the effect of therapy
in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease when added to their
existing regimens. This clinical improvement was similar both with 50 and 100
microg b.i.d. dosage, although the group receiving 50 microg b.i.d. tolerated the
drug better than those receiving 100 microg b.i.d. salmeterol.


PMID: 9150318  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 1997 Apr;155(4):1283-9.

Quality of life changes in COPD patients treated with salmeterol.

Jones PW(1), Bosh TK.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Physiological Medicine, St. George's Hospital Medical School,
London, United Kingdom.

Changes in health-related quality of life (HRQoL) were evaluated in patients with
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) following treatment with placebo,
salmeterol 50 microg twice a day or 100 microg twice a day by metered-dose
inhaler. Patients completed the disease-specific St. George's Respiratory
Questionnaire (SGRQ) and the Medical Outcomes Study Short Form 36 (SF-36) at
baseline and after 16 wk of treatment. Data from 283 patients (95 patients in the
placebo group and 94 in each salmeterol group) were available for HRQoL analysis.
Apart from a small difference in ages, all treatment groups were well matched at 
baseline in terms of forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV1) and HRQoL
scores. Compared with placebo, salmeterol 50 microg twice a day was associated
with significant improvements in SGRQ "Total" and "Impacts" scores which exceeded
the threshold for a clinically significant change. This was not seen with
salmeterol 100 microg twice a day. Changes in SGRQ and SF-36 scores correlated.
They also showed a weak but significant relationship with FEV1. This study has
shown that a modest change in lung function may be associated with clinically
significant gain in health and well-being in COPD patients.

DOI: 10.1164/ajrccm.155.4.9105068 
PMID: 9105068  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. Rev Med Brux. 1996 Sep;17(4):263-5.

[Asthma and obstructive bronchopneumopathies: the consensus].

[Article in French]

Yernault JC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Service de Pneumologie, Hôpital Erasme, Bruxelles.

The prevalence of asthma is at least 5% of the population and that of chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is around 20% of the regular smokers. Long
term inhaled corticosteroids are the first therapeutical choice for chronic
asthma, completed by on demand inhalation of a betamimetic; if an adequate
control of the disease is not obtained with a daily dose up to 1 mg, a long
acting bronchodilator is also given (oral theophylline and/or salmeterol by
inhalation). The drug therapy must be coupled with an in-depth education of the
patient and his/her family. Oral corticosteroid use should be limited to the most
severe cases. Smoking cessation remains the most efficient treatment for COPD,
but also the most difficult enterprise! Bronchodilators, inhaled vagolytics
and/or betamimetics. Oral theophyllines are given to patients who complain of
dyspnea. Corticosteroids, preferably given by inhalation, can be tried in the
most disabled patients; the results of ongoing long term trials will be known in 
September 1997. When a chronic severe hypoxaemia (PaO2 < 56 mm Hg) develops, long
term continuous oxygen therapy is indicated. The efficacy of well conducted
rehabilitation programmes is now definitely established.


PMID: 8927858  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. Respir Med. 1996 Sep;90(8):497-9.

A combination with clinical recommended dosages of salmeterol and ipratropium is 
not more effective than salmeterol alone in patients with chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease.

Matera MG(1), Caputi M, Cazzola M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Cardarelli Hospital, Naples, Italy.


PMID: 8869445  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


484. Thorax. 1996 Jul;51(7):689-93.

Effects of regular salmeterol on lung function and exercise capacity in patients 
with chronic obstructive airways disease.

Grove A(1), Lipworth BJ, Reid P, Smith RP, Ramage L, Ingram CG, Jenkins RJ,
Winter JH, Dhillon DP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacology, Ninewells Hospital and Medical School,
Dundee, UK.

BACKGROUND: The aim of this study was to evaluate the effects of single and
chronic dosing with salmeterol on exercise capacity and lung function in patients
with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
METHODS: Twenty nine patients of mean (SE) age 64 (1.5) years, forced expiratory 
volume in one second (FEV1) 42(3)% of predicted, and 5-15% reversibility to
salbutamol 200 micrograms were randomised to receive four weeks treatment with
salmeterol 50 micrograms twice daily or placebo in a double blind crossover
fashion with a one week washout period in between. Measurements of spirometric
parameters, static lung volumes, and exercise capacity were made one and six
hours after a single dose, and six hours after the final dose of salmeterol or
placebo.
RESULTS: Salmeterol produced a small increase in FEV1 at one and six hours after 
a single dose, and this was maintained after chronic dosing (mean difference and 
95% CI versus placebo): single dosing at one hour 0.07 (95% CI 0.02 to 0.11) 1,
single dosing at six hours 0.16 (95% CI 0.09 to 0.22) 1, chronic dosing at six
hours 0.11 (95% CI 0.03 to 0.19) 1. The increase in forced vital capacity (FVC)
was greater with salmeterol than with placebo six hours after single but not
chronic dosing: single dosing at six hours 0.17 (95% CI 0.04 to 0.29) 1, chronic 
dosing at six hours 0.02 (95% CI -0.18 to 0.22) 1. Slow vital capacity was
increased after treatment with salmeterol compared with placebo one and six hours
after single but not after chronic dosing. There were no significant differences 
in static lung volumes or exercise capacity after single or chronic dosing with
salmeterol compared with placebo. Patients reported a significantly lower Borg
score for perceived exertion following the six minute walk after chronic
treatment with salmeterol compared with placebo.
CONCLUSIONS: Salmeterol produced a small improvement in spirometric values
compared with placebo consistent with the degree of reversibility originally
shown by the subjects to salbutamol 200 micrograms. This was not associated with 
improvements in static lung volumes or exercise capacity, but there was some
symptomatic benefit in that patients were able to walk the same distance in six
minutes with less perceived exertion.


PMCID: PMC472490
PMID: 8882074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. Ugeskr Laeger. 1996 Jun 17;158(25):3604-7.

[The effect of salmeterol in the treatment of smokers with chronic obstructive
lung disease].

[Article in Danish]

Ulrik CS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Lungemedicinsk afdeling P, Bispebjerg Hospital, København.

Patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) may benefit from long 
term treatment with bronchodilators despite having a modest acute response to
these drugs. To investigate the efficacy of salmeterol in smokers with COPD a
double blind, randomised, crossover comparison was performed between salmeterol
(50 micrograms twice daily) and placebo in 63 patients with stable COPD (mean age
63 yrs); inclusion criteria: aFEV1) < 60% of predicted and FEV1 reversibility <
15% (0.4 mg salbutamol). Patients received four weeks of therapy with each of the
treatment regimens. Assessment of efficacy was done by recording morning and
evening peak expiratory flow rates (PEF), respiratory symptoms, and use of rescue
salbutamol. Morning PEF values were higher during the salmeterol than during the 
placebo period, although the mean treatment difference was small (12 l/min (95%
confidence limits 6 to 17)). No difference in mean evening PEF values was found. 
Diurnal variation in PEF was more pronounced during the placebo than during the
salmeterol period. Compared with placebo, treatment with salmeterol was
associated with lower day time and night time symptom scores and less use of
rescue salbutamol both during the day and the night. This study shows that,
compared with placebo, treatment with salmeterol produces an improvement in
respiratory symptoms and morning PEF values in patients with moderate to severe
COPD. Treatment with long acting beta(2)-agonists may therefore result in an
improvement in functional status, even in patients suffering from apparently
non-reversible obstructive pulmonary disease.


PMID: 8693619  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. J Aerosol Med. 1995 Spring;8 Suppl 1:S35-9.

Clinical pharmacology of HFA134a.

Ventresca GP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Pharmacology Division, Glaxo Research and Development Ltd, Greenford,
Middlesex, UK.

The safety, tolerability and pharmacokinetics of the chlorine-free propellant
HFA134a were assessed in healthy subjects after single and repeat doses.
Absorption and disposition were investigated in healthy subjects and severe
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) patients using labelled HFA134a.
There were no clinically significant changes in vital signs, ECG, pulmonary
function tests and laboratory parameters measured. No serious adverse events were
reported. In both subjects and patients HFA134a was mainly eliminated by
exhalation within the first few minutes after administration and was distributed 
throughout the body with no obvious accumulation in any specific region. HFA134a 
was rapidly absorbed after inhalation with dose-related blood concentrations
which declined rapidly after dosing (t1/2 = 31 min). Metabolism was not a
significant route of elimination of HFA134a. Studies were also performed with
salmeterol and salbutamol MDIs reformulated with HFA134a. The results showed that
these MDIs were safe and well tolerated in healthy subjects and gave a similar
pharmacodynamic response to the current MDIs.


PMID: 10150494  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. Pulm Pharmacol. 1995 Dec;8(6):267-71.

A comparison of the bronchodilating effects of salmeterol, salbutamol and
ipratropium bromide in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Matera MG(1), Cazzola M, Vinciguerra A, Di Perna F, Calderaro F, Caputi M, Rossi 
F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pneumology, A. Cardarelli Hospital, Naples, Italy.

Bronchodilator efficacy of salbutamol (200 micrograms), salmeterol (50
micrograms) and ipratropium bromide (40 micrograms) aerosols has been compared in
16 patients with stable chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) using a
double-blind placebo controlled cross-over design. When absolute changes in FEV1 
were used as the response criterion, efficacy of the three drugs was
significantly better than placebo (P < 0.05). The onset of bronchodilatation
after ipratropium bromide was slower than after salbutamol, but ipratropium
induced more and longer-lasting bronchodilatation than the adrenergic drug.
Salmeterol was slower but its duration was longer than salbutamol. The onset of
the effect of salmeterol was slower than ipratropium bromide, but salmeterol
showed, on average, superior bronchodilator efficacy compared with the
anticholinergic agent, sustaining bronchodilation longer than ipratropium bromide
(responses to salmeterol were significantly (P < 0.05) greater than those to
ipratropium bromide from 4-12 h time period, but from 15 min to 1 h time periods 
response to ipratropium bromide exceeded salmeterol). The mean FEV1 area under
the curve was significantly (P < 0.05) larger after salmeterol when compared to
ipratropium bromide and salbutamol. Moreover, the mean FEV1 area under the curve 
after ipratropium bromide was significantly (P < 0.05) higher than that after
salbutamol. In any case, our data showed individual differences in patient
response. We conclude that salmeterol compares favourably with ipratropium
bromide in terms of effects on lung function at clinically recommended doses
because it has a longer duration of action than ipratropium bromide. The longer
dosing intervals, which may enhance compliance, encourage its administration in
patients with COPD.


PMID: 8819181  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. Thorax. 1995 Jul;50(7):750-4.

Efficacy of inhaled salmeterol in the management of smokers with chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease: a single centre randomised, double blind, placebo 
controlled, crossover study.

Ulrik CS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonary Medicine P, Bispebjerg Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark.

Comment in
    Thorax. 1996 Jan;51(1):110.

BACKGROUND: The acute response to bronchodilators in patients with chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is modest; it has, however, been suggested
that these patients may benefit from long term treatment.
METHODS: To investigate the efficacy of salmeterol in smokers with moderate to
severe COPD a double blind, randomised, crossover comparison was performed
between salmeterol (50 micrograms twice daily) and placebo in 63 patients with
stable COPD (mean age 65 years). Prior to inclusion, all patients had a forced
expiratory volume in one second (FEV1) of < 60% of predicted and an improvement
in FEV1 of < 15% following 400 micrograms inhaled salbutamol. Patients received
four weeks of therapy with each of the treatment regimens. Assessment of efficacy
was made with recording of morning and evening peak expiratory flow rates (PEF), 
respiratory symptoms, and use of rescue salbutamol. FEV1 was measured before and 
after nebulised salbutamol prior to randomisation and at the end of each
treatment period.
RESULTS: Morning PEF values were higher during the salmeterol than during the
placebo period, although the mean treatment difference was small (12 l/min (95%
confidence limits 6 to 17)). No difference in mean evening PEF values was found. 
Diurnal variation in PEF, assessed as the difference between the morning PEF and 
that of the previous evening, was more pronounced during the placebo than during 
the salmeterol period. The mean spirometric values (including reversibility in
FEV1) obtained at the end of the two treatment periods were similar. Compared
with placebo, treatment with salmeterol was associated with lower daytime and
night time symptom scores and less use of rescue salbutamol both during the day
and the night. The patients rated the treatment with salmeterol better than
treatment with placebo.
CONCLUSIONS: This study shows that, compared with placebo, treatment with
salmeterol produces an improvement in respiratory symptoms and morning PEF values
in patients with moderate to severe COPD. Treatment with long acting beta
agonists may therefore result in an improvement in functional status, even in
patients suffering from apparently nonreversible obstructive pulmonary disease.


PMCID: PMC474647
PMID: 7570409  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. Respir Med. 1995 May;89(5):357-62.

Salmeterol and formoterol in partially reversible severe chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease: a dose-response study.

Cazzola M(1), Matera MG, Santangelo G, Vinciguerra A, Rossi F, D'Amato G.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pneumology and Allergology, A. Cardarelli Hospital, Naples, Italy.

When testing the response to beta 2-agonist drugs in severe chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD), a dose-response assessment should be undertaken. This
study compares the time course of inhaled salmeterol (25, 50 and 75 micrograms)
and formoterol (12, 24 and 36 micrograms) at different doses in a group of 12
patients with partially reversible, but severe COPD (FEV1 of 12-32% of predicted 
values after beta 2-agonist drugs had been withheld for 24 h). All doses of
salmeterol and formoterol induced a significant (P < 0.01) spirometric
improvement over the 12-h monitoring period, when compared to the spirometric
improvement after placebo, but while formoterol induced a dose-dependent increase
of the FVC, FEV1 and FEF50, this was not the case for salmeterol. In fact, 75
micrograms salmeterol did not produce a further improvement of these parameters. 
Mean peak bronchodilation, expressed as the increase in FEV1 over baseline
values, occurred 2 h after inhalation of the three doses of salmeterol, and 1 h
after inhalation of the three doses of formoterol. A comparison of 50 micrograms 
salmeterol with 12 micrograms or 24 micrograms formoterol (clinically recommended
doses), showed that improvement of FEV1 after salmeterol was statistically (P <
0.05) higher than that after the two doses of formoterol, although the mean peak 
bronchodilations were similar. This was because salmeterol has a longer duration 
of action than formoterol. These data demonstrate that salmeterol is equally
effective as, but longer-acting than, formoterol at clinically recommended doses 
in patients suffering from COPD, with severe airway obstruction.(ABSTRACT
TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)


PMID: 7638371  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. Rev Med Brux. 1994 Jul-Aug;15(4):277, 280-1.

[Endobronchial bronchodilators].

[Article in French]

Yernault JC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Service de Pneumologie, Hôpital Erasme, Bruxelles.

There are two families of inhaled bronchodilators: beta-2-mimetics and
vagolytics. They are equally effective in patients with chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD), whereas beta-mimetics are usually superior in
asthmatics. The clinical benefits linked to long acting beta-mimetics like
salmeterol are already established in asthmatics. Metered dose aerosols remain
the most widely used type of inhaler, eventually connected to a spacer, together 
with powder inhalers. Usual bronchodilators are now prescribed on demand rather
than on a regular basis. There is no proof that beta-mimetics are casually
related to asthma deaths. Inhaled corticosteroids, which have no acute
bronchospasmolytic properties, are the first-choice chronic drug treatment of
moderate to severe asthma; they are currently being evaluated in COPD.


PMID: 7939004  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. Pulm Pharmacol. 1994 Apr;7(2):103-7.

Effect of salmeterol and formoterol in patients with chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease.

Cazzola M(1), Santangelo G, Piccolo A, Salzillo A, Matera MG, D'Amato G, Rossi F.

Author information: 
(1)Divisione di Pneumologia ed Allergologia, Ospedale A. Cardarelli, Napoli,
Italy.

In the present trial we investigated the time course of inhaled salmeterol and
formoterol bronchodilation in comparison with that of inhaled salbutamol and
placebo in 16 patients with moderate to severe chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD). The study was performed using a single-blind crossover randomized
study. The bronchodilator activity of 200 micrograms salbutamol, 50 micrograms
salmeterol, 24 micrograms formoterol and placebo, which were all inhaled from a
metered dose inhaler, was investigated. Our results showed that salmeterol and
formoterol are efficacious in reducing airflow obstruction in patients suffering 
from COPD. We found similar times of onset to improve FEV1 by 15% for salmeterol 
and formoterol (salbutamol behaving faster), while the duration of action showed 
the expected differences between the two long-acting drugs and salbutamol. The
results indicate that long-acting beta 2-agonists appear to be very effective in 
improving airway limitation in patients suffering from COPD. Although the onset
of bronchodilation after inhaling salmeterol and formoterol is slightly delayed
compared with salbutamol, this is of little clinical importance since in these
patients salmeterol and formoterol must be intended for maintenance treatment and
not immediate symptomatic relief.


PMID: 7915921  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. Pneumologie. 1994 Jan;48(1):12-5.

[Increasing physical endurance with salmeterol].

[Article in German]

Schmitz E(1), Hürter T, Ochs JG, Reuber S, Hanrath P.

Author information: 
(1)Medizinsiche Klinik I, Universitätsklinik (RWTH) Aachen.

10 patients with mild to moderate chronic obstructive pulmonary disease were
assessed by lung function tests at rest and spiroergometry before and 1 resp. 7
hours after inhalation of 50 micrograms salmeterol. The parameters changed as
follows: Forced exspiratory volume in 1 second: +16% +/- 6% after 1 resp. +13%
+/- 5% after 7 hours; airway resistance: -43% +/- 11% resp. -43 +/- 9%. Work
capacity at the anaerobic threshold (AT): +44% +/- 17% resp. +37% +/- 16%, oxygen
consumption at the AT (VO2AT): +53% +/- 18% resp. +54 +/- 23%, ventilation at the
AT (VEAT): +31% +/- 11% resp. 30% +/- 7%. Maximum work capacity: +14 +/- 5% resp.
+22 +/- 7%, maximum oxygen consumption (VO2max) +58 +/- 24% resp. 64 +/- 22%,
maximum ventilation (VEmax) +33 +/- 10% resp. + 46 +/- 11%. In conclusion,
salmeterol leads to a long lasting improvement of exercise capacity. This is
related to the improvement of the ventilation caused by salmeterol. Significant
changes of heart rate or blood pressure were not observed.


PMID: 8153113  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]

1. J Aerosol Med Pulm Drug Deliv. 2016 Sep 16. [Epub ahead of print]

Variability in Delivered Dose from Pressurized Metered-Dose Inhaler Formulations 
Due to a Delay Between Shake and Fire.

Hatley RH(1), Parker J(1), Pritchard JN(1), von Hollen D(2).

Author information: 
(1)1 Philips Respironics Respiratory Drug Delivery (UK) Ltd, a business of
Philips Electronics UK Limited, Chichester, United Kingdom . (2)2 Respironics,
Inc., A Philips Healthcare Company , Murrysville, Pennsylvania.

BACKGROUND: Pressurized metered-dose inhalers (pMDIs) should be shaken before use
to prevent creaming or sedimentation of the drugs in solution; however, data
published on this topic are limited, and it is rarely specified how soon after
shaking the device should be actuated. Delays between shaking and firing the pMDI
have previously been shown to cause significant inhomogeneity in delivered dose. 
We studied the effect of various shake-fire delays on the drug delivered from
five commercially available pMDIs commonly prescribed for asthma and chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease to assess the potential variability in delivered
dose.
METHODS: The pMDI formulations tested were the Flovent HFA, Ventolin Evohaler,
Airomir Inhaler, and Symbicort (suspension pMDIs), and the QVAR 100 Inhaler
(solution pMDI). Each pMDI was shaken for 5 seconds before attachment to a dosage
unit sampling apparatus collection tube and filter, and it was actuated once with
shake-fire delays of 0, 5, 10, 20, 30, 40, 50, and 60 seconds. Analysis of the
eluates from the collection tubes and filters was performed by using
high-performance liquid chromatography. Three of each pMDI were tested twice with
each time delay.
RESULTS: All of the suspension pMDIs produced variable amounts of drug over the
shake-fire delays tested. A comparison of the delivered doses after the 0- and
60-second delays showed that the drug delivered increased for the Flovent HFA
(320%), Ventolin Evohaler (346%), and Airomir Inhaler (230%) pMDIs; decreased for
the Symbicort budesonide (75%) and formoterol fumarate (76%) pMDI; and remained
consistent for the QVAR 100 Inhaler pMDI.
CONCLUSIONS: The amount of drug delivered can vary widely over different
shake-fire delays with suspension pMDIs. Therefore, guidance should be given to
users/caregivers on the timing of firing after shaking their device, particularly
with pediatrics, who may take time to become receptive to accepting their
medication after pMDI shaking and before dose administration.

DOI: 10.1089/jamp.2015.1284 
PMID: 27635793  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. Respirology. 2016 Sep 13. doi: 10.1111/resp.12902. [Epub ahead of print]

Can computed tomography and carbon monoxide transfer coefficient diagnose an
asthma-like phenotype in COPD?

Al-Kassimi FA(1), Alhamad EH(2), Al-Hajjaj MS(2), Raddaoui E(3,)(4), Alzeer
AH(5), Alboukai AA(6), Somily AM(4), Cal JG(2), Ibrahim AF(2), Shaik SA(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
falkassimi@yahoo.com. (2)Department of Medicine, King Saud University, Riyadh,
Saudi Arabia. (3)Department of Pathology, Alfaisal University, Riyadh, Saudi
Arabia. (4)Department of Pathology, King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(5)Critical Care Department, King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(6)Department of Radiology, King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(7)Department of Family and Community Medicine, King Saud University, Riyadh,
Saudi Arabia.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Post-mortem and computed tomography (CT) studies
indicated that emphysema is a feature of COPD even in the 'blue bloater/chronic
bronchitis' type. We aim to test the hypothesis that the non-emphysematous
patients are distinct from the main body of COPD and are more akin to asthmatic
patients.
METHODS: We studied 54 patients with COPD. Emphysema was measured by Goddard's
visual scoring of CT scan and the carbon monoxide transfer coefficient (KCO).
Bronchial biopsy was offered for thickness of basement membrane (BM) (≥7 µm) as a
marker of remodelling in irreversible asthma. Spirometry was repeated after
therapy with Budesonide/Formoterol for 1 year.
RESULTS: The non-emphysematous phenotype were 24 of 54 patients (44%) by CT scan 
and 23 of 54 patients (43%) by KCO, showing agreement in 53 out of 54 patients.
The non-emphysematous patients were younger, had higher forced expiratory volume 
in 1 s (FEV1 ) (median 61% vs 49.7%), greater prevalence of hypertrophy of nasal 
turbinates and higher serum IgE. The emphysematous phenotype had lower BMI and
greater dyspnoea score. The BM was thickened in 11 of 14 and 0 of 10 patients in 
the non-emphysematous and emphysematous groups, respectively. Three patients
without emphysema and a normal BM normalized their FEV1 upon receiving inhaled
corticosteroid (ICS)/long-acting β2 agonist (LABA). All the non-emphysematous
improved their FEV1 after ICS/LABA (median = 215 mL). The median decline in the
emphysematous was -65 mL.
CONCLUSION: The non-emphysematous phenotype of COPD displays important features
of asthma: clinical picture, histology and response to ICS. CT and KCO can
predict spirometric response to ICS/LABA.

© 2016 Asian Pacific Society of Respirology.

DOI: 10.1111/resp.12902 
PMID: 27623733  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


3. Eur J Pharm Sci. 2016 Oct 10;93:371-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ejps.2016.08.036. Epub 2016
Aug 21.

Numerical simulation of emitted particle characteristics and airway deposition
distribution of Symbicort(®) Turbuhaler(®) dry powder fixed combination aerosol
drug.

Farkas Á(1), Jókay Á(2), Balásházy I(2), Füri P(2), Müller V(3), Tomisa G(4),
Horváth A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Energy Research, Hungarian Academy of Sciences, Konkoly-Thege
Miklós út 29-33, 1121 Budapest, Hungary. Electronic address:
farkas.arpad@energia.mta.hu. (2)Centre for Energy Research, Hungarian Academy of 
Sciences, Konkoly-Thege Miklós út 29-33, 1121 Budapest, Hungary. (3)Department of
Pulmonology, Semmelweis University, Diós árok 1/C, 1125 Budapest, Hungary.
(4)Department of Pulmonology, Semmelweis University, Diós árok 1/C, 1125
Budapest, Hungary; Chiesi Hungary Kft., Dunavirág u. 2, 1138 Budapest, Hungary.

One of the most widespread dry powder fixed combinations used in asthma and
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) management is Symbicort(®)
Turbuhaler(®). The aim of this study was to simulate the deposition distribution 
of both components of this drug within the airways based on realistic airflow
measurements. Breathing parameters of 25 healthy adults (11 females and 14 males)
were acquired while inhaling through Turbuhaler(®). Individual specific emitted
doses and particle size distributions of Symbicort(®) Turbuhaler(®) were
determined. A self-developed particle deposition model was adapted and validated 
to simulate the deposition of budesonide (inhaled corticosteroid; ICS) and
formoterol (long acting β2 agonist; LABA) in the upper airways and lungs of the
healthy volunteers. Based on current simulations the emitted doses varied between
50.4% and 92.5% of the metered dose for the ICS, and between 38% and 96.1% in
case of LABA component depending on the individual inhalation flow rate. This
variability induced a notable inter-individual spread of the deposited lung doses
(mean: 33.6%, range: 20.4%-48.8% for budesonide and mean: 29.8%, range:
16.4%-42.9% for formoterol). Significant inter-gender differences were also
observed. Average lung dose of budesonide was 29.2% of the metered dose for
females and 37% for males, while formoterol deposited with 26.4% efficiency for
females and 32.5% for males. Present results also highlighted the importance of
breath-holding after inhalation of the drug. About a half of the total lung
deposition occurred during breath-hold at 9.6s average breath-hold time.
Calculated depositions confirmed appropriate lung deposition of Symbicort(®)
Turbuhaler(®) for both genders, however more effort for optimal inhalation
technique is advised for persons with low vital capacity. This study demonstrated
the possibility of personalized prediction of airway deposition of aerosol drugs 
by numerical simulations. The methodology developed in this study will be
applicable also to other marketed drugs in the future.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejps.2016.08.036 
PMID: 27552906  [PubMed - in process]


4. Drug Discov Today. 2016 Jul 21. pii: S1359-6446(16)30259-8. doi:
10.1016/j.drudis.2016.07.009. [Epub ahead of print]

Triple inhaled therapy for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Montuschi P(1), Malerba M(2), Macis G(3), Mores N(4), Santini G(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Faculty of Medicine, University Hospital Agostino 
Gemelli, Catholic University of the Sacred Heart, Rome, Italy. Electronic
address: pmontuschi@rm.unicatt.it. (2)Department of Internal Medicine, University
of Brescia, Brescia, Italy. (3)Department of Radiological Sciences, Faculty of
Medicine, University Hospital Agostino Gemelli, Catholic University of the Sacred
Heart, Rome, Italy. (4)Department of Pharmacology, Faculty of Medicine,
University Hospital Agostino Gemelli, Catholic University of the Sacred Heart,
Rome, Italy.

Combining individual drugs in a single inhaler is the most convenient way to
deliver triple therapy. A long-acting muscarinic receptor antagonist (LAMA) added
to an inhaled corticosteroid (ICS)/long-acting β2-adrenoceptor agonist (LABA)
fixed-dose combination (FDC) can improve efficacy of pharmacological treatment of
patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). New inhaled
ICS/LABA/LAMA FDCs, including fluticasone furoate/vilanterol/umeclidinium,
budesonide/formoterol/glycopyrronium and beclometasone/formoterol/glycopyrronium,
are in Phase III of clinical development for COPD. Triple inhaled therapy might
be particularly useful in patients with severe to very severe COPD, above all in 
those with peripheral blood or sputum eosinophilia, asthma-COPD overlap syndrome 
(ACOS) or frequent exacerbators. Future prospective studies should assess
efficacy and safety of triple ICS/LABA/LAMA therapy in selected COPD phenotypes.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.drudis.2016.07.009 
PMID: 27452453  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


5. Am J Chin Med. 2016;44(5):1027-41. doi: 10.1142/S0192415X16500579. Epub 2016 Jul 
19.

Pinellia ternata Attenuates Mucus Secretion and Airway Inflammation after Inhaled
Corticosteroid Withdrawal in COPD Rats.

Du W(1,)(2), Su J(1), Ye D(3), Wang Y(4), Huang Q(1), Gong X(1,)(5).

Author information: 
(1)* Department of Pathophysiology, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical
University, Guangzhou 510515, China. (2)‡ Respiratory Diseases Group, the 6th
Unit, Department of Internal Medicine, Guangzhou General Hospital of Guangzhou
Military Command, Guangzhou 510010, China. (3)§ Hexian Memorial Hospital, Panyu, 
Guangzhou 511400, China. (4)† Department of Cardiovascular Diseases, Nanfang
Hospital, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou 510515, China. (5)¶ Department
of Biosciences and Nutrition, Karolinska Institutet, Huddinge 14183, Sweden.

Inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) are widely used to manage chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD). However, withdrawal of ICS generally causes various
adverse effects, warranting careful management of the ICS withdrawal. Pinellia
ternata, a traditional Chinese herbal medicine, has been used to treat
respiratory diseases in China for centuries. Here, we investigated its role in
antagonizing ICS withdrawal-induced side effects, and explored the underlying
mechanisms. The rat COPD model was established using a combination of passive
cigarette smoking and intratracheal instillation of lipopolysaccharide (LPS).
COPD rats were treated with saline or budesonide inhalation, or with budesonide
inhalation followed by saline inhalation or Pinellia ternata gavage. The number
of goblet cells and the level of mucin 5AC (MUC5AC) were enhanced by budesonide
withdrawal. Pinellia ternata treatment significantly blocked these effects.
Further, Pinellia ternata treatment reversed budesonide withdrawal-induced
increase of interleukin 1[Formula: see text] (IL-1[Formula: see text] and tumor
necrosis factor [Formula: see text] (TNF-[Formula: see text]) levels in
bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF). Extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK),
but neither p38 nor c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK), was activated by budesonide
withdrawal, and the activation was blocked by Pinellia ternata treatment. The
MUC5AC expression was positively correlated with goblet cell number,
IL-1[Formula: see text] and TNF-[Formula: see text] levels, and ERK activity.
Pinellia ternata treatment protected the airway from ICS withdrawal-induced mucus
hypersecretion and airway inflammation by inhibiting ERK activation. Pinellia
ternata treatment may represent a novel therapeutic strategy to prevent ICS
withdrawal-induced side effects in COPD patients.

DOI: 10.1142/S0192415X16500579 
PMID: 27430907  [PubMed - in process]


6. BMC Health Serv Res. 2016 Jul 12;16:251. doi: 10.1186/s12913-016-1482-7.

The economic burden of asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and the
impact of poor inhalation technique with commonly prescribed dry powder inhalers 
in three European countries.

Lewis A(1), Torvinen S(2), Dekhuijzen PN(3), Chrystyn H(4), Watson AT(1),
Blackney M(5), Plich A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Covance Market Access, London, UK. (2)Teva Pharmaceuticals Europe B.V,
Haarlem, Netherlands. (3)Department of Pulmonary Diseases, Radboud University
Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands. (4)Talmedica Ltd., Rossendale,
and Faculty of Human and Health Sciences, University of Plymouth, Plymouth,
United Kingdom. (5)Covance Market Access, London, UK.
michael.blackney@covance.com.

BACKGROUND: Asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) are common
chronic inflammatory respiratory diseases, which impose a substantial burden on
healthcare systems and society. Fixed-dose combinations (FDCs) of inhaled
corticosteroids (ICS) and long-acting β2 agonists (LABA), often administered
using dry powder inhalers (DPIs), are frequently prescribed to control persistent
asthma and COPD. Use of DPIs has been associated with poor inhalation technique, 
which can lead to increased healthcare resource use and costs.
METHODS: A model was developed to estimate the healthcare resource use and costs 
associated with asthma and COPD management in people using commonly prescribed
DPIs (budesonide + formoterol Turbuhaler(®) or fluticasone + salmeterol
Accuhaler(®)) over 1 year in Spain, Sweden and the United Kingdom (UK). The model
considered direct costs (inhaler acquisition costs and scheduled and unscheduled 
healthcare costs), indirect costs (productive days lost), and estimated the
contribution of poor inhalation technique to the burden of illness.
RESULTS: The direct cost burden of managing asthma and COPD for people using
budesonide + formoterol Turbuhaler(®) or fluticasone + salmeterol Accuhaler(®) in
2015 was estimated at €813 million, €560 million, and €774 million for Spain,
Sweden and the UK, respectively. Poor inhalation technique comprised 2.2-7.7 % of
direct costs, totalling €105 million across the three countries. When lost
productivity costs were included, total expenditure increased to €1.4 billion,
€1.7 billion and €3.3 billion in Spain, Sweden and the UK, respectively, with
€782 million attributable to poor inhalation technique across the three
countries. Sensitivity analyses showed that the model results were most sensitive
to changes in the proportion of patients prescribed ICS and LABA FDCs, and least 
sensitive to differences in the number of antimicrobials and oral corticosteroids
prescribed.
CONCLUSIONS: The cost of managing asthma and COPD using commonly prescribed DPIs 
is considerable. A substantial, and avoidable, contributor to this burden is poor
inhalation technique. Measures that can improve inhalation technique with current
DPIs, such as easier-to-use inhalers or better patient training, could offer
benefits to patients and healthcare providers through improving disease outcomes 
and lowering costs.

DOI: 10.1186/s12913-016-1482-7 
PMCID: PMC4942909
PMID: 27406133  [PubMed - in process]


7. Sci Rep. 2016 Jun 28;6:28698. doi: 10.1038/srep28698.

Azithromycin induces anti-viral effects in cultured bronchial epithelial cells
from COPD patients.

Menzel M(1), Akbarshahi H(1), Bjermer L(2), Uller L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Respiratory Immunopharmacology, Department of Experimental Medical Science,
Lund University, Sweden. (2)Lung medicine and Allergology, Department of Clinical
Sciences, Lund University, Sweden.

Rhinovirus infection is a major cause of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD) exacerbations and may contribute to the development into severe stages of 
COPD. The macrolide antibiotic azithromycin may exert anti-viral actions and has 
been reported to reduce exacerbations in COPD. However, little is known about its
anti-viral actions on bronchial epithelial cells at clinically relevant
concentrations. Primary bronchial epithelial cells from COPD donors and healthy
individuals were treated continuously with azithromycin starting 24 h before
infection with rhinovirus RV16. Expression of interferons, RIG-I like helicases, 
pro-inflammatory cytokines and viral load were analysed. Azithromycin transiently
increased expression of IFNβ and IFNλ1 and RIG-I like helicases in un-infected
COPD cells. Further, azithromycin augmented RV16-induced expression of
interferons and RIG-I like helicases in COPD cells but not in healthy epithelial 
cells. Azithromycin also decreased viral load. However, it only modestly altered 
RV16-induced pro-inflammatory cytokine expression. Adding budesonide did not
reduce interferon-inducing effects of azithromycin. Possibly by inducing
expression of RIG-I like helicases, azithromycin increased rhinovirus-induced
expression of interferons in COPD but not in healthy bronchial epithelium. These 
effects would reduce bronchial viral load, supporting azithromycin's emerging
role in prevention of exacerbations of COPD.

DOI: 10.1038/srep28698 
PMCID: PMC4923851
PMID: 27350308  [PubMed - in process]


8. Pulm Pharmacol Ther. 2016 Aug;39:48-53. doi: 10.1016/j.pupt.2016.06.006. Epub
2016 Jun 22.

Onset of action of budesonide/formoterol Spiromax(®) compared with
budesonide/formoterol Turbuhaler(®) in patients with COPD.

Cazzola M(1), Ora J(2), Di Paolo A(2), Puxeddu E(2), Calzetta L(2), Rogliani
P(2).

Author information: 
(1)University of Rome Tor Vergata, Department of Systems Medicine, Chair of
Respiratory Medicine, Rome, Italy. Electronic address: mario.cazzola@uniroma2.it.
(2)University of Rome Tor Vergata, Department of Systems Medicine, Chair of
Respiratory Medicine, Rome, Italy.

Budesonide/formoterol (BF) is available in two delivery systems, the dry powder
inhaler (DPI) Turbuhaler and a pressurized metered dose inhaler (pMDI) for use in
patients with asthma or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Spiromax
DPI was recently developed as an alternative to Turbuhaler DPI. In the present
study, we examined whether there is a difference in the onset of
bronchodilatation between BF 320/9 μg delivered by Spiromax and BF 320/9 μg
delivered by Turbuhaler in 16 outpatients with stable moderate-to-severe COPD.
Our results confirm the rapid onset of action of formoterol when combined with
budesonide in patients with COPD and indicate that the onset of bronchodilation
induced by BF Spiromax is faster than that elicited by BF Turbuhaler.
Furthermore, they show that BF fixed-dose combination does not induce a decrease 
in SpO2 or an increase in heart rate in patients with COPD, irrespective of the
DPI used to deliver this combination. Given the evidence that both inhalers have 
an equal safety profile, BF Spiromax offers to prescribers and COPD patients an
effective alternative to BF Turbuhaler depending also on their preference,
availability and cost.

Copyright © 2016. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pupt.2016.06.006 
PMID: 27344046  [PubMed - in process]


9. Ter Arkh. 2016;88(3):24-31.

[Nebulized budesonide in the treatment of exacerbations of chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease: Efficacy, safety, and effects on the serum levels of soluble
differentiation molecules].

[Article in Russian; Abstract available in Russian from the publisher]

Makarova EV(1), Varvarina GN(1), Menkov NV(1), Tsapaeva MY(2), Lazareva ES(3),
Kazatskaya ZhA(3), Novikov VV(3), Karaulov AV(4).

Author information: 
(1)Nizhny Novgorod State Medical Academy, Ministry of Health of Russia, Nizhny
Novgorod, Russia. (2)City Clinical Hospital Ten, Nizhny Novgorod, Russia. (3)N.I.
Lobachevsky Nizhny Novgorod State University, National Research University,
Nizhny Novgorod, Russia. (4)I.M. Sechenov First Moscow State Medical University, 
Ministry of Health of Russia, Moscow, Russia.

AIM: To investigate the efficacy and safety of nebulized budesonide and systemic 
glucocorticosteroids (GCS) (SGCS) in the treatment of an exacerbation of chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and their effects on the serum concentration
of soluble leukocyte differentiation antigens.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Seventy-eight hospitalized patients with an acute
exacerbation of COPD were randomized into two groups: 1) 37 patients took
nebulized budesonide 4 mg/day; 2) 41 patients received intravenous prednisolone. 
The symptoms of COPD, forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV1) and other
spirometric indicators, peripheral blood oxygen saturation (SpO2), and adverse
events were studied. The serum levels of the soluble adhesion molecules CD50
(sCD50) and CD54 (sCD54) and the lymphocyte activation molecules CD38 (sCD38) and
CD25 (sCD25) were investigated by an enzyme immunoassay.
RESULTS: There was a significant resolution of the symptoms of COPD, FEV1, and
SpO2 in both groups after treatment. The incidence of hyperglycemia episodes was 
lower in the budesonide group than in the sGCS group. GCSs caused a decrease in
the serum level of soluble interleukin-2 receptor (sCD25) in both groups. A
prednisolone cycle, unlike a budesonide one, was found to reduce the
concentrations of sCD54, sCD50, and sCD38.
CONCLUSION: Nebulized budesonide is an effective and safe alternative to SGCS in 
treating an exacerbation of COPD. Inhaled GCSs, unlike SGCSs, exhibit
anti-inflammatory activity, but exert no immunosuppressive activity.

Publisher: Abstract available from the publisher.

PMID: 27030325  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. J Manag Care Spec Pharm. 2016 Mar;22(3):293-304. doi:
10.18553/jmcp.2016.22.3.293.

Health Care Utilization and Costs After Initiating Budesonide/Formoterol
Combination or Fluticasone/Salmeterol Combination Among COPD Patients New to
ICS/LABA Treatment.

Davis JR(1), Kern DM(2), Williams SA(3), Tunceli O(4), Wu B(5), Hollis S(6),
Strange C(7), Trudo F(8).

Author information: 
(1)1 Director, Health Economics and Outcomes Research, AstraZeneca
Pharmaceuticals, Wilmington, Delaware. (2)2 Associate Research Director, Industry
Sponsored Research, HealthCore, Wilmington, Delaware. (3)3 Senior Director,
Medical Evidence Center, AstraZeneca Pharmaceuticals, Gaithersburg, Maryland.
(4)4 Director, Industry Sponsored Research, HealthCore, Wilmington, Delaware.
(5)5 Research Manager, Industry Sponsored Research, HealthCore, Wilmington,
Delaware. (6)6 Senior Director and Biometrics Team Leader, AstraZeneca
Pharmaceuticals, Alderley Park, Cheshire, United Kingdom. (7)7 Professor,
Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Medical University of South
Carolina, Charleston. (8)8 Medical Lead, Respiratory, AstraZeneca
Pharmaceuticals, Wilmington, Delaware.

BACKGROUND: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) affects approximately 15
million people in the United States and accounts for approximately $36 billion in
economic burden, primarily due to medical costs. To address the increasing
clinical and economic burden, the Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung 
Disease emphasizes the use of therapies that help prevent COPD exacerbations,
including inhaled corticosteroid/long-acting beta2-agonist (ICS/LABA).
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate health care costs and utilization among COPD patients
newly initiating ICS/LABA combination therapy with budesonide/formoterol (BFC) or
fluticasone/salmeterol (FSC) in a managed care system.
METHODS: COPD patients aged 40 years and older who initiated BFC (160/4.5 μg) or 
FSC (250/50 μg) treatment between March 1, 2009, and March 31, 2012, were
identified using claims data from major U.S. health plans. BFC and FSC patients
were propensity score matched (1:1) on age, sex, prior asthma diagnosis, prior
COPD-related health care utilization, and respiratory medication use.
COPD-related, pneumonia-related, and all-cause costs and utilization were
analyzed during the 12-month follow-up period. Post-index costs were assessed
with generalized linear models (GLMs) with gamma distribution. Health care
utilization data were analyzed via logistic regression (any event vs. none) and
GLMs with negative binomial distribution (number of visits) and were adjusted for
the analogous pre-index variable as well as pre-index characteristics that
remained imbalanced after matching.
RESULTS: After matching, each cohort had 3,697 patients balanced on age (mean 64 
years), sex (female 52% BFC and 54% FSC), asthma and other comorbid conditions,
prior COPD-related health care utilization, and respiratory medication use.
During the 12-month follow-up, COPD-related costs averaged $316 less for BFC
versus FSC patients ($4,326 vs. $4,846; P = 0.003), reflecting lower inpatient
($966 vs. $1,202; P < 0.001), pharmacy ($1,482 vs. $1,609; P = 0.002), and
outpatient/office ($1,378 vs. $1,436; P = 0.048) costs, but higher emergency
department ($257 vs. $252; P = 0.033) costs. Pneumonia-related health care costs 
were also lower on average for BFC patients ($2,855 vs. $3,605; P < 0.001).
Similarly, initiating BFC was associated with lower all-use health care costs
versus initiating FSC ($21,580 vs. $24,483; P < 0.001, respectively). No
differences in health care utilization were found between the 2 groups.
CONCLUSIONS: In this study, although no difference was observed in rates of
health care utilization, COPD patients initiating BFC treatment incurred lower
average COPD-related, pneumonia-related, and all-cause costs versus FSC
initiators, which was driven by cumulative differences in inpatient, outpatient, 
and pharmacy costs.

DOI: 10.18553/jmcp.2016.22.3.293 
PMID: 27003559  [PubMed - in process]


11. BMC Pulm Med. 2016 Mar 17;16:42. doi: 10.1186/s12890-016-0200-x.

A randomized, double-blinded, double-dummy efficacy and safety study of
budesonide-formoterol Spiromax® compared to budesonide-formoterol Turbuhaler® in 
adults and adolescents with persistent asthma.

Virchow JC(1), Rodriguez-Roisin R(2), Papi A(3), Shah TP(4), Gopalan G(4,)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pneumology/Intensive Care Medicine, University of Rostock,
Zentrum für Innere Medizin/Medizinische Klinik 1, Rostock, Germany.
j.c.virchow@med.uni-rostock.ch. (2)Servei de Pneumologia (Institut del Tòrax),
Hospital Clínic-IDIBAPS-CIBERES, Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(3)University of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy. (4)Teva Pharmaceuticals, Malvern, PA,
USA. (5), Present address: 41 Spruce Hollow Road, Green Brook, NJ, 08812, USA.

BACKGROUND: Budesonide and formoterol (BF) Spiromax® is a dry powder inhaler
designed to deliver BF with maximum ease of use for patients with asthma or
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
METHODS: A phase 3b, 12-week, multicenter, double-blind, double-dummy,
randomized, controlled trial in patients (≥12 years) with persistent asthma.
PRIMARY OBJECTIVE: to demonstrate non-inferiority of twice-daily BF Spiromax
160/4.5 mcg to BF Turbuhaler® 200/6 mcg in change from baseline in weekly average
of daily trough morning peak expiratory flow (PEF). Secondary endpoints included:
Patient Satisfaction and Preference Questionnaire scores, change from baseline in
evening PEF, trough forced expiratory volume in one second, percentage of
symptom-free and rescue-free 24-hour periods, and safety.
RESULTS: The analysis was based on the per-protocol population (BF Spiromax,
n = 290; BF Turbuhaler, n = 284). The least squares mean change from baseline to 
week 12 in morning PEF was: BF Spiromax, 18.8 L/min and BF Turbuhaler, 21.8
L/min. Non-inferiority of BF Spiromax vs BF Turbuhaler was demonstrated (the
lower limit of the 95% two-sided confidence interval was -9.02 L/min, which is
greater than -15 L/min [the criteria specified for non-inferiority]). The mean
difference in the total performance domains scores for BF Spiromax vs BF
Turbuhaler were 0.248 at baseline and 0.353 at week 12 (both, p <0.001),
indicating statistical superiority for BF Spiromax. No statistical or numerical
differences were recorded in the total convenience domain score between the two
devices. Scores for 'device preference' and 'willingness to continue' supported
BF Spiromax at baseline and at week 12 (p = 0.0005 vs BF Turbuhaler). No
significant between-group differences were observed in the other secondary
efficacy endpoints. Both treatments were well tolerated, with no significant
differences in adverse events or asthma exacerbations.
CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrates the non-inferiority of BF Spiromax vs BF
Turbuhaler in patients (≥12 years) with asthma. More patients preferred the
Spiromax device over Turbuhaler for its performance, and were willing to continue
therapy with BF Spiromax beyond the 12-week study period.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: NCT01803555; February 28, 2013.

DOI: 10.1186/s12890-016-0200-x 
PMCID: PMC4794916
PMID: 26987997  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2016 Feb 25;11:381-90. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S93303.
eCollection 2016.

Early response to inhaled bronchodilators and corticosteroids as a predictor of
12-month treatment responder status and COPD exacerbations.

Calverley PM(1), Postma DS(2), Anzueto AR(3), Make BJ(4), Eriksson G(5), Peterson
S(6), Jenkins CR(7).

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary and Rehabilitation Research Group, University Hospital Aintree,
Liverpool, UK. (2)Department of Pulmonary Medicine and Tuberculosis, Gronigen
Research Institute for Asthma and COPD, University Medical Center Groningen,
University of Groningen, Groningen, the Netherlands. (3)Division of Pulmonary
Diseases and Critical Care Medicine, University of Texas Health Sciences Center, 
School of Medicine, University of Texas, San Antonio, TX, USA; South Texas
Veterans Health Care System, San Antonio, TX, USA. (4)Division of Pulmonary
Sciences and Critical Care Medicine, National Jewish Health, University of
Colorado, Denver, CO, USA. (5)Department of Respiratory Medicine and Allergology,
University Hospital, Lund, Sweden. (6)StatMind AB, Lund, Sweden. (7)George
Institute for Global Health, Concord Clincal School, The University of Sydney,
Sydney, NSW, Australia.

BACKGROUND: Early treatment response markers, for example, improvement in forced 
expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1) and St George's Respiratory Questionnaire
(SGRQ) total score, may help clinicians to better manage patients with chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). We investigated the prevalence of
clinically important improvements in FEV1 and SGRQ scores after 2-month
budesonide/formoterol or formoterol treatment and whether such improvements
predict subsequent improvements and exacerbation rates.
METHODS: This post hoc analysis is based on data from three double-blind,
randomized studies in patients with moderate-to-very-severe COPD receiving
twice-daily budesonide/formoterol or formoterol alone for 6 or 12 months.
Prebronchodilator FEV1 and SGRQ total score were measured before treatment and at
2 and 12 months; COPD exacerbation rates were measured during months 2-12.
Responders were defined by ≥100 mL improvement in prebronchodilator FEV1 and
≥4-point decrease in SGRQ total score.
RESULTS: Overall, 2,331 and 1,799 patients were included in the 0-2- and
0-12-month responder analyses, respectively, and 2,360 patients in the 2-12-month
exacerbation rate analysis. At 2 months, 35.1% of patients were FEV1 responders
and 44.3% were SGRQ responders. The probability of response was significantly
greater with budesonide/formoterol than with formoterol or placebo for both
parameters. Two-month responders had a greater chance of 12-month response than
2-month nonresponders for both FEV1 (odds ratio, 5.57; 95% confidence interval,
4.14-7.50) and SGRQ (odds ratio, 3.87; 95% confidence interval, 2.83-5.31).
Two-month response in FEV1 (P<0.001), but not SGRQ (P=0.11), was associated with 
greater reductions in exacerbation risk.
CONCLUSION: Early FEV1 and SGRQ treatment responses relate to their changes at 12
months. FEV1 response, but not SGRQ response, at 2 months predicts the risk of a 
future COPD exacerbation in some, but not all patients. This is potentially
useful in clinical practice, although more sensitive and specific markers of
favorable treatment response are required.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S93303 
PMCID: PMC4772946
PMID: 26952309  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Eur J Pharm Sci. 2016 Apr 30;86:20-8. doi: 10.1016/j.ejps.2016.02.018. Epub 2016 
Mar 2.

Co-spray dried resveratrol and budesonide inhalation formulation for reducing
inflammation and oxidative stress in rat alveolar macrophages.

Trotta V(1), Lee WH(2), Loo CY(2), Young PM(2), Traini D(3), Scalia S(4).

Author information: 
(1)Respiratory Technology, Woolcock Institute of Medical Research, Australia;
Department of Chemical and Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Ferrara, 44121 
Ferrara, Italy; Discipline of Pharmacology, Sydney Medical School, The University
of Sydney, NSW 2006, Australia. (2)Respiratory Technology, Woolcock Institute of 
Medical Research, Australia; Discipline of Pharmacology, Sydney Medical School,
The University of Sydney, NSW 2006, Australia. (3)Respiratory Technology,
Woolcock Institute of Medical Research, Australia; Discipline of Pharmacology,
Sydney Medical School, The University of Sydney, NSW 2006, Australia. Electronic 
address: daniela.traini@sydney.edu.au. (4)Department of Chemical and
Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Ferrara, 44121 Ferrara, Italy.

Oxidative stress is instrumental in the pathogenesis and progression of chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Novel therapeutic strategies that target
macrophages, based on the use of antioxidant compounds, could be explored to
improve corticosteroid responses in COPD patients. In this study, inhalable
microparticles containing budesonide (BD) and resveratrol (RES) were prepared and
characterized. This approach was undertaken to develop a multi-drug inhalable
formulation with anti-oxidant and anti-inflammatory activities for treatment of
chronic lung diseases. The inhalable microparticles containing different ratios
of BD and RES were prepared by spray drying. The physico-chemical properties of
the formulations were characterized in terms of surface morphology, particle
size, physical and thermal stability. Additionally, in vitro aerosol performances
of these formulations were evaluated with the multi-stage liquid impinger (MSLI) 
at 60 and 90 l/min, respectively. The cytotoxicity effect of the formulations was
evaluated using rat alveolar macrophages. The biological responses of alveolar
macrophages in terms of cytokine expressions, nitric oxide (NO) production and
free radical scavenging activities were also tested. The co-spray dried (Co-SD)
microparticles of all formulations exhibited morphologies appropriate for
inhalation administration. Analysis of the deposition profiles showed an increase
in aerosol performance proportional to BD concentration. Cell viability assay
demonstrated that alveolar macrophages could tolerate a wide range of RES and BD 
concentrations. In addition, RES and BD were able to decrease the levels of
tumour necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α) and interleukin-6 (IL-6) in
lipopolysaccharide (LPS) induced alveolar macrophages. This study has
successfully established the manufacture of Co-SD formulations of RES and BD with
morphology and aerosol properties suitable for inhalation drug delivery,
negligible in vitro toxicity and enhanced efficacy to control inflammation and
oxidative stress in LPS-induced alveolar macrophages.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejps.2016.02.018 
PMID: 26944422  [PubMed - in process]


14. World Allergy Organ J. 2016 Feb 12;9:5. doi: 10.1186/s40413-016-0095-2.
eCollection 2016.

CD4(+)CD25(high)CD127(-) regulatory T-cells in COPD: smoke and drugs effect.

Chiappori A(1), Folli C(1), Balbi F(1), Caci E(2), Riccio AM(1), De Ferrari L(1),
Melioli G(1), Braido F(1), Canonica GW(1).

Author information: 
(1)Allergy and Respiratory Diseases, IRCCS San Martino-IST-University of Genoa,
Genoa, Italy. (2)Istituto Giannina Gaslini, Genoa, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a progressive lung
disorder characterized by poorly reversible airway obstruction and its
pathogenesis remains largely misunderstood. Local changes of regulatory T-cell
populations in the lungs of COPD patients have been demonstrated although data
concerning their pathologic role are contrasting. The aim of our study was to
evaluate the relative percentage of regulatory T-cells in the peripheral blood of
current and former smoker subjects, affected or not by COPD. Furthermore, the
effect of different concentrations of budesonide and formoterol, on regulatory
T-cells has been investigated.
METHODS: T regulatory lymphocytes were isolated and assessed as
CD4(+)CD25(high)CD127(-) cells by flow cytometry and cultured for 48 hours in the
absence or in the presence of budesonide and/or formoterol at different doses.
RESULTS: CD4(+)CD25(high)CD127(-) regulatory T-cells percentage was significantly
reduced in COPD patients, both current and former smokers, with respect to
volunteers. Furthermore, CD4(+)CD25(high)CD127(-) cells of COPD patients showed a
not statistically significant response to drugs compared to healthy subjects.
DISCUSSION: Our results evidenced a different behaviour of
CD4(+)CD25(high)CD127(-) Treg cells in COPD patients after in vitro treatments.
CONCLUSIONS: Based on our data, we suggested a possible role of CD4
CD25(high)CD127 T-cells in COPD pathogenesis.

DOI: 10.1186/s40413-016-0095-2 
PMCID: PMC4751712
PMID: 26904157  [PubMed]


15. Ther Adv Respir Dis. 2016 Jun;10(3):235-55. doi: 10.1177/1753465816630208. Epub
2016 Feb 18.

Inhaled corticosteroids and the increased risk of pneumonia: what's new? A 2015
updated review.

Iannella H(1), Luna C(2), Waterer G(3).

Author information: 
(1)Hospital de Clínicas 'José de San Martin', Universidad de Buenos Aires, Av.
Córdoba 2351, Ciudad de Buenos Aries, C1120AAR, Argentina hiannella@live.com.
(2)Hospital de Clínicas 'José de San Martin', Universidad de Buenos Aires, Ciudad
de Buenos Aires, Argentina. (3)Royal Perth Hospital, University of Western
Australia, Western Australia, Australia.

There is a considerable amount of evidence that supports the possibility of an
increased risk of pneumonia associated with prolonged use of inhaled
corticosteroids (ICS) in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD). However, as yet, no statistically significant increase in
pneumonia-related 30-day mortality in patients on ICS has been demonstrated. The 
lack of objective pneumonia definitions and radiological confirmations have been 
a major source of bias, because of the similarities in clinical presentation
between pneumonia and acute exacerbations of COPD. One of the newer fluticasone
furoate studies overcomes these limitations and also provides an assessment of a 
range of doses, suggesting that the therapeutic window is quite narrow and that
conventional dosing has probably been too high, although the absolute risk may be
different compared to other drugs. Newer studies were not able to rule out
budesonide as responsible for pneumonia, as previous evidence suggested, and
there is still need for evidence from head-to-head comparisons in order to better
assess possible intra-class differences. Although the exact mechanisms by which
ICS increase the risk of pneumonia are not fully understood, the
immunosuppressive effects of ICS on the respiratory epithelium and the disruption
of the lung microbiome are most likely to be implicated. Given that COPD
represents such a complex and heterogeneous disease, attempts are being made to
identify clinical phenotypes with clear therapeutic implications, in order to
optimize the pharmacological treatment of COPD and avoid the indiscriminate use
of ICS. If deemed necessary, gradual withdrawal of ICS appears to be well
tolerated. Vaccination against pneumococcus and influenza should be emphasized in
patients with COPD receiving ICS. Physicians should keep in mind that signs and
symptoms of pneumonia in COPD patients may be initially indistinguishable from
those of an exacerbation, and that patients with COPD appear to be at increased
risk of developing pneumonia as a complication of ICS therapy.

© The Author(s), 2016.

DOI: 10.1177/1753465816630208 
PMID: 26893311  [PubMed - in process]


16. Int J Clin Exp Med. 2015 Dec 15;8(12):22217-26. eCollection 2015.

Erythromycin enhances the anti-inflammatory activity of budesonide in COPD rat
model.

Miao L(1), Gao Z(2), Huang F(1), Huang S(1), Zhang R(1), Ma D(1), Wu Q(1), Li
F(1), Chen H(1), Wang J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, The First Affiliated
Hospital of Zhengzhou University Zhengzhou 450000, Henan Province, China.
(2)Department of Respiratory Medicine, The Affiliated Hospital of Weifang Medical
University Weifang 261031, Shandong Province, China.

Glucocorticoids (GCs) have been widely applied to treat patients with chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). But the effect of GCs was not ideal. This
study was to observe whether erythromycin could enhance the anti-inflammatory
activity of budesonide in COPD model rats and to explore the mechanism involved. 
In this study, male Sprague-Dawley rats were divided into five groups: healthy
control group (H group), COPD model group (C group), erythromycin group (E
group), budesonide group (B group) and erythromycin + budesonide group (E+B
group). The rats in groups of C, E, B and E+B were developed into COPD models.
Different groups were given different drug interventions. The levels of
8-iso-PGF2α, IL-8, and TNF-α in BALF and serum were measured with ELISA. The
protein expression levels of HDAC2, PI3K, and p-AKT in lung tissue were measured 
with Western-blot and immunohistochemistry. The levels of 8-iso-PGF2α, IL-8, and 
TNF-α in BALF and serum were lower in E+B group than those in B group and C group
(all P<0.001).The protein expression level of HDAC2 was higher and PI3K and p-AKT
were lower in E+B group than those in B group and C group (all P<0.001).
Moreover, the expression levels of HDAC2 were negatively correlated with the
levels of 8-iso-PGF2α, IL-8 and TNF-α both in serum and BALF and the expression
levels of PI3K and p-AKT among the five groups, with all P<0.001. We conclude
that erythromycin can enhance the anti-inflammatory activity of budesonide in
COPD model rats, possibly through inhibiting the PI3K/AKT pathway and enhancing
the activity of HDAC2.


PMCID: PMC4729983
PMID: 26885197  [PubMed]


17. Zhonghua Jie He He Hu Xi Za Zhi. 2015 Dec;38(12):901-6.

[Characteristics of subgroups classified by pulmonary function test in chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease patients].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang X(1), Li M(1), Kang X(1), Zhou L(1), Lyu J(1), Sun B(1).

Author information: 
(1)The First Department of Respiratory Medicine, Cangzhou Central Hospital,
Cangzhou 061000, China.

OBJECTIVE: To compare the clinical characteristics and the therapeutic responses 
in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) subgroups, classified by
diffusing capacity of the lung for carbon monoxide (D(L)CO) and inspiratary
capacity (IC).
METHODS: A total of 105 mild-severe patients (70 males, 35 females, 44 to 85
years of age), with stable COPD were recruited in Cangzhou Central Hospital from 
June 2012 to June 2014. According to baseline D(L)CO and IC, the patients were
divided into normal D(L)CO/IC group (group A, n=10), low D(L)CO/normal IC group
(group B, n=18), normal D(L)CO/low IC group (group C, n=22) and low D(L)CO/IC
group (group D, n=55). We compared the clinical characteristics, induced sputum
cells and the therapeutic responses to 3-month treatment of
budesonide/formoterol(320 µg/9 µg, inhale, bid)among the 4 groups.
RESULTS: Group D showed the highest CAT scores(27.6 ± 6.4). Group C showed a
higher prevalence of patients with wheezing(81.8)% and the highest percentage of 
sputum eosinophils (7.6 ± 3.2)%. Group C showed the greatest FEV(1)
increase(0.214 ± 0.053)L. Group D showed a greater FEV(1) increase than Group B
[(0.137 ± 0.063) vs (0.092 ± 0.048)L]. Group C showed a greater FVC[(0.342 ±
0.073), (0.190 ± 0.081), (0.223 ± 0.094)L] increase and CAT[(4.4 ± 2.0), (2.3 ±
1.3), (3.9 ± 1.9)] decrease than Group B and Group D(P<0.05).
CONCLUSION: These findings suggest that COPD subgroups classified by D(L)CO and
IC show several clinical characteristics and may be helpful to predict responses 
to treatment.


PMID: 26850891  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Radiat Oncol. 2016 Feb 2;11:12. doi: 10.1186/s13014-016-0580-3.

Inhalative steroids as an individual treatment in symptomatic lung cancer
patients with radiation pneumonitis grade II after radiotherapy - a single-centre
experience.

Henkenberens C(1,)(2), Janssen S(3,)(4), Lavae-Mokhtari M(5), Leni K(6), Meyer
A(7), Christiansen H(8), Bremer M(9), Dickgreber N(10).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Hannover Medical School, Carl-Neuberg-Str.
1, 30625, Hannover, Germany. henkenberens.christoph@mh-hannover.de. (2)Department
of Radiotherapy and Special Oncology, Hannover Medical School, Carl-Neuberg-Str. 
1, 30625, Hannover, Germany. henkenberens.christoph@mh-hannover.de. (3)Hannover
Joint Practice in Radiooncology, Rundestr. 10, 30161, Hannover, Germany.
st-janssen@gmx.net. (4)Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Lübeck,
Lübeck, Germany. st-janssen@gmx.net. (5)Ibbenbüren Hospital Thoracic and Lung
Center, Große Str. 41, 49477, Ibbenbüren, Germany.
m.lavae-mokthari@mathias-spital.de. (6)Department of Radiation Oncology, Hannover
Medical School, Carl-Neuberg-Str. 1, 30625, Hannover, Germany.
leni.katharina@mh-hannover.de. (7)Hildesheim Goslar Joint Practice in
Radiooncology, Senator-Braun-Allee, 31135, Hildesheim, Germany.
ameyer@strahlentherapie-hildesheim.de. (8)Department of Radiation Oncology,
Hannover Medical School, Carl-Neuberg-Str. 1, 30625, Hannover, Germany.
christiansen.hans@mh-hannover.de. (9)Department of Radiation Oncology, Hannover
Medical School, Carl-Neuberg-Str. 1, 30625, Hannover, Germany.
bremer.michael@mh-hannover.de. (10)Department of Pneumology, Thoracic Oncology
and Respiratory Medicine, Frankenburgstr, 31, 48431, Rheine, Germany.
n.dickgreber@mathias-spital.de.

PURPOSE: To assess efficacy of our single-centre experience with inhalative
steroids (IS) in lung cancer patients with symptomatic radiation pneumonitis (RP)
grade II.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Between 05/09 and 07/10, 24 patients (female, n = 8; male, 
n = 16) with lung cancer (non-small cell lung carcinoma [NSCLC]: n = 19; small
cell lung cancer [SCLC]: n = 3; unknown histology: n = 2) and good performance
status (ECOG ≤1) received definitive radiotherapy to the primary tumour site and 
involved lymph nodes with concurrent chemotherapy (n = 18), sequential
chemotherapy (n = 2) or radiation only (n = 4) and developed symptomatic RP grade
II during follow-up. No patient presented with oxygen requiring RP grade III. The
mean age at diagnosis was 66 years (range: 50-82 years). Nine patients suffered
from chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) before treatment, and 18
patients had a smoking history (median pack years: 48). The mean lung dose was
15.5 Gy (range: 3.0-23.1 Gy). All patients were treated with IS. If a patient's
clinical symptoms did not significantly improve within two weeks of IS therapy
initiation, their treatment was switched to oral prednisolone.
RESULTS: All 24 patients were initially treated with a high dose IS (budesonide
800 μg 1-0-1) for 14 days. Of the patients, 18 showed a significant improvement
of clinical symptoms and 6 patients did not show significant improvement of
clinical symptoms and were classified as non-responders to IS. Their treatment
was switched to oral steroids after two weeks (starting with oral prednisolone,
0.5 mg/kg bodyweight; at least 50 mg per day). All of these patients responded to
the prednisolone. None of non-responders presented with increased symptoms of RP 
and required oxygen and / or hospitalization (RP grade III). The median follow-up
after IS treatment initiation was 18 months (range: 4-66 months). The median
duration of IS treatment and prednisolone treatment was 8.2 months (range:
3.0-48.3 months) and 11.4 months (range: 5.0-44.0 months), respectively. Of the
18 IS treatment responders, 2 (11.1 %) patients with pre-existing grade 2 COPD
still required IS (400 μg twice a day) 45.0 and 48.3 months after radiotherapy,
respectively. For the remaining 16 responders (88.9 %), IS therapy was stopped
after 7.7 months (range: 3.0-18.2 months). None of the patients treated with IS
developed any specific IS-related side effects such as oral candidiasis.
CONCLUSION: This single-centre experience shows that high-dose IS is an
individual treatment option for radiation-induced pneumonitis grade II in
patients with a good performance status.

DOI: 10.1186/s13014-016-0580-3 
PMCID: PMC4736495
PMID: 26830686  [PubMed - in process]


19. Arch Osteoporos. 2016;11:8. doi: 10.1007/s11657-016-0259-2. Epub 2016 Jan 18.

Bilateral non-traumatic hip fractures in a heavy smoker COPD patient on inhaled
steroids.

Sanel S(1), Sezgin G(2), Sarıman N(3), Ugutmen E(1), Solakoglu C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedics and Traumatology, Medical Faculty, Maltepe
University, Maltepe, Turkey. (2)Department of Internal Medicine, Medical Faculty,
Maltepe University, Maltepe, Turkey. (3)Department of Pulmonary Diseases, Medical
Faculty, Maltepe University, Maltepe, 34758, Istanbul, Turkey.
nessariman@yahoo.com.

INTRODUCTION: Bilateral proximal femoral fractures without trauma are very rare
conditions. They have been reported in connection with osteoporosis, renal
osteodystrophy, parathyroid disease, tumors, epileptic seizures,
electroconvulsive therapy, and postirradiation.
METHOD: We present a case of a 75-year-old man with bilateral hip fractures. No
trauma, neurological, endocrinological disorder, or malignancy was reported in
his history. He had a background of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) 
and had been taking inhaled steroids (budesonide) 800 µg per day for 10 years. He
was a heavy smoker with a smoking history of 120 packs/year. His complaints had
initially started as pain on the left hip and groin and then had progressed to
the right in 10 days. Plain x-rays of the pelvis showed left femoral neck and
right subtrochanteric femoral fractures. Fixation with proximal femoral nail of
the right hip and partial arthroplasty of the left hip was performed on the
following day after his admission. Pathological examination revealed osteoporosis
in bone samples from both hips.
RESULT: COPD and osteoporosis have some common risk factors. Smoking, decreased
exercise capacity, inhaled, or oral steroid therapy may increase osteoporosis and
risk of bone fractures by decreasing bone mineral density. Non-traumatic femoral 
fractures may occur in patients on long-term inhaled steroid treatment for
chronic airway diseases such as asthma and COPD.
CONCLUSION: History of COPD with corticosteroid use may be used as a diagnostic
tool to identify patients having osteoporosis. Preventive measures can be
performed by monitoring high-risk patients with bone mineral densitometry, WHO
fracture risk assessment tool (FRAX tool), serum calcium, and vitamin D levels to
prevent bone fractures. Treating those patients with the lowest effective dose of
corticosteroids should be targeted.

DOI: 10.1007/s11657-016-0259-2 
PMID: 26781126  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Value Health. 2015 Nov;18(7):A350-1. doi: 10.1016/j.jval.2015.09.638. Epub 2015
Oct 20.

The Potential For Improved Inhalation Technique With Duoresp® Spiromax®
(Budesonide + Formoterol Fumarate Dihydrate) Compared With Commonly Prescribed
Dry Powder Inhalers For The Management Of Asthma And Chronic Obstructive
Pulmonary Disease In Spain: Estimated Impact On Number And Cost Of Unscheduled
Healthcare Events.

Lewis A(1), Blackney M(1), Garcia Bujalance L(2), Sánchez-de la Rosa R(2),
Torvinen S(3), Plich A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Covance Market Access, London, UK. (2)Teva Pharmaceuticals, Madrid, Spain.
(3)Teva Pharmaceuticals Europe B.V., Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jval.2015.09.638 
PMID: 26531978  [PubMed]


21. BMJ Open. 2015 Oct 26;5(10):e009183. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2015-009183.

Comparative safety and effectiveness of long-acting inhaled agents for treating
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: a systematic review and network
meta-analysis.

Tricco AC(1), Strifler L(2), Veroniki AA(2), Yazdi F(3), Khan PA(2), Scott A(2), 
Ng C(2), Antony J(2), Mrklas K(4), D'Souza J(2), Cardoso R(2), Straus SE(5).

Author information: 
(1)Knowledge Translation Program, Li Ka Shing Knowledge Institute, St. Michael's 
Hospital, Toronto, Ontario, Canada Epidemiology Division, Dalla Lana School of
Public Health, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. (2)Knowledge
Translation Program, Li Ka Shing Knowledge Institute, St. Michael's Hospital,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada. (3)Ottawa Hospital Research Institute, Center for
Practice Changing Research Building, The Ottawa Hospital-General Campus, Ottawa, 
Ontario, Canada. (4)Knowledge Translation Program, Li Ka Shing Knowledge
Institute, St. Michael's Hospital, Toronto, Ontario, Canada Alberta Health
Services, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada. (5)Knowledge Translation Program, Li Ka
Shing Knowledge Institute, St. Michael's Hospital, Toronto, Ontario, Canada
Department of Geriatric Medicine, University of Toronto, 27 Kings College Circle,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

OBJECTIVE: To compare the safety and effectiveness of long-acting β-antagonists
(LABA), long-acting antimuscarinic agents (LAMA) and inhaled corticosteroids
(ICS) for managing chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
SETTING: Systematic review and network meta-analysis (NMA).
PARTICIPANTS: 208 randomised clinical trials (RCTs) including 134,692 adults with
COPD.
INTERVENTIONS: LABA, LAMA and/or ICS, alone or in combination, versus each other 
or placebo.
PRIMARY AND SECONDARY OUTCOMES: The proportion of patients with
moderate-to-severe exacerbations. The number of patients experiencing mortality, 
pneumonia, serious arrhythmia and cardiovascular-related mortality (CVM) were
secondary outcomes.
RESULTS: NMA was conducted including 20 RCTs for moderate-to-severe exacerbations
for 26,141 patients with an exacerbation in the past year. 32 treatments were
effective versus placebo including: tiotropium, budesonide/formoterol,
salmeterol, indacaterol, fluticasone/salmeterol, indacaterol/glycopyrronium,
tiotropium/fluticasone/salmeterol and tiotropium/budesonide/formoterol.
Tiotropium/budesonide/formoterol was most effective (99.2% probability of being
the most effective according to the Surface Under the Cumulative RAnking (SUCRA) 
curve). NMA was conducted on mortality (88 RCTs, 97 526 patients);
fluticasone/salmeterol was more effective in reducing mortality than placebo,
formoterol and fluticasone alone, and was the most effective (SUCRA=71%). NMA was
conducted on CVM (37 RCTs, 55,156 patients) and the following were safest:
salmeterol versus each OF placebo, tiotropium and tiotropium (Soft Mist Inhaler
(SMR)); fluticasone versus tiotropium (SMR); and salmeterol/fluticasone versus
tiotropium and tiotropium (SMR). Triamcinolone acetonide was the most harmful
(SUCRA=81%). NMA was conducted on pneumonia occurrence (54 RCTs, 61 551
patients). 24 treatments were more harmful, including 2 that increased risk of
pneumonia versus placebo; fluticasone and fluticasone/salmeterol. The most
harmful agent was fluticasone/salmeterol (SUCRA=89%). NMA was conducted for
arrhythmia; no statistically significant differences between agents were
identified.
CONCLUSIONS: Many inhaled agents are available for COPD, some are safer and more 
effective than others. Our results can be used by patients and physicians to
tailor administration of these agents.
PROTOCOL REGISTRATION NUMBER: PROSPERO # CRD42013006725.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://www.bmj.com/company/products-services/rights-and-licensing/

DOI: 10.1136/bmjopen-2015-009183 
PMCID: PMC4636655
PMID: 26503392  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Medicine (Baltimore). 2015 Oct;94(42):e1723. doi: 10.1097/MD.0000000000001723.

Inhaled Corticosteroids Increase the Risk of Pneumonia in Patients With Chronic
Obstructive Pulmonary Disease: A Nationwide Cohort Study.

Lee MC(1), Lee CH, Chien SC, Chang JH, She HL, Wang JY, Yu MC.

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Pharmacy, New Taipei City Hospital, New Taipei City,
Taiwan (M-CL); Division of Pulmonary Medicine, Wanfang Hospital, Taipei Medical
University, Taipei, Taiwan (C-HL, J-HC, H-LS, M-CY); School of Medicine, Taipei
Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan (C-HL); Department of Pharmacy, Taipei Medical
University Hospital, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan (S-CC); Department
of Internal Medicine, Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan (J-YW); and
School of Respiratory Therapy, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan (M-CY).

The association of inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) and pneumonia in patients with
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is still controversial.From the
National Health Insurance Database of Taiwan, COPD cases with history of acute
exacerbation (AE) were identified (COPD cohort). Time-dependent Cox regression
analysis was applied to investigate the risk factors for pneumonia with COPD
severity controlled by surrogate variables. Among the COPD cohort, those who
continuously used ICS for more than 360 days without interruption were selected
(ICS cohort). The incidence rate of pneumonia during ICS use was compared with
those before ICS use and after ICS discontinuation by using pair t test.A total
of 6034 and 842 cases were identified as the COPD and ICS cohorts, respectively. 
In the COPD cohort, recent ICS use was independently associated with pneumonia
(hazard ratio: 1.06 [1.02-1.11] for per 80 mg of budesonide). Other independent
risk factors included age, male, diabetes mellitus, malignancy, low income,
baseline pneumonia event, and recent use of oral corticosteroids and
aminophylline. In the ICS cohort, while AE rate gradually decreased, the
incidence rate of pneumonia significantly increased after ICS use (from 0.10 to
0.21 event/person-year, P = 0.001).This study demonstrates the association
between ICS use and pneumonia in patients with COPD and history of AE. ICS should
be judiciously used in indicated COPD patients.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000001723 
PMCID: PMC4620770
PMID: 26496284  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Respiration. 2015;90(5):416-25. doi: 10.1159/000439226. Epub 2015 Oct 10.

Budesonide Inhibits Intracellular Infection with Non-Typeable Haemophilus
influenzae Despite Its Anti-Inflammatory Effects in Respiratory Cells and Human
Lung Tissue: A Role for p38 MAP Kinase.

Wagner C(1), Goldmann T, Rohmann K, Rupp J, Marwitz S, Rotta Detto Loria J,
Limmer S, Zabel P, Dalhoff K, Drömann D.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Clinic III, University of Schleswig-Holstein, Lx00FC;beck, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) are widely used in the treatment of
obstructive lung diseases. Recent data suggest a higher pneumonia risk in chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) patients treated with ICS.
OBJECTIVE: Since non-typeable Haemophilus influenzae (NTHi) is the most common
pathogen associated with acute exacerbations of COPD, we investigated the effects
of budesonide (BUD) on NTHi-induced inflammation and invasive infection.
METHODS: The alveolar epithelial cell line A549 and specimens of human lung
tissue (HLT) were used in our experiments. Intracellular infection was determined
by a lysis/culture assay of infected cells. Activated p38 mitogen-associated
protein kinase (MAPK) was assessed using Western blotting and
immunohistochemistry, expression of toll-like receptor 2 (TLR2) was determined by
PCR, and CXCL-8 levels were measured using ELISA. Immunohistochemistry was used
for detection of CXCL-8, platelet-activating factor receptor (PAF-R) and NTHi.
RESULTS: BUD significantly reduced CXCL-8 secretion in A549 cells and lung tissue
infected with NTHi. Furthermore, BUD decreased the expression of PAF-R in HLT and
A549 cells. In A549 cells and HLT, BUD inhibited intracellular infection and -
synergistically with NTHi - increased the expression of TLR2 (in A549 cells).
TLR2 stimulation did not influence the intracellular infection of A549 cells, but
p38 MAPK inhibition resulted in a significant reduction of infection.
CONCLUSION: The present study adds new insights into the effects of
glucocorticoids on pulmonary host defence after NTHi infection. Although the
inflammatory response to infection is suppressed by BUD, interestingly, the
intracellular infection is also inhibited. This effect seems to depend on the
inhibition of p38 MAPK - a key enzyme in many pro-inflammatory pathways - as well
as of PAF-R expression.

© 2015 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000439226 
PMID: 26452008  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2015 Sep 28;10:2055-66. doi:
10.2147/COPD.S90658. eCollection 2015.

Comparative effectiveness of budesonide/formoterol combination and tiotropium
bromide among COPD patients new to these controller treatments.

Trudo F(1), Kern DM(2), Davis JR(1), Tunceli O(2), Zhou S(2), Graham EL(3),
Strange C(4), Williams SA(1).

Author information: 
(1)AstraZeneca Pharmaceuticals LP, Wilmington, DE, USA. (2)HealthCore, Inc.,
Wilmington, DE, USA. (3)AstraZeneca Pharmaceuticals LP, Alderley Park, Cheshire, 
UK. (4)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Medicine, 
Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, SC, USA.

BACKGROUND: Inhaled corticosteroid/long-acting β2-agonist combinations and/or
long-acting muscarinic antagonists are recommended first-line therapies for
preventing chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) exacerbation. Comparative
effectiveness of budesonide/formoterol combination (BFC, an inhaled
corticosteroid/long-acting β2-agonist combination) vs tiotropium (long-acting
muscarinic antagonist) in the US has not yet been studied.
METHODS: Using US claims data from the HealthCore Integrated Research
Environment, COPD patients (with or without comorbid asthma) ≥40 years old
initiating BFC or tiotropium between March 1, 2009 and February 28, 2012 and at
risk for exacerbation were identified and followed for 12 months. Patients were
propensity score matched on demographics and COPD disease severity indicators.
The primary outcome was time to first COPD exacerbation. Secondary outcomes
included COPD exacerbation rate, health care resource utilization, and costs.
RESULTS: The Cox proportional hazards model for time to first exacerbation
yielded a hazard ratio (HR) of 0.78 (95% CI =[0.70, 0.87], P<0.001), indicating a
22% reduction in risk of COPD exacerbation associated with initiation of BFC
versus tiotropium. A post hoc sensitivity analysis found similar effects in those
who had a prior asthma diagnosis (HR =0.72 [0.61, 0.86]) and those who did not
(HR =0.83 [0.72, 0.96]). BFC initiation was associated with lower COPD-related
health care resource utilization and costs ($4,084 per patient-year compared with
$5,656 for tiotropium patients, P<0.001).
CONCLUSION: In COPD patients new to controller therapies, initiating treatment
with BFC was associated with improvements in health and economic outcomes
compared with tiotropium.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S90658 
PMCID: PMC4592033
PMID: 26451101  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Drug Des Devel Ther. 2015 Sep 21;9:5287-90. doi: 10.2147/DDDT.S90504. eCollection
2015.

The rapid effects of budesonide plus formoterol in patients with obstructive
airway diseases.

Bayiz H(1), Ozkaya S(1), Dirican A(2), Ece F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Bahcesehir University, 
Istanbul, Turkey. (2)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Samsun Medical Park
Hospital, Samsun, Turkey.

INTRODUCTION: The use of a combination inhaler containing budesonide and
formoterol (BUD/FOR) to both maintenance and quick relief therapy has been
recommended as an improved method of using inhaled corticosteroid/long-acting β
agonist therapy. The aim of this study was to investigate the acute effects of
BUD/FOR and testing the availability of BUD/FOR for early reversibility test in
patients with airway obstruction.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: The study was conducted on patients who were admitted to
the Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Samsun Medical Park Hospital, Samsun,
Turkey.
RESULTS: A total of 44 patients were included in the study. The mean age of
patients was 48.5 ± 17.3 (range 10-75) years and the male-to-female ratio was
36:8. The pre-bronchodilator pulmonary function test results are as follows: the 
mean forced vital capacity, 3,025 ± 1,162 mL (76.3% ± 23.2%); mean forced
expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1), 1,898 ± 725 mL (59.2% ± 19.1%); mean
FEV1/forced vital capacity, 62.8 ± 6.3% (range 42%-70%); mean peak expiratory
flow, 3,859 ± 1,779 mL (48.0% ± 19.7%); and forced expiratory flow 25%-75%, 1,295
± 486 mL (35.8% ± 12.3%). The reversibility was positive in 26 (59.1%) patients. 
The absolute change and percentage of change in FEV1 were 318 ± 228 mL and 17.7% 
± 11.9%, respectively. The patients were divided into two groups according to
reversibility (reversible and irreversible) and both groups were compared with
changes according to spirometric results. FEV1 values were statistically
different between the two groups.
CONCLUSION: The fixed combination of BUD/FOR has rapid bronchodilator effect, and
they can be used for early reversibility test.

DOI: 10.2147/DDDT.S90504 
PMCID: PMC4590314
PMID: 26451084  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Respirology. 2016 Jan;21(1):119-27. doi: 10.1111/resp.12646. Epub 2015 Sep 23.

Efficacy and tolerability of budesonide/formoterol added to tiotropium compared
with tiotropium alone in patients with severe or very severe COPD: A randomized, 
multicentre study in East Asia.

Lee SD(1), Xie CM(2), Yunus F(3), Itoh Y(4), Ling X(5), Yu WC(6), Kiatboonsri
S(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine and Clinical Research
Center for Chronic Obstructive Airway Diseases, Asan Medical Center, University
of Ulsan College of Medicine, Seoul, South Korea. (2)Department of Pulmonary and 
Critical Care Medicine, 1st Hospital of Sun Yat-sen University, Institute of
Respiratory Disease of Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China.
(3)Department of Pulmonology and Respiratory Medicine, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Indonesia, Persahabatan Hospital, Jakarta, Indonesia.
(4)AstraZeneca, Osaka, Japan. (5)AstraZeneca, Shanghai, China. (6)Department of
Medicine and Geriatrics, Princess Margaret Hospital, Kowloon, Hong Kong, China.
(7)Pulmonary and Critical Care Unit, Department of Medicine, Ramathibodi
Hospital, Bangkok, Thailand.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Triple combination therapy with tiotropium plus
budesonide/formoterol has improved lung function and reduced exacerbation risk in
patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) in Western countries, 
but no such data exist for East Asian patients. This study aimed to evaluate the 
efficacy and tolerability of adding budesonide/formoterol to tiotropium compared 
with tiotropium alone in East Asian patients with severe/very severe COPD.
METHODS: This 12-week, randomized, parallel-group, multicentre, open-label study 
was conducted in East Asia. After a 14-day run-in period during which patients
received tiotropium 18 μg once daily, patients were randomized to tiotropium
(18 μg once daily) + budesonide/formoterol (160/4.5 μg 2 inhalations twice daily)
or tiotropium alone (18 μg once daily). The primary endpoint was change from
baseline in pre-dose forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1 ) to the mean of
values measured at Weeks 1, 6 and 12.
RESULTS: Pre-dose FEV1 significantly increased from baseline with tiotropium plus
budesonide/formoterol (n = 287) versus tiotropium alone (n = 291) (5.0% vs 0.6%; 
treatment difference: 4.4% (95% CI: 1.9-6.9), P = 0.0004). Triple therapy also
reduced the COPD exacerbation rate by 40.7% (P = 0.0032) and prolonged time to
first exacerbation (38.6% risk reduction, P = 0.0167) versus tiotropium alone and
markedly improved health-related quality of life (HRQoL), measured using the St
George's Respiratory Questionnaire. Incidence of adverse events was 26% for both 
groups.
CONCLUSIONS: In East Asian patients with severe/very severe COPD, adding
budesonide/formoterol to tiotropium was associated with significant improvements 
in FEV1 and HRQoL and lower COPD exacerbation rates. Treatment was generally well
tolerated.
CLINICAL TRIAL REGISTRATION: NCT01397890 at Clinicaltrials.gov.

© 2015 Asian Pacific Society of Respirology.

DOI: 10.1111/resp.12646 
PMID: 26394882  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. World J Clin Cases. 2015 Sep 16;3(9):843-7. doi: 10.12998/wjcc.v3.i9.843.

Do inhaled corticosteroids increase the risk of Pneumocystis pneumonia in people 
with lung cancer?

Msaad S(1), Yangui I(1), Bahloul N(1), Abid N(1), Koubaa M(1), Hentati Y(1), Ben 
Jemaa M(1), Kammoun S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Sameh Msaad, Ilhem Yangui, Najla Bahloul, Narjes Abid, Samy Kammoun,
Department of Respiratory Medicine, Hedi Chaker University Hospital, 3029 Sfax,
Tunisia.

Pneumocystis pneumonia (PCP) is a life-threatening infection in immunocompromised
patients. It is relatively uncommon in patients with lung cancer. We report a
case of PCP in a 59-year-old man with a past medical history of chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease treated with formoterol and a moderate daily dose
of inhaled budesonide. He had also advanced stage non-small lung cancer treated
with concurrent chemo-radiation with a cisplatin-etoposide containing regimen.
The diagnosis of PCP was suspected based on the context of rapidly increasing
dyspnea, lymphopenia and the imaging findings. Polymerase chain reaction testing 
on an induced sputum specimen was positive for Pneumocystis jirovecii. The
patient was treated with oral trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole and systemic
corticotherapy and had showed clinical and radiological improvement. Six months
after the PCP diagnosis, he developed a malignant pleural effusion and expired on
hospice care. Through this case, we remind the importance of screening for PCP in
lung cancer patients under chemotherapeutic regimens and with increasing dyspnea.
In addition, we alert to the fact that long-term inhaled corticosteroids may be a
risk factor for PCP in patients with lung cancer. Despite intensive treatment,
the mortality of PCP remains high, hence the importance of chemoprophylaxis
should be considered.

DOI: 10.12998/wjcc.v3.i9.843 
PMCID: PMC4568535
PMID: 26380833  [PubMed]


28. J Aerosol Med Pulm Drug Deliv. 2015 Oct;28(5):309-19. doi:
10.1089/jamp.2015.1216. Epub 2015 Sep 9.

Spiromax, a New Dry Powder Inhaler: Dose Consistency under Simulated Real-World
Conditions.

Canonica GW(1), Arp J(2), Keegstra JR(3), Chrystyn H(4).

Author information: 
(1)1 University of Genoa , Genoa, Italy . (2)2 Teva Pharmachemie , Haarlem, The
Netherlands . (3)3 Formerly Teva Pharmachemie , Haarlem, The Netherlands . (4)4
Inhalation Consultancy Ltd , Leeds, United Kingdom .

BACKGROUND: Spiromax(®) is a novel dry powder inhaler for patients with asthma or
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). The studies presented here provide 
further data on attributes (in vitro dosing consistency with
budesonide-formoterol (DuoResp) Spiromax; flow rates through empty versions of
the Spiromax and Turbuhaler inhaler) of importance to patients with asthma or
COPD.
METHODS: Dose-delivery studies were performed using low-, middle-, and
high-strength DuoResp Spiromax. Dose consistency was assessed over inhaler life. 
Total emitted doses (TEDs) were measured at various flow rates, after exposure to
high and low temperature or humidity, at different inhaler orientations, and
after dropping the inhaler. The criterion for evaluating dose uniformity was
whether mean TEDs were within the product specification limits. In separate
studies, flow rates were measured after training, using the patient information
leaflets, and again after enhanced training as part of a randomized, open-label, 
cross-over study.
RESULTS: Mean values for both budesonide and formoterol were within 85%-115% of
the label claim for each strength of DuoResp Spiromax for initial dose uniformity
and for the other investigated conditions (temperature, humidity, orientation,
dropping, knocking), with the exception of approximately an 80% increase in first
dose after dropping the inhaler (subsequent doses not affected). In the flow rate
patient study, two patients' inhalations with Spiromax and six with Turbuhaler
were <30 L/min. The majority of asthma patients [91% (Spiromax) versus 82%
(Turbuhaler)] achieved the preferred flow rate of >60 L/min.
CONCLUSIONS: DuoResp Spiromax consistently meets dose uniformity criteria, under 
controlled laboratory conditions and with variations intended to mimic real-world
use. Following enhanced training, all patients in the flow study were able to
achieve the minimal inspiratory flow rate of >30 L/min, which is required for
effective treatment.

DOI: 10.1089/jamp.2015.1216 
PMCID: PMC4601554
PMID: 26352860  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. BMC Pulm Med. 2015 Aug 21;15:97. doi: 10.1186/s12890-015-0077-0.

Reliever salbutamol use as a measure of exacerbation risk in chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease.

Jenkins CR(1), Postma DS(2), Anzueto AR(3), Make BJ(4), Peterson S(5), Eriksson
G(6), Calverley PM(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Medicine, Concord Hospital, University of Sydney and
The George Institute for Global Health, Hospital Rd, Concord, Sydney, NSW, 2139, 
Australia. christine.jenkins@sydney.edu.au. (2)Department of Pulmonary Medicine
and Tuberculosis, University of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen,
Groningen, PO Box 30001, 9700 RB, Groningen, The Netherlands. d.s.postma@umcg.nl.
(3)Pulmonary Section, Department of Medicine, University of Texas Health Science 
Center, and South Texas Veterans Health Care System, San Antonio, TX, USA.
anzueto@uthscsa.edu. (4)Division of Pulmonary Sciences and Critical Care
Medicine, National Jewish Health, University of Colorado Denver School of
Medicine, 1400 Jackson Street, K729, Denver, CO, 80206, USA. makeb@njhealth.org. 
(5)StatMind, Medicon Village AB, Scheelevägen 2, 22363, Lund, Sweden.
stefan.peterson@statmind.se. (6)Department of Respiratory Medicine and
Allergology, University Hospital, Lund, 221 87, Sweden. goran.eriksson@med.lu.se.
(7)Clinical Sciences Department, Institute of Ageing and Chronic Disease,
University Hospital Aintree, Lower Lane, Liverpool, L9 7AL, UK.
pmacal@liverpool.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: Debate exists regarding which endpoints most sensitively reflect
day-to-day variation in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) symptoms and
are most useful in clinical practice to predict COPD exacerbations. We
hypothesized that short-acting β2-agonist (SABA) reliever use would predict
short- and long-term exacerbation risk in COPD patients.
METHODS: We performed a retrospective analysis of data from a study
(ClinicalTrials.gov registration: NCT00419744) comparing budesonide/formoterol
320/9 μg with formoterol 9 μg (both twice daily) in patients with
moderate-to-very-severe COPD; reliever salbutamol 90 μg was provided. First
occurrence of reliever use >4 (low), >10 (medium), and >20 (high) inhalations/day
was assessed as a predictor of short-term (3-week) exacerbation risk. Mean daily 
reliever use in the week preceding the 2-month visit was investigated as a
predictor of the long-term (10-month) exacerbation risk, using intervals of 2-5, 
6-9, and ≥10 inhalations/day.
RESULTS: Overall, 810 patients were included (61 % male; mean age 63.2 years;
post-bronchodilator forced expiratory volume in 1 s 37.7 % of predicted). First
occurrence of low, medium, or high reliever use was predictive of an exacerbation
within the following 3 weeks; exacerbation risk increased significantly with
increasing reliever use. Mean reliever use over 1 week was predictive of
long-term exacerbation risk. Patients with mean use of 2-5, 6-9, and ≥10
inhalations/day exhibited 21 %, 67 %, and 135 % higher exacerbation rates,
respectively, in the following 10 months, compared with <2 inhalations/day.
Budesonide/formoterol was associated with lower short- and long-term exacerbation
risk than formoterol in all reliever-use groups.
CONCLUSIONS: SABA reliever use is a predictor of short- and long-term
exacerbation risk in moderate-to-very-severe COPD patients with a history of
exacerbations receiving budesonide/formoterol or formoterol.

DOI: 10.1186/s12890-015-0077-0 
PMCID: PMC4546184
PMID: 26293575  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Perspect Clin Res. 2015 Jul-Sep;6(3):150-8. doi: 10.4103/2229-3485.159940.

Cost-effectiveness analysis of three different combinations of inhalers for
severe and very severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease patients at a
tertiary care teaching hospital of South India.

Altaf M(1), Zubedi AM(1), Nazneen F(1), Kareemulla S(1), Ali SA(1), Aleemuddin
NM(2), Hannan Hazari MA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy Practice and PharmD, Deccan School of Pharmacy,
Jawaharlal Nehru Technological University, Hyderabad, Telangana, India.
(2)Department of Pulmonology, Deccan College of Medical Sciences, Hyderabad,
Telangana, India. (3)Department of Physiology, Deccan College of Medical
Sciences, Hyderabad, Telangana, India.

BACKGROUND: This study aims at simplifying the practical patient management and
offers some general indications for pharmacotherapeutic choice by the
implementation of (Global Initiative for Chronic Lung Disease) guidelines. This
study was designed to evaluate the clinical and economic consequences of
salmeterol/fluticasone (SF), formoterol/budesonide (FB), and
formoterol/fluticasone (FF) in severe and very severe chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD) patients.
OBJECTIVES: The aim was to find out the most cost-effective drug combination
between the three combinations (SF/FB/FF) in COPD patients.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A prospective observational comparative study
(cost-effectiveness analysis), in which 90 severe (30 ≤ forced expiratory volume 
in 1 s [FEV1] <50% predicted) and very severe (FEV1 < 30% predicted) COPD
patients (outpatients/inpatients) who are prescribed with any one of the
following combinations (SF/FB/FF) were selected. In our study, we have divided 90
COPD patients into three groups (Group I, Group II, and Group III) each group
consisting of 30 patients. Group I was prescribed with medication SF, Group II
with medication FB, and Group III with medication FF. We used five different
parameters such as spirometry test (mean FEV1 initial and final visit), number of
symptom-free days (SFDs), number of moderate and severe exacerbations, Number of 
days of hospitalization and direct, indirect, and total cost to assess the
cost-effectiveness of SF/FB/FF. Comparison of cost and effects was done during
the period of 6 months of using SF/FB/FF.
RESULTS: The average FEV1 for Group I, Group II, and Group III subjects at
initial visit was 33.47%, 33.73%, and 33.20% and was increased to 36.60%, 35.8%, 
and 33.4%, respectively. A 3% increment in FEV1 was reported for Group I subjects
(SF) and was highly significant statistically (t = -8.833, P = 0.000) at 95% CI. 
For Group II subjects (FB), a 2% increment in FEV1 was reported and was highly
significant statistically (t = -9.001, P = 0.000) at 95% CI. For Group III (FF)
subjects 0.2% increment in FEV1. The overall mean total cost for Group I, Group
II, and Group III subjects during the 6 months period was found to be Rs.
29,725/-, Rs. 32,602/- and Rs. 37,155/-. Incremental cost-effectiveness of FB
versus SF was Rs. 37,781/- per avoided exacerbation and Rs. 661/-per SFD.
CONCLUSION: This study highlights the favorable therapeutic performance of
combined inhaled bronchodilators and corticosteroids (SF/FB/FF), thus suggesting 
that healthcare costs would be also affected positively. Results from our study
showed that SF and FB were the most effective strategies in the treatment of
COPD, with a slight clinical superiority of SF. The FF strategy was not much
effective (i.e. associated with fewer outcomes and higher costs).

DOI: 10.4103/2229-3485.159940 
PMCID: PMC4504057
PMID: 26229751  [PubMed]


31. Expert Opin Pharmacother. 2015;16(13):2009-21. doi:
10.1517/14656566.2015.1070826. Epub 2015 Jul 20.

Pharmacological basis and scientific rationale underlying the targeted use of
inhaled corticosteroid/long-acting β2-adrenergic agonist combinations in chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease treatment.

Pelaia G(1), Muzzio CC, Vatrella A, Maselli R, Magnoni MS, Rizzi A.

Author information: 
(1)University 'Magna Græcia' of Catanzaro, Department of Medical and Surgical
Sciences, Section of Respiratory Diseases , Catanzaro , Italy.

INTRODUCTION: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a complex
respiratory disorder, whose medical and socioeconomic burden as one of the main
causes of morbidity and mortality is increasing worldwide. COPD pathophysiology
includes chronic airway/lung inflammation and progressive airflow limitation.
Therefore, anti-inflammatory and bronchodilator agents are key players in COPD
treatment.
AREAS COVERED: This review article discusses the complementary molecular
interactions connecting the respective mechanisms of action of inhaled
corticosteroids (ICS) and long-acting β2-adrenergic agonists (LABAs). Moreover,
attention is also focused on clinical trials, which have shown that ICS/LABA
combinations are very effective in improving COPD symptoms and lung function,
being also able to significantly reduce disease exacerbations.
EXPERT OPINION: In selected subgroups of COPD patients, ICS/LABA combinations
represent a very useful therapeutic approach for this widespread chronic
respiratory disease. In addition to the well-known fixed-dose drug associations
such as fluticasone propionate/salmeterol xinafoate and budesonide/formoterol
fumarate, other newly developed ICS/LABA combinations are currently emerging as
very interesting pharmacological options for COPD treatment.

DOI: 10.1517/14656566.2015.1070826 
PMID: 26194120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Ther Clin Risk Manag. 2015 Jun 2;11:889-99. doi: 10.2147/TCRM.S55116. eCollection
2015.

Fluticasone-formoterol: a systematic review of its potential role in the
treatment of asthma.

Prosser TR(1), Bollmeier SG(1).

Author information: 
(1)St Louis College of Pharmacy, St Louis, MO, USA.

BACKGROUND: The purpose of this systematic review is to summarize and evaluate
the available published data regarding the efficacy and safety of a combination
product containing fluticasone propionate/formoterol (FP-F) in order to establish
its potential role compared with other inhaled combination
corticosteroid/long-acting beta2 receptor agonists for the maintenance treatment 
of asthma.
METHODS: A PubMed and EMBASE search was conducted using the terms "fluticasone
propionate", "formoterol fumarate", "Flutiform(®)", and "asthma" in July 2014 to 
identify trials using this combination specifically for the treatment of asthma. 
Additional information was gathered from references cited in the identified
publications, the package insert, and the ClinicalTrials. gov registry. All
randomized controlled clinical trials for humans in asthma were evaluated for
inclusion. Data from animal trials, clinical trials for chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease, and non-English sources were excluded.
RESULTS: Seven short-term safety and efficacy trials of FP-F compared with its
individual components and two comparison trials of FP-F versus other combination 
products were identified. Generally, the incidence of drug-related adverse events
was low and consistent with previously reported drug class-related adverse events
(ie, pharyngitis, dysphonia, and headache). The combination of FP-F was shown to 
be noninferior to fluticasone propionate/salmeterol for improving predose forced 
expiratory volume at one second (FEV1) and 2 hours post dose FEV1. FP-F was also 
noninferior to budesonide/formoterol in improving predose FEV1. Other clinical
endpoints, including various symptom scores, asthma control, quality of life, and
subjects' assessment of the medications were not significantly different.
CONCLUSION: Poor asthma control is common. The data from short-term studies
indicate that this inhaled corticosteroid and long-acting beta2 receptor agonist 
combination product is non-inferior to similar combination products available. As
FP-F is available in different strengths, the corticosteroid dose can be titrated
without changing devices. A potential advantage is that those with good
technique, the same type of device could be used for both their controller and
rapid relief inhaler medicines. The choice of this combination versus other
similar products may be based primarily on cost.

DOI: 10.2147/TCRM.S55116 
PMCID: PMC4459636
PMID: 26082638  [PubMed]


33. Neonatology. 2015;107(4):358-9. doi: 10.1159/000381132. Epub 2015 Jun 5.

Inhalation or instillation of steroids for the prevention of bronchopulmonary
dysplasia.

Bassler D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neonatology, University Hospital Zurich, University of Zurich,
Zurich, Switzerland.

Survival of extremely preterm infants has increased over recent years, but
bronchopulmonary dysplasia (BPD) remains a major cause of morbidity. In the USA, 
BPD is the most common chronic respiratory disorder of infancy and affects the
pulmonary and overall health of 10,000 preterm infants annually. Preclinical and 
clinical studies suggest a crucial role for lung inflammation and host immune
response in the pathogenesis of BPD. Inflammation may result from, amongst
others, chorioamnionitis, postnatal infection, ventilation, and the
administration of oxygen. Infants with BPD have worse long-term outcomes than
those without chronic lung disease. They are more than twice as likely to be
readmitted to hospital in their first year of life and, having survived their
primary hospitalizations, they are more likely to die than very preterm infants
without chronic lung disease. Survivors with BPD have an increased risk of
neurodevelopmental impairment and their respiratory function remains compromised 
well into adolescence. As the first generations of extremely low birth weight
(ELBW) survivors have not yet reached retirement age, there are currently no
reliable data addressing the association between BPD and pulmonary diseases of
the elderly such as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Although BPD is quite 
common in ELBW infants, there are infants who do not develop BPD, which supports 
the argument that BPD is a preventable disease, emphasizing the need for
high-quality safety and efficacy prevention studies. However, according to an
Institute of Medicine statement regarding pediatric drug studies, the therapeutic
area that has the fewest drugs indicated for neonates is BPD. As inflammation
seems to be a primary mediator of injury in the pathogenesis of BPD,
anti-inflammatory agents such as steroids have long been the focus of preventive 
research activities. However, systemic steroids, although reducing BPD, have
frequently been linked to adverse neurodevelopmental outcomes and these
considerations may have contributed to the recently reported widespread use of
inhaled corticosteroids in neonatal units in North America and Europe. Inhaled
corticosteroids were prescribed to 25% of infants born at <29 weeks of gestation 
with birth weights <1,500 g in neonatal units of 35 children's hospitals in the
USA. According to a survey across all neonatal units in Germany, 46% administered
inhaled corticosteroids to preterm infants either as prophylaxis or treatment for
BPD [10]. Pediatricians and neonatologists should ask themselves whether the
off-label use of inhaled corticosteroids in preterm infants is justifiable in
view of the available evidence. The authors of the pertinent review from the
Cochrane Collaboration, including 7 studies and 492 infants, conclude that there 
is currently no evidence to support the routine use of inhaled steroids for the
prevention of BPD. Recently, the primary outcome results of the Neonatal European
Study of Inhaled Steroids (NEUROSIS), including 863 very preterm infants
(gestational age 23-27 weeks), have been presented at scientific conferences, but
the full study report is not yet published. By contrast, intratracheal
instillation of budesonide using surfactant as a vehicle has not yet become part 
of clinical practice. There are fewer studies addressing the risks and benefits
of this mode of administration. In a randomized blinded pilot study in 116 very
low birth weight infants who had severe radiographic respiratory distress
syndrome and required mechanical ventilation shortly after birth, early
intratracheal instillation of budesonide using surfactant as a vehicle resulted
in significantly lower mean airway pressure on day 1 and day 3 and a
significantly lower oxygen index and PCO2 during the first 3 days compared with
infants in the control group who had received surfactant without corticosteroids.
More infants were extubated in the treatment group than in the controls at 1 and 
2 weeks and the combined outcome of death or chronic lung disease was
significantly lower in the treatment group than in the control group (19 of 60
vs. 34 of 56). No clinically significant adverse effects were observed during the
study and at the time of the follow-up assessment at 2-3 years of age. In the
future, intratracheal instillation of budesonide using surfactant as a vehicle
may play a role in the prevention of BPD in ELBW infants. However, before this
therapy can be introduced into routine clinical care, remaining open questions
need to be answered and appropriately powered studies need to be performed.

© 2015 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000381132 
PMID: 26044104  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Int J Pharm. 2015 Aug 1;491(1-2):268-76. doi: 10.1016/j.ijpharm.2015.05.076. Epub
2015 Jun 1.

Effect of inhalation profile and throat geometry on predicted lung deposition of 
budesonide and formoterol (BF) in COPD: An in-vitro comparison of Spiromax with
Turbuhaler.

Chrystyn H(1), Safioti G(2), Keegstra JR(3), Gopalan G(4).

Author information: 
(1)RiRL, 5a Coles Lane, Oakington, Cambridge, UK. Electronic address:
h.chrystyn@gmail.com. (2)Medical Affairs, Teva Pharmaceuticals, Helsingborg,
Sweden. Electronic address: guilherme.safioti@teva.se. (3)Global Respiratory R&D,
Teva Pharmachemie, Haarlem, The Netherlands. Electronic address:
hans.keegstra@tevapharmachemie.com. (4)Global Medical Affairs, Teva
Pharmaceuticals, Malvern, PA, USA. Electronic address:
gokul.gopalan@tevapharm.com.

Successful delivery of inhalation medication to the lungs can be affected by the 
inhalation manoeuvre used. Conventional in-vitro testing of the emitted dose from
a dry powder inhaler (DPI) uses a vacuum pump to simulate an inhalation. We have 
adapted this method by replacing the pump with patient inhalation profiles and an
anatomical throat. Three anatomical throat sizes and three inhalation profiles
were used. The profiles represented the 10th, 50th and 90th percentiles of peak
inhalation flow and acceleration of flow from a population of 50 COPD patients
inhaling through empty Spiromax and Turbuhaler devices. Combining the dose
emission results for the three throat sizes, the mean (SD) budesonide
fine-particle dose (FPD) from budesonide-formoterol Spiromax 320/9 μg was 78.91
(20.18), 79.91 (15.36) and 75.10 (19.91)μg and the total emitted dose (TED) of
budesonide was 263.69 (40.74), 261.20 (21.65) and 261.61 (45.65)μg. Similarly,
the FPD from 320/9 μg Turbuhaler was 22.45 (3.24), 52.20 (12.57) and 69.11
(75.10)μg with a TED of 143.80 (14.90), 149.50 (26.61) and 158.61 (43.04)μg.
Spiromax showed greater consistency than Turbuhaler over a range of inspiratory
flow profiles. The results demonstrate the value of this new method to assess the
doses that patients receive during real-life use of their DPI.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijpharm.2015.05.076 
PMID: 26043823  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2015 May 15;10:947-54. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S80022.
eCollection 2015.

Clinical, physiological, and radiological features of asthma-chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease overlap syndrome.

Suzuki T(1), Tada Y(1), Kawata N(1), Matsuura Y(1), Ikari J(1), Kasahara Y(1),
Tatsumi K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respirology, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba University,
Chiba, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Asthma-chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) overlap syndrome 
(ACOS) is associated with rapid decline in lung function, poorer health-related
quality-of-life outcomes, and frequent exacerbations, compared to COPD alone.
Although the numbers of patients with ACOS have increased, there is little
established evidence regarding diagnostic criteria and treatment options. Thus,
the aim of our study was to clarify the clinical, physiological, and radiological
features of patients with ACOS.
METHODS: We examined a total of 100 patients with COPD and 40 patients with ACOS,
who were selected based on clinical criteria. All patients underwent baseline
testing, including a COPD assessment test, pulmonary function tests, and
multidetector row computed tomography imaging. Percentage of low attenuation
volume, percentage of wall area, and percentage of total cross-sectional area of 
pulmonary vessels less than 5 mm(2) (%CSA <5) were determined using multidetector
row computed tomography. ACOS patients were administered a fixed dose of
budesonide/formoterol (160/4.5 μg, two inhalations; twice daily) for 12 weeks,
after which the ACOS patients underwent multidetector row computed tomography to 
measure the same parameters.
RESULTS: At baseline, the ACOS patients and COPD patients had a similar degree of
airflow limitation, vital capacity, and residual volume. ACOS patients had higher
COPD assessment test scores, percentage of wall area, and %CSA <5 than COPD
patients. Compared to baseline, budesonide/formoterol treatment significantly
increased the forced expiratory volume in 1 second and decreased the degree of
airway wall thickness (percentage of wall area) as well as pulmonary
microvascular density (%CSA <5) in ACOS patients.
CONCLUSION: Our results suggest that ACOS is characterized by an airway
lesion-dominant phenotype, in contrast to COPD. Higher %CSA <5 might be a
characteristic feature of ACOS.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S80022 
PMCID: PMC4440433
PMID: 26028967  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. BMC Pulm Med. 2015 May 1;15:47. doi: 10.1186/s12890-015-0043-x.

Inhalation characteristics of asthma patients, COPD patients and healthy
volunteers with the Spiromax® and Turbuhaler® devices: a randomised, cross-over
study.

Azouz W(1), Chetcuti P(2), Hosker H(3), Saralaya D(4), Chrystyn H(5).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pharmacy, School of Applied Sciences, University of Huddersfield, 
Huddersfield, UK. wahidaazzouz@yahoo.com. (2)Paediatrics, Leeds General
Infirmary, Leeds, UK. Philip.Chetcuti@leedsth.nhs.uk. (3)Department of
Respiratory, Airedale General Hospital, Steeton, Bradford, UK.
Harold.Hosker@anhst.nhs.uk. (4)Department of Respiratory, Bradford Royal
Infirmary, Bradford, UK. Dinesh.Saralaya@bthft.nhs.uk. (5)Inhalation Consultancy 
Ltd Tarn House (Formerly Division of Pharmacy, School of Applied Sciences,
University of Huddersfield), 55 High Street, Yeadon, Leeds, UK.
h.chrystyn@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Spiromax® is a novel dry-powder inhaler containing formulations of
budesonide plus formoterol (BF). The device is intended to provide dose
equivalence with enhanced user-friendliness compared to BF Turbuhaler® in asthma 
and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). The present study was performed
to compare inhalation parameters with empty versions of the two devices, and to
investigate the effects of enhanced training designed to encourage faster
inhalation.
METHODS: This randomised, open-label, cross-over study included children with
asthma (n = 23), adolescents with asthma (n = 27), adults with asthma (n = 50),
adults with COPD (n = 50) and healthy adult volunteers (n = 50). Inhalation
manoeuvres were recorded with each device after training with the patient
information leaflet (PIL) and after enhanced training using an In-Check Dial
device.
RESULTS: After PIL training, peak inspiratory flow (PIF), maximum change in
pressure (∆P) and the inhalation volume (IV) were significantly higher with
Spiromax than with the Turbuhaler device (p values were at least <0.05 in all
patient groups). After enhanced training, numerically or significantly higher
values for PIF, ∆P, IV and acceleration remained with Spiromax versus Turbuhaler,
except for ∆P in COPD patients. After PIL training, one adult asthma patient and 
one COPD patient inhaled <30 L/min through the Spiromax compared to one adult
asthma patient and five COPD patients with the Turbuhaler. All patients achieved 
PIF values of at least 30 L/min after enhanced training.
CONCLUSIONS: The two inhalers have similar resistance so inhalation flows and
pressure changes would be expected to be similar. The higher flow-related values 
noted for Spiromax versus Turbuhaler after PIL training suggest that Spiromax
might have human factor advantages in real-world use. After enhanced training,
the flow-related differences between devices persisted; increased flow rates were
achieved with both devices, and all patients achieved the minimal flow required
for adequate drug delivery. Enhanced training could be useful, especially in COPD
patients.

DOI: 10.1186/s12890-015-0043-x 
PMCID: PMC4450517
PMID: 25927483  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Respir Res. 2015 Apr 23;16:52. doi: 10.1186/s12931-015-0210-x.

Comparative effectiveness of budesonide/formoterol combination and
fluticasone/salmeterol combination among chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
patients new to controller treatment: a US administrative claims database study.

Kern DM(1), Davis J(2), Williams SA(3), Tunceli O(4), Wu B(5), Hollis S(6),
Strange C(7), Trudo F(8).

Author information: 
(1)HealthCore, Inc., 123 Justison St, Suite 200, Wilmington, DE, 19801-5134, USA.
dkern@healthcore.com. (2)AstraZeneca Pharmaceuticals, 1800 Concord Pike,
Wilmington, DE, 19850, USA. Jill.Davis@astrazeneca.com. (3)AstraZeneca
Pharmaceuticals, One MedImmune Way, Gaithersburg, MD, 20878, USA.
Setareh.Williams@astrazeneca.com. (4)HealthCore, Inc., 123 Justison St, Suite
200, Wilmington, DE, 19801-5134, USA. otunceli@healthcore.com. (5)HealthCore,
Inc., 123 Justison St, Suite 200, Wilmington, DE, 19801-5134, USA.
bwu@healthcore.com. (6)AstraZeneca Pharmaceuticals, Alderley Park, Cheshire, UK. 
Sally.Hollis@astrazeneca.com. (7)Department of Medicine, Division of Pulmonary
and Critical Care Medicine, Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, SC,
29425, USA. strangec@musc.edu. (8)AstraZeneca Pharmaceuticals, 1800 Concord Pike,
Wilmington, DE, 19850, USA. Frank.Trudo@astrazeneca.com.

BACKGROUND: Inhaled corticosteroid/long-acting β2-agonist combinations (ICS/LABA)
have emerged as first line therapies for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD) patients with exacerbation history. No randomized clinical trial has
compared exacerbation rates among COPD patients receiving budesonide/formoterol
combination (BFC) and fluticasone/salmeterol combination (FSC) to date, and only 
limited comparative data are available. This study compared the real-world
effectiveness of approved BFC and FSC treatments among matched cohorts of COPD
patients in a large US managed care setting.
METHODS: COPD patients (≥40 years) naive to ICS/LABA who initiated BFC or FSC
treatments between 03/01/2009-03/31/2012 were identified in a geographically
diverse US managed care database and followed for 12 months; index date was
defined as first prescription fill date. Patients with a cancer diagnosis or
chronic (≥180 days) oral corticosteroid (OCS) use within 12 months prior to index
were excluded. Patients were matched 1-to-1 on demographic and pre-initiation
clinical characteristics using propensity scores from a random forest model. The 
primary efficacy outcome was COPD exacerbation rate, and secondary efficacy
outcomes included exacerbation rates by event type and healthcare resource
utilization. Pneumonia objectives included rates of any diagnosis of pneumonia
and pneumonia-related healthcare resource utilization.
RESULTS: Matching of the identified 3,788 BFC and 6,439 FSC patients resulted in 
3,697 patients in each group. Matched patients were well balanced on age (mean=64
years), gender (BFC: 52% female; FSC: 54%), prior COPD-related medication use,
healthcare utilization, and comorbid conditions. During follow-up, no significant
difference was seen between BFC and FSC patients for number of COPD-related
exacerbations overall (rate ratio [RR]=1.02, 95% CI=[0.96,1.09], p=0.56) or by
event type: COPD-related hospitalizations (RR=0.96), COPD-related ED visits
(RR=1.11), and COPD-related office/outpatient visits with OCS and/or antibiotic
use (RR=1.01). The proportion of patients diagnosed with pneumonia during the
post-index period was similar for patients in each group (BFC =17.3%, FSC =19.0%,
odds ratio=0.92 [0.81,1.04], p=0.19), and no difference was detected for
pneumonia-related healthcare utilization by place of service.
CONCLUSION: This study demonstrated no difference in COPD-related exacerbations
or pneumonia events between BFC and FSC treatment groups for patients new to
ICS/LABA treatment in a real-world setting.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov identifier NCT01921127 .

DOI: 10.1186/s12931-015-0210-x 
PMCID: PMC4409772
PMID: 25899176  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. J Clin Diagn Res. 2015 Feb;9(2):OC10-3. doi: 10.7860/JCDR/2015/10803.5527. Epub
2015 Feb 1.

The Study of Efficacy, Tolerability and Safety of Theophylline Given Along with
Formoterol Plus Budesonide in COPD.

Subramanian(1), Ragulan(1), Jindal A(2), Viswambhar V(3), V AB(2).

Author information: 
(1)Associate Professor, Department of Respiratory Medicine, Chettinad Hospital & 
Research Institute , Chennai, India . (2)Post Graduate Student, Department of
Respiratory Medicine, Chettinad Hospital & Research Institute , Chennai, India . 
(3)Assistant Professor, Department of Respiratory Medicine, Chettinad Hospital & 
Research Institute , Chennai, India .

BACKGROUND: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a common disease
causing significant socioeconomic burden. COPD patients, commonly smokers develop
resistance to inhaled steroids attributed to deficiency of histone deacetylase 2 
(HDAC2). The study of relationship between systemic inflammation and functional
performance demonstrated that increased CRP level is inversely related to six
minute walk distance (SMWD) and Forced Expired Volume in one second (FEV1).
Theophylline restores HDAC2 activity thereby unlocking steroid resistance and
potentiating inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) action culminating in reduced airway
inflammation and mortality.
AIM: To study the effects of addition of Theophylline to the combination of
Formoterol plus Budesonide on various objective and subjective parameters in
moderate to severe COPD patients and to assess the safety profile of the
combination. Setting and Study design: A single blinded, prospective, randomized,
placebo controlled study at a tertiary care hospital in Jaipur, India.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Fifty eight patients diagnosed with moderate to severe
COPD were randomized into two groups. Group A patients received Formoterol 24μg
plus budesonide 800μg daily in divided doses along with Theophylline while group 
B patients received Formoterol 24μg plus budesonide 800μg daily in divided doses 
along with placebo tablets. Both groups were followed up on 15th, 30th &60th day.
During every visit all patients were assessed subjectively (symptom scoring) and 
objectively (spirometry, CRP, SMWT) and adverse effects if any were recorded. The
obtained data subject to statistical analysis using"Graph pad Instat3" software.
RESULTS: Statistically significant improvement with a decline in total symptom
score (p < 0.0001) was found with respect to "Night symptoms"&"SOB on rising" in 
group A. Theophylline group showed significant improvement in SMWD and FEV1.Mean 
fall in CRP was greater in Group A (not statistically significant). No side
effects requiring withdrawal of drug were noted with Theophylline.
CONCLUSION: Addition of Theophylline to Formoterol plus Budesonide reduces
dyspnea, improves exercise performance and pulmonary functions in moderate to
severe COPD. Further studies are required to explore if reduced dosage would have
equal efficacy with better safety and tolerability profile.

DOI: 10.7860/JCDR/2015/10803.5527 
PMCID: PMC4378761
PMID: 25859479  [PubMed]


39. J Aerosol Med Pulm Drug Deliv. 2015 Dec;28(6):462-73. doi:
10.1089/jamp.2014.1195. Epub 2015 Mar 10.

Equivalent Lung Dose and Systemic Exposure of Budesonide/Formoterol Combination
via Easyhaler and Turbuhaler.

Lähelmä S(1), Sairanen U(1), Haikarainen J(1), Korhonen J(1), Vahteristo M(1),
Fuhr R(2), Kirjavainen M(1).

Author information: 
(1)1 Orion Corporation Orion Pharma , Espoo, Finland . (2)2 PAREXEL Early Phase
Clinical Unit , Berlin, Germany .

BACKGROUND: Easyhaler(®) device-metered dry powder inhaler containing budesonide 
and formoterol fumarate dihydrate (hereafter formoterol) for the treatment of
asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease has been developed. The current 
approvals of the product in Europe were based on several pharmacokinetic (PK)
bioequivalence (BE) studies, and in vitro-in vivo correlation (IVIVC) modeling.
METHODS: Four PK studies were performed to compare the lung deposition and total 
systemic exposure of budesonide and formoterol after administration of
budesonide/formoterol Easyhaler and the reference product, Symbicort Turbuhaler. 
The products were administered concomitantly with oral charcoal (lung deposition)
and in two of the studies also without charcoal (total systemic exposure).
Demonstration of BE for lung deposition (surrogate marker for efficacy) and
non-inferiority for systemic exposure (surrogate marker for safety) were
considered a proof of therapeutic equivalence. In addition, IVIVC models were
constructed to predict study outcomes with different reference product fine
particle doses (FPDs).
RESULTS: In the first pivotal study, the exposure and lung dose via Easyhaler
were higher compared to the reference product (mean comparison estimates between 
1.07 and 1.28) as the FPDs of the reference product batch were low. In the
following studies, reference product batches with higher FPDs were utilized. In
the second pivotal study, non-inferiority of Easyhaler compared to Turbuhaler was
shown in safety and BE in efficacy for all other parameters except the formoterol
AUCt. In the fourth study where two reference batches were compared to each other
and Easyhaler, budesonide/formoterol Easyhaler was bioequivalent with one
reference batch but not with the other having the highest FPDs amongst the 28
reference batches studied. In the IVIVC based study outcome predictions, the test
product was bioequivalent with great proportion of the reference batches. For the
test product and the median FPD reference product BE was predicted.
CONCLUSIONS: Equivalence regarding both safety and efficacy between
budesonide/formoterol Easyhaler and Symbicort Turbuhaler was shown based on
totality of evidence from the PK studies and IVIVC analyses, and therefore,
therapeutic equivalence between the products can be concluded. The results of the
PK studies are likely dependent on the variability of FPDs of the reference
product batches.

DOI: 10.1089/jamp.2014.1195 
PMCID: PMC4688463
PMID: 25757188  [PubMed - in process]


40. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2015 Sep;136(3):601-9. doi: 10.1016/j.jaci.2015.01.013.
Epub 2015 Mar 5.

Treatment responsiveness of phenotypes of symptomatic airways obstruction in
adults.

Fingleton J(1), Travers J(2), Williams M(3), Charles T(3), Bowles D(4), Strik
R(3), Shirtcliffe P(4), Weatherall M(5), Beasley R(6); New Zealand Respiratory
Health Survey Study Group.

Collaborators: Fingleton J, Travers J, Weatherall M, Beasley R, Williams M,
Shirtcliffe P, Charles T, Bowles D, Braithwaite I, Strik R, Dooney N, Baker T,
Patel M, Holliday M, Stretch M, Pritchard A, Fabian D, Munro C, Hosking A,
Brinded A, Purdie G.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Institute of New Zealand, Wellington, New Zealand; Capital & 
Coast District Health Board, Wellington, New Zealand; Victoria University of
Wellington, Wellington, New Zealand. (2)Medical Research Institute of New
Zealand, Wellington, New Zealand; Hutt Valley District Health Board, Lower Hutt, 
New Zealand. (3)Medical Research Institute of New Zealand, Wellington, New
Zealand. (4)Medical Research Institute of New Zealand, Wellington, New Zealand;
Capital & Coast District Health Board, Wellington, New Zealand. (5)Capital &
Coast District Health Board, Wellington, New Zealand; University of Otago
Wellington, Wellington, New Zealand. (6)Medical Research Institute of New
Zealand, Wellington, New Zealand; Capital & Coast District Health Board,
Wellington, New Zealand; Victoria University of Wellington, Wellington, New
Zealand. Electronic address: richard.beasley@mrinz.ac.nz.

BACKGROUND: Asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) are
heterogeneous disorders encompassing different phenotypes of airflow obstruction,
which might differ in their response to treatment.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to determine distinct phenotypes comprising 
the syndromes of asthma and COPD and the treatment responsiveness of these
phenotypes to inhaled β-agonist, antimuscarinic, and corticosteroid therapy.
METHODS: We undertook a cross-sectional study with 3 phases. In phase 1, 1,264
participants aged 18 to 75 years with self-reported current wheeze and
breathlessness were identified from a random population sample of 16,459. In
phase 2, 451 participants attended for detailed assessment, including
responsiveness to inhaled salbutamol and ipratropium bromide. In phase 3, 168
steroid-naive participants were enrolled in a 12-week trial of inhaled
budesonide. Cluster analysis was performed in 389 participants who completed
phase 2 with full data. Treatment responsiveness was compared between phenotypes.
RESULTS: Cluster analysis identified 5 phenotypes: moderate-to-severe
childhood-onset atopic asthma, asthma-COPD overlap, obese-comorbid, mild
childhood-onset atopic asthma, and mild intermittent. Bronchodilation after
salbutamol was equal to or greater than that after ipratropium for all
phenotypes. The moderate-to-severe childhood-onset atopic asthma, asthma-COPD
overlap, and obese-comorbid phenotypes had greater efficacy with inhaled
corticosteroid treatment than the mild intermittent group.
CONCLUSION: Cluster analysis of adults with symptomatic airflow obstruction
identifies 5 disease phenotypes, including asthma-COPD overlap and obese-comorbid
phenotypes, and provides evidence that patients with the asthma-COPD overlap
syndrome might benefit from inhaled corticosteroid therapy.

Copyright © 2015 American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaci.2015.01.013 
PMID: 25746966  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Open Respir Med J. 2014 Dec 31;8:59-65. doi: 10.2174/1874306401408010059.
eCollection 2014.

Systemic effects of inhaled corticosteroids: an overview.

Pandya D(1), Puttanna A(1), Balagopal V(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Walsall Manor Hospital, West Midlands, WS2 9PS,
UK. (2)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Walsall Manor Hospital, Walsall, West 
Midlands, WS2 9PS, UK.

Inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) are common medications, used in respiratory
medicine for controlling conditions such as asthma and other obstructive airway
diseases. The systemic effects of oral corticosteroids are well known and
established; inhaled steroids have been known to cause relatively minor and
localized adverse effects such as oral candidiasis. However, less attention has
been paid to their systemic effects. Although currently there is a paucity of
prospective studies demonstrating the systemic effects of inhaled
corticosteroids, there are numerous retrospective studies adding evidence to this
link. Inhaled corticosteroids can affect the hypothalamo-pituitary-adrenal axis, 
bone density and growth, eyes, skin and immunity including an increased risk of
pneumonia. Clinicians are recommended to aim for the lowest possible dose to
avoid these systemic side effects. Fluticasone is more likely to cause systemic
effects compared to budesonide. Newer ICS molecules such as ciclesonide may be
more beneficial in reducing such systemic complications on prolonged use. This
paper provides an updated overview of the common systemic effects encountered
with ICS treatment.

DOI: 10.2174/1874306401408010059 
PMCID: PMC4319197
PMID: 25674175  [PubMed]


42. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2015 Jan 27;10:201-9. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S69589. 
eCollection 2015.

A score to predict short-term risk of COPD exacerbations (SCOPEX).

Make BJ(1), Eriksson G(2), Calverley PM(3), Jenkins CR(4), Postma DS(5), Peterson
S(6), Östlund O(7), Anzueto A(8).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary Sciences and Critical Care Medicine, National Jewish
Health, University of Colorado Denver School of Medicine, Denver, CO, USA.
(2)Department of Respiratory Medicine and Allergology, University Hospital, Lund,
Sweden. (3)Pulmonary and Rehabilitation Research Group, University Hospital
Aintree, Liverpool, UK. (4)George Institute for Global Health, The University of 
Sydney and Concord Clinical School, Woolcock Institute of Medical Research,
Sydney, NSW, Australia. (5)Department of Pulmonology, University of Groningen and
GRIAC Research Institute, University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, The
Netherlands. (6)StatMind AB, Lund, Sweden. (7)Department of Medical Sciences and 
Uppsala Clinical Research Center, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.
(8)Department of Pulmonary/Critical Care, University of Texas Health Sciences
Center and South Texas Veterans Healthcare System, San Antonio, TX, USA.

BACKGROUND: There is no clinically useful score to predict chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD) exacerbations. We aimed to derive this by analyzing data
from three existing COPD clinical trials of budesonide/formoterol, formoterol, or
placebo in patients with moderate-to-very-severe COPD and a history of
exacerbations in the previous year.
METHODS: Predictive variables were selected using Cox regression for time to
first severe COPD exacerbation. We determined absolute risk estimates for an
exacerbation by identifying variables in a binomial model, adjusting for
observation time, study, and treatment. The model was further reduced to
clinically useful variables and the final regression coefficients scaled to
obtain risk scores of 0-100 to predict an exacerbation within 6 months. Receiver 
operating characteristic (ROC) curves and the corresponding C-index were used to 
investigate the discriminatory properties of predictive variables.
RESULTS: The best predictors of an exacerbation in the next 6 months were more
COPD maintenance medications prior to the trial, higher mean daily reliever use, 
more exacerbations during the previous year, lower forced expiratory volume in 1 
second/forced vital capacity ratio, and female sex. Using these risk variables,
we developed a score to predict short-term (6-month) risk of COPD exacerbations
(SCOPEX). Budesonide/formoterol reduced future exacerbation risk more than
formoterol or as-needed short-acting β2-agonist (salbutamol).
CONCLUSION: SCOPEX incorporates easily identifiable patient characteristics and
can be readily applied in clinical practice to target therapy to reduce COPD
exacerbations in patients at the highest risk.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S69589 
PMCID: PMC4315304
PMID: 25670896  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2015 Mar;352(3):559-67. doi: 10.1124/jpet.114.220541. Epub 
2015 Jan 9.

CHF6001 I: a novel highly potent and selective phosphodiesterase 4 inhibitor with
robust anti-inflammatory activity and suitable for topical pulmonary
administration.

Moretto N(1), Caruso P(1), Bosco R(1), Marchini G(1), Pastore F(1), Armani E(1), 
Amari G(1), Rizzi A(1), Ghidini E(1), De Fanti R(1), Capaldi C(1), Carzaniga
L(1), Hirsch E(1), Buccellati C(1), Sala A(1), Carnini C(1), Patacchini R(1),
Delcanale M(1), Civelli M(1), Villetti G(1), Facchinetti F(2).

Author information: 
(1)Corporate Pre-Clinical R & D, Chiesi Farmaceutici S.p.A., Parma, Italy (N.M., 
P.C., R.B., G.M., F.P., E.A., G.A., A.R., E.G., R.D.F., Ca.C., L.C., Ch.C., R.P. 
M.D., M.C., G.V., F.F.); Molecular Biotechnology Center, University of Turin,
Turin, Italy (E.H.); and Dipartimento di Scienze Farmacologiche e Biomolecolari, 
Milan, Italy (C.B., A.S.). (2)Corporate Pre-Clinical R & D, Chiesi Farmaceutici
S.p.A., Parma, Italy (N.M., P.C., R.B., G.M., F.P., E.A., G.A., A.R., E.G.,
R.D.F., Ca.C., L.C., Ch.C., R.P. M.D., M.C., G.V., F.F.); Molecular Biotechnology
Center, University of Turin, Turin, Italy (E.H.); and Dipartimento di Scienze
Farmacologiche e Biomolecolari, Milan, Italy (C.B., A.S.)
f.facchinetti@chiesi.com.

This study examined the pharmacologic characterization of CHF6001
[(S)-3,5-dichloro-4-(2-(3-(cyclopropylmethoxy)-4-(difluoromethoxy)phenyl)-2-(3-(c
yclopropylmethoxy)-4-(methylsulfonamido)benzoyloxy)ethyl)pyridine 1-oxide], a
novel phosphodiesterase (PDE)4 inhibitor designed for treating pulmonary
inflammatory diseases via inhaled administration. CHF6001 was 7- and 923-fold
more potent than roflumilast and cilomilast, respectively, in inhibiting PDE4
enzymatic activity (IC50 = 0.026 ± 0.006 nM). CHF6001 inhibited PDE4 isoforms A-D
with equal potency, showed an elevated ratio of high-affinity rolipram binding
site versus low-affinity rolipram binding site (i.e., >40) and displayed
>20,000-fold selectivity versus PDE4 compared with a panel of PDEs. CHF6001
effectively inhibited (subnanomolar IC50 values) the release of tumor necrosis
factor-α from human peripheral blood mononuclear cells, human acute monocytic
leukemia cell line macrophages (THP-1), and rodent macrophages (RAW264.7 and
NR8383). Moreover, CHF6001 potently inhibited the activation of oxidative burst
in neutrophils and eosinophils, neutrophil chemotaxis, and the release of
interferon-γ from CD4(+) T cells. In all these functional assays, CHF6001 was
more potent than previously described PDE4 inhibitors, including roflumilast,
UK-500,001
[2-(3,4-difluorophenoxy)-5-fluoro-N-((1S,4S)-4-(2-hydroxy-5-methylbenzamido)cyclo
hexyl)nicotinamide], and cilomilast, and it was comparable to GSK256066
[6-((3-(dimethylcarbamoyl)phenyl)sulfonyl)-4-((3-methoxyphenyl)amino)-8-methylqui
noline-3-carboxamide]. When administered intratracheally to rats as a micronized 
dry powder, CHF6001 inhibited liposaccharide-induced pulmonary neutrophilia (ED50
= 0.205 μmol/kg) and leukocyte infiltration (ED50 = 0.188 μmol/kg) with an
efficacy comparable to a high dose of budesonide (1 μmol/kg i.p.). In sum,
CHF6001 has the potential to be an effective topical treatment of conditions
associated with pulmonary inflammation, including asthma and chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease.

Copyright © 2015 by The American Society for Pharmacology and Experimental
Therapeutics.

DOI: 10.1124/jpet.114.220541 
PMID: 25576075  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Basic Clin Pharmacol Toxicol. 2015 Apr;116(4):291-307. doi: 10.1111/bcpt.12366.
Epub 2015 Jan 22.

Diagnosis and pharmacotherapy of stable chronic obstructive pulmonary disease:
the finnish guidelines.

Kankaanranta H(1), Harju T, Kilpeläinen M, Mazur W, Lehto JT, Katajisto M, Peisa 
T, Meinander T, Lehtimäki L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Seinäjoki Central Hospital, Seinäjoki,
Finland; Department of Respiratory Medicine, University of Tampere, Tampere,
Finland.

The Finnish Medical Society Duodecim initiated and managed the update of the
Finnish national guideline for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). The 
Finnish COPD guideline was revised to acknowledge the progress in diagnosis and
management of COPD. This Finnish COPD guideline in English language is a part of 
the original guideline and focuses on the diagnosis, assessment and
pharmacotherapy of stable COPD. It is intended to be used mainly in primary
health care but not forgetting respiratory specialists and other healthcare
workers. The new recommendations and statements are based on the best evidence
available from the medical literature, other published national guidelines and
the GOLD (Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease) report. This
guideline introduces the diagnostic approach, differential diagnostics towards
asthma, assessment and treatment strategy to control symptoms and to prevent
exacerbations. The pharmacotherapy is based on the symptoms and a clinical
phenotype of the individual patient. The guideline defines three clinically
relevant phenotypes including the low and high exacerbation risk phenotypes and
the neglected asthma-COPD overlap syndrome (ACOS). These clinical phenotypes can 
help clinicians to identify patients that respond to specific pharmacological
interventions. For the low exacerbation risk phenotype, pharmacotherapy with
short-acting β2 -agonists (salbutamol, terbutaline) or anticholinergics
(ipratropium) or their combination (fenoterol-ipratropium) is recommended in
patients with less symptoms. If short-acting bronchodilators are not enough to
control symptoms, a long-acting β2 -agonist (formoterol, indacaterol, olodaterol 
or salmeterol) or a long-acting anticholinergic (muscarinic receptor antagonists;
aclidinium, glycopyrronium, tiotropium, umeclidinium) or their combination is
recommended. For the high exacerbation risk phenotype, pharmacotherapy with a
long-acting anticholinergic or a fixed combination of an inhaled glucocorticoid
and a long-acting β2 -agonist (budesonide-formoterol, beclomethasone
dipropionate-formoterol, fluticasone propionate-salmeterol or fluticasone
furoate-vilanterol) is recommended as a first choice. Other treatment options for
this phenotype include combination of long-acting bronchodilators given from
separate inhalers or as a fixed combination (glycopyrronium-indacaterol or
umeclidinium-vilanterol) or a triple combination of an inhaled glucocorticoid, a 
long-acting β2 -agonist and a long-acting anticholinergic. If the patient has
severe-to-very severe COPD (FEV1  < 50% predicted), chronic bronchitis and
frequent exacerbations despite long-acting bronchodilators, the pharmacotherapy
may include also roflumilast. ACOS is a phenotype of COPD in which there are
features that comply with both asthma and COPD. Patients belonging to this
phenotype have usually been excluded from studies evaluating the effects of drugs
both in asthma and in COPD. Thus, evidence-based recommendation of treatment
cannot be given. The treatment should cover both diseases. Generally, the therapy
should include at least inhaled glucocorticoids (beclomethasone dipropionate,
budesonide, ciclesonide, fluticasone furoate, fluticasone propionate or
mometasone) combined with a long-acting bronchodilator (β2 -agonist or
anticholinergic or both).

© 2014 The Authors. Basic & Clinical Pharmacology & Toxicology published by John 
Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of Nordic Association for the Publication of BCPT
(former Nordic Pharmacological Society).

DOI: 10.1111/bcpt.12366 
PMCID: PMC4409821
PMID: 25515181  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Pulm Pharmacol Ther. 2015 Feb;30:44-50. doi: 10.1016/j.pupt.2014.10.006. Epub
2014 Nov 6.

Differences in the efficacy and safety among inhaled corticosteroids
(ICS)/long-acting beta2-agonists (LABA) combinations in the treatment of chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD): Role of ICS.

Latorre M(1), Novelli F(1), Vagaggini B(1), Braido F(2), Papi A(3), Sanduzzi
A(4), Santus P(5), Scichilone N(6), Paggiaro P(7).

Author information: 
(1)Cardio-Thoracic and Vascular Department, Pathophysiology Unit, University of
Pisa, Italy. (2)Allergy and Respiratory Diseases Clinic, DIMI, University of
Genoa, IRCS AOU San Martino-IST, Genoa, Italy. (3)Respiratory Medicine,
Department of Medical Sciences, University of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy. (4)Section
of Respiratory Diseases, Department of Surgery and Clinical Medicine, University 
of Naples, Italy. (5)Dipartimento di Scienze della Salute, Pneumologia
Riabilitativa Fondazione Salvatore Maugeri, Istituto Scientifico di Milano-IRCCS.
Università degli Studi di Milano, Italy. (6)Department of Internal Medicine,
Section of Pulmonology (DIBIMIS), University of Palermo, Palermo, Italy.
(7)Cardio-Thoracic and Vascular Department, Pathophysiology Unit, University of
Pisa, Italy. Electronic address: pierluigi.paggiaro@unipi.it.

Inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) are frequently recommended for the treatment of
asthma and COPD, often in combination with long-acting beta2-agonists (LABA),
depending on the severity of the disease and/or on the specific phenotype.
Several ICS/LABA combinations are currently available that differ in their
pharmacokinetic characteristics and dose of both components. Thus, this review
assesses differences in the efficacy and the safety profiles of the ICS
components in the two more frequently used ICS/LABA combinations
(budesonide/formoterol and fluticasone/salmeterol) for the management of COPD.
Whereas the basic mechanism of action is similar for all ICS (binding with the
intracellular glucocorticoid receptor, which mediates both genomic and non
genomic effects), the pharmacokinetic and characteristics of ICS are quite
different in terms of receptor affinity, bioavailability, lipophilicity and drug 
persistence in the airways. Fluticasone persists longer in airway mucus and
requires more time to dissolve in the lining fluid and then enter the airway
wall, whereas budesonide is cleared more quickly from the airways. Comparative
efficacy of the two major ICS/LABA combinations recommended for the treatment of 
COPD show similar efficacy in terms of reduction of exacerbations, improvement in
forced expiratory volume in the first second (FEV1) and quality of life. One
retrospective cohort study suggested a greater efficacy for the
budesonide/formoterol combination on hospital or emergency department admissions,
oral corticosteroid courses, and addition of tiotropium, and an observational
real-life study reported a greater reduction of COPD exacerbations with
budesonide/formoterol than with fluticasom/salmeterol combination. Among the
potential side effects of chronic ICS treatment in patients with COPD, recently
the use of fluticasone or fluticasone/salmeterol combination has been associated 
with a higher prevalence of pneumonia in the major long-term studies. On the
other hand, no similar increased risk of pneumonia has been reported in patients 
with COPD treated with the budesonide/formoterol combination. A recent
population-based cohort study from the Quebec database showed that the adjusted
odds ratio for having severe pneumonia was higher for fluticasone (2.1) than for 
budesonide (1.17) or other ICS (1.41). Of the ICS studied, only fluticasone
demonstrated a dose-related increase in risk of pneumonia in patients with COPD. 
This difference between fluticasone and budesonide may be explained by the longer
retention of fluticasone in the airways, with potentially greater inhibition of
type-1 innate immunity. Therefore, the risk:benefit ratio should be evaluated
thoroughly when choosing an ICS/LABA combination for patients with COPD.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pupt.2014.10.006 
PMID: 25445928  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Value Health. 2014 Nov;17(7):A598-9. doi: 10.1016/j.jval.2014.08.2070. Epub 2014 
Oct 26.

The Potential Societal Cost Benefits of Improved Inhalation Technique With
Duoresp® Spiromax® (Budesonide + Formoterol Fumarate Dihydrate) Compared With
Symbicort® Turbuhaler® for the Management of Asthma and Chronic Obstructive
Pulmonary Disease in Sweden.

Lewis A(1), Blackney M(1), Torvinen S(2), Lindqvist F(3), Safioti G(3),
Grundström J(4), Polyzoi M(4), Plich A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Covance Inc., London, UK. (2)Teva Pharmaceuticals Europe B. V, Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands. (3)Teva Pharmaceuticals AB, Helsingborg, Sweden. (4)Parexel
International, Stockholm, Sweden.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jval.2014.08.2070 
PMID: 27202062  [PubMed]


47. Value Health. 2014 Nov;17(7):A591. doi: 10.1016/j.jval.2014.08.2027. Epub 2014
Oct 26.

The Budget Impact of Duoresp® Spiromax® (Budesonide + Formoterol Fumarate
Dihydrate) Compared With Symbicort® Turbohaler® for the Management of Asthma and 
Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease in the United Kingdom: Impact on Health
Care Costs and Inhalation Technique.

Lewis A(1), Blackney M(1), Torvinen S(2), Holmes J(3), Osborne M(3), Dale J(3),
Chandler S(3), Plich A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Covance Inc., London, UK. (2)Teva Pharmaceuticals Europe B. V, Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands. (3)Teva UK Limited, Essex, UK.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jval.2014.08.2027 
PMID: 27202019  [PubMed]


48. Pulm Pharmacol Ther. 2015 Apr;31:111-6. doi: 10.1016/j.pupt.2014.09.004. Epub
2014 Oct 2.

Compare the efficacy of inhaled budesonide and systemic methylprednisolone on
systemic inflammation of AECOPD.

Sun X(1), He Z(2), Zhang J(3), Deng J(3), Bai J(3), Li M(3), Zhong X(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, The First Affiliated Hospital of Guangxi
Medical University, Nanning, Guangxi 530021, China; Department of Respiratory
Medicine, Liuzhou People's Hospital, Liuzhou, Guangxi 545006, China.
(2)Department of Respiratory Medicine, The First Affiliated Hospital of Guangxi
Medical University, Nanning, Guangxi 530021, China. Electronic address:
zhiyi-river@163.com. (3)Department of Respiratory Medicine, The First Affiliated 
Hospital of Guangxi Medical University, Nanning, Guangxi 530021, China.

BACKGROUND: Corticosteroids have been shown to improve the outcome of acute
exacerbation of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (AECOPD). However, whether 
inhaled corticosteroids (IC) alone have similar effects with systemic
corticosteroid (SCS) is still unclear.
OBJECTIVES: To compare the efficacy of inhaled budesonide and systemic
methylprednisolone on systemic inflammation of AECOPD.
METHODS: 30 AECOPD patients were randomly divided into two group. Budesonide
group (15 cases) were treated with inhaled budesonide (3 mg Bid);
methylprednisolone group (15 cases) were treated with systemic methylprednisolone
(methylprednisolone acetate injectable suspension 40 mg Qd for three days and
then methylprednisolone tablets 8 mg Bid). Observe symptoms, lung function, blood
gas analysis and adverse effects of the patients in two groups. Peripheral blood 
samples were collected before and after treatment for 1 day, 4 days and 7 days.
Interleukin-8 (IL-8) and TNF-α levels were determined by an enzyme linked
immunosorbent assay (ELISA). Hs-CRP levels were detected by automatic biochemical
analyzer. Western blotting was used to determine histone deacetylase 2 (HDAC2)
protein expression.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: Symptoms, pulmonary function and blood gas
analysis were significantly improved after treatment in the two groups (P < 0.05)
and no significant differences between the two groups (P > 0.05). There were no
significant differences of IL-8, TNF-α and hs-CRP levels in the two groups
(P > 0.05). Besides, the levels of HDAC2 protein expression before treatment were
significantly lower comparing to that after treatment for 4 and 7 days. Incidence
of adverse events (heart rate, blood pressure, glycemic, sleep condition,
gastrointestinal symptoms) in budesonide group was lower than methylprednisolone 
group (P < 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Inhaled budesonide and systemic methylprednisolone have the same
effects on systemic inflammation of AECOPD. Inhaled corticosteroid alone could
instead systemic corticosteroid in AECOPD treatment.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pupt.2014.09.004 
PMID: 25281894  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Eur J Radiol. 2014 Nov;83(11):2093-101. doi: 10.1016/j.ejrad.2014.08.004. Epub
2014 Aug 17.

Feasibility assessment of using oxygen-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging for
evaluating the effect of pharmacological treatment in COPD.

Morgan AR(1), Parker GJ(2), Roberts C(2), Buonaccorsi GA(3), Maguire NC(3),
Hubbard Cristinacce PL(4), Singh D(5), Vestbo J(5), Bjermer L(6), Jögi J(7), Taib
Z(8), Sarv J(8), Bruijnzeel PL(8), Olsson LE(8), Bondesson E(8), Nihlén U(9),
McGrath DM(4), Young SS(10), Waterton JC(11), Nordenmark LH(8).

Author information: 
(1)Bioxydyn Ltd, Manchester, UK; Centre for Imaging Sciences and Biomedical
Imaging Institute, Manchester Academic Health Sciences Centre, University of
Manchester, Manchester, UK. Electronic address: alex.morgan@bioxydyn.com.
(2)Bioxydyn Ltd, Manchester, UK; Centre for Imaging Sciences and Biomedical
Imaging Institute, Manchester Academic Health Sciences Centre, University of
Manchester, Manchester, UK. (3)Bioxydyn Ltd, Manchester, UK. (4)Centre for
Imaging Sciences and Biomedical Imaging Institute, Manchester Academic Health
Sciences Centre, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK. (5)University of
Manchester, Medicines Evaluation Unit, Manchester Academic Health Sciences
Centre, University Hospital of South Manchester, Manchester, UK. (6)Department of
Respiratory Medicine & Allergology, Skåne University Hospital, Lund, Sweden.
(7)Department of Clinical Physiology, Skåne University Hospital and Lund
University, Lund, Sweden. (8)AstraZeneca R&D, Mölndal, Sweden. (9)Department of
Respiratory Medicine & Allergology, Skåne University Hospital, Lund, Sweden;
AstraZeneca R&D, Mölndal, Sweden. (10)AstraZeneca R&D, Alderley Park, UK.
(11)Centre for Imaging Sciences and Biomedical Imaging Institute, Manchester
Academic Health Sciences Centre, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK;
AstraZeneca R&D, Alderley Park, UK.

OBJECTIVES: Oxygen-enhanced MRI (OE-MRI) biomarkers have potential value in
assessment of COPD, but need further evaluation before treatment-induced changes 
can be interpreted. The objective was to evaluate how OE-MRI parameters of
regional ventilation and oxygen uptake respond to standard pharmacological
interventions in COPD, and how the response compares to that of gold standard
pulmonary function tests.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: COPD patients (n=40), mean FEV1 58% predicted normal,
received single-dose inhaled formoterol 9μg, or placebo, followed by 8 weeks
treatment bid with a combination of budesonide and formoterol Turbuhaler(®)
320/9μg or formoterol Turbuhaler(®). OE-MRI biomarkers were obtained, as well as 
X-ray computed tomography (CT) biomarkers and pulmonary function tests, in a
two-center study. An ANCOVA statistical model was used to assess effect size of
intervention measurable in OE-MRI parameters of lung function.
RESULTS: OE-MRI data were successfully acquired at both study sites. 8-week
treatment with budesonide/formoterol significantly decreased lung wash-out time
by 31% (p<0.01), decreased the change in lung oxygen level upon breathing pure
oxygen by 13% (p<0.05) and increased oxygen extraction from the lung by 58%
(p<0.01). Single-dose formoterol increased both lung wash-out time (+47%, p<0.05)
and lung oxygenation time (+47%, p<0.05). FEV1 was improved by single-dose
formoterol (+12%, p<0.001) and 8 weeks of budesonide/formoterol (+ 18%, p<0.001),
consistent with published studies.
CONCLUSIONS: In COPD, OE-MRI parameters showed response to both single-dose
bronchodilatory effects of a β2-agonist, formoterol, and 8-week treatment with an
inhaled corticosteroid, budesonide, and the measurements are feasible in a
small-scale multi-center trial setting.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejrad.2014.08.004 
PMID: 25176287  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Br J Clin Pharmacol. 2014 Aug;78(2):282-300. doi: 10.1111/bcp.12334.

Inhaled corticosteroids in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: a pro-con
perspective.

Babu KS(1), Kastelik JA, Morjaria JB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Queen Alexandra Hospital, Cosham,
Portsmouth, Hampshire, UK.

Current guidelines limit regular use of inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) to a
specific subgroup of patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)
in whom the forced expiratory volume in 1 s is <60% of predicted and who have
frequent exacerbations. In these patients, there is evidence that ICS reduce the 
frequency of exacerbations and improve lung function and quality of life.
However, a review of the literature suggests that the evidence available may be
interpreted to favour or contradict these observations. It becomes apparent that 
COPD is a heterogeneous condition. Clinicians therefore need to be aware of the
heterogeneity as well as having an understanding of how ICS may be used in the
context of the specific subgroups of patients with COPD. This review argues for
and against the use of ICS in COPD by providing an in-depth analysis of the
currently available evidence.

© 2014 The British Pharmacological Society.

DOI: 10.1111/bcp.12334 
PMCID: PMC4137821
PMID: 25099256  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Respir Care. 2014 Oct;59(10):1550-9. doi: 10.4187/respcare.03036. Epub 2014 Jul
29.

Inhaled corticosteroids do not influence the early inflammatory response and
clinical presentation of hospitalized subjects with COPD exacerbation.

Crisafulli E(1), Guerrero M(2), Menéndez R(3), Huerta A(2), Martinez R(3), Gimeno
A(3), Soler N(2), Torres A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Cardio-Thoracic Department, Pneumology and Respiratory Intensive Care Unit,
Carlo Poma Hospital, Mantua, Italy. (2)Pneumology Department, Clinic Institute of
Thorax, Hospital Clinic of Barcelona, Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques
August Pi i Sunyer, University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain. (3)Pneumology
Department, Hospital Universitario y Politecnico La Fe, Centro de Investigación
Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Respiratorias, Valencia, Spain. (4)Pneumology
Department, Clinic Institute of Thorax, Hospital Clinic of Barcelona, Institut
d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer, University of Barcelona,
Barcelona, Spain. atorres@clinic.ub.es.

BACKGROUND: Inhaled corticosteroids are anti-inflammatory medications that can
down-regulate the immunologic response in patients with COPD; however, their role
at onset of COPD exacerbation is still not understood. The aim of this study was 
to assess the early inflammatory response and clinical presentation of patients
with COPD exacerbation mediated by inhaled corticosteroids.
METHODS: Prospective data were collected on 123 hospitalized subjects with COPD
exacerbation over a 30-month period at 2 Spanish university hospitals. Based on
domiciliary use, comparative analyses were performed between subjects who did not
use inhaled corticosteroids (n = 58) and subjects who did (n = 65). Measurements 
of serum biomarkers were recorded on admission to the hospital (day 1) and on day
3; clinical, physiological, microbiological, and severity data and
mortality/readmission rates were also recorded.
RESULTS: At days 1 and 3, both groups showed a similar inflammatory response;
fluticasone produced lower levels of interleukin-8 compared with budesonide (P < 
.01). All clinical features considered were similar in the 2 groups; multivariate
analysis predicting clinical complications on hospitalization showed air-flow
obstruction severity as the only predictive factor (odds ratio 3.13, 95% CI
1.13-8.63, P = .02).
CONCLUSIONS: Our study demonstrates a lack of inhaled corticosteroid influence in
the early systemic inflammatory response to and clinical presentation of COPD
exacerbation.

Copyright © 2014 by Daedalus Enterprises.

DOI: 10.4187/respcare.03036 
PMID: 25074943  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2014 Jul 18;9:775-83. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S64491. 
eCollection 2014.

A US database study characterizing patients initiating a budesonide-formoterol
combination versus tiotropium bromide as initial maintenance therapy for chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease.

Kern DM(1), Williams SA(2), Tunceli O(1), Wessman C(3), Zhou S(1), Pethick N(2), 
Elhefni H(2), Trudo F(2).

Author information: 
(1)HealthCore Inc., Wilmington, DE, US. (2)AstraZeneca, Wilmington, DE, USA.
(3)AstraZeneca, Mölndal, Sweden.

OBJECTIVE: To compare clinical and demographic characteristics, resource
utilization and costs of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) patients
prior to initiating budesonide-formoterol combination (BFC) or
tiotropium-maintenance therapy.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: This cross-sectional study used claims-based diagnosis to 
identify COPD patients in the HealthCore Integrated Research Database who
initiated BFC or tiotropium therapy between March 1, 2009 and January 31, 2012
(intake period); the index date was defined as the initial prescription fill for 
either agent. Patients diagnosed with respiratory tract cancer or receiving
inhaled corticosteroids/long-acting β2-adrenergic agonists or tiotropium in 12
months prior to index date were excluded. Categorical variables were evaluated
with χ(2) tests; mean cost differences were evaluated using γ-regression.
RESULTS: Overall, 6,940 BFC and 10,831 tiotropium patients were identified. The
BFC group was younger (mean age 64 versus 67 years), with a greater proportion of
females (54% versus 51%). BFC-treated patients had more comorbid respiratory
conditions, including asthma (25% versus 13%), but fewer comorbid cardiovascular 
conditions, including atherosclerosis (7% versus 10%) and myocardial infarction
(4% versus 6%). A greater proportion of BFC patients received prior respiratory
medication, including oral corticosteroids (46% versus 35%) and short-acting
β2-agonists (44% versus 35%). Tiotropium-treated patients had a greater mean
number of COPD-related outpatient visits (4.6 versus 4.1). BFC-treated patients
had lower total all-cause ($17,259 versus $17,926) and COPD-related ($1,718
versus $1,930) health care costs, driven by lower all-cause and COPD-related
inpatient expenditures.
CONCLUSION: Initiators of BFC or tiotropium showed differences in clinical and
demographic characteristics and health care utilization and costs prior to
starting COPD maintenance therapy.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S64491 
PMCID: PMC4111649
PMID: 25071369  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Respir Investig. 2014 Jul;52(4):251-60. doi: 10.1016/j.resinv.2014.03.004. Epub
2014 May 6.

Formoterol and budesonide inhibit rhinovirus infection and cytokine production in
primary cultures of human tracheal epithelial cells.

Yamaya M(1), Nishimura H(2), Nadine L(3), Kubo H(4), Nagatomi R(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Advanced Preventive Medicine for Infectious Disease, Tohoku
University Graduate School of Medicine, 2-1 Seiryo-machi, Aoba-ku, Sendai
980-8575, Japan. Electronic address: myamaya@med.tohoku.ac.jp. (2)Virus Research 
Center, Clinical Research Division, Sendai National Hospital, Sendai, Japan.
Electronic address: hide-nishimura@mte.biglobe.ne.jp. (3)Department of Advanced
Preventive Medicine for Infectious Disease, Tohoku University Graduate School of 
Medicine, 2-1 Seiryo-machi, Aoba-ku, Sendai 980-8575, Japan. Electronic address: 
nadinececile@med.tohoku.ac.jp. (4)Department of Advanced Preventive Medicine for 
Infectious Disease, Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine, 2-1
Seiryo-machi, Aoba-ku, Sendai 980-8575, Japan. Electronic address:
hkubo@med.tohoku.ac.jp. (5)Medicine and Science in Sports and Exercise, Tohoku
University Graduate School of Medicine, Sendai, Japan. Electronic address:
nagatomi@med.tohoku.ac.jp.

BACKGROUND: Long-acting β(2) agonists (LABAs) and inhaled corticosteroids (ICSs) 
reduce the frequency of exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
and bronchial asthma. However, inhibitory effects of LABAs and ICSs on the
replication of rhinovirus (RV), the major cause of exacerbations, have not been
demonstrated.
METHODS: Primary cultures of human tracheal epithelial cells were infected with a
major group RV, type 14 rhinovirus (RV14), to examine the effects of formoterol
and budesonide on RV infection and infection-induced airway inflammation.
RESULTS: Treatment with formoterol and budesonide 72 h before and after RV14
infection reduced RV14 titers and cytokine concentrations, including interleukin 
(IL)-1β, IL-6 and IL-8, in supernatants and viral RNA within cells. Formoterol
and budesonide reduced mRNA expression and protein concentration of intercellular
adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1), the receptor for RV14. Formoterol reduced the
number and fluorescence intensity of acidic endosomes through which RV RNA enters
the cytoplasm. Formoterol and budesonide reduced the activation of the nuclear
factor kappa-B protein p65 in nuclear extracts. The effects of formoterol plus
budesonide were additive with respect to RV14 replication, cytokine production,
ICAM-1 expression, acidic endosome fluorescence intensity, and p65 activation.
The selective β(2)-adrenergic receptor antagonist, ICI 118551
[erythro-dl-1-(7-methylindan-4-yloxy)-3-isopropylaminobutan-2-ol], reversed the
inhibitory effects of formoterol on RV14 titers and RNA levels, the
susceptibility of cells to RV14 infection, cytokine production, acidic endosomes,
ICAM-1 expression, and p65 activation.
CONCLUSIONS: Formoterol and budesonide may inhibit RV infection by reducing the
ICAM-1 levels and/or acidic endosomes and modulate airway inflammation associated
with RV infections.

Copyright © 2014 The Japanese Respiratory Society. Published by Elsevier B.V. All
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.resinv.2014.03.004 
PMID: 24998372  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. J Aerosol Med Pulm Drug Deliv. 2014 Oct;27(5):329-40. doi:
10.1089/jamp.2013.1099. Epub 2014 Jun 30.

Evaluation of in vitro and in vivo flow rate dependency of budesonide/formoterol 
Easyhaler(®).

Malmberg LP(1), Everard ML, Haikarainen J, Lähelmä S.

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Allergy, Helsinki University Central Hospital , Helsinki,
Finland .

BACKGROUND: The Easyhaler(®) (EH) device-metered dry powder inhaler containing
budesonide and formoterol is being developed for asthma and chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD). As a part of product optimization, a series of in vitro
and in vivo studies on flow rate dependency were carried out.
METHODS: Inspiratory flow parameters via EH and Symbicort(®) Turbuhaler(®) (TH)
inhalers were evaluated in 187 patients with asthma and COPD. The 10(th), 50(th),
and 90(th) percentile flow rates achieved by patients were utilized to study in
vitro flow rate dependency of budesonide/formoterol EH and Symbicort TH. In
addition, an exploratory pharmacokinetic study on pulmonary deposition of active 
substances for budesonide/formoterol EH in healthy volunteers was performed.
RESULTS: Mean inspiratory flow rates through EH were 64 and 56 L/min in
asthmatics and COPD patients, and through TH 79 and 72 L/min, respectively.
Children with asthma had marginally lower PIF values than the adults. The
inspiratory volumes were similar in all groups between the inhalers. Using
weighted 10(th), 50(th), and 90(th) percentile flows the in vitro delivered doses
(DDs) and fine particle doses (FPDs) for EH were rather independent of flow as
98% of the median flow DDs and 89%-93% of FPDs were delivered already at 10(th)
percentile air flow. Using±15% limits, EH and TH had similar flow rate dependency
profiles between 10(th) and 90(th) percentile flows. The pharmacokinetic study
with budesonide/formoterol EH in healthy subjects (n=16) revealed a trend for a
flow-dependent increase in lung deposition for both budesonide and formoterol.
CONCLUSIONS: Comparable in vitro flow rate dependency between
budesonide/formoterol EH and Symbicort TH was found using the range of clinically
relevant flow rates. The results of the pharmacokinetic study were in accordance 
with the in vitro results showing only a trend of flow rate-dependant increase in
lung deposition of active substances with EH.

DOI: 10.1089/jamp.2013.1099 
PMCID: PMC4175975
PMID: 24978441  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2014 Jun 5;9:569-76. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S65693.
eCollection 2014.

Outcomes and costs of treating chronic obstructive pulmonary disease with inhaled
fixed combinations: the Italian perspective of the PATHOS study.

Roggeri A(1), Micheletto C(2), Roggeri DP(1).

Author information: 
(1)ProCure Solutions, Bergamo, Italy. (2)Respiratory Unit, Mater Salutis
Hospital, Legnago, Verona, Italy.

PURPOSE: Fixed-dose combinations of inhaled corticosteroids and long-acting
β2-agonists have proven to prevent and reduce chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD) exacerbations. The aim of this analysis was to explore the
clinical consequences and direct health care costs of applying the findings of
the PATHOS (An Investigation of the Past 10 Years Health Care for Primary Care
Patients with Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease) study to the Italian
context.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Effectiveness data from the PATHOS study, a
population-based, retrospective, observational registry study conducted in
Sweden, in terms of reduction in COPD and pneumonia-related hospitalizations,
were considered, in order to estimate the differences in resource consumption
between patients treated with budesonide/formoterol and fluticasone/salmeterol.
The base case considers the average dosages of the two drugs reported in the
PATHOS study and the actual public price in charges to the Italian National
Health Service, while the difference in hospitalization rates reported in the
PATHOS study was costed based on Italian real-world data.
RESULTS: The PATHOS study demonstrated a significant reduction in COPD
hospitalizations and pneumonia-related hospitalizations in patients treated with 
budesonide/formoterol versus fluticasone/salmeterol (-29.1% and -42%,
respectively). In the base case, the treatment of a patient for 1 year with
budesonide/formoterol led to a saving of €499.90 (€195.10 for drugs, €193.10 for 
COPD hospitalizations, and €111.70 for pneumonia hospitalizations) corresponding 
to a -27.6% difference compared with fluticasone/salmeterol treatment.
CONCLUSION: Treatment of COPD with budesonide/formoterol compared with
fluticasone/salmeterol could lead to a reduction in direct health care costs,
with relevant improvement in clinical outcomes.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S65693 
PMCID: PMC4051514
PMID: 24940053  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Drugs. 2014 May;74(7):737-55. doi: 10.1007/s40265-014-0214-8.

Management of asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease with combination
inhaled corticosteroids and long-acting β-agonists: a review of comparative
effectiveness research.

Mapel DW(1), Roberts MH.

Author information: 
(1)Lovelace Clinic Foundation, 2309 Renard Place SE, Albuquerque, NM, 87106, USA,
dmapel@comcast.net.

The value of combination therapy with inhaled corticosteroids and long-acting
β-agonists (ICS/LABA) is well recognized in the management of asthma and chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Despite differences in the pharmacological 
properties between two well-established ICS/LABA products (budesonide/formoterol 
and fluticasone/salmeterol), data from randomized clinical trials (RCTs) and
meta-analyses suggest that these two products perform similarly under RCT
conditions. In contrast, a few recently reported real-world comparative
effectiveness studies have suggested that there are substantial differences
between ICS/LABA combination treatments in terms of clinical and healthcare
outcomes in patients with asthma or COPD. The purpose of this article is to
provide a brief review of the benefits, as well as the limitations, of
comparative effectiveness research (CER) in the therapeutic area of asthma and
COPD. We conducted a structured literature review of the current CER studies on
ICS/LABA combinations in asthma and COPD. These articles were then used to
illustrate the unique challenges of CER studies, providing a summary of study
results and limitations. We focus particularly on difficult biases and
confounding factors that may be introduced before, during, and after the
initiation of therapy. Beyond being a review of these two ICS/LABA combination
treatments, this article is intended to help those who wish to assess the quality
of CER published projects in asthma and COPD, or guide investigators who wish to 
design new CER studies for chronic respiratory disease treatments.

DOI: 10.1007/s40265-014-0214-8 
PMCID: PMC4030099
PMID: 24797158  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2014 Mar 26;(3):CD010844. doi:
10.1002/14651858.CD010844.pub2.

Long-acting inhaled therapy (beta-agonists, anticholinergics and steroids) for
COPD: a network meta-analysis.

Kew KM(1), Dias S, Cates CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Population Health Research Institute, St George's, University of London,
Cranmer Terrace, London, UK, SW17 0RE.

BACKGROUND: Pharmacological therapy for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD) is aimed at relieving symptoms, improving quality of life and preventing
or treating exacerbations.Treatment tends to begin with one inhaler, and
additional therapies are introduced as necessary. For persistent or worsening
symptoms, long-acting inhaled therapies taken once or twice daily are preferred
over short-acting inhalers. Several Cochrane reviews have looked at the risks and
benefits of specific long-acting inhaled therapies compared with placebo or other
treatments. However for patients and clinicians, it is important to understand
the merits of these treatments relative to each other, and whether a particular
class of inhaled therapies is more beneficial than the others.
OBJECTIVES: To assess the efficacy of treatment options for patients whose
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease cannot be controlled by short-acting
therapies alone. The review will not look at combination therapies usually
considered later in the course of the disease.As part of this network
meta-analysis, we will address the following issues.1. How does long-term
efficacy compare between different pharmacological treatments for COPD?2. Are
there limitations in the current evidence base that may compromise the
conclusions drawn by this network meta-analysis? If so, what are the implications
for future research?
SEARCH METHODS: We identified randomised controlled trials (RCTs) in existing
Cochrane reviews by searching the Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews (CDSR).
In addition, we ran a comprehensive citation search on the Cochrane Airways Group
Register of trials (CAGR) and checked manufacturer websites and reference lists
of other reviews. The most recent searches were conducted in September 2013.
SELECTION CRITERIA: We included parallel-group RCTs of at least 6 months'
duration recruiting people with COPD. Studies were included if they compared any 
of the following treatments versus any other: long-acting beta2-agonists (LABAs; 
formoterol, indacaterol, salmeterol); long-acting muscarinic antagonists (LAMAs; 
aclidinium, glycopyrronium, tiotropium); inhaled corticosteroids (ICSs;
budesonide, fluticasone, mometasone); combination long-acting beta2-agonist
(LABA) and inhaled corticosteroid (LABA/ICS) (formoterol/budesonide,
formoterol/mometasone, salmeterol/fluticasone); and placebo.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: We conducted a network meta-analysis using Markov
chain Monte Carlo methods for two efficacy outcomes: St George's Respiratory
Questionnaire (SGRQ) total score and trough forced expiratory volume in one
second (FEV1). We modelled the relative effectiveness of any two treatments as a 
function of each treatment relative to the reference treatment (placebo). We
assumed that treatment effects were similar within treatment classes (LAMA, LABA,
ICS, LABA/ICS). We present estimates of class effects, variability between
treatments within each class and individual treatment effects compared with every
other.To justify the analyses, we assessed the trials for clinical and
methodological transitivity across comparisons. We tested the robustness of our
analyses by performing sensitivity analyses for lack of blinding and by
considering six- and 12-month data separately.
MAIN RESULTS: We identified 71 RCTs randomly assigning 73,062 people with COPD to
184 treatment arms of interest. Trials were similar with regards to methodology, 
inclusion and exclusion criteria and key baseline characteristics. Participants
were more often male, aged in their mid sixties, with FEV1 predicted normal
between 40% and 50% and with substantial smoking histories (40+ pack-years). The 
risk of bias was generally low, although missing information made it hard to
judge risk of selection bias and selective outcome reporting. Fixed effects were 
used for SGRQ analyses, and random effects for Trough FEV1 analyses, based on
model fit statistics and deviance information criteria (DIC). SGRQ SGRQ data were
available in 42 studies (n = 54,613). At six months, 39 pairwise comparisons were
made between 18 treatments in 25 studies (n = 27,024). Combination LABA/ICS was
the highest ranked intervention, with a mean improvement over placebo of -3.89
units at six months (95% credible interval (CrI) -4.70 to -2.97) and -3.60 at 12 
months (95% CrI -4.63 to -2.34). LAMAs and LABAs were ranked second and third at 
six months, with mean differences of -2.63 (95% CrI -3.53 to -1.97) and -2.29
(95% CrI -3.18 to -1.53), respectively. Inhaled corticosteroids were ranked
fourth (MD -2.00, 95% CrI -3.06 to -0.87). Class differences between LABA, LAMA
and ICS were less prominent at 12 months. Indacaterol and aclidinium were ranked 
somewhat higher than other members of their classes, and formoterol 12 mcg,
budesonide 400 mcg and formoterol/mometasone combination were ranked lower within
their classes. There was considerable overlap in credible intervals and rankings 
for both classes and individual treatments. Trough FEV1 Trough FEV1 data were
available in 46 studies (n = 47,409). At six months, 41 pairwise comparisons were
made between 20 treatments in 31 studies (n = 29,271). As for SGRQ, combination
LABA/ICS was the highest ranked class, with a mean improvement over placebo of
133.3 mL at six months (95% CrI 100.6 to 164.0) and slightly less at 12 months
(mean difference (MD) 100, 95% CrI 55.5 to 140.1). LAMAs (MD 103.5, 95% CrI 81.8 
to 124.9) and LABAs (MD 99.4, 95% CrI 72.0 to 127.8) showed roughly equivalent
results at six months, and ICSs were the fourth ranked class (MD 65.4, 95% CrI
33.1 to 96.9). As with SGRQ, initial differences between classes were not so
prominent at 12 months. Indacaterol and salmeterol/fluticasone were ranked
slightly better than others in their class, and formoterol 12, aclidinium,
budesonide and formoterol/budesonide combination were ranked lower within their
classes. All credible intervals for individual rankings were wide.
AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: This network meta-analysis compares four different classes 
of long-acting inhalers for people with COPD who need more than short-acting
bronchodilators. Quality of life and lung function were improved most on
combination inhalers (LABA and ICS) and least on ICS alone at 6 and at 12 months.
Overall LAMA and LABA inhalers had similar effects, particularly at 12 months.
The network has demonstrated the benefit of ICS when added to LABA for these
outcomes in participants who largely had an FEV1 that was less than 50%
predicted, but the additional expense of combination inhalers and any potential
for increased adverse events (which has been established by other reviews)
require consideration. Our findings are in keeping with current National
Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) guidelines.

DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD010844.pub2 
PMID: 24671923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Drugs. 2014 Apr;74(5):539-47. doi: 10.1007/s40265-014-0202-z.

Meta-review: adverse effects of inhaled corticosteroids relevant to older
patients.

Mattishent K(1), Thavarajah M, Blanco P, Gilbert D, Wilson AM, Loke YK.

Author information: 
(1)Norwich Medical School, University of East Anglia, Norwich, NR4 7TJ, UK.

BACKGROUND: In recent years, clinical trials and observational studies have
raised concerns about the potential adverse effects of inhaled corticosteroids
(ICS) such as pneumonia, cataract, fractures and hyperglycaemia, which are of
particular concern for older patients.
METHODS: We conducted a meta-review by searching electronic databases (MEDLINE,
EMBASE, PubMed) for systematic reviews and meta-analyses of ICS use and the
adverse effects of interest. We also evaluated new primary studies that reported 
information beyond that available from previously published meta-analyses. Two
reviewers independently extracted data on measures of associated harm with ICS
use.
RESULTS: We identified five relevant meta-analyses for inclusion in this
meta-review, and also three new studies of ICS and pneumonia. We found consistent
evidence of a dose-response relationship between ICS use and serious adverse
effects such as fractures and pneumonia. The estimated number needed to treat for
harm due to fracture with ICS was 83 with 3-years use, and 60 per year for
pneumonia. Both asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) users of 
ICS were at risk of pneumonia, with fluticasone appearing to confer higher risk
than budesonide. There is also some suggestion that ICS use is associated with
cataracts in a dose-response manner but the evidence is less robust here.
Equally, the influence of ICS on diabetes mellitus remains uncertain.
CONCLUSIONS: In view of the dose-response relationship seen between ICS use and
important adverse effects such as fractures and pneumonia, clinicians needs to
carefully balance the benefits of ICS versus the harms in older patients
receiving long-term high-dose ICS.

DOI: 10.1007/s40265-014-0202-z 
PMID: 24659375  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. PLoS One. 2014 Mar 12;9(3):e91788. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0091788. eCollection
2014.

Lower corticosteroid skin blanching response is associated with severe COPD.

Hoonhorst SJ(1), ten Hacken NH(1), Lo Tam Loi AT(2), Koenderman L(2), Lammers
JW(2), Telenga ED(1), Boezen HM(3), van den Berge M(1), Postma DS(1).

Author information: 
(1)University of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, Department of
Pulmonary Diseases, Groningen, the Netherlands; University of Groningen,
University Medical Center Groningen, GRIAC Research Institute, Groningen, the
Netherlands. (2)University Medical Center Utrecht, Department of Respiratory
Medicine, Utrecht, the Netherlands. (3)University of Groningen, University
Medical Center Groningen, GRIAC Research Institute, Groningen, the Netherlands;
University of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, Department of
Epidemiology, Groningen, the Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is characterized by
chronic airflow limitation caused by ongoing inflammatory and remodeling
processes of the airways and lung tissue. Inflammation can be targeted by
corticosteroids. However, airway inflammation is generally less responsive to
steroids in COPD than in asthma. The underlying mechanisms are yet unclear. This 
study aimed to assess whether skin corticosteroid insensitivity is associated
with COPD and COPD severity using the corticosteroid skin blanching test.
METHODS: COPD patients GOLD stage I-IV (n = 27, 24, 22, and 16 respectively) and 
healthy never-smokers and smokers (n = 28 and 56 respectively) were included.
Corticosteroid sensitivity was assessed by the corticosteroid skin blanching
test. Budesonide was applied in 8 logarithmically increasing concentrations
(0-100 μg/ml) on subject's forearm. Assessment of blanching was performed after 7
hours using a 7-point scale (normal skin to intense blanching). All subjects
performed spirometry and body plethysmography.
RESULTS: Both GOLD III and GOLD IV COPD patients showed significantly lower skin 
blanching responses than healthy never-smokers and smokers, GOLD I, and GOLD II
patients. Their area under the dose-response curve values of the skin blanching
response were 586 and 243 vs. 1560, 1154, 1380, and 1309 respectively, p<0.05.
Lower FEV1 levels and higher RV/TLC ratios were significantly associated with
lower skin blanching responses (p = 0.001 and p = 0.004 respectively). GOLD stage
I, II, III and IV patients had similar age and packyears.
CONCLUSIONS: In this study, severe and very severe COPD patients had lower skin
corticosteroid sensitivity than mild and moderate COPD patients and non-COPD
controls with comparable age and packyears. Our findings together suggest that
the reduced skin blanching response fits with a subgroup of COPD patients that
has an early-onset COPD phenotype.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0091788 
PMCID: PMC3951419
PMID: 24622644  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2014 Mar 10;(3):CD010115. doi:
10.1002/14651858.CD010115.pub2.

Inhaled steroids and risk of pneumonia for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Kew KM(1), Seniukovich A.

Author information: 
(1)Population Health Research Institute, St George's, University of London,
Cranmer Terrace, London, UK, SW17 0RE.

Comment in
    Ann Intern Med. 2014 Aug 19;161(4):JC8.

BACKGROUND: Inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) are anti-inflammatory drugs that have
proven benefits for people with worsening symptoms of chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD) and repeated exacerbations. They are commonly used as
combination inhalers with long-acting beta2-agonists (LABA) to reduce
exacerbation rates and all-cause mortality, and to improve lung function and
quality of life. The most common combinations of ICS and LABA used in combination
inhalers are fluticasone and salmeterol, budesonide and formoterol and a new
formulation of fluticasone in combination with vilanterol, which is now
available. ICS have been associated with increased risk of pneumonia, but the
magnitude of risk and how this compares with different ICS remain unclear. Recent
reviews conducted to address their safety have not compared the relative safety
of these two drugs when used alone or in combination with LABA.
OBJECTIVES: To assess the risk of pneumonia associated with the use of
fluticasone and budesonide for COPD.
SEARCH METHODS: We identified trials from the Cochrane Airways Group Specialised 
Register of trials (CAGR), clinicaltrials.gov, reference lists of existing
systematic reviews and manufacturer websites. The most recent searches were
conducted in September 2013.
SELECTION CRITERIA: We included parallel-group randomised controlled trials
(RCTs) of at least 12 weeks' duration. Studies were included if they compared the
ICS budesonide or fluticasone versus placebo, or either ICS in combination with a
LABA versus the same LABA as monotherapy for people with COPD.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Two review authors independently extracted study
characteristics, numerical data and risk of bias information for each included
study.We looked at direct comparisons of ICS versus placebo separately from
comparisons of ICS/LABA versus LABA for all outcomes, and we combined these with 
subgroups when no important heterogeneity was noted. After assessing for
transitivity, we conducted an indirect comparison to compare budesonide versus
fluticasone monotherapy, but we could not do the same for the combination
therapies because of systematic differences between the budesonide and
fluticasone combination data sets.When appropriate, we explored the effects of
ICS dose, duration of ICS therapy and baseline severity on the primary outcome.
Findings of all outcomes are presented in 'Summary of findings' tables using
GRADEPro.
MAIN RESULTS: We found 43 studies that met the inclusion criteria, and more
evidence was provided for fluticasone (26 studies; n = 21,247) than for
budesonide (17 studies; n = 10,150). Evidence from the budesonide studies was
more inconsistent and less precise, and the studies were shorter. The populations
within studies were more often male with a mean age of around 63, mean pack-years
smoked over 40 and mean predicted forced expiratory volume of one second (FEV1)
less than 50%.High or uneven dropout was considered a high risk of bias in almost
40% of the trials, but conclusions for the primary outcome did not change when
the trials at high risk of bias were removed in a sensitivity
analysis.Fluticasone increased non-fatal serious adverse pneumonia events
(requiring hospital admission) (odds ratio (OR) 1.78, 95% confidence interval
(CI) 1.50 to 2.12; 18 more per 1000 treated over 18 months; high quality), and no
evidence suggested that this outcome was reduced by delivering it in combination 
with salmeterol or vilanterol (subgroup differences: I(2) = 0%, P value 0.51), or
that different doses, trial duration or baseline severity significantly affected 
the estimate. Budesonide also increased non-fatal serious adverse pneumonia
events compared with placebo, but the effect was less precise and was based on
shorter trials (OR 1.62, 95% CI 1.00 to 2.62; six more per 1000 treated over nine
months; moderate quality). Some of the variation in the budesonide data could be 
explained by a significant difference between the two commonly used doses: 640
mcg was associated with a larger effect than 320 mcg relative to placebo
(subgroup differences: I(2) = 74%, P value 0.05).An indirect comparison of
budesonide versus fluticasone monotherapy revealed no significant differences
with respect to serious adverse events (pneumonia-related or all-cause) or
mortality. The risk of any pneumonia event (i.e. less serious cases treated in
the community) was higher with fluticasone than with budesonide (OR 1.86, 95% CI 
1.04 to 3.34); this was the only significant difference reported between the two 
drugs. However, this finding should be interpreted with caution because of
possible differences in the assignment of pneumonia diagnosis, and because no
trials directly compared the two drugs.No significant difference in overall
mortality rates was observed between either of the inhaled steroids and the
control interventions (both high-quality evidence), and pneumonia-related deaths 
were too rare to permit conclusions to be drawn.
AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: Budesonide and fluticasone, delivered alone or in
combination with a LABA, are associated with increased risk of serious adverse
pneumonia events, but neither significantly affected mortality compared with
controls. The safety concerns highlighted in this review should be balanced with 
recent cohort data and established randomised evidence of efficacy regarding
exacerbations and quality of life. Comparison of the two drugs revealed no
statistically significant difference in serious pneumonias, mortality or serious 
adverse events. Fluticasone was associated with higher risk of any pneumonia when
compared with budesonide (i.e. less serious cases dealt with in the community),
but variation in the definitions used by the respective manufacturers is a
potential confounding factor in their comparison.Primary research should
accurately measure pneumonia outcomes and should clarify both the definition and 
the method of diagnosis used, especially for new formulations such as fluticasone
furoate, for which little evidence of the associated pneumonia risk is currently 
available. Similarly, systematic reviews and cohorts should address the
reliability of assigning 'pneumonia' as an adverse event or cause of death and
should determine how this affects the applicability of findings.

DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD010115.pub2 
PMID: 24615270  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. PLoS One. 2013 Dec 26;8(12):e83881. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0083881.
eCollection 2013.

Budesonide/formoterol enhances the expression of pro Surfactant Protein-B in
lungs of COPD patients.

Um SJ(1), Lam S(2), Coxson H(3), Man SF(4), Sin DD(5).

Author information: 
(1)UBC James Hogg Research Centre for Cardiovascular and Pulmonary Research, St. 
Paul's Hospital/Providence Health Care, University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, BC, Canada ; Department of Medicine (Division of Respiratory
Medicine), Dong-A University, Busan, Korea. (2)Department of Medicine (Division
of Respiratory Medicine), University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada ;
BC Cancer Agency, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada. (3)UBC
James Hogg Research Centre for Cardiovascular and Pulmonary Research, St. Paul's 
Hospital/Providence Health Care, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC,
Canada ; Department of Radiology, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, 
Canada. (4)UBC James Hogg Research Centre for Cardiovascular and Pulmonary
Research, St. Paul's Hospital/Providence Health Care, University of British
Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada. (5)UBC James Hogg Research Centre for
Cardiovascular and Pulmonary Research, St. Paul's Hospital/Providence Health
Care, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada ; Department of
Medicine (Division of Respiratory Medicine), University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, BC, Canada.

RATIONALE & AIM: Pulmonary surfactants are essential components of lung
homeostasis. In chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), surfactant
expression decreases in lungs whereas, there is a paradoxical increase in protein
expression in plasma. The latter has been associated with poor health outcomes in
COPD. The purpose of this study was to determine the relationship of surfactants 
and other pneumoproteins in bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) fluid and plasma to
airflow limitation and the effects of budesonide/formoterol on this relationship.
METHODS: We recruited (clinical trials.gov identifier: NCT00569712) 7 smokers
without COPD and 30 ex and current smokers with COPD who were free of
exacerbations for at least 4 weeks. All subjects were treated with
budesonide/formoterol 400/12 µg twice a day for 4 weeks. BAL fluid and plasma
samples were obtained at baseline and the end of the 4 weeks. We measured
lung-predominant pneumoproteins: pro-Surfactant Protein-B (pro-SFTPB), Surfactant
Protein-D (SP-D), Club Cell Secretory Protein-16 (CCSP-16) and Pulmonary and
Activation-Regulated Chemokine (PARC/CCL-18) in BAL fluid and plasma.
RESULTS: BAL Pro-SFTPB concentrations had the strongest relationship with airflow
limitation as measured by FEV1/FVC (Spearman rho=0.509; p=0.001) and FEV1% of
predicted (Spearman rho= 0.362; p=0.028). Plasma CCSP-16 concentrations were also
significantly related to airflow limitation (Spearman rho=0.362; p=0.028 for
FEV1% of predicted). The other biomarkers in BAL fluid or plasma were not
significantly associated with airflow limitation. In COPD subjects,
budesonide/formoterol significantly increased the BAL concentrations of pro-SFTPB
by a median of 62.46 ng/ml (p=0.022) or 48.7% from baseline median value.
CONCLUSION: Increased severity of COPD is associated with reduced Pro-SFTPB
levels in BAL fluid. Short-term treatment with budesonide/formoterol increases
these levels in BAL fluid. Long term studies will be needed to determine the
clinical relevance of this observation.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0083881 
PMCID: PMC3873417
PMID: 24386300  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Chin Med J (Engl). 2014;127(1):29-35.

Heliox as a driving gas to atomize inhaled drugs on acute exacerbation of chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease: a prospective clinical study.

Xiao Y(1), Su L(2), Han B(3), Zhang X(4), Xie L(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Chinese People's Liberation Army General
Hospital, Beijing 100853, China; Department of Respiratory Medicine, Lanzhou
General Hospital of Lanzhou Military Area Command of Chinese People's Liberation 
Army, Lanzhou, Gansu 730050, China. (2)Medical College of Nankai University,
Tianjin 300071, China. (3)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Bethune
International Peace Hospital, Shijiazhuang, Hebei 050082, China. (4)Department of
Respiratory Medicine, Chinese People's Liberation Army General Hospital, Beijing 
100853, China. (5)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Chinese People's Liberation
Army General Hospital, Beijing 100853, China. Email: xielx@263.net.

BACKGROUND: Acute exacerbation of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (AECOPD) 
is a common condition, which affects not only the quality of life of patients but
also their prognosis. The purpose of this study was to explore the effects of an 
inhaled salbutamol sulfate solution and an inhalation suspension of the
glucocorticoid budesonide that were atomized with heliox to treat patients with
AECOPD.
METHODS: Twenty-three patients with AECOPD were divided into a treatment group
(He/O2 = 70%/30%) and a control group (N2/O2 = 70%/30%). The salbutamol sulfate
and budesonide were administered by inhalation twice a day for 7 days. Vital
signs, arterial blood gas levels, pulmonary function and the levels of serum
myostatin (sMSTN) were measured and lung vibration imaging was performed.
RESULTS: We found that the PaO2 and PaCO2 values were not significantly different
between the two groups at the various time points (P > 0.05). There were also no 
significant differences in any of the parameters of pulmonary function between
the two groups. However, after baseline correction, the increase rate of the
forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV1), the forced vital capacity (FVC),
and the maximum minute ventilation (MVV) appeared to be significantly increased
at some time points compared with the baseline (before treatment) in both groups 
(P < 0.05). Although the values of quantitative lung distribution (QLD) for
different regions and the levels of sMSTN were slightly different between the two
groups, the repeated measures analysis of variance (ANOVA) revealed that there
were no significant differences between the two groups or within any group (P >
0.05).
CONCLUSION: Although the use of heliox as a driving gas can improve symptoms and 
benefit patients with AECOPD, the heliox treatment group did not have significant
differences in arterial blood gases, lung function, lung vibration response
imaging or the levels of sMSTN compared with the control group. (Chinese Clinical
Trial Register Center ChiCTRTRC-00000273).


PMID: 24384420  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. J Biol Chem. 2014 Feb 7;289(6):3262-75. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.541052. Epub 2013
Dec 17.

Glucocorticoids recruit Tgfbr3 and Smad1 to shift transforming growth factor-β
signaling from the Tgfbr1/Smad2/3 axis to the Acvrl1/Smad1 axis in lung
fibroblasts.

Schwartze JT(1), Becker S, Sakkas E, Wujak ŁA, Niess G, Usemann J, Reichenberger 
F, Herold S, Vadász I, Mayer K, Seeger W, Morty RE.

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Lung Development and Remodelling, Max Planck Institute 
for Heart and Lung Research, D-61231 Bad Nauheim, Germany.

Glucocorticoids represent the mainstay therapy for many lung diseases, providing 
outstanding management of asthma but performing surprisingly poorly in patients
with acute respiratory distress syndrome, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, 
lung fibrosis, and blunted lung development associated with bronchopulmonary
dysplasia in preterm infants. TGF-β is a pathogenic mediator of all four of these
diseases, prompting us to explore glucocorticoid/TGF-β signaling cross-talk.
Glucocorticoids, including dexamethasone, methylprednisolone, budesonide, and
fluticasone, potentiated TGF-β signaling by the Acvrl1/Smad1/5/8 signaling axis
and blunted signaling by the Tgfbr1/Smad2/3 axis in NIH/3T3 cells, as well as
primary lung fibroblasts, smooth muscle cells, and endothelial cells.
Dexamethasone drove expression of the accessory type III TGF-β receptor Tgfbr3,
also called betaglycan. Tgfbr3 was demonstrated to be a "switch" that blunted
Tgfbr1/Smad2/3 and potentiated Acvrl1/Smad1 signaling in lung fibroblasts. The
Acvrl1/Smad1 axis, which was stimulated by dexamethasone, was active in lung
fibroblasts and antagonized Tgfbr1/Smad2/3 signaling. Dexamethasone acted
synergistically with TGF-β to drive differentiation of primary lung fibroblasts
to myofibroblasts, revealed by acquisition of smooth muscle actin and smooth
muscle myosin, which are exclusively Smad1-dependent processes in fibroblasts.
Administration of dexamethasone to live mice recapitulated these observations and
revealed a lung-specific impact of dexamethasone on lung Tgfbr3 expression and
phospho-Smad1 levels in vivo. These data point to an interesting and hitherto
unknown impact of glucocorticoids on TGF-β signaling in lung fibroblasts and
other constituent cell types of the lung that may be relevant to lung physiology,
as well as lung pathophysiology, in terms of drug/disease interactions.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M113.541052 
PMCID: PMC3916529
PMID: 24347165  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2013;8:569-79. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S49307. Epub
2013 Nov 22.

Effect of high-dose N-acetylcysteine on airway geometry, inflammation, and
oxidative stress in COPD patients.

De Backer J(1), Vos W, Van Holsbeke C, Vinchurkar S, Claes R, Parizel PM, De
Backer W.

Author information: 
(1)FluidDA nv, Kontich, Belgium.

BACKGROUND: Previous studies have demonstrated the potential beneficial effect of
N-acetylcysteine (NAC) in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). However, 
the required dose and responder phenotype remain unclear. The current study
investigated the effect of high-dose NAC on airway geometry, inflammation, and
oxidative stress in COPD patients. Novel functional respiratory imaging methods
combining multislice computed tomography images and computer-based flow
simulations were used with high sensitivity for detecting changes induced by the 
therapy.
METHODS: Twelve patients with Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung
Disease stage II COPD were randomized to receive NAC 1800 mg or placebo daily for
3 months and were then crossed over to the alternative treatment for a further 3 
months.
RESULTS: Significant correlations were found between image-based resistance
values and glutathione levels after treatment with NAC (P = 0.011) and
glutathione peroxidase at baseline (P = 0.036). Image-based resistance values
appeared to be a good predictor for glutathione peroxidase levels after NAC (P = 
0.02), changes in glutathione peroxidase levels (P = 0.035), and reduction in
lobar functional residual capacity levels (P = 0.00084). In the limited set of
responders to NAC therapy, the changes in airway resistance were in the same
order as changes induced by budesonide/formoterol.
CONCLUSION: A combination of glutathione, glutathione peroxidase, and imaging
parameters could potentially be used to phenotype COPD patients who would benefit
from addition of NAC to their current therapy. The findings of this small pilot
study need to be confirmed in a larger pivotal trial.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S49307 
PMCID: PMC3842218
PMID: 24293993  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2013 Nov 10;(11):CD003794. doi:
10.1002/14651858.CD003794.pub4.

Combined corticosteroid and long-acting beta₂-agonist in one inhaler versus
placebo for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Nannini LJ(1), Poole P, Milan SJ, Holmes R, Normansell R.

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary Section, Hospital E Peron, Ruta 11 Y Jm Estrada, G. Baigorria, Santa
Fe - Rosario, Argentina, 2152.

Update of
    Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2007;(4):CD003794.

BACKGROUND: Both long-acting beta2-agonists (LABA) and inhaled corticosteroids
(ICS) have been recommended in guidelines for the treatment of chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Their coadministration in a combination
inhaler may facilitate adherence to medication regimens and improve efficacy.
OBJECTIVES: To determine the efficacy and safety of combined ICS and LABA for
stable COPD in comparison with placebo.
SEARCH METHODS: We searched the Cochrane Airways Group Specialised Register of
trials, reference lists of included studies and manufacturers' trial registries. 
The date of the most recent search was June 2013.
SELECTION CRITERIA: We included randomised and double-blind studies of at least
four weeks' duration. Eligible studies compared combined ICS and LABA
preparations with placebo.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Two review authors independently assessed study
risk of bias and extracted data. Dichotomous data were analysed as fixed-effect
odds ratios (OR) or rate ratios (RR) with 95% confidence intervals (95% CI), and 
continuous data as mean differences with 95% confidence intervals.
MAIN RESULTS: Nineteen studies met the inclusion criteria (with 10,400
participants randomly assigned, lasting between 4 and 156 weeks, mean 42 weeks). 
Studies used three different combined preparations (fluticasone/salmeterol,
budesonide/formoterol or mometasone/formoterol). The studies were generally at
low risk of bias for blinding but at unclear or high risk for attrition bias
because of participant dropouts. Compared with placebo, both
fluticasone/salmeterol and budesonide/formoterol reduced the rate of
exacerbations. Mometasone/formoterol reduced the number of participants
experiencing one or more exacerbation. Pooled analysis of the combined therapies 
indicated that exacerbations were less frequent when compared with placebo (Rate 
Ratio 0.73; 95% CI 0.69 to 0.78, 7 studies, 7495 participants); the quality of
this evidence when GRADE criteria were applied was rated as moderate.
Participants included in these trials had on average one or two exacerbations per
year, which means that treatment with combined therapy would lead to a reduction 
of one exacerbation every two to four years in these individuals. An overall
reduction in mortality was seen, but this outcome was dominated by the results of
one study (TORCH) of fluticasone/salmeterol. Generally, deaths in the smaller,
shorter studies were too few to contribute to the overall estimate. Further
longer studies on budesonide/formoterol and mometasone/formoterol are required to
clarify whether this is seen more widely. When a baseline risk of death of 15.2% 
from the placebo arm of TORCH was used, the three-year number needed to treat for
an additional beneficial outcome (NNTB) with fluticasone/salmeterol to prevent
one extra death was 42 (95% CI 24 to 775). All three combined treatments led to
statistically significant improvement in health status measurements, although the
mean differences observed are relatively small in relation to the minimum
clinically important difference. Furthermore, symptoms and lung function
assessments favoured combined treatments. An increase in the risk of pneumonia
was noted with combined inhalers compared with placebo treatment (OR 1.62, 95% CI
1.36 to 1.94), and the quality of this evidence was rated as moderate, but no
dose effect was seen. The three-year NNTH for one extra case of pneumonia was 17,
based on a 12.3% risk of pneumonia in the placebo arm of TORCH. Fewer
participants withdrew from the combined treatment arms for adverse events or lack
of efficacy.
AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: Combined inhaler therapy led to around a quarter fewer COPD
exacerbations than were seen with placebo. A significant reduction in all-cause
mortality was noted, but this outcome was dominated by one trial (TORCH),
emphasising the need for further trials of longer duration. Increased risk of
pneumonia is a concern; however, this did not translate into increased
exacerbations, hospitalisations or deaths. Current evidence does not suggest any 
major differences between inhalers in terms of effects, but nor is the evidence
strong enough to demonstrate that all are equivalent. To permit firmer
conclusions about the effects of combined therapy, more data are needed,
particularly in relation to the profile of adverse events and benefits in
relation to different formulations and doses of inhaled ICS. Head-to-head
comparisons are necessary to determine whether one combined inhaler is better
than the others.

DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD003794.pub4 
PMID: 24214176  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2014 Jan;133(1):207-16.e1-11. doi:
10.1016/j.jaci.2013.08.044. Epub 2013 Oct 28.

Identification of a distinct glucocorticosteroid-insensitive pulmonary macrophage
phenotype in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Chana KK(1), Fenwick PS(1), Nicholson AG(2), Barnes PJ(1), Donnelly LE(3).

Author information: 
(1)Airway Disease, National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College London,
London, United Kingdom. (2)Airway Disease, National Heart and Lung Institute,
Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom; Department of Histopathology,
Royal Brompton and Harefield NHS Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom.
(3)Airway Disease, National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College London,
London, United Kingdom. Electronic address: l.donnelly@imperial.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: In patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD),
pulmonary macrophages increase in number, release increased levels of
inflammatory mediators, and respond poorly to glucocorticosteroids. Whether this 
is due to a change in macrophage phenotype or localized activation is unknown.
OBJECTIVE: We sought to investigate whether macrophages from patients with COPD
are a distinct phenotype.
METHODS: Macrophage populations were isolated from human lung tissue from
nonsmokers, smokers, and patients with COPD by using Percoll density gradients.
Five macrophage populations were isolated on the basis of density (1.011-1.023,
1.023-1.036, 1.036-1.048, 1.048-1.061, and 1.061-1.073 g/mL), and cell-surface
expression of CD14, CD16, CD163, CD40, and CD206 was assessed by using flow
cytometry. Release of active matrix metalloproteinase 9, TNF-α, CXCL8, and IL-10 
was measured by using ELISA.
RESULTS: The 2 least dense fractions were more than 90% apoptotic/necrotic, with 
the remaining fractions greater than 70% viable. Macrophages from nonsmokers and 
smokers were CD163(+), CD206(+), CD14(+), and CD40(-), whereas macrophages from
patients with COPD were less defined, showing significantly lower expression of
all receptors. There were no differences in receptor expression associated with
density. Macrophages from patients with COPD of a density of 1.036 to 1.048 g/mL 
released higher levels of active matrix metalloproteinase 9 compared with cells
from nonsmokers, with no difference between the remaining fractions. This
population of macrophages from patients with COPD was less responsive to
budesonide compared with those from nonsmokers and smokers when stimulated with
LPS. Glucocorticosteroid insensitivity was selective for proinflammatory
cytokines because budesonide inhibition of LPS-stimulated IL-10 release was
similar for all macrophages.
CONCLUSIONS: This study identifies a specific macrophage phenotype in the lungs
of patients with COPD who are glucocorticosteroid insensitive with a density of
1.036 to 1.048 g/mL but do not correspond to the current concept of macrophage
phenotypes.

Copyright © 2013 American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. Published by
Mosby, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaci.2013.08.044 
PMID: 24176116  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2014 Jan;348(1):12-24. doi: 10.1124/jpet.113.204586. Epub
2013 Oct 25.

Induction of regulator of G-protein signaling 2 expression by long-acting
β2-adrenoceptor agonists and glucocorticoids in human airway epithelial cells.

Holden NS(1), George T, Rider CF, Chandrasekhar A, Shah S, Kaur M, Johnson M,
Siderovski DP, Leigh R, Giembycz MA, Newton R.

Author information: 
(1)Airways Inflammation Research Group, Snyder Institute for Chronic Diseases,
Faculty of Medicine, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada (N.S.H.,
T.G., C.F.R., A.C., S.S., M.K., R.L., M.A.G., R.N.); GlaxoSmithKline Research and
Development, Uxbridge, Middlesex, United Kingdom (M.J.); and Department of
Physiology and Pharmacology, School of Medicine, West Virginia University,
Morgantown, West Virginia (D.P.S.).

In asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) multiple mediators act
on Gαq-linked G-protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) to cause bronchoconstriction.
However, acting on the airway epithelium, such mediators may also elicit
inflammatory responses. In human bronchial epithelial BEAS-2B cells (bronchial
epithelium + adenovirus 12-SV40 hybrid), regulator of G-protein signaling (RGS) 2
mRNA and protein were synergistically induced in response to combinations of
long-acting β2-adrenoceptor agonist (LABA) (salmeterol, formoterol) plus
glucocorticoid (dexamethasone, fluticasone propionate, budesonide). Equivalent
responses occurred in primary human bronchial epithelial cells. Concentrations of
glucocorticoid plus LABA required to induce RGS2 expression in BEAS-2B cells were
consistent with the levels achieved therapeutically in the lungs. As RGS2 is a
GTPase-activating protein that switches off Gαq, intracellular free calcium
([Ca(2+)]i) flux was used as a surrogate of responses induced by histamine,
methacholine, and the thromboxane receptor agonist U46619
[(Z)-7-[(1S,4R,5R,6S)-5-[(E,3S)-3-hydroxyoct-1-enyl]-3-oxabicyclo[2.2.1]heptan-6-
yl]hept-5-enoic acid]. This was significantly attenuated by salmeterol plus
dexamethasone pretreatment, or RGS2 overexpression, and the protective effect of 
salmeterol plus dexamethasone was abolished by RGS2 RNA silencing. Although
methacholine and U46619 induced interleukin-8 (IL-8) release and this was
inhibited by RGS2 overexpression, the repression of U46619-induced IL-8 release
by salmeterol plus dexamethasone was unaffected by RGS2 knockdown. Given a role
for Gαq-mediated pathways in inducing IL-8 release, we propose that RGS2 acts
redundantly with other effector processes to repress IL-8 expression. Thus, RGS2 
expression is a novel effector mechanism in the airway epithelium that is induced
by glucocorticoid/LABA combinations. This could contribute to the efficacy of
glucocorticoid/LABA combinations in asthma and COPD.

DOI: 10.1124/jpet.113.204586 
PMID: 24163441  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Exp Ther Med. 2013 Sep;6(3):747-752. Epub 2013 Jul 1.

Expression levels of induced sputum IL-8 and IL-10 and drug intervention effects 
in patients with acute exacerbated COPD complicated with chronic cor pulmonale at
high altitude.

Feng E(1), Wan R, Yang S, Yan Z, Wang S, He W, Zhang Y, Yin H, Chen Z, Liu R.

Author information: 
(1)Center of Respiratory Medicine, The Fourth Hospital of PLA, Lanzhou Command,
Xining, Qinghai 810007, P.R. China.

The aim of this study was to assess the expression levels of induced sputum
interleukin (IL)-8 and IL-10 levels in patients with acute exacerbated chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (AECOPD) complicated with chronic cor pulmonale
(CCP) at high altitude, and to evaluate the intervention effects of an inhaled
corticosteroid (ICS) and a β2-adrenoceptor agonist in this disease. A total of
186 patients with AECOPD complicated with CCP were randomly divided into three
groups, with 62 cases in each. With regard to the two treatment groups, group A
was treated with salmeterol/fluticasone (50 μg/250 μg, respectively) by airway
inhalation twice daily, while group B received budesonide (1 mg) as a spray
inhalation, twice daily. The routine treatment group (group C) received only
routine treatment. The levels of IL-8 and IL-10 in the induced sputum and the
predicted percentage of forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV1%pred),
partial pressure of oxygen in arterial blood (PaO2) and partial pressure of
carbon dioxide in arterial blood (PaCO2) were examined on admission and at a
stable stage two weeks following treatment. Forty healthy volunteers served as a 
control group (group D). Compared with group D values, the IL-8 induced sputum
level and the PaCO2 were significantly increased, while the level of IL-10,
FEV1%pred and the PaO2 were markedly decreased in the three COPD groups prior to 
treatment. Following treatment, the induced sputum IL-8 level and the PaCO2 were 
significantly decreased, while the induced sputum IL-10 level, FEV1%pred and the 
PaO2 were markedly increased in the three treatment groups compared with the
values pre-therapy (all P<0.01). The post-treatment parameters were significantly
different among the three groups (P<0.01). The results indicate that IL-8 and
IL-10 are involved in the airway inflammation of AECOPD complicated by CCP.
Treatment with an ICS was demonstrated to be a successful method of reducing the 
local expression of IL-8 and increasing the local expression of IL-10; however,
ICS combined with a long-acting β2-adrenoceptor agonist (LABA) was more effective
than the sole administration of ICS in patients with AECOPD complicated by CCP at
high altitude.

DOI: 10.3892/etm.2013.1192 
PMCID: PMC3786877
PMID: 24137259  [PubMed]


69. Thorax. 2013 Nov;68(11):1029-36. doi: 10.1136/thoraxjnl-2012-202872.

Inhaled corticosteroids in COPD and the risk of serious pneumonia.

Suissa S(1), Patenaude V, Lapi F, Ernst P.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Epidemiology and Biostatistics and of Medicine, Center for
Clinical Epidemiology, Lady Davis Research Institute, Jewish General Hospital,
McGill University, , Montreal, Québec, Canada.

Comment in
    Evid Based Med. 2014 Jun;19(3):116.
    Dtsch Med Wochenschr. 2014 Jan;139(3):76.
    Praxis (Bern 1994). 2014 Apr 23;103(9):539.

BACKGROUND: Inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) are known to increase the risk of
pneumonia in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). It is
unclear whether the risk of pneumonia varies for different inhaled agents,
particularly fluticasone and budesonide, and increases with the dose and
long-term duration of use.
METHODS: We formed a new-user cohort of patients with COPD treated during
1990-2005. Subjects were identified using the Quebec health insurance databases
and followed through 2007 or until a serious pneumonia event, defined as a first 
hospitalisation for or death from pneumonia. A nested case-control analysis was
used to estimate the rate ratio (RR) of serious pneumonia associated with current
ICS use, adjusted for age, sex, respiratory disease severity and comorbidity.
RESULTS: The cohort included 163 514 patients, of which 20 344 had a serious
pneumonia event during the 5.4 years of follow-up (incidence rate 2.4/100/year). 
Current use of ICS was associated with a 69% increase in the rate of serious
pneumonia (RR 1.69; 95% CI 1.63 to 1.75). The risk was sustained with long-term
use and declined gradually after stopping ICS use, disappearing after 6 months
(RR 1.08; 95% CI 0.99 to 1.17). The rate of serious pneumonia was higher with
fluticasone (RR 2.01; 95% CI 1.93 to 2.10), increasing with the daily dose, but
was much lower with budesonide (RR 1.17; 95% CI 1.09 to 1.26).
CONCLUSIONS: ICS use by patients with COPD increases the risk of serious
pneumonia. The risk is particularly elevated and dose related with fluticasone.
While residual confounding cannot be ruled out, the results are consistent with
those from recent randomised trials.

DOI: 10.1136/thoraxjnl-2012-202872 
PMCID: PMC3812880
PMID: 24130228  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. J Pharm Pract. 2014 Feb;27(1):79-83. doi: 10.1177/0897190013504963. Epub 2013 Oct
4.

Combination of inhaled corticosteroid and bronchodilator-induced delirium in an
elderly patient with lung disease.

Moss JM(1), Kemp DW, Brown JN.

Author information: 
(1)Geriatric Research Education and Clinical Center, Veterans Affairs Medical
Center Durham, NC, USA.

Steroid psychosis has been well described with oral glucocorticoids, however, our
search of the literature did not identify an association between delirium and the
combination of inhaled glucocorticoids and long-acting beta-agonists. We describe
the occurrence of delirium with the combination of an inhaled glucocorticoid and 
bronchodilator. An elderly male described confusion and hallucinations within 1
week after initiation of budesonide/formoterol for chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease. The combination inhaler was discontinued with resolution of symptoms.
Several weeks later, the patient was hospitalized and restarted on the
combination inhaler. The patient was alert and oriented on admission, however,
confusion and hallucinations progressed throughout his hospital stay. The
combination inhaler was discontinued and his confusion and hallucinations
resolved by discharge. The temporal relationship of these events and a probable
Naranjo association allows for reasonable assumption that the use of the
budesonide/formoterol combination inhaler caused or contributed to the
occurrences of delirium in this elderly patient. The onset of delirium was likely
due to the systemic absorption of the glucocorticoid from lung deposition,
complicated in an individual with several predisposing risk factors for delirium.
Health care providers should be aware of this potential adverse drug reaction
when prescribing inhaled medications to older patients at risk for delirium.

DOI: 10.1177/0897190013504963 
PMID: 24097913  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. J Inflamm Res. 2013 Aug 20;6:109-19. doi: 10.2147/JIR.S43736. eCollection 2013.

Anti-inflammatory effects of budesonide in human lung fibroblast are independent 
of histone deacetylase 2.

Wang X(1), Nelson A, Weiler ZM, Patil A, Sato T, Kanaji N, Nakanishi M, Michalski
J, Farid M, Basma H, Levan TD, Miller-Larsson A, Wieslander E, Muller KC, Holz O,
Magnussen H, Rabe KF, Liu X, Rennard SI.

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary, Critical Care, Sleep and Allergy Division, Department of Internal
Medicine, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE, USA;

OBJECTIVE AND DESIGN: Reduced expression of histone deacetylase 2 (HDAC2) in
alveolar macrophages and epithelial cells may account for reduced response of
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) patients to glucocorticoids. HDAC2
expression and its role in mediating glucocorticoid effects on fibroblast
functions, however, has not been fully studied. This study was designed to
investigate whether HDAC2 mediates glucocorticoid effects on release of
inflammatory cytokines and matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) from human lung
fibroblasts.
METHODS: Human lung fibroblasts (HFL-1 cells) were stimulated with interleukin
(IL)-1 β plus tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α in the presence or absence of the
glucocorticoid budesonide. Cytokines (IL-6 and IL-8) were quantified by enzyme
linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) and MMPs (MMP-1 and MMP-3) by immunoblotting
in culture medium. The role of HDAC2 was investigated using a pharmacologic
inhibitor as well as a small interfering ribonucleic acid (siRNA) targeting
HDAC2.
RESULTS: We have demonstrated that budesonide concentration-dependently
(10(-10)-10(-7) M) inhibited IL-6, IL-8, MMP-1, and MMP-3 release by HFL-1 cells 
in response to IL-1β plus TNF-α. While an HDAC inhibitor significantly blocked
the inhibitory effect of budesonide on human bronchial epithelial cells (HBECs)
and monocytes (THP-1 cells), it did not block the inhibitory effect of budesonide
on release of cytokines and MMPs from HFL-1 cells. Similarly, an HDAC2-siRNA
blocked budesonide inhibition of cytokine release in HBECs, but it did not block 
the inhibitory effect of budesonide on HFL-1 cytokine and MMP release.
Furthermore, budesonide significantly blocked release of cytokines and MMPs to a 
similar degree in normal and COPD lung fibroblasts as well as in HFL-1 cells
exposed or not exposed to cigarette smoke extract.
CONCLUSION: These findings suggest that, in contrast to airway epithelial cells
and monocytes/macrophages, HDAC2 is not required for budesonide to inhibit MMP
and cytokine release by lung fibroblasts and this inhibitory pathway appears to
be intact in cultured fibroblasts from COPD patients. These results also suggest 
that budesonide has the potential to modulate fibroblast-mediated tissue
remodeling following airway inflammation in COPD, which is mediated via an HDAC2 
independent pathway.

DOI: 10.2147/JIR.S43736 
PMCID: PMC3780291
PMID: 24062615  [PubMed]


72. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2013 Aug 30;(8):CD006826. doi:
10.1002/14651858.CD006826.pub2.

Combined corticosteroid and long-acting beta(2)-agonist in one inhaler versus
inhaled corticosteroids alone for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Nannini LJ(1), Poole P, Milan SJ, Kesterton A.

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary Section, Hospital E Peron, Ruta 11 Y Jm Estrada, G. Baigorria, Santa
Fe - Rosario, Argentina, 2152.

Update of
    Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2007;(4):CD006826.

BACKGROUND: Both long-acting beta(2)-agonists and inhaled corticosteroids have
been recommended in guidelines for the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD). Their co-administration in a combined inhaler is intended to
facilitate adherence to medication regimens and to improve efficacy. Three
preparations are currently available: fluticasone propionate/salmeterol (FPS).
budesonide/formoterol (BDF) and mometasone furoate/formoterol (MF/F).
OBJECTIVES: To assess the efficacy and safety of combined long-acting
beta2-agonist and inhaled corticosteroid (LABA/ICS) preparations, as measured by 
clinical endpoints and pulmonary function testing, compared with inhaled
corticosteroids (ICS) alone, in the treatment of adults with chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD).
SEARCH METHODS: We searched the Cochrane Airways Group Specialised Register of
trials, which is compiled from systematic searches of multiple literature
databases. The search was conducted in June 2013. In addition, we checked the
reference lists of included studies and contacted the relevant manufacturers.
SELECTION CRITERIA: Studies were included if they were randomised and
double-blind. Compared studies combined LABA/ICS with the ICS component.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Two review authors independently assessed trial
quality and extracted data. The primary outcomes were exacerbations, mortality
and pneumonia. Health-related quality of life (as measured by validated scales), 
lung function and side effects were secondary outcomes. Dichotomous data were
analysed as fixed-effect odds ratios with 95% confidence intervals (CIs), and
continuous data as mean differences or rate ratios and 95% CIs.
MAIN RESULTS: A total of 15 studies of good methodological quality met the
inclusion criteria by randomly assigning 7814 participants with predominantly
poorly reversible, severe COPD. Data were most plentiful for the FPS combination.
Exacerbation rates were significantly reduced with combination therapies (rate
ratio 0.87, 95% CI 0.80 to 0.94, 6 studies, N = 5601) compared with ICS alone.
The mean exacerbation rate in the control (ICS) arms of the six included studies 
was 1.21 exacerbations per participant per year (range 0.88 to 1.60), and we
would expect this to be reduced to a rate of 1.05 (95% CI 0.97 to 1.14) among
those given combination therapy. Mortality was also lower with the combination
(odds ratio (OR) 0.78, 95% CI 0.64 to 0.94, 12 studies, N = 7518) than with ICS
alone, but this was heavily weighted by a three-year study of FPS. When this
study was removed, no significant mortality difference was noted. The reduction
in exacerbations did not translate into significantly reduced rates of
hospitalisation due to COPD exacerbation (OR 0.93, 95% CI 0.80 to 1.07, 10
studies, N = 7060). Lung function data favoured combination treatment in the FPS,
BDF and MF/F trials, but the improvement was small. Small improvements in
health-related quality of life were measured on the St George's Respiratory
Questionnaire (SGRQ) with FPS or BDF compared with ICS, but this was well below
the minimum clinically important difference. Adverse event profiles were similar 
between the two treatments arms, and rates of pneumonia when it was diagnosed by 
chest x-ray (CXR) were lower than those reported in earlier trials.
AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: Combination ICS and LABA offer some clinical benefits in
COPD compared with ICS alone, especially for reduction in exacerbations. This
review does not support the use of ICS alone when LABAs are available. Adverse
events were not significantly different between treatments. Further long-term
assessments using practical outcomes of current and new 24-hour LABAs will help
determine their efficacy and safety. For robust comparisons as to their relative 
effects, long-term head-to-head comparisons are needed.

DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD006826.pub2 
PMID: 23990350  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Thorax. 2014 Jan;69(1):5-13. doi: 10.1136/thoraxjnl-2013-203520. Epub 2013 Aug
26.

Oxidant-induced corticosteroid unresponsiveness in human bronchial epithelial
cells.

Heijink I(1), van Oosterhout A, Kliphuis N, Jonker M, Hoffmann R, Telenga E,
Klooster K, Slebos DJ, ten Hacken N, Postma D, van den Berge M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Allergology & Pulmonary Diseases, Department of Pathology &
Medical Biology, University of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, , 
Groningen, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: We hypothesised that increased oxidative stress, as present in the
airways of asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) patients,
induces epithelial damage and reduces epithelial responsiveness to suppressive
effects of corticosteroids on proinflammatory cytokine production and barrier
function.
METHODS: We induced oxidative stress by H2O2 and/or cigarette smoke extract (CSE)
in human bronchial epithelial 16HBE cells and primary bronchial epithelial cells 
(PBEC) derived by brushings from asthma patients, COPD patients, and smoking and 
non-smoking control individuals. We investigated effects of budesonide on barrier
function (electrical resistance) and TNF-α-induced proinflammatory cytokine
production (IL-8/CXCL8, granulocyte macrophage-colony stimulating factor
(GM-CSF)).
RESULTS: We observed that H2O2 and CSE reduce epithelial resistance. Budesonide
significantly counteracted this effect, likely by protection against epidermal
growth factor receptor-dependent cell-cell contact disruption. Furthermore,
budesonide suppressed proinflammatory cytokine production. H2O2 pretreatment
reduced this effect of budesonide on cytokine production in both 16HBE cells and 
PBECs. Importantly, PBECs from asthma and COPD patients were less sensitive to
budesonide with respect to cytokine production and barrier function than PBECs
from control subjects.
CONCLUSIONS: Together, our data indicate that budesonide suppresses epithelial
proinflammatory responses and barrier dysfunction and that oxidative stress
reduces these effects in airway epithelium from asthma and COPD patients.
Therefore, restoration of corticosteroid responsiveness in asthma and COPD may
act to improve the airway epithelial barrier.

DOI: 10.1136/thoraxjnl-2013-203520 
PMID: 23980116  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Respir Med. 2013 Nov;107(11):1709-21. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2013.06.007. Epub 2013 
Jul 13.

Cost effectiveness of adding budesonide/formoterol to tiotropium in COPD in four 
Nordic countries.

Nielsen R(1), Kankaanranta H, Bjermer L, Lange P, Arnetorp S, Hedegaard M,
Stenling A, Mittmann N.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medicine, University of Bergen, Jonas Lies vei 65, N-5021 Bergen,
Norway; Department of Thoracic Medicine, Haukeland University Hospital, Jonas
Lies vei 65, N-5021 Bergen, Norway. Electronic address: rune.nielsen@med.uib.no.

OBJECTIVE: Assess the cost effectiveness of budesonide/formoterol (BUD/FORM)
Turbuhaler(®)+tiotropium (TIO) HandiHaler(®) vs. placebo (PBO)+TIO in patients
with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) eligible for inhaled
corticosteroids/long-acting β2-agonists (ICS/LABA).
METHODS: The cost-effectiveness analysis was based on the 12-week, randomised,
double-blind CLIMB trial. The study included 659 patients with pre-bronchodilator
forced expiratory volume in 1 s ≤ 50% and ≥1 exacerbation requiring systemic
glucocorticosteroids or antibiotics the preceding year. Patients received
BUD/FORM 320/9 μg bid + TIO 18 μg qd or PBO bid + TIO 18 μg qd. Effectiveness was
defined as the number of severe exacerbations (hospitalisation/emergency room
visit/systemic glucocorticosteroids) avoided. A sub-analysis included antibiotics
in the definition of an exacerbation. Resource use from CLIMB was combined with
Danish (DKK), Finnish (€), Norwegian (NOK) and Swedish (SEK) unit costs (2010).
The incremental cost-effectiveness ratios (ICERs) for BUD/FORM + TIO vs.
PBO + TIO were estimated using descriptive statistics and uncertainty around
estimates using bootstrapping. Analyses were conducted from the societal and
healthcare perspectives in Denmark, Finland, Norway and Sweden.
RESULTS: From a societal perspective, the ICER was estimated at €174/severe
exacerbation avoided in Finland while BUD/FORM + TIO was dominant in the other
countries. From the healthcare perspective, ICERs were DKK 1580 (€212), €307 and 
SEK 1573 (€165) per severe exacerbation avoided for Denmark, Finland and Sweden, 
respectively, while BUD/FORM + TIO was dominant in Norway. Including antibiotics 
decreased ICERs by 8-15%. Sensitivity analyses showed that results were overall
robust.
CONCLUSION: BUD/FORM + TIO represents a clinical and economic benefit to health
systems and society for the treatment of COPD in the Nordic countries.
(ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT00496470).

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2013.06.007 
PMID: 23856511  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Endocr Pract. 2013 Nov-Dec;19(6):e138-41. doi: 10.4158/EP13122.CR.

Iatrogenic Cushing syndrome in patients receiving inhaled budesonide and
itraconazole or ritonavir: two cases and literature review.

Blondin MC(1), Beauregard H, Serri O.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Department of Medicine, Centre Hospitalier de
l'Université de Montréal, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

OBJECTIVE: To present two cases of iatrogenic Cushing syndrome caused by the
interaction of budesonide, an inhaled glucocorticoid, with ritonavir and
itraconazole.
METHODS: We present the clinical and biochemical data of two patients in whom
diagnosis of Cushing syndrome was caused by this interaction. We also reviewed
the pertinent literature and management options.
RESULTS: A 71-year-old man was treated with inhaled budesonide for a chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease and itraconazole for a pulmonary aspergillosis. The
patient rapidly developed a typical Cushing syndrome complicated by bilateral
avascular necrosis of the femoral heads. Serum 8:00 AM cortisol concentrations
were suppressed at 0.76 and 0.83 μg/dL on two occasions. The patient died 4 days 
later of a massive myocardial infarction. The second case is a 46-year-old woman 
who was treated for several years with inhaled budesonide for asthma. She was put
on ritonavir, a retroviral protease inhibitor, for the treatment of human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV). In the following months, she developed typical
signs of Cushing syndrome. Her morning serum cortisol concentration was 1.92
μg/dL. A cosyntropin stimulation test showed values of serum cortisol of <1.10,
2.65, and 5.36 μg/dL at 0, 30, and 60 minutes, respectively, confirming an
adrenal insufficiency. Because the patient was unable to stop budesonide, she was
advised to reduce the frequency of its administration and eventually taper the
dose until cessation.
CONCLUSION: Clinicians should be aware of the potential occurrence of iatrogenic 
Cushing syndrome and secondary adrenal insufficiency due to the association of
inhaled corticosteroids with itraconazole or ritonavir.

DOI: 10.4158/EP13122.CR 
PMID: 23807527  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. BMJ. 2013 May 29;346:f3306. doi: 10.1136/bmj.f3306.

Pneumonia and pneumonia related mortality in patients with COPD treated with
fixed combinations of inhaled corticosteroid and long acting β2 agonist:
observational matched cohort study (PATHOS).

Janson C(1), Larsson K, Lisspers KH, Ställberg B, Stratelis G, Goike H, Jörgensen
L, Johansson G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Sciences, Respiratory Medicine, Uppsala University,
Uppsala, Sweden. christer.janson@medsci.uu.se

Erratum in
    BMJ. 2013;346:f4375.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the occurrence of pneumonia and pneumonia related
events in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) treated with
two different fixed combinations of inhaled corticosteroid/long acting β2
agonist.
DESIGN: Observational retrospective pairwise cohort study matched (1:1) for
propensity score.
SETTING: Primary care medical records data linked to Swedish hospital, drug, and 
cause of death registry data for years 1999-2009.
PARTICIPANTS: Patients with COPD diagnosed by a physician and prescriptions of
either budesonide/formoterol or fluticasone/salmeterol.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Yearly pneumonia event rates, admission to hospital
related to pneumonia, and mortality.
RESULTS: 9893 patients were eligible for matching (2738 in the
fluticasone/salmeterol group; 7155 in the budesonide/formoterol group), yielding 
two matched cohorts of 2734 patients each. In these patients, 2115 (39%) had at
least one recorded episode of pneumonia during the study period, with 2746
episodes recorded during 19,170 patient years of follow up. Compared with
budesonide/formoterol, rate of pneumonia and admission to hospital were higher in
patients treated with fluticasone/salmeterol: rate ratio 1.73 (95% confidence
interval 1.57 to 1.90; P<0.001) and 1.74 (1.56 to 1.94; P<0.001), respectively.
The pneumonia event rate per 100 patient years for fluticasone/salmeterol versus 
budesonide/formoterol was 11.0 (10.4 to 11.8) versus 6.4 (6.0 to 6.9) and the
rate of admission to hospital was 7.4 (6.9 to 8.0) versus 4.3 (3.9 to 4.6). The
mean duration of admissions related to pneumonia was similar for both groups, but
mortality related to pneumonia was higher in the fluticasone/salmeterol group (97
deaths) than in the budesonide/formoterol group (52 deaths) (hazard ratio 1.76,
1.22 to 2.53; P=0.003). All cause mortality did not differ between the treatments
(1.08, 0.93 to 1.14; P=0.59).
CONCLUSIONS: There is an intra-class difference between fixed combinations of
inhaled corticosteroid/long acting β2 agonist with regard to the risk of
pneumonia and pneumonia related events in the treatment of patients with COPD.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: Clinical Trials.gov NCT01146392.


PMCID: PMC3666306
PMID: 23719639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Respirology. 2013 Jul;18(5):866-73. doi: 10.1111/resp.12090.

Budesonide/formoterol via Turbuhaler® versus formoterol via Turbuhaler® in
patients with moderate to severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: phase III
multinational study results.

Fukuchi Y(1), Samoro R, Fassakhov R, Taniguchi H, Ekelund J, Carlsson LG,
Ichinose M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Juntendo University, Tokyo, Japan.
yfukuchi@tea.ocn.ne.jp

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: The efficacy and tolerability of budesonide/formoterol 
versus formoterol in patients with moderate to severe chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD) was evaluated.
METHODS: In this randomized, double-blind, parallel-group, phase III study
(NCT01069289), patients with moderate to severe COPD for ≥2 years received either
budesonide/formoterol 160/4.5 μg two inhalations twice daily via Turbuhaler® or
formoterol 4.5 μg two inhalations twice daily via Turbuhaler® for 12 weeks.
Salbutamol was available as reliever medication. Primary outcome variable: change
from baseline to average during treatment in pre-dose forced expiratory volume in
1 s (FEV1 ).
RESULTS: One thousand two hundred ninety-three patients were randomized
(budesonide/formoterol n = 636; formoterol n = 657). Both budesonide/formoterol
and formoterol increased pre-dose FEV1 versus baseline (improvements of 4.6% and 
1.5% over baseline, respectively), with the increase from baseline being
significantly greater with budesonide/formoterol versus formoterol
(budesonide/formoterol:formoterol ratio 1.032; 95% confidence interval:
1.013-1.052; P = 0.0011). The budesonide/formoterol group had a significantly
prolonged time to first exacerbation versus the formoterol group (hazard ratio:
0.679; 95% confidence interval: 0.507-0.909; P = 0.0094) and significantly
greater improvements in many secondary outcome measures. Both treatments were
well tolerated; the incidence and type of adverse events were similar: most
commonly reported (budesonide/formoterol vs formoterol): COPD (8.0% vs 9.4%) and 
nasopharyngitis (5.5% vs 4.9%).
CONCLUSIONS: Budesonide/formoterol 160/4.5 μg two inhalations twice daily was
effective and well tolerated in patients with moderate to severe COPD, offering
benefits over formoterol alone in terms of improved lung function and reduced
risk of exacerbation.

© 2013 The Authors. Respirology © 2013 Asian Pacific Society of Respirology.

DOI: 10.1111/resp.12090 
PMID: 23551359  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. J Intern Med. 2013 Jun;273(6):584-94. doi: 10.1111/joim.12067. Epub 2013 Apr 1.

Combination of budesonide/formoterol more effective than fluticasone/salmeterol
in preventing exacerbations in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: the PATHOS 
study.

Larsson K(1), Janson C, Lisspers K, Jørgensen L, Stratelis G, Telg G, Ställberg
B, Johansson G.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Lung and Allergy Research, National Institute of Environmental
Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. kjell.larsson@ki.se

OBJECTIVES: Combinations of inhaled corticosteroids (ICSs) and long-acting β2
-agonists (LABAs) are recommended for patients with moderate and severe chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). However, it is not known whether different 
fixed combinations are equally effective. The aim of this study was to
investigate exacerbation rates in primary care patients with COPD treated with
budesonide/formoterol compared with fluticasone/salmeterol.
METHODS: Patients with physician-diagnosed COPD and a record of postdiagnosis
treatment with a fixed combination of budesonide/formoterol or
fluticasone/salmeterol were included. Data from primary care medical records were
linked to those from Swedish national hospital, drug and cause of death
registers. Pairwise (1 : 1) propensity score matching was carried out at the
index date (first prescription) by prescribed fixed ICS/LABA combination.
Exacerbations were defined as hospitalizations, emergency visits and collection
of oral steroids or antibiotics for COPD. Yearly event rates were compared using 
Poisson regression.
RESULTS: Matching of 9893 patients (7155 budesonide/formoterol and 2738
fluticasone/salmeterol) yielded two cohorts of 2734 patients, comprising 19 170
patient-years. The exacerbation rates were 0.80 and 1.09 per patient-year in the 
budesonide/formoterol and fluticasone/salmeterol groups, respectively (difference
of 26.6%; P < 0.0001); yearly rates for COPD-related hospitalizations were 0.15
and 0.21, respectively (difference of 29.1%; P < 0.0001). All other healthcare
outcomes were also significantly reduced with budesonide/formoterol versus
fluticasone/salmeterol.
CONCLUSIONS: Long-term treatment with fixed combination budesonide/formoterol was
associated with fewer healthcare utilization-defined exacerbations than
fluticasone/salmeterol in patients with moderate and severe COPD.

© 2013 The Association for the Publication of the Journal of Internal Medicine.

DOI: 10.1111/joim.12067 
PMID: 23495860  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Ther Adv Respir Dis. 2013 Aug;7(4):225-34. doi: 10.1177/1753465813480550. Epub
2013 Feb 27.

Inhaled corticosteroids and the increased risk of pneumonia.

Marzoratti L(1), Iannella HA, Waterer GW.

Author information: 
(1)CEMIT (Centro Médico Investigadores Tucumán), San Miguel de Tucumán, Tucumán, 
Argentina.

Recently it has been suggested that there is a causal association between the use
of inhaled corticosteroids (ICSs) and the risk of developing pneumonia in
patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). An increased risk of 
pneumonia associated with ICS use has been seen in trials with different design, 
different study populations and with evidence of a dose-response relationship.
However, as none of these clinical trials were originally designed to assess
pneumonia risk, radiographic confirmation of pneumonia was not always obtained.
The extent to which pneumonia events have been confounded with acute
exacerbations of COPD is unclear. As increased pneumonia events were not
associated with increased mortality it remains unclear what the clinical
significance of these findings are. Further complicating the association between 
ICSs and pneumonia is that meta-analyses restricted to budesonide trials have not
shown an increased risk of pneumonia, and no association has been seen in
patients with asthma. A number of mechanisms by which ICSs could increase the
risk of pneumonia have been proposed, principally related to their
immunosuppressive effect. Well-designed clinical trials with predefined endpoints
and objective pneumonia definitions are needed before the real risk of pneumonia 
conferred by ICSs can be established. In the meantime, it seems reasonable to
reduce ICSs given to COPD patients to the lowest effective doses, reduce the risk
in individual patients by ensuring appropriate vaccination and to be vigilant for
the possibility of pneumonia in patients with COPD on ICSs as they largely
overlap with those of an acute exacerbation.

DOI: 10.1177/1753465813480550 
PMID: 23445751  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Curr Med Chem. 2013;20(12):1477-95.

Long-acting beta-agonists and their association with inhaled corticosteroids in
COPD.

Fuso L(1), Mores N, Valente S, Malerba M, Montuschi P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Geriatrics, Faculty of Medicine, Catholic 
University of the Sacred Heart, Rome, Italy.

Inhaled bronchodilators, including beta(2)-agonists and antimuscaric receptor
antagonists, are the mainstay of pharmacotherapy in chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD). The short-acting beta(2)-agonists, including salbutamol, and
fenoterol, have a rapid onset of action, a bronchodilating effect for 3-6 h and
are used on demand. The long-acting beta(2)-agonists (LABAs), including
salmeterol and formoterol, have 12-hour duration of action and are used with a
twice-daily dosing regimen for long-term COPD treatment. Unlike salmeterol,
formoterol has a rapid onset of action. Pharmacological characteristics required 
by novel inhaled LABAs include 24 h bronchodilator effect in vivo which would
make them suitable for once daily administration (ultra-LABA), high potency and
selectivity for beta(2)-adrenoceptors, rapid onset of action, low oral
bioavailability (< 5%) after inhalation, and high systemic clearance.
Indacaterol, which has been approved for long-term treatment of COPD in Europe
and in the USA, has a 24-h duration of action and a once-daily dosing regimen.
Newer ultra-LABAs, including olodaterol, vilanterol, milveterol, carmoterol, and 
abediterol, are in development. Combination with ICS (fluticasone/salmeterol,
budesonide/formoterol, beclomethasone/formoterol) appears to provide an
additional benefit over the monocomponent therapy, although the extent of this
benefit is variable and often not clinically significant in all the endpoints
assessed. In patients with COPD, treatment with ICS is associated with increased 
risk of pneumonia which should be carefully considered when assessing the
risk/benefit ratio of ICS/LABA combinations. Subphenotyping of patients with COPD
(e.g., frequent exacerbations, sputum eosinophilia, mixed asthma/COPD phenotype) 
might help identify those patients who are most likely to benefit from addition
of ICS to bronchodilating treatment. Ultra-LABA/ long-acting muscarinic receptor 
antagonist (LAMA) combination treatment is under development and is likely to
become a standard pharmacological strategy for COPD. Dual-pharmacology inhaled
muscarinic antagonist-beta(2) agonist (MABA) molecules provide a new approach to 
the treatment of COPD.


PMID: 23409722  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Respir Res. 2013 Jan 28;14:10. doi: 10.1186/1465-9921-14-10.

Atopy is a risk factor for respiratory symptoms in COPD patients: results from
the EUROSCOP study.

Fattahi F(1), ten Hacken NH, Löfdahl CG, Hylkema MN, Timens W, Postma DS, Vonk
JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonology, University of Groningen, University Medical Center 
Groningen, PO Box 196 9700 AD, Groningen, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: The pathogenesis of COPD is complex and remains poorly understood.
The European Respiratory Society Study on Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease
(EUROSCOP) investigated long-term effects of budesonide; 18% of the COPD
participants were atopic. So far effects of atopy on the long-term course of COPD
have not been elucidated.
METHODS: Factors related to the presence of atopy (positive phadiatop) in 1277
mild-to-moderate COPD patients participating in EUROSCOP were analysed using
regression analysis. Incidence and remission of respiratory symptoms during
3-year follow-up were analysed using generalised estimating equations models, and
association of atopy with lung function decline using linear mixed effects
models.
RESULTS: Independent predisposing factors associated with the presence of atopy
were: male gender (OR: 2.21; 95% CI: 1.47-3.34), overweight/obese (OR: 1.41; 95% 
CI: 1.04-1.92) and lower age (OR: 0.98; 95% CI: 0.96-0.99). Atopy was associated 
with a higher prevalence of cough (OR: 1.71; 95% CI: 1.26-2.34) and phlegm (OR:
1.50; 95% CI: 1.10-2.03), but not with lung function levels or FEV1 decline.
Atopic COPD patients not treated with budesonide had an increased incidence of
cough over time (OR: 1.79, 95% CI: 1.03-3.08, p = 0.038), while those treated
with budesonide had increased remission of cough (OR: 1.93, 95% CI: 1.11-3.37,
p = 0.02) compared to non-atopic COPD patients.
CONCLUSIONS: Atopic COPD patients are more likely male, have overweight/obesity
and are younger as compared with non-atopic COPD patients. Atopy in COPD is
associated with an increased incidence and prevalence of respiratory symptoms. If
atopic COPD patients are treated with budesonide, they more often show remission 
of symptoms compared to non-atopic COPD patients who are treated with budesonide.
We recommend including atopy in the diagnostic work-up and management of COPD.

DOI: 10.1186/1465-9921-14-10 
PMCID: PMC3599617
PMID: 23356508  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Pulm Pharmacol Ther. 2013 Jun;26(3):336-41. doi: 10.1016/j.pupt.2013.01.005. Epub
2013 Jan 20.

Multidetector-row computed tomography assessment of adding budesonide/formoterol 
to tiotropium in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Yasui H(1), Inui N, Furuhashi K, Nakamura Y, Uto T, Sato J, Yasuda K, Takehara Y,
Suda T, Chida K.

Author information: 
(1)Second Division, Department of Internal Medicine, Hamamatsu University School 
of Medicine, 1-20-1 Handayama, Hamamatsu 431-3192, Japan.

BACKGROUND: In patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD),
multidetector-row computed tomography (MDCT) showed that tiotropium dilated the
inner diameters in airways from the third to the sixth generation of the bronchi.
Here we aimed to evaluate the morphological effect by adding a
budesonide/formoterol combination to tiotropium in COPD patients using
three-dimensional MDCT.
METHODS: Pulmonary function tests, St. George's Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ) 
and MDCT imaging studies were performed at the beginning and after
budesonide/formoterol combination treatment for 12 weeks in 14 patients with
COPD.
RESULTS: The median age was 73.5 years and the mean forced expiratory volume in
1 s (FEV1) as a percentage of the predicted value was 57.2 ± 18.3%. The luminal
area in the fifth generation bronchi and the emphysema volume/CT-derived total
lung volume were significantly correlated with FEV1 at baseline (r = 0.682,
p < 0.02 and r = -0.868, p < 0.001, respectively). The average luminal area and
wall area percentage in the third, fourth and fifth generations were correlated
with the SGRQ total score. Budesonide/formoterol induced insignificant pulmonary 
function changes and significant symptoms improvement. CT images showed an
increased inner luminal area and decreased wall area after budesonide/formoterol 
treatment. Average luminal area was significantly increased from 24.3 ± 9.7 to
26.0 ± 9.9 mm(2) in the third generation, 13.0 ± 6.5 to 14.7 ± 7.3 mm(2) in the
fourth generation, 8.0 ± 4.8 to 9.4 ± 4.9 mm(2) in the fifth generation and
5.6 ± 2.7 to 6.7 ± 3.6 mm(2) in the sixth generation (p < 0.01). The average
increase of the third generation luminal area was correlated with the FEV1
increase (r = 0.632, p < 0.03). The wall area percentage significantly decreased 
from 51.5 ± 9.2 to 49.1 ± 9.7 in the third generation, 56.1 ± 9.7 to 53.0 ± 11.1 
in the fourth generation, and 62.3 ± 9.9 to 57.6 ± 9.8 in the fifth generation
(p < 0.05). Emphysema volume/CT-derived total lung volume was unchanged with
treatment.
CONCLUSION: MDCT demonstrated budesonide/formoterol induced bronchodilation in
the non-small airway. CT imaging can evaluate drug therapeutic effect and may
provide additional insights into pharmacotherapy for COPD.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pupt.2013.01.005 
PMID: 23340058  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Tuberk Toraks. 2012;60(4):301-13.

Evaluation of inhaler technique and patient satisfaction with fixed-combination
budesonide/formoterol dry-powder inhaler in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD): data on real-life clinical practice in Turkey.

Öztürk C(1), Kaya A, Bilgin C, Yücesoy L, İkidağ B, Demirel M, Başlılar Ş, Şaylan
B, Senol T, Ağanoğlu S, Can G, Doğrul MI, Çam M, Erdoğan N, Batum Ö, Turan MO,
Demir C, Torun Ş, Cirit M, Turan M, Keleşoğlu A, Yaşar S, Uzunay Ö, Melek K,
Altıparmak O.

Author information: 
(1)Gazi University Faculty of Medicine, Ankara, Turkey. canozturk.gazi@gmail.com

INTRODUCTION: The present study was designed to evaluate inhaler techniques and
patient satisfaction with fixed-combination budesonide/formoterol dry-powder
inhaler chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) in Turkey in real-life
clinical practice.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: A total of 442 patients with COPD [mean (SD) age: 63.2
(10.6) years, 76.5% were males] were included in this cross-sectional study
conducted at 25 outpatient clinics across Turkey. Data on socio-demographic
characteristics, characteristics of COPD, inhaler technique and satisfaction with
dry-powder inhaler were recorded at a single crosssectional visit performed at
the study enrolment.
RESULTS: Patients were characterized by prominence of moderate to severe (78.1%) 
COPD, high rate of regular use of overall COPD medications (89.4%) and
Turbuhaler® for an average of 33.7 months, predominance of males (76.5%), primary
education (85.7%), urban location (68.3), ex-smokers (61.1%) and spending time
outdoors for ≥ 4 hour/day (62.0%). Use of correct techniques was evident in
majority of patients (≥ 94%), whereas inhalation maneuvers including breathing
out gently away from mouthpiece without blowing into it (71.9%) and holding the
breath for 5-10 seconds (78.3%) were performed correctly by lesser percent of
patients especially in the older group (≥ 65 years, p< 0.05). Overall percent of 
patients with the feeling that she/he used the inhaler very/fairly correctly was 
73.3%, while 86% of patients identified that they were very/fairly satisfied with
the inhaler, irrespective of age and educational status.
CONCLUSION: In conclusion, our findings revealed the majority of patients are
able to use Turbuhaler® correctly regardless of the educational status, while
older age was associated with higher rate of errors in inhalation maneuvers in
the real clinical practice in Turkey. Majority of our patients identified
Turbuhaler® to be very/fairly convenient regarding ease of use, portability, and 
usability with an overall self-confidence in using the inhaler correctly among
73% and the satisfaction rate of 86%; irrespective of age and educational level.


PMID: 23289459  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Basic Clin Pharmacol Toxicol. 2013 Jun;112(6):401-11. doi: 10.1111/bcpt.12043.
Epub 2013 Feb 7.

Tissue accumulation kinetics of ciclesonide-active metabolite and budesonide in
mice.

Mårs U(1), d'Argy R, Hallbeck K, Miller-Larsson A, Edsbäcker S.

Author information: 
(1)AstraZeneca R&D Södertälje, Södertälje, Sweden.

Inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) are mainstay treatment of asthma and chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease. However, highly lipophilic ICS accumulate in
systemic tissues, which may lead to adverse systemic effects. The accumulation of
a new, highly lipophilic ICS, ciclesonide and its active metabolite (des-CIC) has
not yet been reported. Here, we have compared tissue accumulation of des-CIC and 
an ICS of a moderate lipophilicity, budesonide (BUD), after 14 days of once-daily
treatment in mice. Single, three or 14 daily doses of [(3) H]-des-CIC or [(3)
H]-BUD were administered subcutaneously to male CD1 albino mice, which were
killed at 4 hr, 24 hr or 5 days after the last dose. Distribution of tissue
concentration of radioactivity was studied by quantitative whole-body
autoradiography. Pattern of radioactivity distribution across most tissues was
similar for both corticosteroids after a single as well as after repeated dosing.
However, tissue concentration of radioactivity differed between des-CIC and BUD. 
After a single dose, concentrations of radioactivity for both corticosteroids
were low for most tissues but increased over 14 days of daily dosing. The tissue 
radioactivity of des-CIC at 24 hr and 5 days after the 14th dose was 2-3 times
higher than that of BUD in majority of tissues. Tissue accumulation, assessed as 
concentration of tissue radioactivity 5 days after the 14th versus 3rd dose,
showed an average ratio of 5.2 for des-CIC and 2.7 for BUD (p < 0.0001). In
conclusion, des-CIC accumulated significantly more than BUD. Systemic
accumulation may lead to increased risk of adverse systemic side effects during
long-term therapy.

© 2012 Nordic Pharmacological Society. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/bcpt.12043 
PMID: 23256845  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. J Thorac Dis. 2012 Dec;4(6):583-7. doi: 10.3978/j.issn.2072-1439.2012.11.02.

Comparison of the lung function change in patients with COPD and bronchial asthma
before and after treatment with budesonide/formoterol.

Gao SY(1), Huang JQ, Luo YF, Li ZP, Xie CM, Guo YB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, the First Affiliated Hospital of Fujian
Medical University, Fuzhou 350005, P. R. China;

OBJECTIVE: This study investigated the rapid onset of bronchodilation effect and 
compared lung function changes following budesonide/formoterol (Symbicort
Turbuhaler®) inhalation in Chinese patients with moderate-severe chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and bronchial asthma.
METHODS: In this open-label, parallel-group clinical study, patients eligible for
study were divided into COPD group (n=62, mean age 68.16±8.75 years) and asthma
group (n=30, mean age 45.80±12.35 years). Lung function tests (include FEV1, FVC,
FEV1/FVC, and IC) were performed at baseline (t=0 min time point, value before
inhalation of budesonide/formoterol), and then eligible patients received two
inhalations of budesonide/formoterol (160/4.5 μg). Lung function tests were
reassessed at t=3, 10 and 30 min time point. The primary end-point was lung
function change 3 min after drug inhalation, and the secondary end-points were
comparison of the gas flow rate (ΔFEV1) and volume responses (ΔFVC, ΔIC) between 
COPD and asthma patients after inhalation of budesonide/formoterol.
RESULTS: Compared with the baseline, all patients significantly improved their
lung function (included FEV1, FVC, FEV1/FVC, and IC) at 3 min (P<0.05). Greater
bronchodilation efficacy was found in the asthma group compared with the COPD
group (P<0.05). In the asthmatic patients, the curves of FEV1, FVC, FEV1/FVC, IC,
showed improvement with an ascending trend at all time points from 3 to 30 min.
Whereas in the COPD patients, only the curves of FEV1, FVC, IC showed similar
pattern. We found that ΔFVC was significantly higher than ΔFEV1 in both groups
(P<0.05), but no significant difference between ΔIC and ΔFEV1 (P>0.05). Compared 
with COPD group, asthma group had higher level of ΔFEV1 and ΔIC (P<0.05), but no 
significant difference for ΔFVC can be found.
CONCLUSIONS: Budesonide/formoterol has a fast onset of bronchodilation effect in 
patients with moderate-severe COPD and asthma. Greater efficacy was found in the 
asthma group compared with the COPD group. The gas flow rate and volume responses
in patients with COPD differ from those with asthma after inhalation of
Budesonide/formoterol.

DOI: 10.3978/j.issn.2072-1439.2012.11.02 
PMCID: PMC3506807
PMID: 23205282  [PubMed]


86. Ann Thorac Med. 2012 Oct;7(4):238-42. doi: 10.4103/1817-1737.102185.

Abrupt withdrawal of inhaled corticosteroids does not result in spirometric
deterioration in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: Effect of phenotyping?

Al-Kassimi FA(1), Alhamad EH, Al-Hajjaj MS, Abba AA, Raddaoui E, Shaikh SA.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Department, College of Medicine, King Saud University, Saudi Arabia.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Some studies show a decline of FEV(1) only one month
after withdrawal of inhaled corticosteroids (ICS), while others show no decline. 
We speculate that the presence of an asthma phenotype in the Chronic Obstructive 
Pulmonary Disease (COPD) population, and that its exclusion may result in no
spirometric deterioration.
METHODS: We performed a prospective clinical observation study on 32 patients who
fulfilled the Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive lung disease definition
of COPD (Grade II-IV). They were divided into two phenotypic groups. 1.
Irreversible asthma (A and B) (n = 13): A. Asthma: Bronchial biopsy shows diffuse
thickening of basement membrane (≥ 6.6 μm). B. Airflow limitation (AFL) likely to
be asthma: KCO > 80% predicted if the patient refused biopsy. 2. COPD (A and B)
(n = 19): A. COPD: hypercapneic respiratory failure with raised bicarbonate,
panlobular emphysema with multiple bullas, or bronchial biopsy showing squamous
metaplasia and epithelial/subepithelial inflammation without thickening of the
basement membrane. B. AFL likely to be COPD: KCO < 80% predicted.
RESULTS: The asthma phenotype was significantly younger, had a strong association
with hypertrophy of nasal turbinates, and registered a significant improvement of
FEV(1) (350 ml) vs a decline of - 26.5 ml in the COPD phenotype following therapy
with budesonide/formoterol for one year. Withdrawal of budesonide for 4 weeks in 
the COPD phenotype resulted in FEV(1) + 1.33% (SD ± 5.71) and FVC + 1.24% (SD ±
5.32); a change of <12% in all patients.
CONCLUSIONS: We recorded no spirometric deterioration after exclusion of the
asthma phenotype from a COPD group.

DOI: 10.4103/1817-1737.102185 
PMCID: PMC3506105
PMID: 23189102  [PubMed]


87. BMC Pharmacol Toxicol. 2012 Nov 13;13:15. doi: 10.1186/2050-6511-13-15.

Comparison of the anti-inflammatory effects of Cilomilast, Budesonide and a p38
Mitogen activated protein kinase inhibitor in COPD lung tissue macrophages.

Ratcliffe MJ(1), Dougall IG.

Author information: 
(1)Personalised Healthcare and Biomarkers, AstraZeneca R&D Alderley Park,
Cheshire, SK, 10 4TG, UK. Marianne.ratcliffe@astrazeneca.com

Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD) is a disease characterized by a
largely irreversible airflow obstruction and a persistent, excessive inflammatory
response. Alveolar macrophages (AMs) are increased in the lungs of COPD patients,
and act as orchestrators of the inflammatory response, releasing a range of
mediators to coordinate recruitment and activation of leukocytes. Attempts to
treat the inflammatory component of COPD with anti-inflammatory drugs such as
steroids has met with limited success. In this study, we compared the ability of 
the phosphodiesterase IV (PDEIV) inhibitor Cilomilast, the steroid Budesonide,
and the p38 mitogen activated protein kinase inhibitor BIRB-796 to inhibit tumour
necrosis factor alpha (TNFα) and interleukin 6 (IL-6) releases from AMs isolated 
from COPD lung transplant tissue. All studies were carried out with appropriate
ethical approval and written, informed consent was obtained from each subject.
Cilomilast had little effect on cytokine release from AMs. There was considerable
variability in the responsiveness of AMs to Budesonide, with a subset of AMs
responding poorly to Budesonide. BIRB-796 inhibited TNFα release from all AM
donors, including those that responded poorly to steroids. Treatment with
BIRB-796 and Budesonide together gave an additive decrease in TNFa release. These
results suggest that a p38 inhibitor may provide advantages over existing
anti-inflammatory treatments for COPD, either as an add-on to existing therapy,
or to treat patients who respond poorly to steroids.

DOI: 10.1186/2050-6511-13-15 
PMCID: PMC3534411
PMID: 23148608  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Chang Gung Med J. 2012 Sep-Oct;35(5):373-81.

Comparison of respiratory parameters and plasma cytokine levels between treatment
with Salmeterol/fluticasone and ipratropium/terbutaline/budesonide in
mechanically ventilated COPD patients.

Wu HP(1), Liu YC, Lin SC, Chien MY, Liao FC, Chang SC, Shieh WB.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care and Sleep Medicine, Chang Gung Memorial
Hospital at Keelung, Chang Gung University College of Medicine, Taoyuan, Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: It is unknown whether the bronchodilation and anti-inflammatory
effects of inhaled salmeterol and fluticasone (SF) are better than those of
traditionally inhaled ipratropium, terbutaline and budesonide (ITB) in
mechanically ventilated patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD).
METHODS: Nineteen stable COPD patients with respiratory failure were randomly
enrolled into two groups. Patients were treated with inhaled SF delivered by a
metered-dose inhaler with a spacer or with inhaled nebulized ITB. Respiratory
parameters were measured for 7 days and plasma cytokine levels were measured on
days 1 and 7.
RESULTS: The kinetic curve of the rapid shallow index (RSI) from day 1 to day 7
was significant lower in the SF group than that in the ITB group. There were no
significant differences in minute ventilation, intrinsic positive end expiratory 
pressure, and airway resistance between the ITB and SF groups from day 1 to day
7. There were no differences in plasma interleukin (IL)-6, IL-10, IL- 12, and
transforming growth factor-beta1 levels between day 1 and day 7 in the ITB or SF 
group.
CONCLUSIONS: Patients with inhaled SF treatment had a lower RSI. The effects of
bronchodilators and anti-inflammation were similar between inhaled SF and ITB in 
COPD patients with ventilator support.


PMID: 23127342  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Pulm Pharmacol Ther. 2012 Oct;25(5):399-406. doi: 10.1016/j.pupt.2012.08.001.
Epub 2012 Aug 16.

Altered lung function relates to inflammation in an acute LPS mouse model.

Håkansson HF(1), Smailagic A, Brunmark C, Miller-Larsson A, Lal H.

Author information: 
(1)Former employees of AstraZeneca R&D, Lund, Sweden. Hanna_fn@bredband.net

Preclinical in vivo models of lipopolysaccharide (LPS) -induced acute lung injury
are commonly used to recapitulate pathophysiological features of chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease and acute exacerbations. The LPS-induced lung
inflammation is well described; however, whether the inflammatory response
relates temporally to specific alterations in lung function has not been
elucidated. We have investigated the effects of acute LPS inhalation in mice up
to 96 h post LPS. Quantitation of inflammatory cells and inflammatory mediators
in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid and non-invasive and invasive lung function
measurements were performed at corresponding time points. The inhibitory effect
of the glucocorticoid, budesonide, on LPS-induced lung inflammation and lung
function was determined. LPS inhalation induced distinct histopathological
changes, and infiltration of inflammatory cells to the lungs peaked at 48 h. At
this time point, significantly increased inflammatory mediators and significantly
altered lung capacity and mechanics parameters were observed. Budesonide given
per os prevented the LPS-induced lung inflammation and lung dysfunction. These
results demonstrate a temporal relationship between the peak of inflammatory cell
influx and significant impairment of lung function, suggestive of a causative
role of inflammation. These results allow better understanding of the functional 
consequences of lung inflammation in respiratory diseases.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pupt.2012.08.001 
PMID: 22975080  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2012 Sep 12;(9):CD006829. doi:
10.1002/14651858.CD006829.pub2.

Combined corticosteroid and long-acting beta(2)-agonist in one inhaler versus
long-acting beta(2)-agonists for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Nannini LJ(1), Lasserson TJ, Poole P.

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary Section, Hospital E Peron, G. Baigorria, Argentina.
nanninilj@cimero.org.ar.

Comment in
    Ann Intern Med. 2013 Feb 19;158(4):JC9.

Update of
    Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2007;(4):CD006829.

BACKGROUND: Both inhaled steroids (ICS) and long-acting beta(2)-agonists (LABA)
are used in the management of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). This 
updated review compared compound LABA plus ICS therapy (LABA/ICS) with the LABA
component drug given alone.
OBJECTIVES: To assess the efficacy of ICS and LABA in a single inhaler with
mono-component LABA alone in adults with COPD.
SEARCH METHODS: We searched the Cochrane Airways Group Specialised Register of
trials. The date of the most recent search was November 2011.
SELECTION CRITERIA: We included randomised, double-blind controlled trials. We
included trials comparing compound ICS and LABA preparations with their component
LABA preparations in people with COPD.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Two authors independently assessed study risk of
bias and extracted data. The primary outcomes were exacerbations, mortality and
pneumonia, while secondary outcomes were health-related quality of life (measured
by validated scales), lung function, withdrawals due to lack of efficacy,
withdrawals due to adverse events and side-effects. Dichotomous data were
analysed as random-effects model odds ratios or rate ratios with 95% confidence
intervals (CIs), and continuous data as mean differences and 95% CIs. We rated
the quality of evidence for exacerbations, mortality and pneumonia according to
recommendations made by the GRADE working group.
MAIN RESULTS: Fourteen studies met the inclusion criteria, randomising 11,794
people with severe COPD. We looked at any LABA plus ICS inhaler (LABA/ICS) versus
the same LABA component alone, and then we looked at the 10 studies which
assessed fluticasone plus salmeterol (FPS) and the four studies assessing
budesonide plus formoterol (BDF) separately. The studies were well-designed with 
low risk of bias for randomisation and blinding but they had high rates of
attrition, which reduced our confidence in the results for outcomes other than
mortality.Primary outcomes There was low quality evidence that exacerbation rates
in people using LABA/ICS inhalers were lower in comparison to those with LABA
alone, from nine studies which randomised 9921 participants (rate ratio 0.76; 95%
CI 0.68 to 0.84). This corresponds to one exacerbation per person per year on
LABA and 0.76 exacerbations per person per year on ICS/LABA. Our confidence in
this effect was limited by statistical heterogeneity between the results of the
studies (I(2) = 68%) and a risk of bias from the high withdrawal rates across the
studies. When analysed as the number of people experiencing one or more
exacerbations over the course of the study, FPS lowered the odds of an
exacerbation with an odds ratio (OR) of 0.83 (95% CI 0.70 to 0.98, 6 studies,
3357 participants). With a risk of an exacerbation of 47% in the LABA group over 
one year, 42% of people treated with LABA/ICS would be expected to experience an 
exacerbation. Concerns over the effect of reporting biases led us to downgrade
the quality of evidence for this effect from high to moderate.There was no
significant difference in the rate of hospitalisations (rate ratio 0.79; 95% CI
0.55 to 1.13, very low quality evidence due to risk of bias, statistical
imprecision and inconsistency). There was no significant difference in mortality 
between people on combined inhalers and those on LABA, from 10 studies on 10,680 
participants (OR 0.92; 95% CI 0.76 to 1.11, downgraded to moderate quality
evidence due to statistical imprecision). Pneumonia occurred more commonly in
people randomised to combined inhalers, from 12 studies with 11,076 participants 
(OR 1.55; 95% CI 1.20 to 2.01, moderate quality evidence due to risk of bias in
relation to attrition) with an annual risk of around 3% on LABA alone compared to
4% on combination treatment. There were no significant differences between the
results for either exacerbations or pneumonia from trials adding different doses 
or types of inhaled corticosteroid.Secondary outcomes ICS/LABA was more effective
than LABA alone in improving health-related quality of life measured by the St
George's Respiratory Questionnaire (1.58 units lower with FPS; 2.69 units lower
with BDF), dyspnoea (0.09 units lower with FPS), symptoms (0.07 units lower with 
BDF), rescue medication (0.38 puffs per day fewer with FPS, 0.33 puffs per day
fewer with BDF), and forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV(1)) (70 mL
higher with FPS, 50 mL higher with BDF). Candidiasis (OR 3.75) and upper
respiratory infection (OR 1.32) occurred more frequently with FPS than SAL. We
did not combine adverse event data relating to candidiasis for BDF studies as the
results were very inconsistent.
AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: Concerns over the analysis and availability of data from
the studies bring into question the superiority of ICS/LABA over LABA alone in
preventing exacerbations. The effects on hospitalisations were inconsistent and
require further exploration. There was moderate quality evidence of an increased 
risk of pneumonia with ICS/LABA. There was moderate quality evidence that
treatments had similar effects on mortality. Quality of life, symptoms score,
rescue medication use and FEV(1) improved more on ICS/LABA than on LABA, but the 
average differences were probably not clinically significant for these outcomes. 
To an individual patient the increased risk of pneumonia needs to be balanced
against the possible reduction in exacerbations.More information would be useful 
on the relative benefits and adverse event rates with combination inhalers using 
different doses of inhaled corticosteroids. Evidence from head-to-head
comparisons is needed to assess the comparative risks and benefits of the
different combination inhalers.

DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD006829.pub2 
PMCID: PMC4170910
PMID: 22972099  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Int Arch Allergy Immunol. 2013;160(1):27-36. doi: 10.1159/000338430. Epub 2012
Aug 31.

Corticosteroids plus long-acting β2-agonists prevent double-stranded RNA-induced 
upregulation of B7-H1 on airway epithelium.

Kan-O K(1), Matsumoto K, Inoue H, Fukuyama S, Asai Y, Watanabe W, Kurokawa M,
Araya J, Kuwano K, Nakanishi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute for Diseases of the Chest, Graduate School of Medical
Sciences, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Airway viral infections provoke exacerbations of asthma and chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease. B7-H1 is a costimulatory molecule that is
implicated in an escape mechanism of viruses from host immune systems. This
escape may be associated with the persistence of viral infection and lead to
exacerbation of underlying diseases. We have shown that an analog of viral
double-stranded RNA, polyinosinic-polycytidylic acid (poly IC), upregulated the
expression of B7-H1 on airway epithelial cells, an effect which was
corticosteroid-resistant. We investigated the effects of corticosteroids plus
long-acting β(2)-agonists (LABAs; fluticasone/salmeterol or
budesonide/formoterol) on the expression of B7-H1.
METHODS: BEAS-2B cells and primary airway epithelial cells were stimulated with
poly IC or respiratory syncytial virus. The expression of B7-H1 was assessed by
flow cytometry.
RESULTS: Poly IC upregulated the expression of B7-H1, which was suppressed by
high-concentration corticosteroids but not by LABAs. The upregulation was
suppressed by very low-concentration corticosteroids when used in combination
with LABAs. Their combination also suppressed the virus-induced upregulation of
B7-H1. Poly IC stimulation induced the nuclear translocation of nuclear factor ĸB
(NF-ĸB). Inhibitors of NF-ĸB activation prevented the poly IC-induced
upregulation of B7-H1. Low-concentration corticosteroids in combination with
LABAs enhanced the de novo induction of IĸBα, the endogenous inhibitor of NF-ĸB
activation.
CONCLUSIONS: Fluticasone/salmeterol or budesonide/formoterol attenuate the
virus-associated upregulation of B7-H1 on airway epithelial cells via suppression
of NF-ĸB activation.

Copyright © 2012 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000338430 
PMID: 22948082  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Ann Thorac Med. 2012 Jul;7(3):140-4. doi: 10.4103/1817-1737.98846.

Comparison of the effect of high-dose inhaled budesonide and fluticasone on
adrenal function in patients with severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Fahim A(1), Faruqi S, Wright CE, Kastelik JA, Morice AH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiovascular and Respiratory Studies, Department of Respiratory 
Medicine,Castle Hill Hospital, Cottingham, HU16 5JQ, UK.

INTRODUCTION: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a leading cause of 
respiratory-related morbidity and mortality. Inhaled steroids are frequently used
in patients with moderate to severe disease and may lead to adrenal suppression.
OBJECTIVES: The aim of this study was to compare the effect of inhaled
budesonide/formoterol with inhaled fluticasone/salmeterol in severe COPD.
METHODS: It was a prospective open-label crossover study of 22 patients. Adrenal 
suppression was measured by overnight urinary cortisol/creatinine ratio. The
measurements were taken while patients were on either combination for at least 4 
weeks.
RESULTS: A total of 12 patients completed the study. The mean age was 64 years (8
males, 4 females). The mean FEV1 was 1 L (range, 0.5-1.8). There was no
significant difference in adrenal suppression measured by overnight urinary
cortisol/creatinine ratio (budesonide 5.2 ± 4.3, fluticasone 4.7 ± 3.1; 95% CI
-2.2 to 1.2; P = 0.52) and urinary cortisol concentration (budesonide 51 ± 53,
fluticasone 43 ± 31 [nmol/l]; 95% CI -35 to 20; P = 0.56).
CONCLUSION: Inhaled budesonide and fluticasone have no significantly different
effect on adrenal function in moderate to severe COPD. The adverse event profile 
of high-dose inhaled steroids should not influence the choice of medication.

DOI: 10.4103/1817-1737.98846 
PMCID: PMC3425045
PMID: 22924071  [PubMed]


93. J Pharm Pharmacol. 2012 Sep;64(9):1245-53. doi: 10.1111/j.2042-7158.2011.01370.x.
Epub 2011 Oct 27.

Co-deposition of a triple therapy drug formulation for the treatment of chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease using solution-based pressurised metered dose
inhalers.

Adi H(1), Young PM, Traini D.

Author information: 
(1)Advanced Drug Delivery Group, Faculty of Pharmacy, The University of Sydney,
Sydney, NSW, Australia.

OBJECTIVES: The formulation of multi-drug pressurised metered dose inhalers
(pMDIs) opens up exciting therapeutic opportunities for the treatment of asthma
and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). We have investigated the
formulation of a solution-based triple therapy pMDI containing ipratropium,
formoterol, budesonide and ethanol as co-solvent.
METHODS: This system was characterised for in-vitro performance and compared with
marketed pMDIs (Atrovent and Symbicort).
KEY FINDINGS: No significant difference was found in the stage deposition of each
drug from the triple therapy formulation, suggesting that the droplets contained 
a fixed ratio of the three components used. Stage deposition of formoterol and
budesonide from the suspension-based marketed Symbicort were significantly
different, suggesting that the two drugs were deposited as separate entities.
Calculation of the mass median aerodynamic diameter (MMAD) of each formulation
suggested Atrovent (ipratropium, MMAD = 0.9 ± 0.0 µm) to have a small particle
size, similar to the triple therapy formulation. Atrovent, like the triple
therapy formulation was solution based and it contained ethanol as a co-solvent
(triple therapy formulation, MMAD = 1.3 ± 0.0 µm).
CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrated the feasibility of formulating a
solution-based pMDI containing a triple therapy with identical deposition pattern
for the treatment of several respiratory diseases where multi-drug cell targeting
is required.

© 2011 The Authors. JPP © 2011 Royal Pharmaceutical Society.

DOI: 10.1111/j.2042-7158.2011.01370.x 
PMID: 22881437  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2012;7:415-20. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S31526. Epub
2012 Jul 5.

Efficacy of indacaterol 75 μg versus fixed-dose combinations of
formoterol-budesonide or salmeterol-fluticasone for COPD: a network
meta-analysis.

Cope S(1), Kraemer M, Zhang J, Capkun-Niggli G, Jansen JP.

Author information: 
(1)MAPI Consultancy, Boston, MA 02114, USA.

BACKGROUND: The purpose of this study was to update our network meta-analysis in 
order to compare the efficacy of indacaterol 75 μg with that of a fixed-dose
combination of formoterol and budesonide (FOR/BUD) and a fixed-dose combination
salmeterol and fluticasone (SAL/FP) for the treatment of chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD) based on evidence identified previously in addition to
two new randomized clinical trials.
METHODS: Fifteen randomized, placebo-controlled clinical trials including COPD
patients were evaluated: indacaterol 75 μg once daily (n = 2 studies),
indacaterol 150 μg once daily (n = 5), indacaterol 300 μg once daily (n = 4),
FOR/BUD 9/160 μg twice daily (n = 2), FOR/BUD 9/320 μg twice daily (n = 2),
SAL/FP 50/500 μg twice daily (n = 4), and SAL/FP 50/250 μg twice daily (n = 1).
All trials were analyzed simultaneously using a Bayesian network meta-analysis
and relative treatment effects between all regimens were obtained.
Treatment-by-covariate interactions were included where possible to improve the
similarity of the trials. Outcomes of interest were trough forced expiratory
volume in 1 second (FEV(1)) and transitional dyspnea index at 12 weeks.
RESULTS: Based on the results without adjustment for covariates, indacaterol 75
μg resulted in a greater improvement in FEV(1) at 12 weeks compared with FOR/BUD 
9/160 μg (difference in change from baseline 0.09 L [95% credible interval
0.04-0.13]) and FOR/BUD 9/320 μg (0.07 L [0.03-0.11]) and was comparable with
SAL/FP 50/250 μg (0.00 L [-0.07-0.07]) and SAL/FP 50/500 μg (0.01 L
[-0.04-0.05]). For transitional dyspnea index, data was available only for
indacaterol 75 μg versus SAL/FP 50/500 μg (-0.49 points [-1.87-0.89]).
CONCLUSION: Based on results of a network meta-analysis with and without
covariates, indacaterol 75 μg is expected to be at least as efficacious as
FOR/BUD (9/320 μg and 9/160 μg) and comparable with SAL/FP (50/250 μg and 50/500 
μg) in terms of lung function. In terms of breathlessness (transitional dyspnea
index) at 12 weeks, the results are inconclusive given the limited data.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S31526 
PMCID: PMC3402062
PMID: 22848154  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Thorax. 2013 Mar;68(3):256-62. doi: 10.1136/thoraxjnl-2012-201772. Epub 2012 Jul 
10.

Chronic respiratory disease, inhaled corticosteroids and risk of non-tuberculous 
mycobacteriosis.

Andréjak C(1), Nielsen R, Thomsen VØ, Duhaut P, Sørensen HT, Thomsen RW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Epidemiology, Institute of Clinical Medicine, Aarhus
University Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark.

BACKGROUND: Chronic respiratory disease and inhaled corticosteroid (ICS) therapy 
for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) increase the risk of pneumonia. 
Few data are available on the association of these risk factors with
non-tuberculous mycobacterial (NTM) pulmonary disease.
METHODS: This study examined chronic respiratory diseases and ICS use as risk
factors in a population-based case-control study encompassing all adults in
Denmark with microbiologically confirmed NTM pulmonary disease between 1997 and
2008. The study included 10 matched population controls per case. Conditional
logistic regression was used to compute adjusted ORs for NTM pulmonary disease
with regard to chronic respiratory disease history.
RESULTS: Overall, chronic respiratory disease was associated with a 16.5-fold
(95% CI 12.2 to 22.2) increased risk of NTM pulmonary disease. The adjusted OR
for NTM disease was 15.7 (95% CI 11.4 to 21.5) for COPD, 7.8 (95% CI 5.2 to 11.6)
for asthma, 9.8 (95% CI 2.03 to 52.8) for pneumoconiosis, 187.5 (95% CI 24.8 to
1417.4) for bronchiectasis, and 178.3 (95% CI 55.4 to 574.3) for tuberculosis
history. ORs were 29.1 (95% CI 13.3 to 63.8) for patients with COPD on current
ICS therapy and 7.6 (95% CI 3.4 to 16.8) for patients with COPD who had never
received ICS therapy. Among patients with COPD, ORs increased according to ICS
dose, from 28.1 for low-dose intake to 47.5 for high-dose intake (more than 800
μg/day). The OR was higher for fluticasone than for budesonide.
CONCLUSION: Chronic respiratory disease, particularly COPD treated with ICS
therapy, is a strong risk factor for NTM pulmonary disease.

DOI: 10.1136/thoraxjnl-2012-201772 
PMID: 22781123  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Pulm Pharmacol Ther. 2012 Oct;25(5):371-6. doi: 10.1016/j.pupt.2012.06.009. Epub 
2012 Jul 2.

COPD treatment: real life and experimental effects on peripheral NK cells, their 
receptors expression and their IFN-γ secretion.

Folli C(1), Chiappori A, Pellegrini M, Garelli V, Riccio AM, De Ferrari L, Braido
F, Canonica GW.

Author information: 
(1)Allergy & Respiratory Diseases Clinic, DIMI-University of Genova, IRCCS AOU
San Martino-IST, Genova, Italy.

A role in pulmonary immunity has been ascribed to Natural Killer (NK) cells and
several in vitro studies have shown a corticosteroid-induced inhibition of NK
cells mediated cytotoxicity. Several clinical trials on chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD) have suggested a relationship between COPD treatment and
occurrence of respiratory infections. Aims of our study were to investigate if
real life COPD treatment affects peripheral blood NK cells total count and their 
receptors expression and to assess if different doses of formoterol and
budesonide, administered alone or in combination, are able to modulate the
surface expression of activating (NKp30, NKp44, NKp46 and NKG2D) and inhibitory
(KIR2DL2/L3, KIR3DL1 and NKG2A) receptors on peripheral blood NK cells of COPD
patients. Moreover, we evaluated the potential effect of treatment with
budesonide and/or formoterol on IFN-γ secretion in vitro. NK cells were isolated 
from peripheral blood of 7 healthy volunteers, 9 chronic bronchitis (CB) and 11
COPD patients. Total NK cells count and activating and inhibitory receptors
expression were evaluated. NK cells were cultured for 20h in 96-well plates with 
IL-2 (100IU/ml)+IL-12 (2.5ng/ml), with or without budesonide (Bud; 1 and 0.01μM) 
and formoterol (For; 30 and 0.3nM) alone or in combination. Cells were analyzed
by flow cytometry and IFN-γ was measured in cell supernatants by ELISA test. No
difference between real life treated COPD, CB and healthy subjects was found
concerning NK total count and NK cell receptors expression. When cells were
stimulated over night with cytokines and treated with drugs, only NKG2D receptor 
was modulated. Its expression was significantly downregulated by budesonide alone
and in combination with formoterol in COPD patients. IFN-γ production induced by 
stimulation with IL-2+IL-12 was decreased in a highly significant way (p<0.01) by
all treatments in all groups. Even if in vitro experiments with budesonide, alone
or in combination with formoterol, showed a modulation of NKG2D receptor
expression and IFN-γ production, our ex vivo results show that real life LABA and
ICS treatment does not influence peripheral NK cells count and their receptors
phenotype.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pupt.2012.06.009 
PMID: 22766315  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Can J Physiol Pharmacol. 2012 Jul;90(7):895-902. doi: 10.1139/y2012-079. Epub
2012 Jun 18.

Low-dose theophylline restores corticosteroid responsiveness in rats with
smoke-induced airway inflammation.

Sun X(1), Li Q, Gong Y, Ren L, Wan H, Deng W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Ruijin Hospital Affiliated to Shanghai
Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, PR China.

Patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) respond poorly to
corticosteroids. Histone deacetylase-2 (HDAC-2) plays a pivotal role in many
cases of steroid insensitivity. The main aim of this study was to restore the
smoking-induced reduction in corticosteroid sensitivity by increasing HDAC-2
activity using low-dose theophylline. Rats were exposed to cigarette smoke (CS)
and treated with budesonide and two doses of theophylline. Besides the pathologic
examination and cell counting in the bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF), the
expression of HDAC-2 and CXC chemokine ligand-8 (CXCL-8) were measured. Airway
inflammation induced by CS was demonstrated by pathologic changes of lung tissue 
and increased level of CXCL-8. CS exposure also markedly decreased HDAC-2
expression. Moreover, a negative correlation was found between HDAC-2 activity
and a lung destruction index. The index was restored to control levels with
inhaled corticosteroid treatment in combination with a low, not a high, dose of
theophylline. These results indicate that low-dose theophylline might provide
protection from smoke damage and improve the anti-inflammatory effects of
steroids by increasing HDAC-2 activity.

DOI: 10.1139/y2012-079 
PMID: 22708526  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Exp Lung Res. 2012 Aug;38(6):295-301. doi: 10.3109/01902148.2012.689924. Epub
2012 May 30.

Budesonide inhibits interleukin-32 expression in a rat model of chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease.

Deng X(1), Zhang Z, Gu W, Li Y, Liu M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Emergency Medicine, Central Hospital of Minhang District,
Shanghai Ruijin Hospital Group, Shanghai, China. dengchengsheng@sina.com

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a chronic inflammatory disorder
of the lung, and is the fifth leading cause of morbidity worldwide. A novel
proinflammatory factor, interleukine-32 (IL-32), is suggested as a risk factor of
COPD. Budesonide is widely used for COPD treatment as anti-inflammatory drug.
However, the inflammatory inhibition mechanism of budesonide is not fully
understood. In this study, we used a rat model with COPD to investigate the
effect of budesonide on IL-32 expression in lung tissue. We found that cigarette 
smoking (CS) strongly induced IL-32 expression in lung tissue, seriously weakened
lung function, and damaged pulmonary tissue. Budesonide inhibited the expression 
of IL-32 in lung tissue. In budesonide-treated rats, we observed no repair of
damaged lung tissue but the pulmonary function was partly recovered. To our
knowledge, this is the first report that budesonide inhibits the expression of
IL-32 in lung tissues, which is strongly induced by CS.

DOI: 10.3109/01902148.2012.689924 
PMID: 22646473  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2012 Jun 22;423(1):134-9. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.05.096. Epub 2012 May 24.

Lung epithelial-C/EBPβ contributes to LPS-induced inflammation and its
suppression by formoterol.

Roos AB(1), Barton JL, Miller-Larsson A, Dahlberg B, Berg T, Didon L, Nord M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Respiratory Medicine Unit, Karolinska Institutet,
Stockholm, Sweden. abraham.roos@ki.se

The inflammatory processes associated with pulmonary disorders remains
incompletely understood. CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein (C/EBP)β is implicated in
inflammatory lung disorders as well as in β(2)-adrenoceptor signaling. We
hypothesized that C/EBPβ in the lung epithelium contributes to lipopolysaccharide
(LPS)-induced airway neutrophilia and expression of neutrophil chemoattractant
chemokine (C-X-C) motif ligand (CXCL)1, as well as the suppressive effects of
long-acting β(2)-agonists (LABAs) and glucocorticoids (GCs). To investigate this,
mice with a lung epithelial-specific deletion of C/EBPβ (Cebpb(ΔLE)) and control 
littermates (Cebpb(fl/fl)) were pre-treated with a LABA, formoterol and/or a GC, 
budesonide, and challenged with LPS. Inflammatory cell recruitment in
bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) fluid and pulmonary expression of inflammatory
mediators were investigated. In addition, the ability of formoterol to increase
C/EBP transactivation was assessed in vitro. LPS-challenged Cebpb(ΔLE) mice
exhibited fewer BAL neutrophils and lower pulmonary expression of CXCL1 versus
Cebpb(fl/fl) mice. Suppression of LPS-induced neutrophilia by formoterol was
impaired in Cebpb(ΔLE) mice and Cxcl1 expression was increased. However,
suppression of the neutrophilia by budesonide with/without formoterol was
preserved. Further studies indicated that C/EBP transactivation was increased by 
the cAMP elevating agent forskolin and formoterol in a β(2)-adrenoceptor
dependent manner. Thus, C/EBPβ in the lung epithelium contributes to LPS-induced 
CXCL1 expression and airway neutrophilia as well as to the suppressive effects of
formoterol. Reduced C/EBPβ activity, observed in smokers with chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease, may impair the responsiveness to LABAs when used without GCs.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.05.096 
PMID: 22634316  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Pneumonol Alergol Pol. 2012;80(3):255-62.

[The influence of treatment with formoterol, formoterol with tiotropium,
formoterol with inhaled glucocorticosteroid and tiotropium on lung functions,
tolerance of exercise and simple, morning everyday activities in patients with
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)].

[Article in Polish]

Szmidt M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Oddział Kliniczny Chorób Wewnętrznych i Alergologii, Katedra Nauk Klinicznych,
Wydział Nauk Biomedycznych i Kształcenia Podyplomowego Uniwersytetu Medycznego w 
Łodzi. mirszmidt@wp.pl

Bronchodilators - long-acting b2-adrenergic agonists (formoterol and salmeterol) 
and a long-acting antimuscarinic drug (tiotropium), are the main drugs applied in
symptomatic treatment of COPD. In patients with COPD, dyspnea is frequently
associated with simple everyday activities. Two questionnaires have been
published recently as a means of assessing the patients' ability to perform
morning activities and symptoms. Dynamic hyperinflation is the pathophysiological
disorder responsible for dyspnea and decreased exercise tolerance in COPD.
Formoterol is faster than salmeterol in diminishing air-trapping. It has been
shown that treatment with formoterol and tiotropium in COPD patients improves
FEV(1), FVC, IC, symptoms score and quality of life in comparison with tiotropium
applied alone. Among LABA and inhaled glucocorticosteroids combinations, those
containing formoterol have a more beneficial effect on the ability to perform
simple morning activities (budesonide/formoterol was better than
fluticasone/salmeterol). Beclomethasone/formoterol - 400/24 mcg/die, in
comparison with fluticasone/salmeterol - 500/100 mcg/die significantly reduced
air-trapping and dyspnea in COPD patients. The comparison of
budesonide/formoterol - 400/12 mcg 2 x die with beclomethasone/ /formoterol -
200/12 mcg 2 x die has shown similar influence of both combinations on FEV(1),
dyspnea, 6-minute walk test, symptoms score and quality of life. The addition of 
budesonide and formoterol combination to tiotropium gives further benefits:
reduces number of exacerbations, improves FEV1, symptoms score and performance of
simple morning routines. Doctors should pay more attention to symptoms and
limitations in simple activities in the morning and adequately adjust the
treatment.


PMID: 22562275  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Drugs. 2012 Feb 12;72(3):395-414. doi: 10.2165/11208460-000000000-00000.

Budesonide/formoterol Turbuhaler®: a review of its use in chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease.

Scott LJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Adis, Auckland, New Zealand. demail@adis.co.nz

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a highly heterogeneous,
progressive inflammatory disease that imposes considerable economic and
healthcare burdens on society, with the disease predicted to remain a leading
cause of morbidity and mortality worldwide in the future. Current pharmacological
treatment can improve symptoms of the disease, but not progression. Global
Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease guidelines recommend that
patients with moderate COPD should use one or more long-acting bronchodilators
(e.g. a long-acting β(2)-agonist) as required and, for those with severe and very
severe disease who are experiencing repeated COPD exacerbations, an inhaled
corticosteroid should be added as required. Budesonide/formoterol Turbuhaler®
(Symbicort® Turbuhaler®) is a dry powder inhaler (DPI) that combines these two
classes of drugs in a single inhaler, thereby making administration easier and
more convenient. Budesonide/formoterol Turbuhaler® (delivered dose 320 μg/9 μg)
is recommended for the symptomatic treatment of adult patients with severe COPD
(forced expiratory volume in 1 second <50% of predicted value) and a history of
repeated exacerbations, who have significant symptoms despite regular therapy
with long-acting bronchodilators. This article reviews the pharmacological
properties and clinical use of budesonide/formoterol Turbuhaler® in adult
patients with moderate to severe COPD. Budesonide/formoterol Turbuhaler®
(320 μg/9 μg twice daily) was effective and well tolerated in adult patients with
moderate to severe COPD participating in large, multicentre trials of up to 12
months' duration. Budesonide/formoterol Turbuhaler® improved lung function,
exacerbation rates, COPD symptom scores and health status from baseline to a
significantly greater extent than placebo and, in general, than the individual
monotherapies in these trials. Moreover, as reflected in the faster onset of
action of formoterol than salmeterol, budesonide/formoterol Turbuhaler® was more 
effective than salmeterol/fluticasone propionate DPI at improving the patient's
ability to perform morning activities in a short-term study. In the 12-week CLIMB
trial, adding budesonide/formoterol Turbuhaler® to inhaled tiotropium bromide
therapy was significantly more effective than adding placebo to tiotropium
bromide therapy. Thus, inhaled budesonide/formoterol, either alone or as add-on
therapy to other medications, continues to be a useful option for the management 
of COPD.

DOI: 10.2165/11208460-000000000-00000 
PMID: 22316354  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Br J Pharmacol. 2012 Oct;167(4):775-86. doi: 10.1111/j.1476-5381.2012.01864.x.

Corticosteroid insensitivity is reversed by formoterol via
phosphoinositide-3-kinase inhibition.

Rossios C(1), To Y, Osoata G, Ito M, Barnes PJ, Ito K.

Author information: 
(1)Airway Disease Section, NHLI, Imperial College, London, UK.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD) show a poor response to corticosteroids, which has been linked to
oxidative stress. Here we show that the long-acting β(2) -agonist formoterol (FM)
reversed corticosteroid insensitivity under oxidative stress via inhibition of
phosphoinositide-3-kinase (PI3K) signalling.
EXPERIMENTAL APPROACH: Responsiveness to corticosteroids dexamethasone (Dex),
budesonide (Bud) and fluticasone propionate (FP) was determined, as IC(50) values
on TNF-α-induced interleukin 8 release, in U937 monocytic cell line treated with 
hydrogen peroxide (H(2) O(2) ) or peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) from
patients with COPD or severe asthma.
KEY RESULTS: PBMCs from severe asthma and COPD were less sensitive to Dex
compared with those from healthy subjects. Both FM (10(-9)  M) and salmeterol
(SM, 10(-8)  M) reversed Dex insensitivity in severe asthma, but only FM restored
Dex sensitivity in COPD. Although H(2) O(2) exposure decreased steroid
sensitivity in U937 cells, FM restored responsiveness to Bud and FP while the
effects of SM were weaker. Additionally, FM, but not SM, partially inhibited H(2)
O(2) -induced PI3Kδ-dependent (PKB) phosphorylation. H(2) O(2) decreased
SM-induced cAMP production in U937 cells, but did not significantly affect the
response to FM. The reduction of SM effects by H(2) O(2) was reversed by
pretreatment with LY294002, a PI3K inhibitor, or IC87114, a PI3Kδ inhibitor.
CONCLUSION AND IMPLICATIONS: FM reversed oxidative stress-induced corticosteroid 
insensitivity and decreased β(2) adrenoceptor-dependent cAMP production via
inhibition of PI3Kδ signalling. FM will be more effective than SM, when combined 
with corticosteroids, for the treatment of respiratory diseases under conditions 
of high oxidative stress, such as in COPD.

© 2012 The Authors. British Journal of Pharmacology © 2012 The British
Pharmacological Society.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1476-5381.2012.01864.x 
PMCID: PMC3575778
PMID: 22251095  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Drugs. 2012 Jan 22;72(2):273-300. doi: 10.2165/11208620-000000000-00000.

Tiotropium bromide inhalation powder: a review of its use in the management of
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Keating GM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Adis, a Wolters Kluwer Business, Auckland, New Zealand. demail@adis.co.nz

The anticholinergic agent tiotropium bromide (Spiriva®) is a long-acting
bronchodilator that is indicated for the treatment of chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD). This article reviews the clinical efficacy and
tolerability of tiotropium bromide inhalation powder, administered using the
HandiHaler® device, in patients with COPD, as well as reviewing its
pharmacological properties and the results of pharmacoeconomic analyses.
Shorter-term placebo-controlled trials in patients with COPD demonstrated
significantly higher trough forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV(1))
responses with tiotropium bromide than with placebo, confirming it has a duration
of action of ≥24 hours and is suitable for once-daily administration. Lung
function improved to a greater extent with tiotropium bromide than with
ipratropium bromide or, in most instances, salmeterol. Indacaterol was shown to
be noninferior to tiotropium bromide in terms of the trough FEV(1) response. The 
large, 4-year UPLIFT® trial did not show a significant reduction in the annual
rate of decline in FEV(1) with tiotropium bromide versus placebo in patients with
COPD, although subgroup analyses demonstrated a significantly lower rate of
decline with tiotropium bromide than with placebo in some patient groups (e.g.
patients with moderate COPD, patients aged ≥50 years, patients not receiving
maintenance therapy at baseline). Tiotropium bromide prevented exacerbations in
patients with COPD, with a significantly lower exacerbation rate and a
significantly longer time to first exacerbation seen with tiotropium bromide than
with placebo or salmeterol. Exacerbation rates did not significantly differ
between patients receiving tiotropium bromide and those receiving
salmeterol/fluticasone propionate. Tiotropium bromide also had beneficial effects
on health-related quality of life (HR-QOL) and other endpoints, such as dyspnoea 
and rescue medication use. Combination therapy with tiotropium bromide plus
formoterol with or without budesonide improved lung function to a significantly
greater extent than tiotropium bromide alone in patients with COPD. In addition, 
exacerbation rates were lower and HR-QOL was improved with tiotropium bromide
plus budesonide/formoterol versus tiotropium bromide alone. Although the addition
of salmeterol/fluticasone propionate to tiotropium bromide did not reduce the
COPD exacerbation rate, it did improve lung function and HR-QOL. Tiotropium
bromide inhalation powder is generally well tolerated in patients with COPD, with
anticholinergic adverse events (e.g. dry mouth, constipation, gastrointestinal
obstruction, dysuria) among the most commonly reported adverse events. The
UPLIFT® trial showed no significant difference between tiotropium bromide and
placebo recipients in the risk of stroke, and the risk of serious cardiac adverse
events (including congestive heart failure and myocardial infarction) was
significantly lower with tiotropium bromide than with placebo. The absence of a
detrimental effect on cardiovascular outcomes was supported by the results of a
meta-analysis and pooled analyses. In addition, on-treatment mortality was lower 
with tiotropium bromide than with placebo in the UPLIFT® trial. Pooled analyses
showed significantly lower cardiovascular mortality with tiotropium bromide than 
with placebo, with a meta-analysis demonstrating no significant difference
between patients receiving tiotropium bromide and controls in cardiovascular
mortality. Results of modelled pharmacoeconomic analyses conducted from a
healthcare payer perspective in several developed countries suggest that
tiotropium bromide is a cost-effective option in patients with COPD. In
conclusion, tiotropium bromide inhalation powder is a useful option for the
maintenance treatment of patients with COPD.

DOI: 10.2165/11208620-000000000-00000 
PMID: 22217233  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Respir Med. 2012 Apr;106(4):531-9. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2011.10.020. Epub 2011 Dec
23.

AZD9668, a neutrophil elastase inhibitor, plus ongoing budesonide/formoterol in
patients with COPD.

Kuna P(1), Jenkins M, O'Brien CD, Fahy WA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Internal Medicine, Asthma and Allergy, Barlicki University
Hospital, Medical University of Lodz, Lodz, Poland. piotr.kuna@umed.lodz.pl

BACKGROUND: Neutrophil elastase (NE) is implicated in chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD). AZD9668 is a reversible and selective inhibitor of NE, 
well tolerated at doses of 60 mg bid during Phase I/IIa development.
METHODS: This 12-week, randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, Phase IIb,
trial (NCT01023516), investigated the efficacy and safety of AZD9668 (60 mg bid) 
versus placebo in patients with symptomatic COPD and a history of exacerbation
receiving maintenance budesonide/formoterol. Primary outcome variable: forced
expiratory volume in one second (FEV1). Secondary endpoints included:
post-bronchodilator FEV1, pre- and post-bronchodilator forced vital capacity,
FEV6, forced expiratory flow between 25% and 75% of vital capacity and
inspiratory capacity; peak expiratory flow and FEV1 measured at home;
EXAcerbations of Chronic pulmonary disease Tool and Breathlessness, Cough and
Sputum Scores; St George's respiratory questionnaire for COPD (SGRQ-C) scores;
exacerbations; and safety assessments.
RESULTS: Six hundred and fifteen patients were randomised: placebo (302), AZD9668
60 mg bid (313). AZD9668 showed no effect on lung function: change in mean
pre-bronchodilator FEV1 versus placebo was 0.01L (95% confidence interval: -0.03,
0.05; p=0.533). AZD9668 did not significantly improve respiratory signs and
symptoms, SGRQ-C score or time to first exacerbation. Adverse events were similar
for AZD9668 and placebo.
CONCLUSIONS: Three months' treatment with AZD9668 did not improve lung function, 
respiratory signs and symptoms or SGRQ-C score when added to
budesonide/formoterol maintenance therapy in patients with COPD. In the absence
of definitive biomarkers of short-term disease progression, further research is
needed to determine the optimal duration of studies to evaluate NE inhibitors as 
disease-modifying agents.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2011.10.020 
PMID: 22197578  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Eur Respir J. 2012 Aug;40(2):298-305. doi: 10.1183/09031936.00072511. Epub 2011
Dec 19.

The acute effect of budesonide/formoterol in COPD: a multi-slice computed
tomography and lung function study.

De Backer LA(1), Vos W, De Backer J, Van Holsbeke C, Vinchurkar S, De Backer W.

Author information: 
(1)Dept of Respiratory Medicine, Antwerp University Hospital, Wilrijkstraat 10,
2650 Edegem, Antwerp, Belgium. lieve.debacker@ua.ac.be

The Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease (GOLD) classification 
of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) does not always match with other 
clinical disease descriptors such as exacerbation frequency and quality of life, 
indicating that forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV(1)) is not a perfect
descriptor of the disease. The aim of this study was to find out whether changes 
in airway geometry after inhalation of the most commonly used inhalation therapy 
in severe COPD can more adequately be described with an image-based approach than
with spirometry. 10 COPD GOLD stage III patients were assessed in a double-blind 
crossover study. Airway volumes were analysed using segmentation of multi-slice
computed tomography (MSCT) images; airway resistance was determined using
computational fluid dynamics (CFD). Distal airway volume significantly increased 
(p=0.011) in patients 4 h after receiving a budesonide/formoterol combination
from 9.6±4.67 cm(3) to 10.14±4.81 cm(3). Also CFD-determined airway resistance
significantly decreased (p=0.047) from 0.051±0.021 kPa·s·L(-1) to 0.043±0.019
kPa·s·L(-1). None of the lung function parameters showed a significant change.
Only functional residual capacity (FRC) showed a trend to decline (p=0.056). Only
the image-based parameters were able to predict the visit at which the
combination product was administered. This study showed that imaging is a
sensitive, complementary tool to describe changes in airway structure.

DOI: 10.1183/09031936.00072511 
PMID: 22183484  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2011 Dec 7;(12):CD007033. doi:
10.1002/14651858.CD007033.pub3.

Inhaled corticosteroids versus long-acting beta(2)-agonists for chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease.

Spencer S(1), Karner C, Cates CJ, Evans DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Health and Medicine, Lancaster University, Bailrigg, Lancaster,
Lancashire, UK, LA1 4YD.

Update of
    Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2011;(10):CD007033.

BACKGROUND: Long-acting beta(2)-agonists and inhaled corticosteroids can be used 
as maintenance therapy by patients with moderate to severe chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease. These interventions are often taken together in a combination 
inhaler. However, the relative added value of the two individual components is
unclear.
OBJECTIVES: To determine the relative effects of inhaled corticosteroids (ICS)
compared to long-acting beta(2)-agonists (LABA) on clinical outcomes in patients 
with stable chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
SEARCH METHODS: We searched the Cochrane Airways Group Specialised Register of
trials (latest search August 2011) and reference lists of articles.
SELECTION CRITERIA: We included randomised controlled trials comparing inhaled
corticosteroids and long-acting beta(2)-agonists in the treatment of patients
with stable chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Three authors independently assessed trials for
inclusion and then extracted data on trial quality, study outcomes and adverse
events. We also contacted study authors for additional information.
MAIN RESULTS: We identified seven randomised trials (5997 participants) of good
quality with a duration of six months to three years. All of the trials compared 
ICS/LABA combination inhalers with LABA and ICS as individual components. Four of
these trials included fluticasone and salmeterol monocomponents and the remaining
three included budesonide and formoterol monocomponents. There was no
statistically significant difference in our primary outcome, the number of
patients experiencing exacerbations (odds ratio (OR) 1.22; 95% CI 0.89 to 1.67), 
or the rate of exacerbations per patient year (rate ratio (RR) 0.96; 95% CI 0.89 
to 1.02) between inhaled corticosteroids and long-acting beta(2)-agonists. The
incidence of pneumonia, our co-primary outcome, was significantly higher among
patients on inhaled corticosteroids than on long-acting beta(2)-agonists whether 
classified as an adverse event (OR 1.38; 95% CI 1.10 to 1.73) or serious adverse 
event (Peto OR 1.48; 95% CI 1.13 to 1.93). Results of the secondary outcomes
analysis were as follows. Mortality was higher in patients on inhaled
corticosteroids compared to patients on long-acting beta(2)-agonists (Peto OR
1.17; 95% CI 0.97 to 1.42), although the difference was not statistically
significant. Patients treated with beta(2)-agonists showed greater improvements
in pre-bronchodilator FEV(1) compared to those treated with inhaled
corticosteroids (mean difference (MD) 18.99 mL; 95% CI 0.52 to 37.46), whilst
greater improvements in health-related quality of life were observed in patients 
receiving inhaled corticosteroids compared to those receiving long-acting
beta(2)-agonists (St George's Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ) MD -0.74; 95% CI
-1.42 to -0.06). In both cases the differences were statistically significant but
rather small in magnitude. There were no statistically significant differences
between ICS and LABA in the number of hospitalisations due to exacerbations,
number of mild exacerbations, peak expiratory flow, dyspnoea, symptoms scores,
use of rescue medication, adverse events, all cause hospitalisations, or
withdrawals from studies.
AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: Placebo-controlled trials have established the benefits of 
both long-acting beta-agonist and inhaled corticosteroid therapy for COPD
patients as individual therapies. This review, which included trials allowing
comparisons between LABA and ICS, has shown that the two therapies confer similar
benefits across the majority of outcomes, including the frequency of
exacerbations and mortality. Use of long-acting beta-agonists appears to confer a
small additional benefit in terms of improvements in lung function compared to
inhaled corticosteroids. On the other hand, inhaled corticosteroid therapy shows 
a small advantage over long-acting beta-agonist therapy in terms of
health-related quality of life, but inhaled corticosteroids also increase the
risk of pneumonia. This review supports current guidelines advocating long-acting
beta-agonists as frontline therapy for COPD, with regular inhaled corticosteroid 
therapy as an adjunct in patients experiencing frequent exacerbations.

DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD007033.pub3 
PMID: 22161409  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Int J Nanomedicine. 2011;6:2351-66. doi: 10.2147/IJN.S25363. Epub 2011 Oct 14.

Rehydrated sterically stabilized phospholipid nanomicelles of budesonide for
nebulization: physicochemical characterization and in vitro, in vivo evaluations.

Sahib MN(1), Darwis Y, Peh KK, Abdulameer SA, Tan YT.

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Universiti Sains Malaysia, Penang,
Malaysia. mohanad_pharm@yahoo.com

BACKGROUND: Inhaled corticosteroids provide unique systems for local treatment of
asthma or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. However, the use of poorly
soluble drugs for nebulization has been inadequate, and many patients rely on
large doses to achieve optimal control of their disease. Theoretically,
nanotechnology with a sustained-release formulation may provide a favorable
therapeutic index. The aim of this study was to determine the feasibility of
using sterically stabilized phospholipid nanomicelles of budesonide for pulmonary
delivery via nebulization.
METHODS: PEG(5000)-DSPE polymeric micelles containing budesonide (BUD-SSMs) were 
prepared by the coprecipitation and reconstitution method, and the
physicochemical and pharmacodynamic characteristics of BUD-SSMs were
investigated.
RESULTS: The optimal concentration of solubilized budesonide at 5 mM
PEG(5000)-DSPE was 605.71 ± 6.38 μg/mL, with a single-sized peak population
determined by photon correlation spectroscopy and a particle size distribution of
21.51 ± 1.5 nm. The zeta potential of BUD-SSMs was -28.43 ± 1.98 mV. The percent 
entrapment efficiency, percent yield, and percent drug loading of the lyophilized
formulations were 100.13% ± 1.09%, 97.98% ± 1.95%, and 2.01% ± 0.02%,
respectively. Budesonide was found to be amorphous by differential scanning
calorimetry, and had no chemical interaction with PEGylated polymer according to 
Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy. Transmission electron microscopic images
of BUD-SSMs revealed spherical nanoparticles. BUD-SSMs exhibited prolonged
dissolution behavior compared with Pulmicort Respules (P < 0.05). Aerodynamic
characteristics indicated significantly higher deposition in the lungs compared
with Pulmicort Respules. The mass median aerodynamic, geometric standard
deviation, percent emitted dose, and the fine particle fraction were 2.83 ± 0.08 
μm, 2.33 ± 0.04 μm, 59.13% ± 0.19%, and 52.31% ± 0.25%, respectively.
Intratracheal administration of BUD-SSMs 23 hours before challenge (1 mg/kg) in
an asthmatic/chronic obstructive pulmonary disease rat model led to a significant
reduction in inflammatory cell counts (76.94 ± 5.11) in bronchoalveolar lavage
fluid compared with administration of Pulmicort Respules (25.06 ± 6.91).
CONCLUSION: The BUD-SSMs system might be advantageous for asthma or chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease and other inflammatory airway diseases.

DOI: 10.2147/IJN.S25363 
PMCID: PMC3205131
PMID: 22072872  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Curr Med Res Opin. 2012 Feb;28(2):257-65. doi: 10.1185/03007995.2011.636420. Epub
2012 Jan 20.

Efficacy and safety of budesonide/formoterol via a dry powder inhaler in Chinese 
patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Zhong N(1), Zheng J, Wen F, Yang L, Chen P, Xiu Q, Yao W, Sun T, Zhao Z, Shen H, 
Shi Y, Lin J, Li Q.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Lab of Respiratory Diseases, The First Affiliated Hospital of
Guangzhou Medical College, Guangzhou, China.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the efficacy and safety of budesonide (BUD)/formoterol
(FORM) compared with BUD, both administered by way of a dry powder inhaler
(Turbuhaler * ). * Turbuhaler is a registered trade name of AstraZeneca,
Södertälje, Sweden.
METHODS: This was a 6-month, multicenter, randomized, parallel-group,
double-blind, double-dummy design study (NCT 00421122). Patients were randomized 
to either BUD/FORM 160/4.5 μg, two inhalations twice daily, or BUD 200 μg, two
inhalations twice daily. Improvement of lung function, daily symptoms, reliever
use and health-related quality-of-life (St George's Respiratory Questionnaire
[SGRQ] score) were compared between the two treatment groups.
RESULTS: A total of 308 patients with moderate to very severe COPD from 12
centers in China were randomized to BUD/FORM (n = 156) or BUD (n = 152). The
primary endpoint, 1-hour post-dose forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1),
in the BUD/FORM group improved by 0.18 L (from 0.83 L at baseline to 1.01 L) and 
this was significantly better (p < 0.001) than the small increase (0.03 L)
observed in the BUD group after 24 weeks' treatment. Increases in pre-dose and
15-min post-dose FEV(1) together with 1-hour post-dose forced vital capacity were
also significantly larger with BUD/FORM than BUD (p < 0.001 for all). Compared
with BUD alone, BUD/FORM improved COPD total symptom scores (-1.04 ± 0.16 vs.
-0.55 ± 0.17; p = 0.03), reduced reliever use (-0.85 ± 0.16 puffs/day vs.
-0.31 ± 0.16 puffs/day; p = 0.012) and improved health-related quality-of-life
(mean change of total SGRQ score -4.5 points (p = 0.0182). Overall, both
treatments were well tolerated.
CONCLUSIONS: In Chinese patients with moderate to very severe COPD, fixed
combination treatment with BUD/FORM resulted in clinically meaningful
improvements in lung function, health-related quality-of-life, COPD symptoms and 
a reduction in reliever use, compared with BUD alone and both treatments were
well tolerated. Treatment of BUD/FORM for milder patients with COPD and head to
head comparison of Chinese and Caucasians in future studies will be helpful to
expand upon the findings of the current clinical trial.

DOI: 10.1185/03007995.2011.636420 
PMID: 22046961  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Respir Med. 2012 Feb;106(2):257-68. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2011.07.020. Epub 2011
Oct 26.

Effect of budesonide/formoterol pMDI on COPD exacerbations: a double-blind,
randomized study.

Sharafkhaneh A(1), Southard JG, Goldman M, Uryniak T, Martin UJ.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Pulmonary, Critical Care and Sleep Medicine, Baylor College of
Medicine and Michael E. DeBakey VA Medical Center Bldg. 100 (111i), Houston, TX
77030, USA. amirs@bcm.edu

BACKGROUND: Treatment with an inhaled corticosteroid (ICS) and long-acting
bronchodilator is recommended for severe/very severe chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD) patients with repeated exacerbations. This randomized,
double-blind, double-dummy, parallel-group, 12-month multicenter study evaluated 
the effect of budesonide/formoterol pressurized metered-dose inhaler (pMDI) on
COPD exacerbations.
METHODS: Following a 2-week run-in during which COPD patients aged ≥40 years with
an exacerbation history discontinued medications except ICSs, 1219 patients were 
randomized 1:1:1 to twice-daily budesonide/formoterol pMDI 320/9 μg,
budesonide/formoterol pMDI 160/9 μg, or formoterol dry powder inhaler 9 μg. An
exacerbation was defined as COPD worsening requiring oral corticosteroids and/or 
hospitalization. A post hoc analysis, with antibiotic treatment added to the
exacerbation definition, was also performed.
RESULTS: Budesonide/formoterol 320/9 and 160/9 reduced exacerbation rates (number
per patient-treatment year) by 34.6% and 25.9%, respectively, versus formoterol
(p ≤ 0.002). Budesonide/formoterol 320/9 prolonged time to first exacerbation
versus formoterol, corresponding to a 21.2% reduction in hazard ratio (0.788 [95%
CI: 0.639, 0.972]; p = 0.026). Exacerbation rates (number per patient-treatment
year) including antibiotic treatment (post hoc analysis) were reduced by 25.9%
and 18.7% with budesonide/formoterol 320/9 and 160/9, respectively, versus
formoterol (p ≤ 0.023). Both budesonide/formoterol doses were well tolerated with
safety profiles similar to formoterol. Pneumonia adverse events occurred in 6.4%,
4.7%, and 2.7% of patients in the budesonide/formoterol 320/9, 160/9, and
formoterol groups.
CONCLUSIONS: Over 12 months, both budesonide/formoterol doses reduced the
exacerbation rate (defined with or without antibiotic treatment) versus
formoterol. Budesonide/formoterol pMDI is an appropriate treatment for reducing
exacerbations in COPD patients with a history of exacerbations. (NCT00419744).

Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2011.07.020 
PMID: 22033040  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2011 Oct 5;(10):CD007033. doi:
10.1002/14651858.CD007033.pub2.

Inhaled corticosteroids versus long-acting beta(2)-agonists for chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease.

Spencer S(1), Evans DJ, Karner C, Cates CJ.

Author information: 
(1)School of Health and Medicine, Lancaster University, Bailrigg, Lancaster,
Lancashire, UK, LA1 4YD.

Update in
    Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2011;(12):CD007033.

BACKGROUND: Long-acting beta(2)-agonists and inhaled corticosteroids can be used 
as maintenance therapy by patients with moderate to severe chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease. These interventions are often taken together in a combination 
inhaler. However, the relative added value of the two individual components is
unclear.
OBJECTIVES: To determine the relative effects of inhaled corticosteroids (ICS)
compared to long-acting beta(2)-agonists (LABA) on clinical outcomes in patients 
with stable chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
SEARCH STRATEGY: We searched the Cochrane Airways Group Specialised Register of
trials (latest search August 2011) and reference lists of articles.
SELECTION CRITERIA: We included randomised controlled trials comparing inhaled
corticosteroids and long-acting beta(2)-agonists in the treatment of patients
with stable chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Three authors independently assessed trials for
inclusion and then extracted data on trial quality, study outcomes and adverse
events. We also contacted study authors for additional information.
MAIN RESULTS: We identified seven randomised trials (5997 participants) of good
quality with a duration of six months to three years. All of the trials compared 
ICS/LABA combination inhalers with LABA and ICS as individual components. Four of
these trials included fluticasone and salmeterol monocomponents and the remaining
three included budesonide and formoterol monocomponents. There was no
statistically significant difference in our primary outcome, the number of
patients experiencing exacerbations (odds ratio (OR) 1.22; 95% CI 0.89 to 1.67), 
or the rate of exacerbations per patient year (rate ratio (RR) 0.96; 95% CI 0.89 
to 1.02) between inhaled corticosteroids and long-acting beta(2)-agonists. The
incidence of pneumonia, our co-primary outcome, was significantly higher among
patients on inhaled corticosteroids than on long-acting beta(2)-agonists whether 
classified as an adverse event (OR 1.38; 95% CI 1.10 to 1.73) or serious adverse 
event (Peto OR 1.48; 95% CI 1.13 to 1.93). Results of the secondary outcomes
analysis were as follows. Mortality was higher in patients on inhaled
corticosteroids compared to patients on long-acting beta(2)-agonists (Peto OR
1.17; 95% CI 0.97 to 1.42), although the difference was not statistically
significant. Patients treated with beta(2)-agonists showed greater improvements
in pre-bronchodilator FEV(1) compared to those treated with inhaled
corticosteroids (mean difference (MD) 18.99 mL; 95% CI 0.52 to 37.46), whilst
greater improvements in health-related quality of life were observed in patients 
receiving inhaled corticosteroids compared to those receiving long-acting
beta(2)-agonists (St George's Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ) MD -0.74; 95% CI
-1.42 to -0.06). In both cases the differences were statistically significant but
rather small in magnitude. There were no statistically significant differences
between ICS and LABA in the number of hospitalisations due to exacerbations,
number of mild exacerbations, peak expiratory flow, dyspnoea, symptoms scores,
use of rescue medication, adverse events, all cause hospitalisations, or
withdrawals from studies.
AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: Placebo-controlled trials have established the benefits of 
both long-acting beta-agonist and inhaled corticosteroid therapy for COPD
patients as individual therapies. This review, which included trials allowing
comparisons between LABA and ICS, has shown that the two therapies confer similar
benefits across the majority of outcomes, including the frequency of
exacerbations and mortality. Use of long-acting beta-agonists appears to confer a
small additional benefit in terms of improvements in lung function compared to
inhaled corticosteroids. On the other hand, inhaled corticosteroid therapy shows 
a small advantage over long-acting beta-agonist therapy in terms of
health-related quality of life, but inhaled corticosteroids also increase the
risk of pneumonia. This review supports current guidelines advocating long-acting
beta-agonists as frontline therapy for COPD, with regular inhaled corticosteroid 
therapy as an adjunct in patients experiencing frequent exacerbations.

DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD007033.pub2 
PMID: 21975759  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. J Med Econ. 2011;14(6):769-76. doi: 10.3111/13696998.2011.622817. Epub 2011 Sep
27.

Comparative effectiveness of budesonide/formoterol and fluticasone/salmeterol for
COPD management.

Roberts M(1), Mapel D, Petersen H, Blanchette C, Ramachandran S.

Author information: 
(1)Lovelace Clinic Foundation, Albuquerque, NM, USA. mroberts@lcfresearch.org

OBJECTIVE: To compare the effectiveness of budesonide/formoterol fumarate
dihydrate (BFC) and fluticasone propionate/salmeterol (FSC), two combination
inhaled corticosteroid/long-acting beta-agonist (ICS/LABA) products approved for 
the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) in the US with
respect to cost, therapy adherence, and related healthcare utilization. The
effectiveness of these two treatments has not previously been compared in a US
COPD population.
METHODS: A retrospective cohort study assessed COPD-related outcomes using
administrative claims data among ICS/LABA-naïve patients. Patients initiating BFC
were propensity matched to FSC patients. Cost and effectiveness were measured as 
total healthcare expenditures, exacerbation events (hospitalizations, emergency
department visits, or outpatient visits associated with oral corticosteroid or
antibiotic prescription fills), and treatment medication adherence. Differences
in COPD symptom control were assessed via proxy measure through claims for rescue
medications and outpatient encounters.
RESULTS: Of the 6770 patients (3385 BFC and 3385 FSC), fewer BFC patients had
claims for short-acting beta agonists (SABA) (34.7% vs 39.5%; p<0.001) and
ipratropium (7.8% vs 9.8%, p<0.005) than FSC patients, but no substantial
differences were seen in other clinical outcomes including tiotropium or
nebulized SABA claims, COPD-related outpatient visits, or exacerbation events.
There were no significant differences in total COPD-related medical costs in the 
6-month period after initiation of combination therapy.
LIMITATIONS: This was a retrospective observational study using claims data and
accuracy of COPD diagnoses could not be verified, nor was information available
on severity of disease. The results and conclusions of this study are limited to 
the population observed and the operational definitions of the study variables.
CONCLUSIONS: For most outcomes of interest, BFC and FSC showed comparable
real-world effectiveness.

DOI: 10.3111/13696998.2011.622817 
PMID: 21942463  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Eur J Pharmacol. 2011 Nov 16;670(1):244-51. doi: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2011.08.022.
Epub 2011 Sep 2.

Long-acting fluticasone furoate has a superior pharmacological profile to
fluticasone propionate in human respiratory cells.

Rossios C(1), To Y, To M, Ito M, Barnes PJ, Adcock IM, Johnson M, Ito K.

Author information: 
(1)Airway Disease Section, National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College
London, London SW3 6LY, United Kingdom.

Currently available glucocorticoids are relatively short acting and may be less
effective in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) where
high levels of oxidative stress are seen. Here we show that a novel
glucocorticoid, fluticasone furoate (FF), has a longer duration of action in
several cell systems compared with fluticasone propionate (FP) and budesonide,
and unlike FP, FF is resistant to oxidative stress. FF had similar or slightly
higher potency to FP and was 2-9 fold more potent than budesonide, when assessed 
at 4h, in inhibiting inflammatory cytokine production in epithelial cell lines
(BEAS2B, A549), primary bronchial epithelial cells and a monocytic cell line
(U937). The potency of FF was sustained beyond 16 h with or without washout
compared with FP or budesonide, such that it showed a greater duration of action 
in this range of cellular assays. The activated YFP-conjugated glucocorticoid
receptor was detectable in nuclei of FF treated BEAS2B cells for at least for 30 
h, and FF had a longer duration of action than FP in inhibiting activation of
transcription factors such as NF-κB and AP-1. In addition, FF showed superior
effects to FP in peripheral blood mononuclear cells from patients with COPD and
also in U937 cells or primary bronchial epithelial cells under conditions of
oxidative stress. The longer duration of action and oxidative stress
insensitivity of FF compared with FP has potential clinical implications for the 
control of inflammation in respiratory diseases, such as COPD.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2011.08.022 
PMID: 21920359  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2011;6:329-44. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S18759. Epub
2011 Jun 8.

Comparative efficacy of indacaterol 150 μg and 300 μg versus fixed-dose
combinations of formoterol + budesonide or salmeterol + fluticasone for the
treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease--a network meta-analysis.

Cope S(1), Capkun-Niggli G, Gale R, Jardim JR, Jansen JP.

Author information: 
(1)Mapi Values, Boston, MA, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To compare efficacy of indacaterol to that of fixed-dose combination
(FDC) formoterol and budesonide (FOR/BUD) and FDC salmeterol and fluticasone
(SAL/FP) for the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) based 
on the available randomized clinical trials (RCTs).
METHODS: Fifteen placebo-controlled RCTs were included that evaluated:
indacaterol 150 μg (n = 5 studies), indacaterol 300 μg (n = 4), FOR/BUD 9/160 μg 
(n = 2), FOR/BUD 9/320 μg (n = 3), SAL/FP 50/500 μg (n = 5), and SAL/FP 50/250 μg
(n = 1). Outcomes of interest were trough forced expiratory volume in 1 second
(FEV(1)), total scores for St. George's Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ), and
transition dyspnea index (TDI). All trials were analyzed simultaneously using a
Bayesian network meta-analysis and relative treatment effects between all
regimens were obtained. Treatment-by-covariate interactions were included where
possible to improve the similarity of the trials.
RESULTS: Indacaterol 150 μg resulted in a higher change from baseline (CFB) in
FEV(1) at 12 weeks compared to FOR/BUD 9/160 μg (difference in CFB 0.11 L [95%
credible intervals: 0.08, 0.13]) and FOR/BUD 9/320 μg (0.09 L [0.06, 0.11]) and
was comparable to SAL/FP 50/250 μg (0.02 L [-0.04, 0.08]) and SAL/FP 50/500 μg
(0.03 L [0.00, 0.06]). Similar results were observed for indacaterol 300 μg at 12
weeks and indacaterol 150/300 μg at 6 months. Indacaterol 150 μg demonstrated
comparable improvement in SGRQ total score at 6 months versus FOR/BUD (both
doses), and SAL/FP 50/500 μg (-2.16 point improvement [-4.96, 0.95]). Indacaterol
150 and 300 μg demonstrated comparable TDI scores versus SAL/FP 50/250 μg (0.21
points (-0.57, 0.99); 0.39 [-0.39, 1.17], respectively) and SAL/FP 50/500 μg at 6
months.
CONCLUSION: Indacaterol monotherapy is expected to be at least as good as FOR/BUD
(9/320 and 9/160 μg) and comparable to SAL/FP (50/250 and 50/500 μg) in terms of 
lung function. Indacaterol is also expected to be comparable to FOR/BUD (9/320
and 9/160 μg) and SAL/FP 50/500 μg in terms of health status and to SAL/FP
(50/250 and 50/500 μg) in terms of breathlessness.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S18759 
PMCID: PMC3119108
PMID: 21697997  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Int J Clin Pract. 2011 Jul;65(7):764-74. doi: 10.1111/j.1742-1241.2011.02685.x.

Budesonide/formoterol vs. salmeterol/fluticasone in COPD: a systematic review and
adjusted indirect comparison of pneumonia in randomised controlled trials.

Halpin DM(1), Gray J, Edwards SJ, Morais J, Singh D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Royal Devon & Exeter Hospital, Exeter, UK.

AIMS: This analysis was designed to provide a comparison between
budesonide/formoterol and salmeterol/fluticasone for the relative incidence of
pneumonia adverse events, pneumonia serious adverse events and pneumonia-related 
mortality in patients being treated for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
METHODS: An initial literature search revealed no suitable head-to-head trials
between budesonide/formoterol and salmeterol/fluticasone and therefore a
systematic review was conducted to find randomised controlled trials providing
data for input into an adjusted indirect comparison of the two combination
treatments using placebo as a common comparator. The Bucher adjusted indirect
comparison method was used to calculate odds ratios and 95% confidence intervals.
RESULTS: Eight salmeterol/fluticasone trials and four budesonide/formoterol
trials were identified as being relevant for the analyses. The proportion of
patients experiencing a pneumonia adverse event was significantly lower with
budesonide/formoterol than salmeterol/fluticasone (odds ratio, 0.47; 95%
confidence interval, 0.28-0.80). The proportion of patients experiencing a
pneumonia serious adverse event was also significantly lower with
budesonide/formoterol than salmeterol/fluticasone (odds ratio, 0.41; 95%
confidence interval, 0.19-0.86). However, there were too few events to draw any
firm conclusions on pneumonia-related mortality.
CONCLUSIONS: The results of the indirect comparison support the hypothesis that
budesonide/formoterol is associated with fewer pneumonia events than
salmeterol/fluticasone in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. The limitations 
of the analysis are that the results from a single study, TORCH, have a large
bearing on the overall findings of the analysis, and that there is heterogeneity 
in the length and the dosing of the included studies, although it does not appear
that heterogeneity affected the reported results. Another important limitation is
the lack of predefined diagnostic standards for pneumonia in these studies.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1742-1241.2011.02685.x 
PMID: 21676119  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2011 Sep;338(3):860-9. doi: 10.1124/jpet.111.181016. Epub
2011 May 27.

Inflammatory stimuli inhibit glucocorticoid-dependent transactivation in human
pulmonary epithelial cells: rescue by long-acting beta2-adrenoceptor agonists.

Rider CF(1), King EM, Holden NS, Giembycz MA, Newton R.

Author information: 
(1)Airways Inflammation Research Group, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada.

By repressing inflammatory gene expression, glucocorticoids are the most
effective treatment for chronic inflammatory diseases such as asthma. However, in
some patients with severe disease, or who smoke or suffer from chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease, glucocorticoids are poorly effective. Although
many investigators focus on defects in the repression of inflammatory gene
expression, glucocorticoids also induce (transactivate) the expression of
numerous genes to elicit anti-inflammatory effects. Using human bronchial
epithelial (BEAS-2B) and pulmonary (A549) cells, we show that cytokines [tumor
necrosis factor α (TNFα) and interleukin 1β], mitogens [fetal calf serum (FCS)
and phorbol ester], cigarette smoke, and a G(q)-linked G protein-coupled receptor
agonist attenuate simple glucocorticoid response element (GRE)-dependent
transcription. With TNFα and FCS, this effect was not overcome by increasing
concentrations of dexamethasone, budesonide, or fluticasone propionate. Thus, the
maximal ability of the glucocorticoid to promote GRE-dependent transcription was 
reduced, and this was shown additionally for the glucocorticoid-induced gene
p57(KIP2). The long-acting β(2)-adrenoceptor agonists (LABAs) formoterol fumarate
and salmeterol xinafoate enhanced simple GRE-dependent transcription to a level
that could not be achieved by glucocorticoid alone. In the presence of TNFα or
FCS, which repressed glucocorticoid responsiveness, these LABAs restored
glucocorticoid-dependent transcription to levels that were achieved by
glucocorticoid alone. Given the existence of genes, such as p57(KIP2), which may 
mediate anti-inflammatory actions of glucocorticoids, we propose that repression 
of transactivation represents a mechanism for glucocorticoid resistance and for
understanding the clinical benefit of LABAs as an add-on therapy in asthma and
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

DOI: 10.1124/jpet.111.181016 
PMID: 21622733  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Thorax. 2011 Aug;66(8):699-708. doi: 10.1136/thx.2011.160028. Epub 2011 May 20.

Risk of fractures with inhaled corticosteroids in COPD: systematic review and
meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials and observational studies.

Loke YK(1), Cavallazzi R, Singh S.

Author information: 
(1)School of Medicine, University of East Anglia, Norwich NR4 7TJ, UK.
y.loke@uea.ac.uk

Comment in
    Evid Based Med. 2012 Jun;17(3):90-1.
    Ann Intern Med. 2012 Mar 20;156(6):JC3-7.

BACKGROUND: The effect of inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) on fracture risk in
patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) remains uncertain. The
aim of this study was to evaluate the association between ICS and fractures in
COPD.
METHODS: MEDLINE, EMBASE, regulatory documents and company registries were
searched up to August 2010. Randomised controlled trials (RCTs) of budesonide or 
fluticasone versus control treatment for COPD (≥24 weeks duration) and controlled
observational studies reporting on fracture risk with ICS exposure vs no exposure
in COPD were included. Peto OR meta-analysis was used for fracture risk from RCTs
while ORs from observational studies were pooled using the fixed effect inverse
variance method. Dose-response analysis was conducted using variance-weighted
least squares regression in the observational studies. Heterogeneity was assessed
using the I(2) statistic.
RESULTS: Sixteen RCTs (14 fluticasone, 2 budesonide) with 17,513 participants,
and seven observational studies (n=69,000 participants) were included in the
meta-analysis. ICSs were associated with a significantly increased risk of
fractures (Peto OR 1.27; 95% CI 1.01 to 1.58; p=0.04; I(2)=0%) in the RCTs. In
the observational studies, ICS exposure was associated with a significantly
increased risk of fractures (OR 1.21; 95% CI 1.12 to 1.32; p<0.001; I(2)=37%),
with each 500 μg increase in beclomethasone dose equivalents associated with a 9%
increased risk of fractures, OR 1.09 (95% CI 1.06 to 1.12; p<0.001).
CONCLUSION: Among patients with COPD, long-term exposure to fluticasone and
budesonide is consistently associated with a modest but statistically significant
increased likelihood of fractures.

DOI: 10.1136/thx.2011.160028 
PMID: 21602540  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Respir Med. 2011 Aug;105(8):1176-88. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2011.02.020. Epub 2011
Apr 30.

Bronchodilator responsiveness and onset of effect with budesonide/formoterol pMDI
in COPD.

Celli BR(1), Tashkin DP, Rennard SI, McElhattan J, Martin UJ.

Author information: 
(1)Harvard University, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Pulmonary and Critical Care 
Medicine, Boston, MA 02115, USA. bcelli@copdnet.org

BACKGROUND: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) patients are thought to 
have limited bronchodilator response, determined by changes in forced expiratory 
volume in 1s (FEV(1)). In this study, we assessed bronchodilator response in
patients with COPD using not only FEV(1) but also changes in lung volume
expressed as forced vital capacity (FVC) and inspiratory capacity (IC). We also
evaluated the speed of onset of bronchodilation.
METHODS: Data were from 2 randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled studies
(6-months [NCT00206154]; 12-months [NCT00206167]) in patients with moderate to
very severe COPD.
TREATMENTS: twice daily budesonide/formoterol pressurized metered-dose inhaler
(pMDI) 320/9μg, budesonide/formoterol pMDI 160/9μg, formoterol dry powder inhaler
(DPI) 9μg, placebo.
RESULTS: The percentage of patients with FEV(1) improvement (≥12% and ≥200mL;
American Thoracic Society [ATS] criterion) was 34-39% post-albuterol (screening).
On day of randomization (DOR), a larger proportion receiving
formoterol-containing treatment exhibited reversibility within 60min: FEV(1)
(57-59%). Similar results were seen for IC (50-61%) and FVC (57-67%) using the
same improvement criteria. The time to ≥15% FEV(1) improvement on DOR was 5.0,
4.8, and 7.3min for budesonide/formoterol 320/9, budesonide/formoterol 160/9, and
formoterol, respectively. Time to ≥15% FEV(1) improvement was better maintained
with budesonide/formoterol than formoterol at treatment end (6 and 12 months).
CONCLUSIONS: Most patients with moderate to very severe COPD exhibit ATS-defined 
bronchodilator reversibility based on flow and lung volume measures after
budesonide/formoterol pMDI or formoterol treatment. Budesonide/formoterol pMDI
also has a rapid (within 5min) onset of bronchodilation that is maintained over
time compared with formoterol alone.

Copyright © 2011. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2011.02.020 
PMID: 21531124  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Pharmacoeconomics. 2011 May;29(5):403-14. doi: 10.2165/11590380-000000000-00000.

Cost effectiveness of budesonide/formoterol added to tiotropium bromide versus
placebo added to tiotropium bromide in patients with chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease: Australian, Canadian and Swedish healthcare perspectives.

Mittmann N(1), Hernandez P, Mellström C, Brannman L, Welte T.

Author information: 
(1)Health Outcomes and PharmacoEconomic (HOPE) Research Centre, Sunnybrook Health
Sciences Centre, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
nicole.mittmann@sunnybrook.ca

BACKGROUND: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a progressive
inflammatory lung disease associated with increasing morbidity and mortality and 
an economic burden that stretches beyond the patient to healthcare systems.
Avoiding exacerbations and subsequent hospitalizations is an important clinical
aim and can avoid significant costs associated with the disease. International
guidelines recommend the addition of an inhaled corticosteroid (ICS) to a
long-acting β₂-adrenoceptor agonist (LABA) for patients with severe to very
severe COPD and a history of exacerbations.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate retrospectively over a 3-month period, the cost
effectiveness of budesonide/formoterol added to tiotropium bromide (tiotropium)
compared with placebo added to tiotropium in COPD patients eligible for ICS/LABA 
combination therapy, based on the CLIMB study (NCT00496470).
METHODS: A cost-effectiveness analysis of data from the 12-week, randomized,
double-blind CLIMB study of COPD patients (n = 659; eligible for ICS/LABA; aged ≥
40 years) comparing budesonide/formoterol (Symbicort® Turbuhaler® 320/9 μg twice 
daily) added to tiotropium (18 μg daily) or placebo added to tiotropium was
conducted. A severe exacerbation was defined as a requirement for systemic
glucocorticosteroids and/or ED visit and/or hospitalization. The effectiveness
variable used for this analysis was the number of severe exacerbations avoided.
Direct costs (medications, hospitalizations, ED and GP visits) were calculated by
applying year 2009 unit costs from Australia ($A), Canada ($Can) and Sweden
(Swedish krona [SEK]) to the study's pooled resource use. One-way sensitivity
analyses for each country's mean incremental cost-effectiveness ratio and
sensitivity to overall exacerbations were conducted. Bootstrapping was performed 
to estimate the variation around resource use, exacerbations and each country's
mean incremental cost-effectiveness ratio.
RESULTS: The mean number of severe exacerbations per patient 3-month period was
0.11 in the budesonide/formoterol added to tiotropium arm and 0.29 in the placebo
added to tiotropium arm--a 62% reduction in the rate of severe exacerbations.
Treatment with budesonide/formoterol added to tiotropium costs less in Australia 
and Canada (-$A90 [-€58] and -$Can4.51 [-€3]) and only slightly more in Sweden
(SEK444 [€43]), i.e. the savings associated with fewer exacerbations more than
offset the additional budesonide/formoterol drug cost in Australia and Canada,
and partially offset it in Sweden. In the Australian and Canadian perspectives,
budesonide/formoterol added to tiotropium was a dominant treatment (fewer
exacerbations at a lower cost) compared with placebo added to tiotropium. In
Sweden, the estimated incremental cost per avoided exacerbation was SEK2502
(€244.40).
CONCLUSION: Budesonide/formoterol added to tiotropium was the dominant strategy
compared with placebo added to tiotropium based on a 12-week study in COPD
patients eligible for ICS/LABA combination therapy in Australia and Canada, and
appears to be a cost-effective strategy in Sweden.

DOI: 10.2165/11590380-000000000-00000 
PMID: 21504240  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Med Clin (Barc). 2011 Sep 17;137(7):302-4. doi: 10.1016/j.medcli.2010.10.026.
Epub 2011 Mar 10.

[Risk of pneumonia with inhaled corticosteroids for stable chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease patients].

[Article in Spanish]

Ruiz García V(1), Compte Torrero L.

Author information: 
(1)Unidad de Hospitalización a Domicilio, CASP, Hospital Universitario La Fe,
Valencia, España. vicenteruizgarcia@gmail.com

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Treatment with inhaled steroids is related to pneumonia
and acute respiratory infection. The aim of this review is to quantify the effect
inhaled steroids in pneumonia in stable chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD) patients.
MATERIAL AND METHOD: We performed a systematic review of the systematic reviews
that have studied inhaled corticosteroids in stable COPD patients.
RESULTS: Inhaled steroid therapy in patients with clinically stable COPD causes
an increase in the number of pneumonia. The NNTH of the analysed systematic
reviews ranged from 12 subjects exposed to more than three years, to 80 subjects 
with one year follow up. Budesonide did not show this side effect.
CONCLUSION: It would be advisable to inform patients about the risk/benefit of
these therapies.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier España, S.L. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.medcli.2010.10.026 
PMID: 21396667  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Clin Exp Allergy. 2011 Apr;41(4):535-46. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2222.2011.03715.x.

Oxidative stress-induced glucocorticoid resistance is prevented by dual PDE3/PDE4
inhibition in human alveolar macrophages.

Milara J(1), Navarro A, Almudéver P, Lluch J, Morcillo EJ, Cortijo J.

Author information: 
(1)Research Unit, University General Hospital Consortium, Valencia, Spain.
xmilara@hotmail.com

BACKGROUND: Oxidative stress is present in airway diseases such as severe asthma 
or Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease and contributes to the low response to
glucocorticoids through the down-regulation of histone deacetylase (HDAC)
activity.
OBJECTIVE: To study the effects of the phosphodiesterase (PDE)-3 and 4 inhibitors
and their combination vs. glucocorticoids in a model of lipopolysaccharide
(LPS)-induced cytokine release in alveolar macrophages under oxidative stress
conditions.
METHODS: Differentiated U937 or human alveolar macrophages were stimulated with
H(2) O(2) (10-1000 μM) or cigarette smoke extract (CSE, 0-15%) for 4 h before LPS
(0.5 μg/mL, 24 h) addition. In other experiments, cells were pre-treated with
dexamethasone or budesonide (10(-9) -10(-6) M), with the PDE4 inhibitor rolipram 
(10(-9) -10(-5) M), PDE3 inhibitor motapizone (10 μM), 3',5'-cyclic monophosphate
enhancer PGE(2) (10 nM), or with the combination of rolipram (10(-6) M)+PGE(2)
(10 nM)+motapizone (10 μM) 15 min before oxidants. IL-8 and TNF-α were measured
by ELISA and HDAC activity by a colorimetric assay.
RESULTS: Budesonide and dexamethasone produced a concentration-dependent
inhibition of the LPS-induced IL-8 and TNF-α secretion with an E(max) about 90%
of inhibition, which was reduced by approximately 30% in the presence of H(2)O(2)
or CSE. Pre-treatment with rolipram, motapizone or PGE2 only reached about 20% of
inhibition but was not affected by oxidative stress. In contrast, PDE4/PDE3
combination in presence of PGE2 effectively inhibited the LPS-induced cytokine
secretion by about 90% and was not affected by oxidative stress. Combined PDE4
and PDE3 inhibition reversed glucocorticoid resistance under oxidative stress
conditions. HDAC activity was reduced in the presence of oxidative stress, and in
contrast to glucocorticoids, pre-treatment with PDE4/PDE3 combination was able to
prevent HDAC inactivity.
CONCLUSIONS & CLINICAL RELEVANCE: This study shows that the combination of the
PDE3/PDE4 inhibitors prevents alveolar macrophage activation in those situations 
of glucocorticoid resistance, which may be of potential interest to develop new
effective anti-inflammatory drugs in airway diseases.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2222.2011.03715.x 
PMID: 21395877  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Arch Bronconeumol. 2010;46 Suppl 8:20-4. doi: 10.1016/S0300-2896(10)70063-6.

[Importance and variability of symptoms in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
Their significance for treatment].

[Article in Spanish]

López-Campos JL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Unidad Médico-Quirúrgica de Enfermedades Respiratorias, Hospital Universitario
Virgen del Rocío, Seville, Spain. lcampos@separ.es

Assessment of patients with COPD has changed in the last few years by adding
subjective patient evaluations to traditional measurements based on pulmonary
function. One of the most recently studied variables is symptom variability
during the day and, specifically, patients' perceptions of these symptoms in the 
first few hours of the day. To evaluate this feature, two new symptom
questionnaires, the Capacity of Daily Living in the Morning (CDLM) questionnaire 
and the Global Chest Symptoms Questionnaire (GCSQ), have recently been developed.
Recent studies have begun to provide data on the effect of the available
treatments on these morning symptoms, yielding information on the rapidity of
action of budesonide/formoterol with a significant and nearly clinically relevant
effect on morning activities. Confirmation of these results could lead to future 
strategies designed to earlier symptomatic improvement, which could lead to
greater treatment adherence.

Copyright © 2010 Sociedad Española de Neumología y Cirugía Torácica. Published by
Elsevier Espana. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S0300-2896(10)70063-6 
PMID: 21334552  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2011 May;337(2):465-70. doi: 10.1124/jpet.110.175950. Epub 
2011 Feb 7.

Nortriptyline reverses corticosteroid insensitivity by inhibition of
phosphoinositide-3-kinase-δ.

Mercado N(1), To Y, Ito K, Barnes PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Airway Disease Section, National Heart and Lung Institute, Dovehouse St.,
London, SW3 6LY, United Kingdom.

Corticosteroid insensitivity represents a major barrier to the treatment of
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and severe asthma. It is caused by
oxidative stress, leading to reduced histone deacetylase-2 (HDAC2) function
through activation of phosphoinositide-3-kinase-δ (PI3Kδ). The tricyclic
antidepressant nortriptyline has been identified in high-throughput screens as an
agent that increases corticosteroid responsiveness. The aim of this study was to 
identify the molecular mechanism whereby nortriptyline increases corticosteroid
sensitivity. Phosphorylation of Akt, a footprint of PI3K activation, and HDAC
activity were evaluated by Western blotting and fluorescent activity assay in
U937 monocytic cells. Corticosteroid sensitivity was evaluated by the inhibition 
of tumor necrosis factor α (TNFα)-induced interleukin 8 (IL-8) production by
budesonide. Hydrogen peroxide (H(2)O(2)) or cigarette smoke extract (CSE)
increased the level of phosphorylated Akt (pAkt) and reduced HDAC activity.
Pretreatment with nortriptyline inhibited pAkt induced by CSE and H(2)O(2) as
well as restored HDAC activity that had been decreased by H(2)O(2) and CSE. In
addition, nortriptyline inhibited PI3Kδ activity, but had no effect on the PI3Kα 
and PI3Kγ isoforms. Although CSE reduced the effects of budesonide on
TNFα-induced IL-8 production in U937 cells, nortriptyline reversed CSE-induced
corticosteroid insensitivity. Nortriptyline restores corticosteroid sensitivity
induced by oxidative stress via direct inhibition of PI3Kδ and is a potential
treatment for corticosteroid-insensitive diseases such as COPD and severe asthma.

DOI: 10.1124/jpet.110.175950 
PMCID: PMC3083104
PMID: 21300705  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Pharmacol Ther. 2011 May;130(2):114-43. doi: 10.1016/j.pharmthera.2010.12.008.
Epub 2011 Jan 27.

The use of long acting β₂-agonists, alone or in combination with inhaled
corticosteroids, in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD): a risk-benefit 
analysis.

Cave AC(1), Hurst MM.

Author information: 
(1)Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency, 151 Buckingham Palace
Road, London SW1W9SZ , United Kingdom. Alison.Cave@mhra.gsi.gov.uk

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a slowly progressive, largely
non-reversible pulmonary disease which is characterised by airflow limitation. It
is one of the few diseases with an increasing mortality rate and by 2020 it is
predicted to be the third leading cause of death. The mainstays of current
treatment are long acting β₂ agonists (LABAs) coupled with an increasing reliance
on inhaled corticosteroids (ICS). Two LABAs (salmeterol and formoterol) are
currently licensed for COPD both as monotherapy and in combination with ICS
(fluticasone propionate (FP) and budesonide respectively). A comprehensive review
of the risk-benefit of these medicines in COPD is provided here which concludes
that there is limited efficacy for LABAs in COPD either alone or in combination
with ICS and no overall modification of the disease process. However, where
directly compared, combination therapy usually provides an advantage over
monotherapy. Importantly the apparent effectiveness of treatment may
significantly depend upon the outcome measure chosen with some measures possibly 
underestimating the extent of benefit. ICS benefit may also be greater in those
patients who respond to treatment. Set against this benefit are recent concerns
that a number of issues related to the clinical trial design such as prior use of
ICS and different withdrawal rates between groups may be significantly
influencing results. Furthermore there is no evidence of a dose response
relationship with regard to ICS dose. A key issue with combination therapy is the
excess risk of pneumonia conferred by the use of an ICS in this patient
population. This risk does not appear to be proportional to the ICS dose but may 
differ between FP and budesonide. We conclude that further studies are required
to identify the optimal dose of ICS, in terms of both risk and benefit, and to
confirm their benefit in steroid naïve patients. Furthermore it will be important
to determine whether the risk of pneumonia is apparent with both FP and
budesonide and to identify factors which may predict steroid responsiveness in
COPD.

Crown Copyright © 2011. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pharmthera.2010.12.008 
PMID: 21276815  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Bioimpacts. 2011;1(2):105-11. doi: 10.5681/bi.2011.014. Epub 2011 Aug 5.

Investigation into alternative sugars as potential carriers for dry powder
formulation of budesonide.

Momin MN(1), Hedayati A, Nokhodchi A.

Author information: 
(1)Medway School of Pharmacy, Universities of Kent and Greenwich, Kent, England, 
UK.

INTRODUCTION: Dry powder inhaler (DPI) formulations are so far being used for
pulmonary drug delivery, mainly for the treatment of asthma and chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Currently most of DPI formulations rely on 
lactose as a carrier in the drug powder blend. However, due to reducing sugar
function of lactose which makes it incompatible with some drugs such as
budesonide, it is realistic to investigate for alternative sugars that would
overcome the concerned drawback but still have the positive aspects of lactose.
METHODS: The study was conducted by characterizing carriers for their
physico-chemical properties and preparing drug/carrier blends with concentration 
of 5% and 10% drug with the carrier. The mixing uniformity (homogeneity) of
Budesonide in the blends was analyzed using spectrophotometer. The blend was then
filled into NB7/2 Airmax inhaler device and the deposition profiles of the drug
were determined using multi stage liquid impinger (MSLI) after aerosolization at 
4 kPa via the inhaler. The morphology of the carriers conducted using the
scanning electron microscope.
RESULTS: The results determined that the mean fine particle fraction (FPF) of 5% 
and 10% blends of mannitol was 61%, possibly due to fine elongated particles.
Dextrose exhibited excellent flowability. Scanning electron microscope
illustrated mannitol with fine elongated particles and dextrose presenting larger
and coarse particles. It was found out that type of carriers, particle size
distribution, and morphology would influence the FPF of budesonide.
CONCLUSION: It may be concluded that mannitol could be suitable as a carrier on
the basis of its pharmaceutical performance and successful achievement of FPF
whereas the more hygroscopic sugars such as sorbitol or xylitol showed poor
dispersibility leading to lower FPF.

DOI: 10.5681/bi.2011.014 
PMCID: PMC3648955
PMID: 23678414  [PubMed]


125. Expert Rev Respir Med. 2010 Dec;4(6):703-14. doi: 10.1586/ers.10.77.

Budesonide and formoterol in a single pressurized metered-dose inhaler for
treatment of COPD.

Tashkin DP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, 10833 Le
Conte Avenue, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA. dtashkin@mednet.ucla.edu

Budesonide/formoterol in two dosage strengths (80/4.5 µg and 160/4.5 µg), each
administered as two inhalations twice daily, was previously developed as a
fixed-dose inhaled corticosteroid/long-acting β-agonist combination in a
pressurized metered-dose inhaler for use in asthma. More recent double-blind,
randomized controlled trials of 6 and 12 months duration (referred to,
respectively, as SHINE and SUN) have demonstrated the efficacy and safety of the 
higher-dose formulation in patients with severe and very severe chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease. Specifically, budesonide/formoterol 160/4.5 µg
(two inhalations twice daily) has demonstrated additive benefits over one or the 
other of its monocomponents with respect to improvements in morning predose and
1-h postdose lung function, as well as greater improvements in respiratory
symptoms, health status and rescue medication use, and greater reductions in
exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease than placebo. It also has 
a satisfactory safety profile and has not been shown to increase the risk of
pneumonia.

DOI: 10.1586/ers.10.77 
PMID: 21128746  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2010 Oct 5;5:357-66. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S4215.

Budesonide/formoterol combination in COPD: a US perspective.

Sharafkhaneh A(1), Mattewal AS, Abraham VM, Dronavalli G, Hanania NA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.
amirs@bcm.tmc.edu

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a preventable and treatable
disease of the lung caused primarily by exposure to cigarette smoke. Clinically, 
it presents with progressive cough, sputum production, dyspnea, reduced exercise 
capacity, and diminished quality of life. Physiologically, it is characterized by
the presence of partially reversible expiratory airflow limitation and
hyperinflation. Pathologically, COPD is a multicomponent disease characterized by
bronchial submucosal mucous gland hypertrophy, bronchiolar mucosal hyperplasia,
increased luminal inflammatory mucus, airway wall inflammation and scarring, and 
alveolar wall damage and destruction. Management of COPD involves both
pharmacological and nonpharmacological approaches. Bronchodilators and inhaled
corticosteroids are recommended medications for management of COPD especially in 
more severe disease. Combination therapies containing these medications are now
available for the chronic management of stable COPD. The US Food and Drug
Administration, recently, approved the combination of budesonide/formoterol
(160/4.5 μg; Symbicort™, AstraZeneca, Sweden) delivered via a pressurized meter
dose inhaler for maintenance management of stable COPD. The combination also is
delivered via dry powder inhaler (Symbicort™ and Turbuhaler™, AstraZeneca,
Sweden) but is not approved for use in the United States. In this review, we
evaluate available data of the efficacy and safety of this combination in
patients with COPD.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S4215 
PMCID: PMC2962302
PMID: 21037960  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Respir Med. 2010 Dec;104(12):1858-68. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2010.09.008. Epub 2010 
Oct 20.

Beclomethasone/formoterol in the management of COPD: a randomised controlled
trial.

Calverley PM(1), Kuna P, Monsó E, Costantini M, Petruzzelli S, Sergio F, Varoli
G, Papi A, Brusasco V.

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary and Rehabilitation Research Group, Dept of Medicine, Clinical
Sciences, University Hospital Aintree, Longmoor Lane, Liverpool, United Kingdom. 
pmacal@liverpool.ac.uk

OBJECTIVES: To evaluate the effect of beclomethasone/formoterol versus
budesonide/formoterol (non-inferiority) and versus formoterol (superiority) in
patients with severe stable chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
METHODS: A double-blind, double-dummy, randomised, active-controlled,
parallel-group study. After 4 weeks run-in with ipratropium/salbutamol
(40/200 μg, three times daily) patients were randomised to receive
beclomethasone/formoterol (200/12 μg pressurised metered dose inhaler),
budesonide/formoterol (400/12 μg dry powder inhaler) or formoterol (12 μg dry
powder inhaler) twice daily for 48 weeks. Co-primary efficacy variables were
change from baseline to 48 weeks in pre-dose morning forced expiratory volume in 
1 s (FEV(1)) and mean rate of COPD exacerbations.
RESULTS: Of 718 patients randomised, 703 (232 beclomethasone/formoterol, 238
budesonide/formoterol, 233 formoterol) were in the ITT analysis. Improvement in
pre-dose morning FEV(1) was 0.077 L, 0.080 L and 0.026 L for
beclomethasone/formoterol, budesonide/formoterol and formoterol respectively (LS 
mean from the ANCOVA model). Beclomethasone/formoterol was not inferior to
budesonide/formoterol (95% CI of the difference -0.052, 0.048) and superior to
formoterol (p = 0.046). The overall rate of COPD exacerbations/patient/year was
similar and not statistically significantly different among treatments
(beclomethasone/formoterol 0.414, budesonide/formoterol 0.423 and formoterol
0.431). Quality of life and COPD symptoms improved in all groups and use of
rescue medication decreased. Safety profiles were as expected and treatments
well-tolerated.
CONCLUSIONS: Beclomethasone/formoterol (400/24 μg) treatment for 48 weeks
improved pulmonary function, reduced symptoms compared to formoterol, was safe
and well-tolerated in patients with severe stable COPD. Neither of the
long-acting β2-agonist/inhaled corticosteroid combinations affected the low
exacerbation rate seen in this population.

Copyright © 2010. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2010.09.008 
PMID: 20965712  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2011 Mar 1;183(5):589-95. doi:
10.1164/rccm.201005-0694OC. Epub 2010 Oct 1.

Risks of pneumonia in patients with asthma taking inhaled corticosteroids.

O'Byrne PM(1), Pedersen S, Carlsson LG, Radner F, Thorén A, Peterson S, Ernst P, 
Suissa S.

Author information: 
(1)Firestone Institute for Respiratory Health, Michael G. DeGroote School of
Medicine, Faculty of Health Sciences, McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario,
Canada. obyrnep@mcmaster.ca

RATIONALE: Inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) are the mainstay of asthma treatment.
Studies in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease reported increased rates of
pneumonia with ICS. Concerns exist about an increased pneumonia risk in patients 
with asthma taking ICS.
OBJECTIVES: To evaluate the risks of pneumonia in patients with asthma taking
ICS.
METHODS: A retrospective analysis evaluated studies of the ICS budesonide in
asthma. The primary data set were all double-blind, placebo-controlled trials
lasting at least 3 months, involving budesonide (26 trials, n = 9,067 for
budesonide; n = 5,926 for the comparator) sponsored by AstraZeneca. A secondary
data set evaluated all double-blind trials lasting at least 3 months but without 
placebo control (60 trials, n = 33,496 for budesonide, n = 2,773 for fluticasone 
propionate). Cox proportional hazards regression modeling was used to estimate
the relative effect of ICS on pneumonia adverse events (AEs) or serious adverse
events (SAEs).
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: In the primary data set, the occurrence of
pneumonia AEs was 0.5% (rate 10.0 events/1,000 patient-years [TPY]) for
budesonide and 1.2% (19.3 per TPY) for placebo (hazard ratio, 0.52; 95%
confidence interval, 0.36-0.76; P < 0.001); the occurrence of pneumonia SAEs was 
0.15% (2.9 per TPY) for budesonide and 0.13% (2.1 per TPY) for placebo (hazard
ratio, 1.29; 95% confidence interval, 0.53-3.12; P = 0.58). In the secondary data
set, the percentage of patients reporting pneumonia AEs was 0.70% (12.7 per TPY),
whereas the percentage of patients reporting pneumonia SAEs was 0.17% (3.1 per
TPY). There was no increased risk with higher budesonide doses or any difference 
between budesonide and fluticasone.
CONCLUSIONS: There is no increased risk of pneumonia in patients with asthma,
identified as an AE or SAE, in clinical trials using budesonide.

DOI: 10.1164/rccm.201005-0694OC 
PMID: 20889908  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Postgrad Med. 2010 Sep;122(5):150-64. doi: 10.3810/pgm.2010.09.2212.

Innovations to achieve excellence in COPD diagnosis and treatment in primary
care.

Fromer L(1), Barnes T, Garvey C, Ortiz G, Saver DF, Yawn B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Family Medicine, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of 
California, Los Angeles, CA, USA. lf@grouppracticeforum.com

Recognition of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is often missed or
delayed in primary care. Once recognized, COPD is often undertreated or
episodically treated, focusing on acute exacerbations without establishing
maintenance treatment to control ongoing disease. Diagnostic and therapeutic
pessimism result in missed opportunities to reduce exacerbations, maintain
physical functioning, and reduce emergent health care requirements. Proactive
diagnosis and evidence-based management can alleviate the impact of COPD on
patients' lives. Smoking cessation has been proven to slow the rate of lung
function decline. Maintenance pharmacotherapy and immunizations reduce
exacerbations. Pulmonary rehabilitation improves respiratory symptoms and
physical functioning and reduces rehospitalizations after exacerbations.
Self-management education improves health-related quality of life and reduces
inpatient and emergency care usage. Maintenance treatment with long-acting
inhaled bronchodilators is appropriate beginning in moderate COPD to maintain
airway patency and reduce exacerbations. Tiotropium is US Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) approved to treat bronchospasm and reduce exacerbations in
patients with COPD; salmeterol/fluticasone is FDA approved to treat airflow
obstruction in COPD and reduce exacerbations in patients with a history of
exacerbations. Other maintenance long-acting bronchodilators-salmeterol,
formoterol, and budesonide/formoterol-are FDA approved to treat airway
obstruction in COPD but lack an approved indication against exacerbations. FDA
warnings on the use of long-acting beta-adrenergic agents (LABAs) in asthma
specifically exempt COPD and do not apply to LABA/inhaled corticosteroid
combinations used in COPD. The actual effectiveness achieved in practice with any
COPD therapies depends on patients' inhaler technique, adherence, and
persistence. Medication usage rates and inhaler proficiency may be improved by
concordance, in which the health care provider and patient collaborate to make
treatment plans sustainable in the patient's daily life. Practice redesign for
whole-patient primary care provides additional tools for comprehensive COPD
management. Innovations such as group visits and the patient-centered medical
home provide newer ways to interact with COPD patients and their families.
Patient-focused and evidence-based options enable primary care practices to
manage COPD longitudinally and improve patient outcomes through the course of the
disease.

DOI: 10.3810/pgm.2010.09.2212 
PMID: 20861599  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Respir Res. 2010 Sep 18;11:126. doi: 10.1186/1465-9921-11-126.

Pharmacological characterisation of anti-inflammatory compounds in acute and
chronic mouse models of cigarette smoke-induced inflammation.

Wan WY(1), Morris A, Kinnear G, Pearce W, Mok J, Wyss D, Stevenson CS.

Author information: 
(1)Respiratory Disease Area, Novartis Institutes for BioMedical Research,
Wimblehurst Road, Horsham RH12 5AB, UK.

BACKGROUND: Candidate compounds being developed to treat chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease are typically assessed using either acute or chronic mouse
smoking models; however, in both systems compounds have almost always been
administered prophylactically. Our aim was to determine whether the prophylactic 
effects of reference anti-inflammatory compounds in acute mouse smoking models
reflected their therapeutic effects in (more clinically relevant) chronic
systems.
METHODS: To do this, we started by examining the type of inflammatory cell
infiltrate which occurred after acute (3 days) or chronic (12 weeks) cigarette
smoke exposure (CSE) using female, C57BL/6 mice (n = 7-10). To compare the
effects of anti-inflammatory compounds in these models, mice were exposed to
either 3 days of CSE concomitant with compound dosing or 14 weeks of CSE with
dosing beginning after week 12. Budesonide (1 mg kg-1; i.n., q.d.), roflumilast
(3 mg kg-1; p.o., q.d.) and fluvastatin (2 mg kg-1; p.o., b.i.d.) were dosed 1 h 
before (and 5 h after for fluvastatin) CSE. These dose levels were selected
because they have previously been shown to be efficacious in mouse models of lung
inflammation. Bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) leukocyte number was the
primary endpoint in both models as this is also a primary endpoint in early
clinical studies.
RESULTS: To start, we confirmed that the inflammatory phenotypes were different
after acute (3 days) versus chronic (12 weeks) CSE. The inflammation in the acute
systems was predominantly neutrophilic, while in the more chronic CSE systems
BALF neutrophils (PMNs), macrophage and lymphocyte numbers were all increased (p 
< 0.05). In the acute model, both roflumilast and fluvastatin reduced BALF PMNs
(p < 0.01) after 3 days of CSE, while budesonide had no effect on BALF PMNs. In
the chronic model, therapeutically administered fluvastatin reduced the numbers
of PMNs and macrophages in the BALF (p ≤ 0.05), while budesonide had no effect on
PMN or macrophage numbers, but did reduce BALF lymphocytes (p < 0.01).
Roflumilast's inhibitory effects on inflammatory cell infiltrate were not
statistically significant.
CONCLUSIONS: These results demonstrate that the acute, prophylactic systems can
be used to identify compounds with therapeutic potential, but may not predict a
compound's efficacy in chronic smoke exposure models.

DOI: 10.1186/1465-9921-11-126 
PMCID: PMC2954922
PMID: 20849642  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2010 Aug 9;5:189-95.

An overview of the benefits and drawbacks of inhaled corticosteroids in chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease.

Singh S(1), Loke YK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland 21287, USA. ssingh31@jhu.edu

BACKGROUND: The benefit harm profile of inhaled corticosteroids, and their effect
on patient oriented outcomes and comorbid pneumonia, osteoporosis and
cardiovascular disease in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
remain uncertain.
METHODS: An overview of the evidence on the risks and benefits of inhaled
corticosteroids (fluticasone and budesonide) in chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease from recent randomized controlled trials and systematic reviews.
Observational studies on adverse effects were also evaluated.
RESULTS: Evidence from recent meta-analysis suggests a modest benefit from
inhaled corticosteroid long-acting beta-agonist combination inhalers on the
frequency of exacerbations, (rate ratio [RR], 0.82; 95% confidence interval [CI]:
0.78 to 0.88), in improvements in quality of life measures, and forced expiratory
volume in one second when compared to long-acting beta-agonists alone. On the
outcome of pneumonia, our updated meta-analysis of trials (n = 24 trials; RR,
1.56; 95% CI: 1.40-1.74, P < 0.0001) and observational studies (n = 4 studies;
RR, 1.44; 95% CI: 1.20-1.75, P = 0.0001) shows a significant increase in the risk
of pneumonia with the inhaled corticosteroids currently available (fluticasone
and budesonide). Evidence for any intraclass differences in the risk of pneumonia
between currently available formulations is inconclusive due to the absence of
head to head trials. Inhaled corticosteroids have no cardiovascular effects.
CONCLUSIONS: Among patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease,
clinicians should carefully balance these long-term risks of inhaled
corticosteroid against their symptomatic benefits.


PMCID: PMC2921686
PMID: 20714372  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Clin Ther. 2010 May;32(5):965-72. doi: 10.1016/j.clinthera.2010.05.004.

Impact of prior authorization for asthma medications on the use of emergency
health services: a retrospective cohort study among newly diagnosed patients with
asthma.

Guénette L(1), Gaudet M.

Author information: 
(1)Direction Scientifique du Suivi et de L'usage Optimal, Conseil du Médicament
du Québec, Québec City, Québec, Canada. line.guenette@msss.gouv.qc.ca

Comment in
    Clin Ther. 2010 May;32(5):962-4.

BACKGROUND: A prior authorization process to limit the nonoptimal use of
medications combining inhaled corticosteroids and long-acting bronchodilators was
introduced in the province of Québec, Canada, on October 1, 2003.
OBJECTIVE: We assessed the impact of this administrative measure on the rate of
asthma-related emergency department (ED) visits and hospitalizations.
METHODS: A retrospective cohort study was conducted using Régie de l'assurance
maladie du Québec administrative databases. We identified all persons aged 6 to
44 years with an incident asthma diagnosis in the 2-year periods preceding
(October 1, 2001-September 30, 2003) and following (October 1, 2003-September 30,
2005) the introduction of the process. Children aged < or = 5 years at the time
of the first encountered diagnosis were excluded because it is difficult to make 
an objective asthma diagnosis until 6 years of age. People aged > or = 45 years
at the time of the first encountered diagnosis were also excluded to avoid the
inclusion of persons who might also have had chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease. Two groups were created based on their prescription drug insurance
(private or public). Publicly insured persons were considered exposed to the
process while privately insured persons were considered not exposed. Cox
proportional hazards regression was used to assess, for each insurance group, the
hazard ratio (HR) for an asthma-related first hospitalization or ED visit between
the 2 periods. The use of medication, quality of life, and visits to physicians' 
offices were not considered in the analysis. The interaction between group and
period was assessed to test whether the change in risk between the preprocess and
postprocess periods differed by insurance group; statistical models were adjusted
for sex, age, region, presence of a comorbidity other than asthma, and discipline
of diagnosing physician.
RESULTS: There were 47,579 publicly insured persons and 93,177 privately insured 
persons with incident asthma during the study period. The risk of an
asthma-related first hospitalization or ED visit remained unchanged in the 2
periods evaluated among both the publicly insured (adjusted HR, 0.95 [95% CI,
0.88-1.03]) and the privately insured (adjusted HR, 1.03 [95% CI, 0.96-1.03]).
The change in risk between the preprocess and postprocess periods was not
significantly different between insurance groups.
CONCLUSIONS: The prior authorization process introduced to limit the nonoptimal
use of combination products (formoterol/budesonide and salmeterol/fluticasone)
had no apparent impact on first asthma-related hospitalization or ED visit in
these patients newly diagnosed with asthma who were covered by Québec's public
prescription drug insurance plan.

Copyright 2010 Excerpta Medica Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clinthera.2010.05.004 
PMID: 20685505  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Clin Ther. 2010 Jul;32(7):1320-8. doi: 10.1016/j.clinthera.2010.06.022.

Relative effectiveness of budesonide/formoterol and fluticasone
propionate/salmeterol in a 1-year, population-based, matched cohort study of
patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD): Effect on
COPD-related exacerbations, emergency department visits and hospitalizations,
medication utilization, and treatment adherence.

Blais L(1), Forget A, Ramachandran S.

Author information: 
(1)University of Montreal, Quebec, Canada. lucie.blais@umontreal.ca

BACKGROUND: According to evidence-based guidelines, the combination of inhaled
corticosteroids and inhaled long-acting beta(2)-agonists in a single inhaler is
recommended for patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) who
are experiencing exacerbations. The relative effectiveness of combination
products such as budesonide/formoterol (BUD/FM) and fluticasone
propionate/salmeterol (FP/SM) has not been well documented.
OBJECTIVE: This study was conducted to investigate the different outcomes
associated with the use of either BUD/FM or FP/SM in a single inhaler in patients
with COPD. Outcomes included rates of exacerbations, emergency department (ED)
visits and hospitalizations for COPD, medication utilization, and treatment
adherence.
METHODS: A 1-year, population-based, matched cohort study was conducted using
administrative health care databases from the Canadian province of Quebec.
Patients treated with BUD/FM were matched (1:1) to patients treated with FP/SM
based on the following criteria: age group, sex, calendar year of treatment
initiation, the number of COPD exacerbations in the year before treatment
initiation, and use of inhaled short acting beta(2)-agonists (SABAs) and
ipratropium bromide in the 3 months before treatment initiation. COPD
exacerbations were defined as a claim for a short-course (< or =14 days)
prescription of oral corticosteroids, or an ED visit or a hospitalization for
COPD. Events occurring within 15 days were counted as a single exacerbation.
Between-group comparisons of the number of exacerbations, ED visits, and
hospitalizations for COPD, as well as claims for oral corticosteroids, were
performed using Poisson regression models. Between-group comparisons of the mean 
number of doses of SABAs and ipratropium bromide per day were performed using
linear regression models. Treatment adherence was also assessed.
RESULTS: Of the 2262 patients in the matched cohort, 78.1% were aged > or =65
years and 52.1% were men. COPD exacerbations, claims for oral corticosteroids,
use of SABAs, and patient adherence to treatment did not differ significantly
between the BUD/FM and FP/SM groups. However, the BUD/FM group was significantly 
less likely to have an ED visit (adjusted relative risk [RR] = 0.75; 95% CI, 0.58
to 0.97) or hospitalization (adjusted RR = 0.61; 95% CI, 0.47 to 0.81) for COPD
and had fewer claims for prescriptions for tiotropium (adjusted RR = 0.71; 95%
CI, 0.57 to 0.89). The BUD/FM group also used fewer doses of ipratroprium bromide
than the FP/SM group (adjusted mean difference, -0.2 dose; 95% CI, -0.3 to -0.1).
CONCLUSIONS: These COPD patients treated with BUD/FM were less likely to have ED 
visits and hospitalizations for COPD and used fewer doses of anticholinergic
medication than patients treated with FP/SM in the year after treatment
initiation. However, due to the observational nature of the study design, we
cannot conclude with certainty that the medication was the only factor
responsible for the observed differences.

2010 Excerpta Medica Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clinthera.2010.06.022 
PMID: 20678680  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Br J Pharmacol. 2010 Aug;160(8):1985-96. doi: 10.1111/j.1476-5381.2010.00857.x.

Exposing rodents to a combination of tobacco smoke and lipopolysaccharide results
in an exaggerated inflammatory response in the lung.

Hardaker EL(1), Freeman MS, Dale N, Bahra P, Raza F, Banner KH, Poll C.

Author information: 
(1)Novartis Institutes for Biomedical Research, Horsham, UK.
liz.hardaker@novartis.com

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Acute exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD), which are often associated with respiratory infections, are
defined as a worsening of symptoms that require a change in medication.
Exacerbations are characterized by a reduction in lung function, quality of life 
and are associated with increased pro-inflammatory mediators in the lung. Our aim
was to develop an animal model to mimic aspects of this exaggerated inflammatory 
response by combining key etiological factors, tobacco smoke (TS) and bacterial
lipopolysaccharide (LPS).
EXPERIMENTAL APPROACH: Rats were exposed to TS for 30 min twice a day for 2 days.
On day 3 animals were exposed to LPS for 30 min followed by exposure to TS 5 h
later. Inflammation, mucus and lung function were assessed 24 h after LPS.
KEY RESULTS: Neutrophils, mucus, oedema and cytotoxicity in lung and/or
bronchoalveolar lavage was increased in animals exposed to combined LPS and TS,
compared with either stimulus alone. Lung function was impaired in animals
exposed to combined LPS and TS. Inflammatory cells, oedema and mucus were
unaffected by pretreatment with the corticosteroid, budesonide, but were reduced 
by the phosphodiesterase 4 selective inhibitor roflumilast. Additionally, lung
function was improved by roflumilast.
CONCLUSIONS AND IMPLICATIONS: We have established an in vivo model mimicking
characteristic features of acute exacerbations of COPD including lung function
decline and increased lung inflammation. This model may be useful to investigate 
molecular and cellular mechanisms underlying such exacerbations, to identify new 
targets and to discover novel therapeutic agents.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1476-5381.2010.00857.x 
PMCID: PMC2958644
PMID: 20649596  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Int J Immunopathol Pharmacol. 2010 Apr-Jun;23(2):471-9.

Effects of budesonide on P38 MAPK activation, apoptosis and IL-8 secretion,
induced by TNF-alpha and Haemophilus influenzae in human bronchial epithelial
cells.

Gallelli L(1), Pelaia G, Fratto D, Muto V, Falcone D, Vatrella A, Curto LS, Renda
T, Busceti MT, Liberto MC, Savino R, Cazzola M, Marsico SA, Maselli R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental and Clinical Medicine, University Magna Grecia of
Catanzaro, Catanzaro, Italy.

Non-typeable Haemophilus influenzae (NTHi) is one of the most frequently involved
pathogens in bacterial exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD). In the airways, the main tissue target of NTHi is bronchial epithelium,
where this pathogen can further amplify the inflammatory and structural changes
induced by proinflammatory cytokines such as tumour necrosis factor-alpha
(TNF-alpha). Therefore, the aim of this study is to investigate, in primary
cultures of human bronchial epithelial cells, the effects of NTHi on signal
transduction pathways, apoptotic events and chemokine production activated by
TNF-alpha. Moreover, we also evaluated the effects exerted on such cellular and
molecular phenomena by a corticosteroid drug. p38 mitogen-activated protein
kinase (MAPK) phosphorylation was analyzed by Western blotting, using an
anti-phospho-p38 MAPK monoclonal antibody. Apoptosis was assayed by active
caspase-3 expression. Interleukin-8 (IL-8/CXCL8) was detected in cell-free
culture supernatants by ELISA. TNF-alpha induced a significant increase in p38
MAPK phosphorylation. NTHi was able to potentiate the stimulatory actions of
TNF-alpha on caspase-3 expression and, to a lesser extent, on IL-8 secretion.
These effects were significantly (P less than 0.01) inhibited by a
pharmacological pre-treatment with budesonide. These results suggest that
TNF-alpha is able to stimulate, via activation of p38 MAPK signalling pathway,
IL-8 release and airway epithelial cell apoptosis; the latter effect can be
markedly potentiated by NTHi. Furthermore, budesonide can be very effective in
preventing, through inhibition of p38 MAPK phosphorylation, both structural and
proinflammatory changes elicited in bronchial epithelium by TNF-alpha and NTHi.


PMID: 20646342  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Eur J Med Res. 2009 Dec 7;14 Suppl 4:108-11.

Increased FKBP51 in induced sputum cells of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
patients after therapy.

Holownia A(1), Mroz RM, Kolodziejczyk A, Chyczewska E, Braszko JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacology, Medical University of Bialystok, Poland. 
Holow_sinai@hotmail.com

OBJECTIVE: Immunophilin FKBP51 assists polypeptide folding, participates in
glucocorticoid actions and may play a role in glucocorticoid resistance. FKBP51
is altered in patients with asthma, but its role in chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD) characterized by dysregulation of several pro/antiinflammatory
genes is less clear.
METHODS: We assessed changes in nuclear/cytosolic FKBP51 protein using
SDS-PAGE/WB and FKBP51 mRNA by qRT-PCR in cells isolated from induced sputum of
stable COPD patients treated with formoterol/budesonide or
formoterol/budesonide/theophylline for 4 wk.
RESULTS: Expression of FKBP51 was higher in formoterol/
budesonide/theophylline-treated patients, compared with formoterol/budesonide
group in both cytosolic and nuclear fractions by about 57% and 31%, respectively 
(P<0.001, P<0.01). FKBP51 mRNA was only slightly, but not significantly, higher
in patients on formoterol/ budesonide/theophylline.
CONCLUSIONS: Increased FKBP51 in COPD patients treated with formoterol/
budesonide/theophylline may be important in altering signaling from
corticosteroid receptors.


PMCID: PMC3521382
PMID: 20156738  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Eur J Med Res. 2009 Dec 7;14 Suppl 4:104-7.

Nuclear HSP90 and HSP70 in COPD patients treated with formoterol or formoterol
and corticosteroids.

Holownia A(1), Mroz RM, Kielek A, Chyczewska E, Braszko JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacology, Medical University of Bialystok, Poland. 
Holow_sinai@hotmail.com

OBJECTIVE: Heat shock proteins assist cellular protein folding and are required
for the normal activity of steroid receptors. In this study we assessed nuclear
HSP90 and HSP70 proteins and mRNA levels in cells isolated from induced sputum of
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease patients treated for 4 weeks with
formoterol (F) or formoterol+budesonide (F/ICS).
METHODS: Nuclear heat shock protein levels were assessed by Western blot and
specific mRNAs were quantified in cell lysates using qRT-PCR.
RESULTS: Both HSP90 and HSP70 protein levels were higher in the F/ICS-treated
patients in comparison with the F-treated group (by 31%, P<0.05 and 28%, P<0.05, 
respectively), while specific mRNAs were lowered. HSP86/HSP89 and
D6S182/HSP90-BETA were repressed by about 40% (P<0.05) while HSP70-1/HSP70-1A,
HSP70-1B/HSP70-2, and HSP70-HSC54/HSC70 were repressed by 47% (P<0.01), 57%
(P<0.01) and 65% (P<0.01), respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: It is possible that increased nuclear heat shock proteins may play a
role in the attenuation of the response to glucocorticoids in COPD patients.


PMCID: PMC3521358
PMID: 20156737  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Eur J Med Res. 2009 Dec 7;14 Suppl 4:71-7.

Novel devices for individualized controlled inhalation can optimize aerosol
therapy in efficacy, patient care and power of clinical trials.

Fischer A(1), Stegemann J, Scheuch G, Siekmeier R.

Author information: 
(1)Federal Institute for Drugs and Medical Devices (BfArM), Bonn, Germany.

In the treatment of pulmonary diseases the inhalation of aerosols plays a key
role - it is the preferred route of drug delivery in asthma, chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD) and cystic fibrosis. But, in contrast to oral and
intravenous administration drug delivery to the lungs is controlled by additional
parameters. Beside its pharmacology the active agent is furthermore determined by
its aerosol characteristics as particle diameter, particle density,
hygroscopicity and electrical charge. The patient related factors like age and
stage of pulmonary disease will be additionally affected by the individual
breathing pattern and morphometry of the lower airways. A number of these
parameters with essential impact on the pulmonary drug deposition can be
influenced by the performance of the inhalation system. Therefore, the
optimization of nebulisation technology was a major part of aerosol science in
the last decade. At this time the control of inspiration volume and air flow as
well as the administration of a defined aerosol bolus was in the main focus. Up
to date a more efficient and a more targeted pulmonary drug deposition - e.g., in
the alveoli - will be provided by novel devices which also allow shorter
treatment times and a better reproducibility of the administered lung doses. By
such means of precise dosing and drug targeting the efficacy of inhalation
therapy can be upgraded, e.g., the continuous inhalation of budesonide in asthma.
From a patients' perspective an optimized inhalation manoeuvre means less side
effects, e.g., in cystic fibrosis therapy the reduced oropharyngeal tobramycin
exposure causes fewer bronchial irritations. Respecting to shorter treatment
times also, this result in an improved quality of life and compliance. For
clinical trials the scaling down of dose variability in combination with enhanced
pulmonary deposition reduces the number of patients to be included and the
requirement of pharmaceutical compounds. This review summarises principles and
advances of individualised controlled inhalation (ICI) as offered by the AKITA
inhalation system.


PMCID: PMC3521343
PMID: 20156730  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Respir Res. 2010 May 11;11:56. doi: 10.1186/1465-9921-11-56.

The effects of long-acting bronchodilators on total mortality in patients with
stable chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Kliber A(1), Lynd LD, Sin DD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine (Respiratory Division), University of British Columbia,
6040 Iona Drive, Vancouver, V6T 2E8, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is the 4th leading cause
of mortality worldwide. Long-acting bronchodilators are considered first line
therapies for patients with COPD but their effects on mortality are not well
known. We performed a comprehensive systematic review and meta-analysis to
evaluate the effects of long-acting bronchodilators on total mortality in stable 
COPD.
METHODS: Using MEDLINE, EMBASE and Cochrane Systematic Review databases, we
identified high quality randomized controlled trials of tiotropium, formoterol,
salmeterol, formoterol/budesonide or salmeterol/fluticasone in COPD that had a
follow-up of 6 months or longer and reported on total mortality. Two reviewers
independently abstracted data from the original trials and disagreements were
resolved by iteration and consensus.
RESULTS: Twenty-seven trials that included 30,495 patients were included in the
review. Relative risk (RR) for total mortality was calculated for each of the
study and pooled together using a random-effects model. The combination of
inhaled corticosteroid (ICS) and long-acting beta-2 agonist (LABA) therapy was
associated with reduced total mortality compared with placebo (RR, 0.80; p =
0.005). Neither tiotropium (RR, 1.08; p = 0.61) nor LABA by itself (RR, 0.90; p =
0.21) was associated with mortality.
CONCLUSIONS: A combination of ICS and LABA reduced mortality by approximately
20%. Neither tiotropium nor LABA by itself modifies all-cause mortality in COPD.

DOI: 10.1186/1465-9921-11-56 
PMCID: PMC2876086
PMID: 20459831  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Inhal Toxicol. 2010 May;22(6):493-9. doi: 10.3109/08958370903521216.

Budesonide enhances Toll-like receptor 2 expression in activated bronchial
epithelial cells.

von Scheele I(1), Larsson K, Palmberg L.

Author information: 
(1)Lung and Allergy Research, The Institute of Environmental Medicine, Karolinska
Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. Ida.von.Scheele@ki.se

Endotoxin, tumor necrosis factor (TNF), and organic dust constitute
proinflammatory stimuli involved in the initiation of inflammation. The major
receptor for endotoxin (lipopolysaccharide [LPS]) is Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4),
whereas TLR2 binds to agents from gram-positive bacteria. The aim of the study
was to elucidate whether TLR2 and TLR4, expressed on primary bronchial epithelial
cells (PBECs), are influenced by exogenous (organic dust and LPS) and endogenous 
(TNF) stimuli and whether this interaction is influenced by a
glucocorticosteroid. The cells were exposed to LPS (10 microg/ml), TNF (10
ng/ml), or dust (100 microg/ml) 1.5 and 6 h, in the presence or absence of
budesonide (10(-6) M) in vitro. The mRNA expression of interleukin (IL)-6, IL-8, 
TLR2, and TLR4 were measured with real-time reverse transcriptase-polymerase
chain reaction (RT-PCR) and IL-6 and IL-8 release was assessed with enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay (ELISA). To elucidate the importance of TLR-signaling for
IL-6 and IL-8 secretion, the effect of TLR-blockers was studied. Endotoxin, TNF, 
and dust stimulated the release of IL-6 and IL-8 in a time-dependent manner.
Budesonide significantly attenuated the release and expression of IL-6 and IL-8
after exposure. Budesonide did not influence TLR expression, but costimulation
with LPS, TNF, or dust together with budesonide increased TLR2 expression
synergistically. Blocking of TLR2 and TLR4 reduced cytokine secretion in
stimulated cells. Budesonide reduced IL-6 and IL-8 production and enhanced
expression of TLR2 in PBECs only in the presence of a proinflammatory stimulus.
These findings contribute to our understanding of the beneficial effects of
glucocorticosteroids during chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)
exacerbations and asthma, which are frequently caused by microorganisms.

DOI: 10.3109/08958370903521216 
PMID: 20388003  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Pulm Pharmacol Ther. 2010 Aug;23(4):316-23. doi: 10.1016/j.pupt.2010.03.004. Epub
2010 Mar 20.

Effect of formoterol and budesonide on chemokine release, chemokine receptor
expression and chemotaxis in human neutrophils.

Strandberg K(1), Blidberg K, Sahlander K, Palmberg L, Larsson K.

Author information: 
(1)Lung and Allergy Research, The National Institute of Environmental Medicine,
Karolinska Institutet, Box 287, SE-171 77 Stockholm, Sweden.
karin.strandberg@ki.se

Severe persistent asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) are
associated with neutrophil influx into the airways. It is not clear whether
neutrophil chemotaxis is influenced by beta(2)-agonists and glucocorticoids,
drugs commonly used in treatment of asthma and COPD. The effect of a long-acting 
beta(2)-agonist (formoterol), and a glucocorticosteroid (budesonide) on
chemokine/cytokine release (CXCL8, CXCL1, IL-6), regulation of chemokine
receptors (CXCR1, CXCR2), and migration were assessed in neutrophils from 10
non-allergic, healthy donors. Formoterol enhanced and budesonide inhibited IL-6, 
CXCL8 and CXCL1 release from LPS-stimulated neutrophils. Formoterol up-regulated 
both CXCR1 and CXCR2 expression, whereas budesonide up-regulated the expression
of CXCR2 only. Despite the effects on chemokine release and drug-induced
up-regulation of CXCR1 and CXCR2, no influence on neutrophil chemotaxis could be 
demonstrated. We conclude that a beta(2)-agonist and a glucocorticoid, commonly
used in the treatment of obstructive lung diseases, influence chemokine release
and receptor sensitivity but the functional consequences of these findings remain
unclear.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pupt.2010.03.004 
PMID: 20307681  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Prostaglandins Other Lipid Mediat. 2010 Jun;92(1-4):33-43. doi:
10.1016/j.prostaglandins.2010.02.003. Epub 2010 Mar 7.

Effects of LTB4 receptor antagonism on pulmonary inflammation in rodents and
non-human primates.

Hicks A(1), Goodnow R Jr, Cavallo G, Tannu SA, Ventre JD, Lavelle D, Lora JM,
Satjawatcharaphong J, Brovarney M, Dabbagh K, Tare NS, Oh H, Lamb M, Sidduri A,
Dominique R, Qiao Q, Lou JP, Gillespie P, Fotouhi N, Kowalczyk A, Kurylko G,
Hamid R, Wright MB, Pamidimukkala A, Egan T, Gubler U, Hoffman AF, Wei X, Li YL, 
O'Neil J, Marcano R, Pozzani K, Molinaro T, Santiago J, Singer L, Hargaden M,
Moore D, Catala AR, Chao LC, Benson J, March T, Venkat R, Mancebo H, Renzetti LM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of RNA Therapeutics, Roche, 340 Kingsland Street, Nutley, NJ 07110,
USA. alexandra.hicks@roche.com

Asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and acute lung injury/acute 
respiratory distress syndrome (ALI/ARDS) are characterized by neutrophilic
inflammation and elevated levels of leukotriene B4 (LTB4). However, the exact
role of LTB4 pathways in mediating pulmonary neutrophilia and the potential
therapeutic application of LTB4 receptor antagonists in these diseases remains
controversial. Here we show that a novel dual BLT1 and BLT2 receptor antagonist, 
RO5101576, potently inhibited LTB4-evoked calcium mobilization in HL-60 cells and
chemotaxis of human neutrophils. RO5101576 significantly attenuated LTB4-evoked
pulmonary eosinophilia in guinea pigs. In non-human primates, RO5101576 inhibited
allergen and ozone-evoked pulmonary neutrophilia, with comparable efficacy to
budesonide (allergic responses). RO5101576 had no effects on LPS-evoked
neutrophilia in guinea pigs and cigarette smoke-evoked neutrophilia in mice and
rats. In toxicology studies RO5101576 was well-tolerated. Theses studies show
differential effects of LTB4 receptor antagonism on neutrophil responses in vivo 
and suggest RO5101576 may represent a potential new treatment for pulmonary
neutrophilia in asthma.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.prostaglandins.2010.02.003 
PMID: 20214997  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Expert Opin Pharmacother. 2010 Apr;11(6):1039-42. doi: 10.1517/14656561003652450.

Triple inhaled therapy in stable chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: the
earlier, the better? Evaluation of Welte T, Miravitlles M, Hernandez P, et al.
Efficacy and tolerability of budesonide/formoterol added to tiotropium in
patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Am J Respir Crit Care Med
2009;180:741-50.

Antoniu SA(1), Carone M, Sampablo I.

Author information: 
(1)University of Medicine and Pharmacy Gr.T.Popa Iasi, Department of Internal
Medicine-II Pulmonary Disease University Hospital, 30 Dr I Cihac Str, 700115
Iasi, Romania. sabina.antonela.antoniu@pneum.umfiasi.ro

Comment on
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2009 Oct 15;180(8):741-50.

DOI: 10.1517/14656561003652450 
PMID: 20201731  [PubMed]


144. Evid Based Med. 2010 Feb;15(1):8-9. doi: 10.1136/ebm.15.1.8.

Use of inhaled budesonide for 1 year does not increase risk of pneumonia in
patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

John Rees P(1).

Author information: 
(1)King's College London School of Medicine, Sherman Education Centre, Guy's
Hospital, London SE1 9RT, UK. John.rees@kcl.ac.uk

Comment on
    Lancet. 2009 Aug 29;374(9691):712-9.

DOI: 10.1136/ebm.15.1.8 
PMID: 20176867  [PubMed]


145. Eur Respir J. 2010 Jul;36(1):178-86. doi: 10.1183/09031936.00158008. Epub 2009
Nov 19.

Effects of formoterol and salmeterol on cytokine release from monocyte-derived
macrophages.

Donnelly LE(1), Tudhope SJ, Fenwick PS, Barnes PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Airway Disease, National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College London,
Dovehouse Street, London, SW3 6LY, UK. l.donnelly@imperial.ac.uk

Pulmonary macrophages are a target for inhaled therapies. Combinations of
long-acting beta(2)-agonists (LABA) and glucocorticosteroids have been developed 
for asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). This study examined 
two LABA, salmeterol and formoterol, and the glucocorticosteroid, budesonide, on 
cytokine release from monocyte-derived macrophages (MDM) to determine whether
anti-inflammatory effects observed in patients are due to inhibition of
macrophages. MDM were incubated in the absence or presence of LABA or budesonide 
prior to stimulation with lipopolysaccharide (LPS). Tumour necrosis factor
(TNF)-alpha, granulocyte macrophage-colony stimulating factor (GM-CSF) and CXC
chemokine ligand (CXCL)8 were measured by ELISA. Formoterol and salmeterol
inhibited LPS-stimulated release of TNF-alpha (mean effective concentration
(EC(50)) 2.4+/-1.8 and 3.5+/-2.7 nM, respectively; n = 11-16), GM-CSF (EC(50)
24.6+/-2.1 and 52.4+/-40.8 nM, respectively, n = 11-12) but not CXCL8 from
LPS-stimulated MDM. Budesonide inhibited release of all three cytokines (EC(50)
TNF-alpha: 1.2+/-0.4 nM; GM-CSF: 0.4+/-0.2 nM; CXCL8: 0.4+/-0.1 nM; n = 3-4).
Formoterol but not salmeterol elevated cAMP in these cells. These effects were
attenuated by beta-adrenoceptor antagonists, propranolol and ICI118551.
Salmeterol (10(-7) M) also inhibited formoterol-induced cAMP and
formoterol-mediated attenuation of cytokine release. Combining budesonide (0.3
nM) with formoterol, inhibited TNF-alpha release additively. LABA may inhibit
inflammatory cytokine release from macrophages in a cAMP-independent manner and
act additively with budesonide.

DOI: 10.1183/09031936.00158008 
PMID: 19926732  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Eur Respir J. 2010 May;35(5):1039-47. doi: 10.1183/09031936.00036709. Epub 2009
Nov 6.

Defective macrophage phagocytosis of bacteria in COPD.

Taylor AE(1), Finney-Hayward TK, Quint JK, Thomas CM, Tudhope SJ, Wedzicha JA,
Barnes PJ, Donnelly LE.

Author information: 
(1)Airways Disease Section, National Heart and Lung Institute, Dovehouse Street, 
London, UK.

Exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) are an increasing
cause of hospitalisations and are associated with accelerated progression of
airflow obstruction. Approximately half of COPD exacerbations are associated with
bacteria and many patients have lower airways colonisation. This suggests that
bacterial infection in COPD could be due to reduced pathogen removal. This study 
investigated whether bacterial clearance by macrophages is defective in COPD.
Phagocytosis of fluorescently labelled polystyrene beads and Haemophillus
influenzae and Streptococcus pneumoniae by alveolar macrophages and
monocyte-derived macrophages (MDM) was assessed by fluorimetry and flow
cytometry. Receptor expression was measured by flow cytometry. Alveolar
macrophages and MDM phagocytosed polystyrene beads similarly. There was no
difference in phagocytosis of beads by MDM from COPD patients compared with cells
from smokers and nonsmokers. MDM from COPD patients showed reduced phagocytic
responses to S. pneumoniae and H. influenzae compared with nonsmokers and
smokers. This was not associated with alterations in cell surface receptor
expression of toll-like receptor (TLR)2, TLR4, macrophage receptor with
collagenous structure, cluster of differentiation (CD)163, CD36 or mannose
receptor. Budesonide, formoterol or azithromycin did not suppress phagocytosis
suggesting that reduced responses in COPD MDM were not due to medications. COPD
macrophage innate responses are suppressed and may lead to bacterial colonisation
and increased exacerbation frequency.

DOI: 10.1183/09031936.00036709 
PMID: 19897561  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Respir Res. 2009 Oct 31;10:104. doi: 10.1186/1465-9921-10-104.

The bioavailability and airway clearance of the steroid component of
budesonide/formoterol and salmeterol/fluticasone after inhaled administration in 
patients with COPD and healthy subjects: a randomized controlled trial.

Dalby C(1), Polanowski T, Larsson T, Borgström L, Edsbäcker S, Harrison TW.

Author information: 
(1)Respiratory Medicine Unit, City Hospital Campus, Nottingham University,
Nottingham, UK. chris.dalby@nuh.nhs.uk

BACKGROUND: Airway absorption and bioavailability of inhaled corticosteroids
(ICSs) may be influenced by differences in pharmacokinetic properties such as
lipophilicity and patient characteristics such as lung function. This study aimed
to further investigate and clarify the distribution of budesonide and fluticasone
in patients with severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) by measuring
the systemic availability and sputum concentration of budesonide and fluticasone,
administered via combination inhalers with the respective long-acting
beta2-agonists, formoterol and salmeterol.
METHODS: This was a randomized, double-blind, double-dummy, two-way crossover,
multicenter study. Following a run-in period, 28 patients with severe COPD (mean 
age 65 years, mean forced expiratory volume in 1 second [FEV1] 37.5% predicted
normal) and 27 healthy subjects (mean age 31 years, FEV1 103.3% predicted normal)
received two single-dose treatments of budesonide/formoterol (400/12 microg) and 
salmeterol/fluticasone (50/500 microg), separated by a 4-14-day washout period.
ICS concentrations were measured over 10 hours post-inhalation in plasma in all
subjects, and over 6 hours in spontaneously expectorated sputum in COPD patients.
The primary end point was the area under the curve (AUC) of budesonide and
fluticasone plasma concentrations in COPD patients relative to healthy subjects.
RESULTS: Mean plasma AUC values were lower in COPD patients versus healthy
subjects for budesonide (3.07 microM x hr versus 6.21 microM x hr) and
fluticasone (0.84 microM x hr versus 1.50 microM x hr), and the dose-adjusted AUC
(geometric mean) ratios in healthy subjects and patients with severe COPD for
plasma budesonide and fluticasone were similar (2.02 versus 1.80; primary end
point). In COPD patients, the Tmax and the mean residence time in the systemic
circulation were shorter for budesonide versus fluticasone (15.5 min versus 50.8 
min and 4.41 hrs versus 12.78 hrs, respectively) and Cmax was higher (1.08 microM
versus 0.09 microM). The amount of expectorated fluticasone (percentage of
estimated lung-deposited dose) in sputum over 6 hours was significantly higher
versus budesonide (ratio 5.21; p = 0.006). Both treatments were well tolerated.
CONCLUSION: The relative systemic availabilities of budesonide and fluticasone
between patients with severe COPD and healthy subjects were similar. In patients 
with COPD, a larger fraction of fluticasone was expectorated in the sputum as
compared with budesonide.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: Trial registration number NCT00379028.

DOI: 10.1186/1465-9921-10-104 
PMCID: PMC2780403
PMID: 19878590  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. J Aerosol Med Pulm Drug Deliv. 2010 Apr;23(2):91-5. doi: 10.1089/jamp.2009.0762.

Prevalence and associated factors of oropharyngeal side effects in users of
inhaled corticosteroids in a real-life setting.

Molimard M(1), Le Gros V, Robinson P, Bourdeix I.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM , Unité 657, IFR 99, Bordeaux, France.
mathieu.molimard@pharmaco.u-bordeaux2.fr

BACKGROUND: Inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) are extensively used to treat asthma,
and more recently, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Oropharyngeal
disorders represent the most frequent side effect of these drugs, which may have 
a negative impact on adherence.
OBJECTIVES: To evaluate the prevalence of oropharyngeal disorders in users of ICS
in a real-life setting and investigate the factors associated with their
occurrence.
METHODS: For this observational cross-sectional study, general practitioners and 
pulmonologists were contacted and asked to include patients suffering from asthma
or COPD treated by ICS. Physicians collected data during a medical examination. A
multivariate regression model for the occurrence of oropharyngeal disorders was
constructed.
RESULTS: A total of 1778 physicians included 6740 patients. The mean (SD) age was
51.3 (18.5) years, 44.0% had no smoking history, and the ICS indication was
asthma in 63.9% of subjects. Of the study subjects, 52.3% used beclometasone
(43.4% without a long-acting ss(2)-agonist, LABA); 22.1% used budesonide (18.8%
with a LABA), and 25.6% used fluticasone (19.3% with a LABA in a single inhaler).
One-third (34.7%) of subjects suffered from at least one oropharyngeal disorder; 
the most frequently reported were hoarseness, tingling, mouth irritation, and
reddening. Multivariate regression analysis found that the factors positively
associated with oropharyngeal disorders were COPD indication [odds ratio (OR)
1.600; 95% confidence intervals (95% CI) 1.391, 1.839], nominal daily dose (OR = 
1.388; 95% CI 1.227, 1.569), decreased adherence (OR = 1.318; 95% CI 1.104,
1.574) and the use of fluticasone (OR = 1.176; 95% CI 1.008, 1.372), whereas
those negatively associated were the absence of smoking history (OR = 0.837; 95% 
CI 0.742, 0.945), increased adherence (OR = 0.663; 95% CI 0.581, 0.755), and
beclometasone use (OR = 0.630; 95% CI 0.543, 0.732).
CONCLUSIONS: The high prevalence of oropharyngeal disorders and the association
of adherence with these must be taken into account by prescribers, especially in 
patients suffering from COPD, a relatively new group of ICS users.

DOI: 10.1089/jamp.2009.0762 
PMID: 19778267  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Ther Adv Respir Dis. 2009 Aug;3(4):1-11. doi: 10.1177/1753465809344870. Epub 2009
Sep 4.

Effect on lung function and morning activities of budesonide/formoterol versus
salmeterol/fluticasone in patients with COPD.

Partridge MR(1), Schuermann W, Beckman O, Persson T, Polanowski T.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Medicine, Imperial College London, NHLI Division at Charing Cross
Hospital, London, UK. m.partridge@imperial.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: Patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) often
experience symptoms and problems with activities early in the morning. This is
the first study to compare the effect of budesonide/formoterol and
salmeterol/fluticasone on lung function, symptoms and activities early in the
morning.
METHODS: Lung function (peak expiratory flow [PEF] and forced expiratory volume
in 1 second [FEV( 1)]) and symptoms were measured at bedside and activities were 
measured during the morning using a six-item questionnaire concerning basic
morning routines. In a randomised, double-blind, multicentre, cross-over study,
442 patients with COPD aged >or=40 years (pre-bronchodilator FEV(1) <or=50%;
FEV(1)/vital capacity <70%) received budesonide/formoterol (320/9 microg, one
inhalation twice daily) dry powder inhaler (DPI) or salmeterol/fluticasone
(50/500 microg, one inhalation twice daily) DPI daily, for 1 week each, separated
by a 1- to 2-week washout. Lung function (PEF and FEV(1)) shortly after rising
from bed in the morning, symptoms and basic morning activities were assessed by
electronic diary (e-Diary) recordings.
RESULTS: Budesonide/formoterol and salmeterol/fluticasone treatment increased
morning PEF 5 minutes post-dose, measured as a mean improvement from baseline
over the full study period (primary endpoint; adjusted mean change: 15.1 l/min
and 14.2 l/min, respectively [difference 1.0 l/min; p = 0.603]). Mean morning
FEV(1) improved more following budesonide/ formoterol treatment versus
salmeterol/fluticasone at 5 minutes (0.12 l versus 0.09 l; p = 0.090) and 15
minutes (0.14 l versus 0.10 l; p < 0.05) post-dose. Budesonide/formoterol
demonstrated a more rapid onset of effect as reflected by increases in
e-Diary-recorded PEF and FEV( 1) from pre-dose to 5 and 15 minutes post-dose (all
p < 0.001) and spirometry at the clinic measured after the first dose (FEV(1) p <
0.001; 5 minutes post-dose). Improvements in symptom scores within 15 minutes
after drug administration were similar for both drugs, but budesonide/formoterol 
treatment resulted in significantly greater improvements in total morning
activities score (getting washed, dried, dressed, eating breakfast and walking
around the home; 0.22 versus 0.12 respectively, p < 0.05). Both treatments were
well tolerated.
CONCLUSIONS: Short-term treatment with budesonide/formoterol DPI or
salmeterol/fluticasone DPI was effective in patients with COPD.
Budesonide/formoterol had a more rapid onset of effect compared with
salmeterol/fluticasone and resulted in greater improvements in ability to perform
morning activities despite the lower inhaled corticosteroid dose.

DOI: 10.1177/1753465809344870 
PMID: 19734176  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Lancet. 2009 Aug 29;374(9691):712-9. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(09)61250-2.

Budesonide and the risk of pneumonia: a meta-analysis of individual patient data.

Sin DD(1), Tashkin D, Zhang X, Radner F, Sjöbring U, Thorén A, Calverley PM,
Rennard SI.

Author information: 
(1)Providence Heart and Lung Institute, St Paul's Hospital (iCAPTURE Centre), and
Department of Medicine (Division of Respirology), University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, BC, Canada. dsin@mrl.ubc.ca

Comment in
    Lancet. 2009 Dec 19;374(9707):2051; author reply 2051-2.
    Lancet. 2009 Aug 29;374(9691):668-70.
    Lancet. 2009 Dec 19;374(9707):2050; author reply 2051-2.
    Evid Based Med. 2010 Feb;15(1):8-9.

BACKGROUND: Concern is continuing about increased risk of pneumonia in patients
with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) who use inhaled
corticosteroids. We aimed to establish the effects of inhaled budesonide on the
risk of pneumonia in such patients.
METHODS: We pooled patient data from seven large clinical trials of inhaled
budesonide (320-1280 mug/day), with or without formoterol, versus control regimen
(placebo or formoterol alone) in patients with stable COPD and at least 6 months 
of follow-up. The primary analysis compared treatment groups for the risk of
pneumonia as an adverse event or serious adverse event during the trial or within
15 days of the trial end. Cox proportional hazards regression was used to analyse
the data on an intention-to-treat basis. Data were adjusted for patients' age,
sex, smoking status, body-mass index, and postbronchodilator percent of predicted
forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV(1)).
FINDINGS: We analysed data from 7042 patients, of whom 3801 were on inhaled
budesonide and 3241 were on control treatment, with 5212 patient-years of
exposure to treatment. We recorded no significant difference between treatment
groups for the occurrence of pneumonia as an adverse event (3% [n=122 patients]
vs 3% [n=103]; adjusted hazard ratio 1.05, 95% CI 0.81-1.37) or a serious adverse
event (1% [n=53] vs 2% [n=50]; 0.92, 0.62-1.35), or for time to pneumonia as an
adverse event (log-rank test 0.94) or a serious adverse event (0.61). Increasing 
age and decreasing percent of predicted FEV(1) were the only two variables that
were significantly associated with occurrence of pneumonia as an adverse event or
a serious adverse event.
INTERPRETATION: Budesonide treatment for 12 months does not increase the risk of 
pneumonia in patients with COPD during that time and therefore is safe for
clinical use in such patients.
FUNDING: Michael Smith Foundation for Health Research.

DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(09)61250-2 
PMID: 19716963  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2009 Oct 15;180(8):741-50. doi:
10.1164/rccm.200904-0492OC. Epub 2009 Jul 30.

Efficacy and tolerability of budesonide/formoterol added to tiotropium in
patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Welte T(1), Miravitlles M, Hernandez P, Eriksson G, Peterson S, Polanowski T,
Kessler R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Hannover Medical School, Hannover,
Germany. Welte.Tobias@MH-Hannover.DE

Comment in
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2009 Oct 15;180(8):689-90.
    Expert Opin Pharmacother. 2010 Apr;11(6):1039-42.

RATIONALE: Budesonide/formoterol and tiotropium are commonly used maintenance
treatments for patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Combining
these medications may provide additional benefits.
OBJECTIVES: To assess the efficacy and tolerability of budesonide/formoterol
added to tiotropium in patients eligible for inhaled corticosteroid/long-acting
beta(2)-agonist combination therapy.
METHODS: In this 12-week, randomized, double-blind, parallel-group, multicenter
study, after a 2-week run-in, 660 subjects (75% male; mean age, 62 yr; FEV(1),
1.1 L; 38% predicted normal), 40 years of age or older, received tiotropium (18
microg once daily) plus either budesonide/formoterol (320/9 microg) (n = 329) or 
placebo (n = 331) twice daily.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: Clinic predose (primary outcome) and postdose
FEV(1), predose and postdose forced vital capacity and inspiratory capacity, and 
health status were measured. Other outcomes included daily measurements taken at 
home (pre- and postdose morning FEV(1) and peak expiratory flow, morning symptoms
and activities, and morning reliever use), severe exacerbations, and
tolerability. Over the treatment period, budesonide/formoterol plus tiotropium
significantly increased predose FEV(1) by 6% (65 ml) and postdose by 11% (123 and
131 ml at 5 and 60 min postdose, respectively) versus tiotropium alone (both P < 
0.001). Other outcomes all significantly improved with budesonide/formoterol plus
tiotropium versus tiotropium alone. The number of severe exacerbations decreased 
by 62% (rate ratio, 0.38; 95% confidence interval, 0.25-0.57; P < 0.001). Both
treatments were well tolerated.
CONCLUSIONS: In patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease,
budesonide/formoterol added to tiotropium versus tiotropium alone provides rapid 
and sustained improvements in lung function, health status, morning symptoms and 
activities, and reduces severe exacerbations. Clinical trial registered with
www.clinicaltrials.gov (NCT00496470).

DOI: 10.1164/rccm.200904-0492OC 
PMID: 19644045  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Drugs. 2009 Jul 30;69(11):1459-70. doi: 10.2165/00003495-200969110-00005.

Budesonide/formoterol pressurized metered-dose inhaler: in chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease.

Lyseng-Williamson KA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Wolters Kluwer Health, Adis, Auckland, New Zealand.

The corticosteroid budesonide and the rapid-onset, long-acting
beta(2)-adrenoceptor agonist formoterol have been combined into a single
pressurized metered-dose inhaler (pMDI) for use in patients with chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Well designed 6- and 12-month clinical
trials, twice-daily budesonide/formoterol pMDI 320 microg/9 microg effectively
improved lung function in patients with moderate to very severe COPD. The
co-primary endpoints of adjusted mean morning predose forced expiratory volume in
1 second (FEV(1)) and 1-hour post-dose FEV(1) improved from baseline to a
significantly greater extent with twice-daily budesonide/formoterol pMDI 320
microg/9 microg than with twice-daily placebo, budesonide pMDI 320 microg and
formoterol dry powder inhaler 9 microg. Budesonide/formoterol pMDI was also
associated with improvements from baseline in other measures of lung function,
COPD control (including the time to first COPD exacerbation in the 12-month
trial), symptoms and health status. These improvements were significantly greater
than those observed with placebo and, for some endpoints, monotherapy with the
individual components. Budesonide/formoterol pMDI was well tolerated in clinical 
trials in patients with COPD. Its overall adverse event profile is consistent
with the known tolerability profiles of formoterol and budesonide, and is
generally similar to that with placebo.

DOI: 10.2165/00003495-200969110-00005 
PMID: 19634924  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Int J Clin Pract. 2009 Aug;63(8):1136-49. doi: 10.1111/j.1742-1241.2009.02139.x.

Optimising treatment for COPD--new strategies for combination therapy.

Welte T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Hannover Medical School,
Carl-Neuberg-Strasse 1, Hannover, Germany. Welte.Tobias@MH-Hannover.DE

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a multi-component disease
characterised by airflow limitation and airway inflammation. Exacerbations of
COPD have a considerable impact on the quality of life, daily activities and
general well-being of patients and are a great burden on the health system. Thus,
the aims of COPD management include not only relieving symptoms and preventing
disease progression but also preventing and treating exacerbations. Attention
towards the day-to-day burden of the disease is also required in light of
evidence that suggests COPD may be variable throughout the day with morning being
the time when symptoms are most severe and patients' ability to perform regular
morning activities the most problematic. While available therapies improve
clinical symptoms and decrease airway inflammation, they do not unequivocally
slow long-term progression or address all disease components. With the burden of 
COPD continuing to increase, research into new and improved treatment strategies 
to optimise pharmacotherapy is ongoing - in particular, combination therapies,
with a view to their complementary modes of action enabling multiple components
of the disease to be addressed. Evidence from recent clinical trials indicates
that triple therapy, combining an anticholinergic with an inhaled corticosteroid 
and a long-acting beta(2)-agonist, may provide clinical benefits additional to
those associated with each treatment alone in patients with more severe COPD.
This article reviews the evidence for treatment strategies used in COPD with a
focus on combination therapies and introduces the 3-month CLIMB study (Evaluation
of Efficacy and Safety of Symbicort as an Add-on Treatment to Spiriva in Patients
With Severe COPD) which investigated the potential treatment benefits of
combining tiotropium with budesonide/formoterol in patients with COPD with regard
to lung function, exacerbations, symptoms and morning activities.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1742-1241.2009.02139.x 
PMCID: PMC2739483
PMID: 19624783  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Eur J Clin Pharmacol. 2009 Sep;65(9):853-71. doi: 10.1007/s00228-009-0682-z. Epub
2009 Jun 26.

Inhaled corticosteroids as combination therapy with beta-adrenergic agonists in
airways disease: present and future.

Chung KF(1), Caramori G, Adcock IM.

Author information: 
(1)Airway Disease Section, National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College
London, Dovehouse Street, London SW36LY, UK. f.chung@imperial.ac.uk

Inhaled corticosteroid (ICS) therapy in combination with long-acting
beta-adrenergic agonists represents the most important treatment for chronic
airways diseases such as asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
ICS therapy forms the basis for treatment of asthma of all severities, improving 
asthma control, lung function and preventing exacerbations of disease. Use of ICS
has also been established in the treatment of COPD, particularly symptomatic
patients, who experience useful gains in quality of life, likely from an
improvement in symptoms such as breathlessness and in reduction in exacerbations,
and an attenuation of the yearly rate of deterioration in lung function. The
addition of long-acting beta-agonist (LABA) therapy with ICS increases the
efficacy of ICS effects in moderate-to-severe asthma. Thus, a 800 mug daily dose 
of the ICS budesonide reduced severe exacerbation rates by 49% compared to a low 
dose of 200 mug daily, and addition of the LABA formoterol to budesonide (800
mug) led to a 63% reduction. In COPD, the effects of ICS are less prominent but
there are beneficial effects on the decline in FEV(1) and the rate of
exacerbations. A reduction in the rate of decline in FEV(1) of 16 ml/year with a 
25% reduction in exacerbation rate has been reported with the salmeterol and
fluticasone combination. A non-significant 17.5% reduction in all-cause mortality
rate with ICS and LABA is reported. Chronic inflammation is a feature of both
asthma and COPD, although there are site and characteristic differences. ICS
targets this inflammation although this effect of ICS is less effective in
patients with severe asthma and with COPD; however, addition of LABA may
potentiate the anti-inflammatory effects of ICS. An important consideration is
the presence of corticosteroid insensitivity in these patients. Currently
available ICS have variably potent binding activities to specific glucocorticoid 
receptors, leading to inhibition of gene expression by either binding to DNA and 
inducing anti-inflammatory genes or by repressing the induction of
pro-inflammatory mediators. Local side effects of ICS include oral candidiasis,
hoarseness and dysphonia, while systemic side effects, such as easy bruising and 
reduction in growth velocity or bone mineral densitometry, are usually restricted
to doses above maximally recommended doses. Use of LABA alone in patients with
asthma increases the risk of asthma-related events including deaths, but this is 
less observed with the combination of ICS and LABA. Therefore, use of LABA alone 
is not recommended for asthma therapy. Future progress in ICS development will be
characterised by the introduction of ICS with greater efficacy with a limited
side-effect profile, and by longer-acting ICS that can be used in combination
with once-daily LABAs. Other agents that could improve the efficacy of
corticosteroids or reverse corticosteroid insensitivity may be added to ICS. ICS 
in combination with LABAs will continue to remain the main focus of treatment of 
airways diseases.

DOI: 10.1007/s00228-009-0682-z 
PMID: 19557399  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Clin Exp Allergy. 2009 Nov;39(11):1700-10. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2222.2009.03307.x.
Epub 2009 Jun 22.

Budesonide and formoterol inhibit inflammatory mediator production by bronchial
epithelial cells infected with rhinovirus.

Skevaki CL(1), Christodoulou I, Spyridaki IS, Tiniakou I, Georgiou V, Xepapadaki 
P, Kafetzis DA, Papadopoulos NG.

Author information: 
(1)Second Department of Pediatrics, Allergy Research Center, University of
Athens, Athens, Greece. cskevaki@allergy.gr

BACKGROUND: Rhinoviruses (RVs) are responsible for the majority of acute asthma
and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) exacerbations. RVs infect the
lower airways and induce the production of pro-inflammatory and
remodelling-associated mediators. Budesonide (BUD) and formoterol (FORM)
synergize in controlling asthma and COPD exacerbations; however, their effects on
virus-induced inflammation and remodelling are less known.
OBJECTIVE: We investigated whether BUD and FORM synergize in suppressing
RV-induced inflammation and remodelling in the airways.
METHODS: In vitro models of RV infection of BEAS-2B and primary normal human
bronchial epithelial (NHBE) cells were used. We assessed the effects of
individual and combined drugs administered post-infection, at a clinically
relevant concentration range (10(-6)-10(-10) m), on the production of CCL5,
CXCL10, CXCL8, IL-6 and the remodelling-associated VEGF and bFGF, using ELISA and
RT-PCR.
RESULTS: BUD effectively suppressed RV-mediated induction of all mediators
studied, in a concentration-dependent manner. FORM alone suppressed the
production of CXCL8 and bFGF. The combination of BUD and FORM had
concentration-dependent, additive or synergistic effects in the suppression of
RV-induced CCL5, CXCL8 and CXCL10 in both cell types as well as VEGF in NHBE
only. Combination treatment also resulted in an enhanced suppression of
RV-induced IL-6, and CCL5 at the mRNA level as compared with BUD or FORM alone.
CONCLUSION: BUD and FORM suppress RV-induced chemokines and growth factors in
bronchial epithelial cells in a concentration-dependent, synergistic or additive 
manner. These data further support the combined use of BUD and FORM in asthma and
COPD and intensification of this therapy during exacerbations.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2222.2009.03307.x 
PMID: 19549024  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Curr Opin Pulm Med. 2009 Mar;15(2):133-7. doi: 10.1097/MCP.0b013e32832185da.

Steroids in acute exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: are
nebulized and systemic forms comparable?

Gunen H(1), Mirici A, Meral M, Akgün M.

Author information: 
(1)Turgut Ozal Research Center, Department of Pulmonary and Sleep Medicine, Inonu
University, Malatya 44069, Turkey. hgunen@yahoo.com

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Systemic corticosteroids are strongly recommended in the
treatment of exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). As
COPD patients are usually elderly and are relatively immobile, side effects of
systemic corticosteroids frequently outweigh their beneficial effects. On the
contrary, nebulized corticosteroid solutions have a negligible systemic
side-effect profile. In this review, as an alternative to systemic
corticosteroids, the place of nebulized corticosteroids in exacerbation periods
of COPD was summarized.
RECENT FINDINGS: The number of trials in the literature is increasing. Regarding 
the available data, high dose nebulized budesonide was found as effective as
systemic corticosteroids in exacerbations of COPD. The side-effect profile, blood
glucose level in particular, is better for nebulized budesonide.
SUMMARY: Findings from recent studies are giving a positive impression on the
role of high dose nebulized budesonide in exacerbations of COPD. However, larger 
and statistically high powered trials testing different types of nebulized
corticosteroid solutions with varying dosages are still lacking. Before
recommending the routine use of nebulized corticosteroids in exacerbations,
present findings need to be confirmed with further studies of high quality.

DOI: 10.1097/MCP.0b013e32832185da 
PMID: 19532028  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. COPD. 2009 Apr;6(2):104-11. doi: 10.1080/15412550902772593.

The effect of inhaled corticosteroids on the development of emphysema in smokers 
assessed by annual computed tomography.

Shaker SB(1), Dirksen A, Ulrik CS, Hestad M, Stavngaard T, Laursen LC, Maltbaek
N, Clementsen P, Skjaerbaek N, Nielsen L, Stoel B, Skovgaard LT, Tonnesen P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Gentofte University Hospital, Hellerup,
Denmark. saher@dadlnet.dk

The objective was to evaluate the effect of inhaled corticosteroids on disease
progression in smokers with moderate to severe chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD), as assessed by annual computed tomography (CT) using lung density
(LD) measurements. Two hundred and fifty-four current smokers with COPD were
randomised to treatment with either an inhaled corticosteroids (ICS), budesonide 
400 microg bid, or placebo. COPD was defined as FEV(1) < or = 70% pred,
FEV(1)/FVC < or = 60% and no reversibility to beta(2)-agonists and oral
corticosteroids. The patients were followed for 2-4 years with biannual
spirometry and annual CT and comprehensive lung function tests (LFT). CT images
were analysed using Pulmo-CMS software. LD was derived from a pixel-density
histogram of the whole lung as the 15th percentile density (PD15) and the
relative area of emphysema at a threshold of -910 Hounsfield units (RA-910), and 
both were volume-adjusted to predicted total lung capacity. At baseline, mean age
was 64 years and 64 years; mean number of pack-years was 56 and 56; mean FEV(1)
was 1.53 L (51% pred) and 1.53 L (53% pred); mean PD15 was 103 g/L and 104 g/L;
and mean RA-910 was 14% and 13%, respectively, for the budesonide and placebo
groups. The annual fall in PD15 was -1.12 g/L in the budesonide group and -1.81
g/L in the placebo group (p = 0.09); the annual increase in RA-910 was 0.4% in
the budesonide group and 1.1% in the placebo group (p = 0.02). There was no
difference in annual decline in FEV(1) between ICS (-54 mL) and placebo (-56 mL) 
(p = 0.89). Long-term budesonide inhalation shows a non-significant trend towards
reducing the progression of emphysema as determined by the CT-derived 15th
percentile lung density from annual CT scans in current smokers with moderate to 
severe COPD.

DOI: 10.1080/15412550902772593 
PMID: 19378223  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Drugs. 2009;69(5):549-65. doi: 10.2165/00003495-200969050-00004.

Efficacy and tolerability of budesonide/formoterol in one hydrofluoroalkane
pressurized metered-dose inhaler in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease: results from a 1-year randomized controlled clinical trial.

Rennard SI(1), Tashkin DP, McElhattan J, Goldman M, Ramachandran S, Martin UJ,
Silkoff PE.

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary Critical Care, Allergy and Sleep Medicine, University of Nebraska
Medical Center, Omaha, Nebraska 68198-5885, USA. srennard@unmc.edu

BACKGROUND: Combination therapy with a long-acting bronchodilator and an inhaled 
corticosteroid (ICS) is recommended in patients with chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD) who have frequent exacerbations. The efficacy and
tolerability of the combination of budesonide/formoterol have been demonstrated
in patients with COPD when administered via the dry powder inhaler (DPI) in a
1-year study and when administered via the hydrofluoroalkane (HFA) pressurized
metered-dose inhaler (pMDI) in a 6-month study.
OBJECTIVE: This study assessed the long-term efficacy and tolerability of
budesonide/formoterol HFA pMDI in patients with moderate to very severe COPD.
METHODS: This was a 12-month, randomized, double-blind, double-dummy,
parallel-group, active- and placebo-controlled, multicentre study (NCT00206167)
of 1, 964 patients aged >or =40 years with moderate to very severe COPD conducted
from 2005 to 2007 at 237 sites in the US, Europe and Mexico. After 2 weeks of
treatment based on previous therapy (ICSs, short-acting bronchodilators allowed),
patients received one of the following treatments twice daily:
budesonide/formoterol pMDI 160/4.5 microg x two inhalations (320/9 microg);
budesonide/formoterol pMDI 80/4.5 microg x two inhalations (160/9 microg);
formoterol DPI 4.5 microg x two inhalations (9 microg); or placebo.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: The co-primary efficacy variables were pre-dose forced
expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1) and 1-hour post-dose FEV1. .
RESULTS: Budesonide/formoterol 320/9 microg demonstrated greater improvements in 
pre-dose FEV1 versus formoterol (p = 0.008), and both budesonide/formoterol doses
demonstrated greater improvements in 1-hour post-dose FEV1 versus placebo (p <
0.001). The rate of COPD exacerbations was lower in both budesonide/formoterol
groups compared with formoterol and placebo (p <or= 0.004). Both
budesonide/formoterol doses were more effective than placebo (p <or= 0.006) for
controlling dyspnoea and improving health status (St George's Respiratory
Questionnaire). All treatments were generally well tolerated. The incidence of
pneumonia was not different for active (3.4-4.0%) and placebo (5.0%) groups.
CONCLUSIONS: Budesonide/formoterol pMDI (320/9 microg and 160/9 microg) improved 
pulmonary function and reduced symptoms and exacerbations over 1 year in patients
with moderate to very severe COPD. Only budesonide/formoterol pMDI 320/9 microg
demonstrated greater efficacy for both co-primary variables compared with
formoterol DPI 9 microg. Both budesonide/formoterol pMDI dosages were well
tolerated relative to formoterol and placebo.

DOI: 10.2165/00003495-200969050-00004 
PMCID: PMC3580134
PMID: 19368417  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. J Physiol Pharmacol. 2008 Dec;59 Suppl 6:303-9.

Expression of CREB-binding protein and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
gamma during formoterol or formoterol and corticosteroid therapy of chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease.

Holownia A(1), Mroz RM, Noparlik J, Chyczewska E, Braszko JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacology, Bialystok Medical University, Bialystok, 
Poland. holow_sinai@hotmail.com

We assessed the effect of therapy on nuclear signaling related to inflammatory
processes in sputum cells of patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
(COPD). Patients were treated with formoterol (F) or formoterol plus budesonide
(F/ICS) b.i.d. for 4 weeks, their sputum cells were isolated and subjected to RNA
extraction or lysis, followed by differential centrifugation. Signaling protein
levels were assessed by Western blots, their specific mRNAs were quantified using
qRTPCR, while 8-isoprostane levels were examined using enzyme immunoassay kit.
Cytosolic 8-isoprostane levels and nuclear glucocorticoid receptor expression
(protein and mRNA) were not significantly different in both groups, while nuclear
cAMP response element binding protein (CREB; protein and mRNA) and peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPARgamma protein and mRNA) were
significantly higher in cells from F/ICS-treated patients. CREB-binding protein
(CBP; protein and mRNA) levels were significantly lower in F/ICS patients. These 
changes indicate increased anti-inflammatory signaling in F/ICS-treated patients 
and seem to be beneficial.


PMID: 19218654  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Respir Med. 2009 Apr;103(4):582-8. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2008.10.017. Epub 2008 Dec
21.

Primary care of the patient with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease in Italy.

Cazzola M(1), Bettoncelli G, Sessa E, Cricelli C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Unit of Respiratory Diseases, University of
Rome Tor Vergata, Rome, Italy. mario.cazzola@uniroma2.it

Using a general practice research database with general practitioner (GP)
clinical records, it has been observed that among the 617,280 subjects registered
with 400 Italian GPs, 15,229 (2.47%) patients were suffering from chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Of these, 67.7% had a chest radiograph at
least once in a period of 10 years (1997-2006), while in the same period only
31.9% had a spirometry, 29.9% had a visit to a specialist, and 0.94% had a visit 
to an allergologist. From 1997 to 2006, 7.5% of patients with COPD, especially
the oldest ones, were hospitalized at least once for the disease, although 44.0% 
of all patients with COPD were hospitalized for other pathologies. With regard to
treatment, in 2006, 10,936 (71.1%) of COPD patients received at least one drug
for their disease (drugs classified within the R03 therapeutic pharmacological
subgroup of the Anatomical Therapeutic Chemical Classification). In particular,
salmeterol/fluticasone was prescribed 6441 times, tiotropium 4962, theophylline
3142, beclomethasone 2853, salbutamol 2256, formoterol 2191,
salbutamol/beclomethasone 2129, oxitropium 1802 and formoterol/budesonide 1741
times. Based on these findings, the level of COPD management in Italy seems to
fall short of recommended international COPD guidelines. In particular, it
appears that GPs usually prescribe treatment without the use of spirometry,
and/or without taking into account the severity of airway obstruction. It must
also be noted that, in general, patients with COPD are undertreated.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2008.10.017 
PMID: 19103479  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2008;3(3):469-75.

Effect of COPD treatments on MRP1-mediated transport in bronchial epithelial
cells.

van der Deen M(1), Homan S, Timmer-Bosscha H, Scheper RJ, Timens W, Postma DS, de
Vries EG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, University Medical Center Groningen, The
Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Smoking is the principle risk factor for development of chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Multidrug resistance-associated protein 1
(MRP1) is known to protect against toxic compounds and oxidative stress, and
might play a role in protection against smoke-induced disease progression. We
questioned whether MRP1-mediated transport is influenced by pulmonary drugs that 
are commonly prescribed in COPD.
METHODS: The immortalized human bronchial epithelial cell line 16HBE14o- was used
to analyze direct in vitro effects of budesonide, formoterol, ipratropium bromide
and N-acetylcysteine (NAC) on MRP1-mediated transport. Carboxyfluorescein (CF)
was used as a model MRP1 substrate and was measured with functional flow
cytometry.
RESULTS: Formoterol had a minor effect, whereas budesonide
concentration-dependently decreased CF transport by MRP1. Remarkably, addition of
formoterol to the highest concentration of budesonide increased CF transport.
Ipratropium bromide inhibited CF transport at low concentrations and tended to
increase CF transport at higher levels. NAC increased CF transport by MRP1 in a
concentration-dependent manner.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest that, besides their positive effects on respiratory
symptoms, budesonide, formoterol, ipratropium bromide, and NAC modulate MRP1
activity in bronchial epithelial cells. Further studies are required to assess
whether stimulation of MRP1 activity is beneficial for long-term treatment of
COPD.


PMCID: PMC2629975
PMID: 18990976  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. J Clin Pharmacol. 2008 Nov;48(11):1300-8. doi: 10.1177/0091270008322122.

Pharmacokinetics of budesonide and formoterol administered via 1 pressurized
metered-dose inhaler in patients with asthma and COPD.

Tronde A(1), Gillen M, Borgström L, Lötvall J, Ankerst J.

Author information: 
(1)AstraZeneca R&D Lund, SE-221 87, Lund, Sweden. Ann.Tronde@astrazeneca.com

In 3 open-label studies, the systemic bioavailability of budesonide and
formoterol administered via pressurized metered-dose inhaler (pMDI) or dry powder
inhaler (DPI) formulations was evaluated in asthma (24 children, 55 adults) or
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD; n = 26) patients. Treatments were
administered at doses high enough to estimate pharmacokinetic parameters
reliably. Two of the studies included an experimental budesonide pMDI
formulation. In study 1 (asthma, adults), budesonide area under the curve (AUC)
was 32% and 31% lower and maximal budesonide concentration (C(max)) 45% and 56%
lower after budesonide/formoterol pMDI and budesonide pMDI versus budesonide DPI.
Formoterol AUC and C(max) were 13% and 39% lower after budesonide/formoterol pMDI
versus formoterol DPI. In study 2 (asthma, children), budesonide AUC and C(max)
were 27% and 41% lower after budesonide/formoterol pMDI versus budesonide DPI +
formoterol DPI. In study 3 (COPD/asthma, adults), budesonide AUC and C(max) were 
similar and formoterol AUC and C(max) 18% and 22% greater after
budesonide/formoterol pMDI versus budesonide pMDI + formoterol DPI (COPD).
Budesonide and formoterol AUC were 12% and 15% higher in COPD versus asthma
patients. In conclusion, systemic exposure generally is similar or lower with
budesonide/formoterol pMDI versus combination therapy via separate DPIs or
monotherapy and comparable between asthma and COPD patients.

DOI: 10.1177/0091270008322122 
PMID: 18974284  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. COPD. 2008 Oct;5(5):282-90. doi: 10.1080/15412550802363360.

Anti-inflammatory effects of combined budesonide/formoterol in COPD
exacerbations.

Bathoorn E(1), Liesker JJ, Postma DS, Boorsma M, Bondesson E, Koëter GH, Kauffman
HF, van Oosterhout AJ, Kerstjens HA.

Author information: 
(1)Groningen Research Institute for Asthma and COPD, Department of Pulmonology,
University Medical Center Groningen, University of Groningen, Groningen, The
Netherlands. ebathoorn@gmail.com

Systemic corticosteroids and additional short-acting beta2-agonists are commonly 
used in exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). In this
double-blind study, the combination of a high-dose inhaled corticosteroid with a 
rapid-onset long-acting beta2-agonist was evaluated in the treatment of
out-patient COPD exacerbations. The primary aim was to compare 14-day treatment
effects of budesonide/formoterol to placebo on sputum eosinophils and,
secondarily, on other indices of inflammation, forced expiratory flow in one
second (FEV(1)), symptoms, health status, and adverse events. Forty-five patients
not using steroids (37 male, 21/24 current/ex smoker, median packyears 38, age 65
years, FEV(1) 61% predicted), experiencing a COPD exacerbation, were treated at
home with budesonide/formoterol (320/9 microg 4 times daily), prednisolone (30 mg
daily), or placebo for 14 days. Sputum eosinophils were significantly reduced by 
budesonide/formoterol (-57%) compared to placebo (+24%) (p = 0.01).
Budesonide/formoterol reduced total symptom scores significantly (p = 0.01)
compared to placebo. The increase in FEV(1) by 2 weeks of treatment with
budesonide/formoterol (125 ml) was not significantly different from that of
placebo (43 ml) (p = 0.07). Budesonide/ formoterol treatment did not suppress
morning serum cortisol compared to placebo (-16%; p = 0.50). In conclusion,
budesonide/formoterol reduces sputum eosinophils and improves symptoms in the
treatment of out-patient COPD exacerbations.

DOI: 10.1080/15412550802363360 
PMID: 18972276  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Drug Saf. 2008;31(11):965-88.

Safety of inhaled budesonide: clinical manifestations of systemic
corticosteroid-related adverse effects.

Christensson C(1), Thorén A, Lindberg B.

Author information: 
(1)Patient Safety, Clinical Development, AstraZeneca R&D Lund, Lund, Sweden.

Inhaled corticosteroid (ICS) therapy is central to the long-term management of
asthma and is extensively used in the management of chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD). While administration via inhalation limits systemic exposure
compared with oral or injected corticosteroids and, therefore, the risk of
systemic corticosteroid-related adverse effects, concerns over the long-term
safety of ICS persist. The assessment of the long-term effects of ICS therapy
requires considerable research effort over years or even decades. Surrogate
markers/predictors for clinical endpoints such as adrenal crisis, reduced final
height and fractures have been identified for use in relatively short-term
studies. However, the predictive value of such markers remains
questionable.Inhaled budesonide has been available since the early 1980s and
there is a considerable evidence base investigating the safety of this agent. To 
assess the long-term safety of inhaled budesonide therapy in terms of the actual 
incidence of the clinical endpoints adrenal crisis/insufficiency, reduced final
height, fractures and pregnancy complications, we undertook a review of the
scientific literature. The external databases BIOSIS, Cochrane Central Register
of Controlled Trials, Current Contents, EMBASE, International Pharmaceutical
Abstracts and MEDLINE were searched, in addition to AstraZeneca's internal
product literature database Planet, up to 29 February 2008. Only original
articles of epidemiological studies, national surveys, clinical trials and case
reports concerning inhaled budesonide were included.Eight surveys of adrenal
crisis were found. The only survey with specified criteria for diagnosis involved
2912 paediatricians and endocrinologists and revealed 33 patients with adrenal
crisis associated with ICS therapy; only one patient used budesonide (in
co-treatment with fluticasone propionate). In addition, 14 case reports of
adrenal crisis in budesonide-treated patients were found. In only two of these,
budesonide was used at recommended doses and in the absence of interacting
medication.Three retrospective studies and one prospective study assessing final 
height were found. None of them showed any reduced final height in patients
receiving inhaled budesonide during childhood or adolescence.Seventeen
epidemiological studies investigating the risk of fractures were found. When
adjusting for confounding factors, they did not provide any unequivocal data for 
an increased fracture risk with budesonide. Four prospective placebo-controlled
clinical trials of 2-6 years duration with inhaled budesonide in patients with
asthma or COPD were found. None of the studies identified any association between
inhaled budesonide and increased risk for fractures.Four studies using data from 
the Swedish birth and health registries showed there was no increased risk for
congenital malformations, cardiovascular defects, decreased gestational age,
birth weight or birth length among infants born to women using inhaled budesonide
during pregnancy compared with the general population. This was confirmed by five
observational studies in Australia, Canada, Hungary, Japan and the US. Similarly,
one randomized clinical trial comparing pregnancy outcomes among asthma patients 
receiving inhaled budesonide or placebo did not demonstrate any difference in
outcome of pregnancy.In summary, based on 25 years of experience with different
doses and in different populations, inhaled budesonide therapy only in very rare 
cases appears to be associated with an increased risk of adrenal crisis,
reduction in final height, increases in the number of fractures or complications 
during pregnancy.


PMID: 18840017  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Presse Med. 2008 Nov;37(11):1604-8. doi: 10.1016/j.lpm.2008.08.003. Epub 2008 Sep
30.

[Prevention of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease exacerbations].

[Article in French]

Dusser D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Faculté Cochin Port-Royal, Service de Pneumologie, Groupe Hospitalier Cochin
Saint-Vincent-de-Paul, APHP, Université Paris Descartes, Paris Cedex 14, France. 
daniel.dusser@cch.aphp.fr

Exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) aggravate disease
course, induce increased morbidity and mortality, impair quality of life, and
raise the direct costs of COPD. Their prevention is essential and is an integral 
part of the COPD program defined by French health authorities for the 2005-2010
period. Both pharmacologic and nonpharmacologic approaches have been shown to be 
effective in preventing exacerbations, but these treatments are still underused
and misused. Important nonpharmacologic therapies that directly decrease the risk
of exacerbation or hospitalization include smoking cessation, oxygen therapy,
pulmonary rehabilitation, and education. Most of the drugs available for
long-term management of COPD have significant effects on the frequency of
exacerbations: tiotropium and salmeterol, each used alone, as well as fixed
combinations of salmeterol/fluticasone or formoterol/budesonide. Tiotropium
reduces the frequency of exacerbation in both moderate and severe COPD. Inhaled
glucocorticosteroid agents are not recommended alone. They must be prescribed
only with a long-acting bronchodilator and only to patients with severe disease
and repeated exacerbations. Influenza vaccination is recommended.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lpm.2008.08.003 
PMID: 18829252  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Expert Rev Respir Med. 2008 Oct;2(5):551-64. doi: 10.1586/17476348.2.5.551.

Budesonide/formoterol in the treatment of asthma.

Lee C(1), Corren J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Allergy and Immunology, VA Greater Los
Angeles Healthcare System/University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, 
USA.

Budesonide/formoterol is a combination of an inhaled corticosteroid plus a
long-acting beta(2)-agonist available as a dry-powder inhaler for the indication 
of asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease in various countries outside 
of the USA and as a pressurized metered-dose inhaler in the USA for the
indication of asthma. Clinical studies have shown that budesonide/formoterol is
significantly more effective than an equivalent or higher dose of budesonide or
fluticasone propionate alone in patients with moderate-to-severe disease, and at 
least as effective as its two components administered via separate inhalers in
asthmatics with predominantly moderate to severe persistent disease.
Budesonide/formoterol is effective when administered both once or twice daily.
Adjustable maintenance dosing with budesonide/formoterol has been shown to
provide equivalent or better asthma control with a significantly lower amount of 
study drug use compared with fixed dosing. The rapid onset of action of
budesonide/formoterol, predominantly due to formoterol, as well as its favorable 
dose-response, has prompted budesonide/formoterol to be used as both a
maintenance and reliever medication, referred to as the Symbicort maintenance and
reliever therapy (SMART) dosing regimen in several countries. Use of this
approach has resulted in studies evaluating SMART, demonstrating significantly
lower rates of exacerbations and reliever medication use compared with
fixed-dosing regimens in asthma.

DOI: 10.1586/17476348.2.5.551 
PMID: 20477290  [PubMed]


167. Ann Pharmacother. 2008 Oct;42(10):1416-24. doi: 10.1345/aph.1L273.

Compatibility and aerosol characteristics of formoterol fumarate mixed with other
nebulizing solutions.

Akapo S(1), Gupta J, Martinez E, McCrea C, Ye L, Roach M.

Author information: 
(1)Analytical Development, Dey L.P., 2751 Napa Valley Corporate Dr., Napa, CA
94558, USA. samuel.akapo@dey.com

BACKGROUND: Patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) are often 
given admixtures of nebulizable drugs to minimize the time of administration in
treatment regimens.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the physicochemical compatibility and aerodynamic
characteristics of formoterol fumarate 20 microg/2 mL when mixed or sequentially 
nebulized with budesonide inhalation suspension 0.5 mg/2 mL, ipratropium bromide 
0.5 mg/2.5 mL, cromolyn sodium 20 mg/2 mL, or acetylcysteine 10% (100 mg/mL).
METHODS: The admixtures were prepared in triplicate and analyzed for
physicochemical compatibility at 0, 15, 30, and 60 minutes after mixing at room
temperature. Physical compatibility was determined by visual examination and
measurements of pH, osmolality, and turbidity. Chemical stability was evaluated
using compendial or in-house-validated high-performance liquid chromatography
(HPLC) assay methods. The aerodynamic characteristics of the admixtures or
sequentially nebulized drugs were determined from aerosols generated from a Pari 
LC Plus nebulizer, using an 8-stage cascade impactor followed by HPLC analysis of
the deposited drug.
RESULTS: The admixtures remained clear, colorless solutions with no
precipitation, except for cloudiness observed in the formoterol/budesonide
combination due to budesonide suspension. The pH, osmolality, and turbidity for
all admixtures were within the initial values (< or = 3%), and there were no
significant changes (< or = 2%) in potency of the active components throughout
the 1-hour study period. Due to increased drug volume or reconcentration in the
nebulizer cup, the respirable fraction/delivered dose increased significantly (p 
< 0.05) for the mixed or sequentially nebulized drug. However, the fine particle 
fraction (FPF), mass median aerodynamic diameter, and geometric standard
deviation generally remained unchanged for all admixtures, with the exception of 
FPF for the formoterol/budesonide combination.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results indicate that admixtures of formoterol with budesonide, 
ipratropium, cromolyn, or acetylcysteine are physically and chemically
compatible. However, admixing or sequential nebulization significantly increased 
the amount of drug delivered compared with single drug nebulization. The clinical
implications of the in vitro data in patients with COPD have not been determined.

DOI: 10.1345/aph.1L273 
PMID: 18780805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Drugs. 2008;68(14):1975-2000.

Efficacy and safety of budesonide and formoterol in one pressurized metered-dose 
inhaler in patients with moderate to very severe chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease: results of a 6-month randomized clinical trial.

Tashkin DP(1), Rennard SI, Martin P, Ramachandran S, Martin UJ, Silkoff PE,
Goldman M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, University of California,
Los Angeles, California, USA. dtashkin@mednet.ucla.edu

BACKGROUND: The combination of an inhaled corticosteroid (ICS) and a long-acting 
bronchodilator is recommended in the treatment of patients with chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) who have frequent exacerbations.
Budesonide/formoterol dry powder inhaler (DPI) has demonstrated efficacy and
tolerability in patients with COPD.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the efficacy and tolerability of budesonide/formoterol
administered via one hydrofluoroalkane pressurized metered-dose inhaler (pMDI) in
patients with COPD.
METHODS: This was a 6-month, randomized, double-blind, double-dummy,
placebo-controlled, parallel-group, multicentre study (NCT00206154) of 1704
patients aged > or =40 years with moderate to very severe COPD conducted in 194
centres in the US, Czech Republic, the Netherlands, Poland and South Africa.
After 2 weeks of treatment based on previous therapy (ICSs and short-acting
bronchodilators allowed during the run-in period), patients received one of the
following treatments administered twice daily: budesonide/formoterol pMDI 160/4.5
microg x two inhalations (320/9 microg); budesonide/formoterol pMDI 80/4.5 microg
x two inhalations (160/9 microg); budesonide pMDI 160 microg x two inhalations
(320 microg) plus formoterol DPI 4.5 microg x two inhalations (9 microg);
budesonide pMDI 160 microg x two inhalations (320 microg); formoterol DPI 4.5
microg x two inhalations (9 microg); or placebo.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: The co-primary efficacy variables were pre-dose forced
expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV(1)) and 1-hour post-dose FEV(1).
RESULTS: Budesonide/formoterol 320/9 microg demonstrated significantly greater
improvements in pre-dose FEV(1) versus formoterol (p = 0.026; pre-specified
primary comparator) and 1-hour post-dose FEV(1) versus budesonide (p < 0.001;
pre-specified primary comparator); budesonide/formoterol 160/9 microg
demonstrated significantly greater improvements versus budesonide (p < 0.001) for
1-hour post-dose FEV(1) but not versus formoterol for pre-dose FEV(1). Dyspnoea
(measured using the Breathlessness Diary) and health-related quality-of-life
(HR-QOL) scores (based on the St George's Respiratory Questionnaire total score) 
were significantly improved with both dosage strengths of budesonide/formoterol
compared with budesonide, formoterol and placebo (p < or = 0.044 for all).
Although not powered a priori for comparisons, the number of exacerbations per
patient-treatment year requiring treatment with oral corticosteroids and/or
hospitalization was numerically (20-25%) lower with the budesonide-containing
treatments (0.710-0.884) versus formoterol (1.098) and placebo (1.110). This
result was driven by the exacerbations requiring treatment with oral
corticosteroids (79-120 events). The number of exacerbations resulting in
hospitalization was very low across treatment groups (11-22); the number per
patient-treatment year was significantly different for budesonide/formoterol
320/9 microg (0.158) versus other treatment groups (0.081-0.108) except
budesonide/formoterol 160/9 microg (0.139), and for budesonide/formoterol 160/9
microg versus formoterol (0.081) [p < or = 0.05]. All treatments were generally
well tolerated. The incidence of individual non-fatal serious adverse events was 
similar across all treatment groups, except COPD, which was highest in the
budesonide/formoterol 320/9 microg group (6.1%) and lowest in the budesonide
(3.6%) and formoterol (3.9%) groups, with a range of 4.3-4.6% in the
budesonide/formoterol 160/9 microg, budesonide plus formoterol and placebo
groups. Budesonide/formoterol had a safety profile comparable with that of the
monocomponents and placebo. There was no increase in the incidence of pneumonia
in the active treatment groups relative to placebo.
CONCLUSIONS: Budesonide/formoterol pMDI 320/9 microg demonstrated significantly
greater efficacy for pulmonary function on both co-primary endpoints versus the
pre-specified comparators (formoterol DPI 9 microg for pre-dose FEV(1) and
budesonide pMDI 320 microg for 1-hour post-dose FEV(1)). Budesonide/formoterol
pMDI 160/9 microg demonstrated significantly greater efficacy for 1-hour
post-dose FEV(1) versus budesonide pMDI 320 microg. Dyspnoea scores and HR-QOL
were significantly improved with both budesonide/formoterol pMDI dosage strengths
versus both monocomponents and placebo. Both budesonide/formoterol pMDI dosage
strengths were well tolerated relative to the monocomponents and placebo.


PMID: 18778120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Cell Mol Immunol. 2008 Aug;5(4):287-91. doi: 10.1038/cmi.2008.35.

Atomization inhalation of terbutaline and budesonide efficiently improved
immunity and lung function of AECOPD patients.

Xiong G(1), Xu L, Wei L, Li X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, The First Hospital of Jilin University,
Changchun 130021, China.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a syndrome of chronic progressive
airflow limitation as a result of chronic inflammation of the airways and lung
parenchyma. COPD patients always have airway hyperreactivity (AHR), so how to
reduce AHR becomes the key purpose of clinical treatment. It is hypothesized that
combined inhalation of corticosteroids and beta2-agonists can reduce the AHR in
COPD. In this study, atomization inhalation of budesonide and terbutaline plus
conventional therapies was applied to treat AECOPD (acute exacerbation of chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease) patients for two weeks. The results showed that
additional inhalation of budesonide and terbutaline could upregulate serum IL-2
levels, the percentages of CD3+ T and CD4+ T cells, and CD4/CD8 ratio, and
decrease eosinophils and serum CRP level more efficiently than conventional
treatment in patients with AECOPD. And the lung function of the atomization
inhalation group was improved more obviously after the treatment compared with
the conventional treatment group. Thus, atomization inhalation of terbutaline and
budesonide can control AECOPD effectively, and has wide clinical perspective in
controlling and preventing the exacerbation of COPD.

DOI: 10.1038/cmi.2008.35 
PMCID: PMC4651299
PMID: 18761816  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Respir Med. 2008 Nov;102(11):1615-24. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2008.05.007. Epub 2008 
Aug 8.

Identifying COPD patients at increased risk of mortality: predictive value of
clinical study baseline data.

Halpin DM(1), Peterson S, Larsson TP, Calverley PM.

Author information: 
(1)Royal Devon & Exeter Hospital, Barrack Road, Exeter, EX2 5DW, UK.
d.m.g.halpin@ex.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: Identifying chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) patients at 
increased risk of mortality is an important component of effective disease
management.
METHODS: A pooled analysis of patients with severe COPD, from two well-controlled
1-year studies, was conducted using Cox regression and spline analysis to
evaluate predictability of baseline demographic data and in-study variables for
mortality risk, and to evaluate the effect of treatment allocation to budesonide 
and formoterol, versus their respective control groups, on these outcomes.
RESULTS: In the pooled analysis, a Cox regression model reported a higher
baseline St George's Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ) total score as a
significant predictor of mortality (hazard ratio 1.037 [95% confidence interval
1.021-1.054]; p<0.0001). The 36-item short-form health survey (SF-36) mental and 
physical component scores were also predictive of an increased mortality risk
(p<0.05). Age, forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV(1)), body mass index and
smoking status were not significant predictors. Spline analysis of baseline
variables revealed a linear association between SGRQ total score and mortality
risk over 1 year (logarithmic scale). Other baseline variables, including FEV(1),
showed different bimodal patterns in the spline analysis. There was no difference
in mortality in the formoterol versus the non-formoterol treatment group while
budesonide-containing treatment was associated with reduced 1-year, all-cause,
in-study mortality compared with non-budesonide therapy.
CONCLUSION: Health status measured by SGRQ and SF-36 may be important for
predicting COPD patients at increased mortality risk, with SGRQ total score
emerging as the strongest predictor compared with other baseline covariates.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2008.05.007 
PMID: 18691861  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. COPD. 2008 Jun;5(3):187-200. doi: 10.1080/15412550802093041.

Mortality in COPD: inevitable or preventable? Insights from the cardiovascular
arena.

Halpin D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Royal Devon & Exeter Hospital Barrack Road Exeter EX2 5DW, UK.
David.Halpin@rdeft.nhs.uk

Mortality due to chronic obstructive pulmonary disease continues to rise, whereas
mortality rates related to cardiovascular disease appear to be slowing, or even
declining. This is due at least in part to more widespread use of preventative
therapies that have been shown to reduce cardiovascular mortality, raising the
question of whether appropriate use of therapies for chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease which potentially reduce mortality could have a similar impact.
This article discusses approaches used successfully in managing heart disease and
considers whether these can be applied to chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
and whether a better understanding of the strongest predictors of mortality in
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease is needed. It reviews the role of inhaled
corticosteroids, both alone and in combination with long-acting beta(2)-agonists,
in individuals with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, including the role of 
combination therapy with inhaled corticosteroids/long-acting beta(2)-agonists
(budesonide/formoterol or salmeterol/fluticasone propionate) in decreasing
exacerbations and improving health status, potentially providing survival
benefits in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. This review also discusses the
potential impact of treatments indicated for cardiovascular disease on chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease and possible links between the two diseases.

DOI: 10.1080/15412550802093041 
PMCID: PMC2442901
PMID: 18568843  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. COPD. 2008 Jun;5(3):163-9. doi: 10.1080/15412550802092969.

Beta2-agonists potentiate corticosteroid-induced neutrophil survival.

Perttunen H(1), Moilanen E, Zhang X, Barnes PJ, Kankaanranta H.

Author information: 
(1)The Immunopharmacology Research Group, Medical School, University of Tampere
and Research Unit, Tampere University Hospital, Tampere, Finland.
heli.perttunen@uta.fi

Comment in
    COPD. 2008 Jun;5(3):143-5.

Neutrophils are considered to play a role in the pathogenesis of chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and severe asthma. Recent guidelines
recommend the use of a combination of inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) and
long-acting beta2-agonists (LABA) in the treatment of COPD with exacerbations and
asthma not adequately controlled by ICS alone. LABA have been proposed to have a 
synergistic effect with corticosteroids by activating glucocorticoid receptors.
The aim of this study was to investigate the effect of beta2-agonists on the
inhibitory effects of corticosteroids on human neutrophil apoptosis. In addition,
the effects of beta2-agonists on spontaneous neutrophil apoptosis and on GM-CSF- 
and LTB4-afforded survival were also evaluated. Neutrophils were isolated from
human blood under sterile conditions and cultured for 16 hours. Apoptosis was
assessed by relative DNA fragmentation assay. Morphological analysis was used as 
a control method to confirm the occurrence of apoptosis. Salbutamol, formoterol
and salmeterol prolonged the lifespan of budesonide- and fluticasone
propionate-treated neutrophils by inhibiting apoptosis. Formoterol and salbutamol
partly reversed the inhibitory effect of GM-CSF on neutrophil apoptosis. In
contrast, the effects of beta(2)-agonists on spontaneous neutrophil apoptosis and
on LTB(4)-afforded survival were negligible. beta2-agonists potentiate
corticosteroid-induced neutrophil survival at clinically relevant drug
concentrations. Whether these effects translate into clinically relevant changes 
in lung neutrophil numbers remains to be demonstrated.

DOI: 10.1080/15412550802092969 
PMID: 18568840  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Allergy Asthma Proc. 2008 Mar-Apr;29(2):103-8. doi: 10.2500/aap.2008.29.3088.

The future of the long-acting beta-adrenergic bronchodilators in the treatment of
asthma.

Mansfield LE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Texas Tech Regional Health Science Center, El Paso, TX, USA.
immunman@westernskymed.com

The combination of long-acting beta-agonist (LABA) bronchodilators with inhaled
corticosteroids (ICSs) has been shown to be an extremely effective treatment for 
asthma. Use of LABA as monotherapy for asthma is associated with increased
adverse events including exacerbations and asthma deaths. However, intensive
evaluation of the combined LABA-ICS therapy provided no signals of increased
risk. LABA appears to potentiate the effects of ICS. This provides the
opportunity for use a of lower ICS dose for asthma control with less risk of
steroid side effects. The combination of formoterol and budesonide used as both
maintenance and relief medications may offer superior asthma control with less
medication use. The recent introduction of 24-hour LABA, which are in clinical
trials, makes possible the concept of very effective once-daily combinations of
LABA and ICS, which would be expected to increase patient adherence and improve
asthma outcomes. The 24-hour LABA will likely be combined with a 24-hour
anticholinergic to treat chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Whether this dual
combination with ICS will enhance our treatment of more severe asthma remains an 
exciting hypothesis to be tested.

DOI: 10.2500/aap.2008.29.3088 
PMID: 18430306  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. J Physiol Pharmacol. 2007 Nov;58 Suppl 5(Pt 2):437-44.

Cytoplasm-nuclear trafficking of CREB and CREB phosphorylation at Ser133 during
therapy of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Mroz RM(1), Holownia A, Chyczewska E, Drost EM, Braszko JJ, Noparlik J, Donaldson
K, Macnee W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pneumology, Bialystok Medical University, Bialystok, Poland.
robmroz@wp.pl

cAMP responsive element binding protein (CREB) plays an important role in
transcriptional machinery. CREB signaling is altered in patients with asthma.
However, the role of CREB in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is less
clear. In the present study we assessed changes in subcellular CREB distribution 
and activation (CREB-P) in 35 stable COPD patients treated with formoterol (F),
formoterol+budesonide (F/ICS), and formoterol+budesonide+theophylline (F/ICS/Th) 
b.i.d. for 4 weeks, using SDS-PAGE/WB in cytosol and nuclear extracts of induced 
sputum cells. The expression of CREB was increased after F/ICS in both cytosolic 
and nuclear fractions by about 40% and 24%, respectively (P<0.001, P<0.01), while
CREB-P increased after F/ICS by about 50% (P<0.01) in both compartments. These
changes were not affected by theophylline. In F/ICS-treated patients, relative
accumulation of CREB in cytosol was observed. These findings indicate, that poor 
response to ICS therapy may be related to increased CREB-associated signaling.


PMID: 18204156  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Pulm Pharmacol Ther. 2008;21(3):499-506. doi: 10.1016/j.pupt.2007.11.003. Epub
2007 Nov 22.

Phosphodiesterase 4 inhibitors delay human eosinophil and neutrophil apoptosis in
the absence and presence of salbutamol.

Parkkonen J(1), Hasala H, Moilanen E, Giembycz MA, Kankaanranta H.

Author information: 
(1)The Immunopharmacology Research Group, Medical School, University of Tampere
and Research Unit, Tampere University Hospital, Tampere, Finland.

In asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), the number of
eosinophils and neutrophils in the lung is increased. One described mechanism
leading to the impaired clearance of these cells from the lung is the delay in
their programmed cell death (apoptosis). Selective inhibitors of
phosphodiesterases (PDEs) are under development for the treatment of lung
diseases because of their anti-inflammatory and bronchodilator activity. The aim 
of the present study was to establish whether inhibitors of PDE3, PDE4 and PDE5
modulate human eosinophil or neutrophil apoptosis or beta 2-adrenoceptor agonist-
or cytokine-afforded survival. We also evaluated whether a PDE4 inhibitor could
modulate the effect of a corticosteroid on eosinophil and neutrophil apoptosis.
Apoptosis was measured by using the relative DNA fragmentation assay and
Annexin-V binding. Inhibitors of PDE4 (rolipram; 0.1-10 microM) and PDE3
(cilostazol; 0.1-10 microM) delayed spontaneous eosinophil apoptosis maximally by
25% and 15%, respectively. A combination of a PDE4 or PDE3 inhibitor (10 microM) 
with salbutamol (100 nM) further delayed eosinophil apoptosis maximally by
42-49%. In neutrophils, rolipram (10 microM) also decreased apoptosis with a
maximal inhibition of 13%. The combination of rolipram (10 microM) and salbutamol
(100 nM) produced a 27% inhibition of neutrophil apoptosis. Inhibitor of
cGMP-specific PDE5 (zaprinast; 0.1-10 microM) did not affect eosinophil apoptosis
and only slightly increased spontaneous neutrophil apoptosis. The effect of
budesonide on apoptosis was not significantly modulated by a PDE4 inhibitor in
eosinophils or neutrophils. The present results show that selective inhibitors of
cAMP-hydrolyzing PDEs (PDE3 and PDE4) delay eosinophil apoptosis and, thus,
increase their survival in vitro. Furthermore, beta 2-adrenoceptor agonists
enhance the anti-apoptotic effects of PDE3 and PDE4 inhibitors, suggesting that
such drug combinations may prolong eosinophil and neutrophil longevity in the
lung.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pupt.2007.11.003 
PMID: 18282775  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Pulm Pharmacol Ther. 2008;21(3):540-50. doi: 10.1016/j.pupt.2007.12.004. Epub
2008 Jan 6.

The impact of inhaled corticosteroid and long-acting beta-agonist combination
therapy on outcomes in COPD.

Hanania NA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Section of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Asthma Clinical Research
Center, Baylor College of Medicine, 1504 Taub Loop, Houston, TX 77030, USA.
hanania@bcm.tmc.edu <hanania@bcm.tmc.edu>

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is an under-recognized cause of
morbidity and mortality worldwide that imposes an ever increasing burden on the
patient and society alike. The disease encompasses multiple structural and
functional components of which inflammation is at the core of the disease,
affecting the lungs and other organs. Consequently, current treatment strategies 
are aimed at treating both the symptoms and the pulmonary inflammation underlying
the complex pathophysiology of COPD. Smoking cessation is the only intervention
currently shown to slow disease progression in COPD and decrease all-cause
mortality, aside from lung transplant, lung-volume reduction surgery and oxygen
therapy in selective patients. However, this intervention is difficult to achieve
and sustain because of the addictive and chronic relapsing nature of cigarette
smoking. Pharmacotherapy with bronchodilating agents, including the beta
2-agonists, anticholinergics and methylxanthines, is central to the symptomatic
management of all stages of COPD. While inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) are
employed to reduce inflammation in more severe patients, their role as stand
alone medication in COPD is not well defined. However, increasing evidence
suggests that long-acting beta 2-agonists (LABAs) and ICS have complementary and 
synergistic effects, when delivered as combination therapy from a single inhaler.
In this respect, two preparations comprising combinations of
salmeterol+fluticasone propionate (SFC) and formoterol+budesonide (FBC) are
currently available and employed for treatment of more severe disease. Several
large-scale studies in patients with moderate-to-severe COPD have demonstrated
that treatment with SFC and FBC leads to significantly greater improvements in
lung function, exacerbations, health status and breathlessness, compared with
placebo or monotherapy with the component drugs. In the recently published
landmark study, Towards a Revolution in COPD Health (TORCH), regular treatment
with SFC narrowly missed demonstrating a statistically significant benefit on the
reduction in all-cause mortality over 3 years (17.5% reduction in risk, P=0.052),
further emphasizing the clinical usefulness of LABA+ICS therapy in COPD. In view 
of this increasing evidence for the additional effectiveness of LABA+ICS
combinations compared with the individual components, and the potential benefits 
of LABA+ICS on lung function, disease progression and potentially on all-cause
mortality, initiation of LABA+ICS combination treatment early in the COPD disease
process may be warranted.SEARCH STRATEGY: The studies discussed in this review
were identified from systematic searches of Medline and the Cochrane Database, up
to October 2007, for articles in English or with English abstracts describing
randomized, double-blind, parallel-group/crossover trials of at least 24 weeks'
duration. All searches were performed using the terms: chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease, COPD, chronic obstructive airway disease, or COAD AND either
salmeterol, formoterol, long-acting beta 2-adrenoceptor agonist, fluticasone
propionate, budesonide, inhaled corticosteroids, or inhaled glucocorticosteroids.
Additional relevant references were identified from the reference lists of
selected papers. Only studies that compared a combined LABA+ICS therapy with its 
monotherapy components were selected for inclusion in this manuscript.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pupt.2007.12.004 
PMID: 18280761  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. J Med Econ. 2008;11(2):345-62. doi: 10.3111/13696990802210984.

Symbicort: a pharmacoeconomic review.

Halpin DM(1).

Author information: 
(1)David.Halpin@rdeft.nhs.uk

OBJECTIVE: This systematic review examines the published evidence on the
pharmacoecomonics of Symbicort. Symbicort is a combination inhaler used in asthma
and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) that contains budesonide and
formoterol. In asthma, Symbicort can be used as fixed or adjustable dose
maintenance therapy as well as for both maintenance and reliever therapy (SMART).
METHOD: A literature search of PubMed was carried out to find all publications on
the pharmacoeconomics of Symbicort. Additional studies were searched for in the
reference lists of the papers retrieved and by searching tables of contents of
relevant journals. A total of 13 studies on Symbicort in asthma and 2 studies on 
Symbicort in COPD were found.
RESULTS: Total costs were lower with Symbicort than with separate inhalers
containing budesonide and formoterol. Adjustable dosing maintained control of
asthma using less medication and was associated with lower treatment costs than
fixed dosing with Symbicort or the combination of fluticasone/salmeterol. SMART
improves asthma control, reduces exacerbations and reduces direct and indirect
costs compared to fixed maintenance therapy with either Symbicort or
fluticasone/salmeterol. In COPD, Symbicort offers clinical advantages over
therapy with the monocomponents and these are achieved at little or no extra
cost.

DOI: 10.3111/13696990802210984 
PMID: 19450091  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2007;2(2):107-16.

Comparison and optimal use of fixed combinations in the management of COPD.

Mensing M(1), Aalbers R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonolgy, Martini Hospital, Groningen, The Netherlands.
m.mensing@mzh.nl

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a leading cause of morbidity and 
mortality worldwide. Indications for the use of long-acting beta-agonists (LABAs)
and inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) in patients with COPD are described in the
various international guidelines, but no special recommendations are made
concerning the use of combination inhalers containing a LABA as well as an ICS.
To determine the place of combination inhalers in the treatment of COPD we
reviewed recent literature concerning this subject. On molecular level ICS/LABA
combination therapy has anti-inflammatory properties which cannot be attributed
to ICS alone. All clinical studies indicate that the two available combinations
(salmeterol/fluticasone and formoterol/budesonide) significantly reduce
exacerbation rate of moderate/severe exacerbations when compared with placebo.
Some studies also showed a significant reduction in exacerbation rate compared
with LABA monotherapy, but not compared with ICS monotherapy. From the patient's 
perspective, ICS/LABA combination inhalers are the first choice when both need to
be prescribed, possibly improving patient compliance for ICS. Currently little
evidence is available to predict if flexible treatment with LABA/ICS combination 
inhalers will improve disease control in COPD. Further studies are needed to
elucidate the clinical benefit of combination inhalers versus the individual
components in different inhalers, and to investigate the clinical benefit of
flexible dosing of combination inhalers in patients with COPD.


PMCID: PMC2695609
PMID: 18044682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. J Korean Med Sci. 2007 Oct;22(5):839-45.

The combination of tiotropium and budesonide in the treatment of chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease.

Um SW(1), Yoo CG, Kim YW, Han SK, Shim YS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Internal
Medicine, Seoul National University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

Because additive effects of inhaled corticosteroids and long-acting
anticholinergics are unclear, we undertook this study to compare the efficacy of 
tiotropium alone and tiotropium plus budesonide in patients with chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease. The study subjects were randomized to receive
either tiotropium 18 microg once daily with or without budesonide 200 microg
twice daily for 6 weeks. The efficacy variables were changes in trough forced
expiratory volume in one second (FEV1), St. George's Respiratory Questionnaire
(SGRQ), 6-minute walk distance (6MWD), and use of rescue medication. One hundred 
patients were randomized and 81 completed the study. The mean age was 64.0 yr,
and the mean FEV1 was 39.7% predicted. Compared with tiotropium alone (N=40), the
tiotropium/budesonide combination (N=41) was related to an improvement in the
SGRQ total score (tiotropium -2.8 units and tiotropium/budesonide -5.6 units,
p=0.003). 6MWD was improved by 13.5 m in the tiotropium group and by 22.5 m in
the tiotropium/budesonide group (p=0.031). Changes in trough FEV1 and the use of 
rescue medication were similar between two groups. In conclusion, compared with
tiotropium alone, the tiotropium/budesonide combination was related to an
improved health-related quality of life. These data support that low-dose
budesonide may enhance the efficacy of tiotropium.

DOI: 10.3346/jkms.2007.22.5.839 
PMCID: PMC2693850
PMID: 17982232  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2007 Oct 17;(4):CD006829.

Combined corticosteroid and long-acting beta-agonist in one inhaler versus
long-acting beta-agonists for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Nannini LJ(1), Cates CJ, Lasserson TJ, Poole P.

Author information: 
(1)Hospital G. Baigorria, Pulmonary Section, Ruta 11 Y Jm Estrada, G. Baigorria, 
Santa Fe - Rosario, Argentina, 2152. nanninilj@cimero.org.ar

Comment in
    Evid Based Med. 2008 Apr;13(2):56-7.
    ACP J Club. 2008 Mar-Apr;148(2):48-9.

Update in
    Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2012;9:CD006829.

BACKGROUND: The co-administration of inhaled corticosteroids and long-acting
beta-agonists in a combined inhaler is intended to facilitate adherence to
medication regimens, and to improve efficacy in COPD. In this review they are
compared with mono component long-acting beta-agonists.
OBJECTIVES: To assess the efficacy of combined inhaled corticosteroids and
long-acting beta-agonists preparations with mono component long-acting
beta-agonists in adults with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
SEARCH STRATEGY: We searched the Cochrane Airways Group Specialised Register of
trials. The date of the most recent search is April 2007.
SELECTION CRITERIA: Studies were included if they were randomised and
double-blind. Studies could compare a combined inhaled corticosteroids and
long-acting beta-agonist preparation with component long-acting beta-agonist
preparation.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Two reviewers independently assessed trial quality 
and extracted data. The primary outcomes were exacerbations, mortality and
pneumonia, with health-related quality of life (measured by validated scales),
lung function and side-effects as secondary outcomes. Dichotomous data were
analysed as fixed effect odds ratios (OR), and continuous data as mean
differences and 95% confidence intervals (CI). Sensitivity analysis was performed
by combining data with a random effects model.
MAIN RESULTS: Ten studies of good methodological quality met the inclusion
criteria, randomising 7598 participants with severe chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease. Eight studies assessed fluticasone/salmeterol, and two studies
budesonide/formoterol. The exacerbation rates with combined inhalers were reduced
in comparison to long-acting beta-agonists alone (Rate Ratio 0.82, 95% CI 0.78 to
0.88). There was no significant difference in mortality between combined inhalers
and long-acting beta-agonists alone. Pneumonia occurred more commonly with
combined inhalers (OR 1.62; 95% CI 1.35 to 1.94). There was no significant
difference in terms of hospitalisations, although the two studies contributing
data to this outcome may have been drawn from differing populations. Combination 
was more effective than LABA in improving quality of life measured by the St
George Respiratory Questionnaire, and the Chronic Respiratory Questionnaire, and 
predose and post dose FEV1.
AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: Combination therapy was more effective than long-acting
beta-agonists in reducing exacerbation rates, although the evidence for the
effects on hospitalisations was mixed, and requires further exploration. No
significant impact on mortality was found even with additional information from
the TORCH trial. The superiority of combination inhalers should be viewed against
the increased risk of side-effects, particularly pneumonia. Additional studies on
BDF are required and more information would be useful of the relative benefits
and adverse event rates with different doses of inhaled corticosteroids.

DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD006829 
PMID: 17943918  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2007 Oct 17;(4):CD006826.

Combined corticosteroid and long-acting beta-agonist in one inhaler versus
inhaled steroids for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Nannini LJ(1), Cates CJ, Lasserson TJ, Poole P.

Author information: 
(1)Hospital G. Baigorria, Pulmonary Section, Ruta 11 Y Jm Estrada, G. Baigorria, 
Santa Fe - Rosario, Argentina, 2152. nanninilj@cimero.org.ar

Comment in
    Evid Based Med. 2008 Jun;13(3):74.

Update in
    Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2013;8:CD006826.

BACKGROUND: Long-acting beta-agonists and inhaled corticosteroids have both been 
recommended in guidelines for the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease. Their co-administration in a combined inhaler is intended to facilitate 
adherence to medication regimens, and to improve efficacy. Two preparations are
currently available, fluticasone/salmeterol (FPS) and budesonide/formoterol
(BDF).
OBJECTIVES: To assess the efficacy of combined inhaled corticosteroid and
long-acting beta-agonist preparations, compared to inhaled corticosteroids, in
the treatment of adults with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
SEARCH STRATEGY: We searched the Cochrane Airways Group Specialised Register of
trials. The date of the most recent search is April 2007.
SELECTION CRITERIA: Studies were included if they were randomised and
double-blind. Studies compared combined inhaled corticosteroids and long-acting
beta-agonist preparations with the inhaled corticosteroid component.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Two reviewers independently assessed trial quality 
and extracted data. The primary outcome were exacerbations, mortality and
pneumonia. Health-related quality of life (measured by validated scales), lung
function and side-effects were secondary outcomes. Dichotomous data were analysed
as fixed effect odds ratios (OR), and continuous data as mean differences and 95%
confidence intervals (CI).
MAIN RESULTS: Seven studies of good methodological quality met the inclusion
criteria randomising 5708 participants with predominantly poorly reversible,
severe COPD. Exacerbation rates were significantly reduced with combination
therapies (Rate ratio 0.91; 95% confidence interval 0.85 to 0.97, P = 0.0008).
Data from two FPS studies indicated that exacerbations requiring oral steroids
were reduced with combination therapy. Data from one large study suggest that
there is no significant difference in the rate of hospitalisations. Mortality was
also lower with combined treatment (odds ratio 0.77; 95% confidence interval 0.63
to 0.94). Quality of life, lung function and withdrawals due to lack of efficacy 
favoured combination treatment. Adverse event profiles were similar between the
two treatments. No significant differences were found between FPS and BDP in the 
primary outcomes, but the confidence intervals for the BDP results were wide as
smaller numbers of patients have been studied.
AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: Combination ICS and LABA significantly reduces morbidity
and mortality in COPD when compared with mono component steroid. Adverse events
were not significantly different between treatments, although evidence from other
sources indicates that inhaled corticosteroids are associated with increased risk
of pneumonia. Assessment of BDF in larger, long-term trials is required. Dose
response data would provide valuable evidence on whether efficacy and safety
outcomes are affected by different steroid loads.

DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD006826 
PMCID: PMC4069257
PMID: 17943917  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2007 Oct 17;(4):CD003794.

Combined corticosteroid and long-acting beta-agonist in one inhaler versus
placebo for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Nannini L(1), Cates CJ, Lasserson TJ, Poole P.

Author information: 
(1)Hospital G. Baigorria, Pulmonary Section, Ruta 11 Y Jm Estrada, G. Baigorria, 
Santa Fe - Rosario, Argentina, 2152. nanninilj@cimero.org.ar

Update in
    Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2013;11:CD003794.

Update of
    Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2004;(3):CD003794.

BACKGROUND: Long-acting beta-agonists and inhaled corticosteroids have both been 
recommended in guidelines for the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease. Their co-administration in a combined inhaler may facilitate adherence
to medication regimens, and improve efficacy.
OBJECTIVES: To assess the efficacy of combined inhaled corticosteroid and
long-acting beta-agonist preparations, compared to placebo, in the treatment of
adults with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
SEARCH STRATEGY: We searched the Cochrane Airways Group Specialised Register of
trials. The date of the most recent search is April 2007.
SELECTION CRITERIA: Studies were included if they were randomised and
double-blind. Studies could compare any combined inhaled corticosteroids and
long-acting beta-agonist preparation with placebo.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Two authors independently assessed trial quality
and extracted data. One author entered the data.
MAIN RESULTS: Eleven studies met the inclusion criteria (6427 participants
randomised). Two different combination preparations (fluticasone/salmeterol and
budesonide/formoterol) were used. Study quality was good. Fluticasone/salmeterol 
and budesonide/formoterol both reduced the rate of exacerbations. Pooled analysis
of both combination therapies indicated that exacerbations were less frequent
when compared with placebo, Rate Ratio: 0.74 (95% CI 0.7 to 0.8). The clinical
impact of this effect depends on the frequency of exacerbations experienced by
patients. The patients included in these trials had on average 1-2 exacerbations 
per year which means that treatment with combination therapy would lead to a
reduction of one exacerbation every two to four years in these individuals. There
is an overall reduction in mortality, but this outcome is dominated by the
results of TORCH and further studies on budesonide/formoterol are required. The
three year number needed to treat to prevent one extra death is 36 (95% CI 21 to 
258), using a baseline risk of 15.2% from the placebo arm of TORCH. Both
treatments led to statistically significant improvement in health status
measurements, although the clinical importance of the differences observed is
open to interpretation. Symptoms and lung function assessments favoured
combination treatments. There was an increase in the risk of pneumonia with
combined inhalers. The three year number needed to treat for one extra case of
pneumonia is 13 (95% CI 9 to 20), using a baseline risk of 12.3% from the placebo
arm of TORCH. Fewer participants withdrew from studies assessing combined
inhalers due to adverse events and lack of efficacy.
AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: Compared with placebo, combination therapy led to a
significant reduction of a quarter in exacerbation rates. There was a significant
reduction in all-cause mortality with the addition of data from the TORCH trial. 
The increased risk of pneumonia is a concern, and better reporting of this
outcome in future studies would be helpful. In order to draw firmer conclusions
about the effects of combination therapy in a single inhaler more data are
necessary, particularly in relation to the profile of adverse events and benefits
in relation to different doses of inhaled corticosteroids.

DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD003794.pub3 
PMCID: PMC4164185
PMID: 17943798  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Int J Clin Pract. 2007 Nov;61(11):1874-83. Epub 2007 Sep 20.

Therapeutic comparison of a new budesonide/formoterol pMDI with budesonide pMDI
and budesonide/formoterol DPI in asthma.

Morice AH(1), Peterson S, Beckman O, Osmanliev D.

Author information: 
(1)Academic Medicine, University of Hull, East Yorkshire, UK.
a.h.morice@hull.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: Budesonide/formoterol is an effective treatment for both asthma and
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. This study compared the efficacy and
safety of a novel hydrofluoroalkane (HFA) pressurised metered-dose inhaler (pMDI)
formulation of budesonide/formoterol with that of budesonide pMDI and
budesonide/formoterol dry-powder inhaler (DPI; Turbuhaler).
METHODS: This was a 12-week, multinational, randomised, double-blind,
double-dummy study involving patients aged > or = 12 years with asthma. All
patients had a forced expiratory volume in 1 s of 50-90% predicted normal and
were inadequately controlled on inhaled corticosteroids (500-1600 microg/day)
alone. Following a 2-week run-in, during which they received their usual
medication, patients were randomised (two inhalations twice daily) to budesonide 
pMDI 200 microg, budesonide/formoterol DPI 160/4.5 microg or
budesonide/formoterol pMDI 160/4.5 microg. The primary efficacy end-point was
change from baseline in morning peak expiratory flow (PEF).
RESULTS: In total, 680 patients were randomised, of whom 668 were included in the
primary analysis. Therapeutically equivalent increases in morning PEF were
observed with budesonide/formoterol pMDI (29.3 l/min) and budesonide/formoterol
DPI (32.0 l/min) (95% confidence interval: -10.4 to 4.9; p = 0.48). The increase 
in morning PEF with budesonide/formoterol pMDI was significantly higher than with
budesonide pMDI (+28.7 l/min; p < 0.001). Similar improvements with
budesonide/formoterol pMDI vs. budesonide pMDI were seen for all secondary
efficacy end-points. Both combination treatments were similarly well tolerated.
CONCLUSIONS: Budesonide/formoterol, administered via the HFA pMDI or DPI, is an
effective and well-tolerated treatment for adult and adolescent patients with
asthma, with both devices being therapeutically equivalent.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1742-1241.2007.01574.x 
PMCID: PMC2228375
PMID: 17887990  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Respirology. 2007 Sep;12(5):732-9.

Fast onset of effect of budesonide/formoterol versus salmeterol/fluticasone and
salbutamol in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and reversible 
airway obstruction.

Lindberg A(1), Szalai Z, Pullerits T, Radeczky E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Sunderby Central Hospital of Norrbotten,
Luleå, Sweden. anne.lindberg@nll.se

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Data on the onset of action of COPD medications are
lacking. This study compared the onset of bronchodilation following different
inhaled therapies in patients with moderate-to-severe COPD and reversible airway 
obstruction.
METHODS: In this double-blind, double-dummy, crossover study, 90 patients (aged
>or=40 years; FEV(1) 30-70% predicted) were randomized to a single dose (two
inhalations) of budesonide/formoterol 160/4.5 microg, salmeterol/fluticasone
25/250 microg, salbutamol 100 microg or placebo (via pressurized metered-dose
inhalers) on four visits. The primary end-point was change in FEV(1) 5 min after 
drug inhalation; secondary end-points included inspiratory capacity (IC) and
perception of onset of effect.
RESULTS: Budesonide/formoterol significantly improved FEV(1) at 5 min compared
with placebo (P < 0.0001) and salmeterol/fluticasone (P = 0.0001). Significant
differences were first observed at 3 min. Onset of effect was similar with
budesonide/formoterol and salbutamol. Improvements in FEV(1) following active
treatments were superior to placebo after 180 min (all P < 0.0001); both
combinations were better than salbutamol at maintaining FEV(1) improvements (P
<or= 0.0001) at 180 min. Active treatments improved IC at 15 and 185 min compared
with placebo (P < 0.0001). Maximal IC was greater with budesonide/formoterol than
salmeterol/fluticasone (P = 0.0184) at 65 min. Patients reported a positive
response to the perceptions of the onset of effect question shortly after
receiving active treatments (median time to onset 5 min for active treatments vs 
20 min for placebo), with no significant difference between active treatments.
CONCLUSION: Budesonide/formoterol has an onset of bronchodilatory effect in
patients with COPD and reversible airway obstruction that is faster than
salmeterol/fluticasone and similar to salbutamol.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1440-1843.2007.01132.x 
PMID: 17875063  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Adv Ther. 2007 May-Jun;24(3):560-70.

Effects of inhaled budesonide on insulin sensitivity in nondiabetic patients with
asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Canis R(1), Demirkok SS, Osar Z, Balci H, Can G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Cerrahpasa School of Medicine, Istambul
University, Turkey.

In the study reported here, investigators explored the following: (1) the effects
of inhaled corticosteroid (ICS) therapy on insulin sensitivity (IS) (the
Homeostatic Model Assessment-Insulin Resistance [HOMA-IR] Index, which has never 
been used before in nondiabetic patients with asthma and chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease [COPD], was used in this investigation); and (2) differences
and similarities between asthma and COPD groups. A total of 12 patients with
asthma and 6 with COPD who were not previously treated with oral corticosteroids 
or ICSs were treated with budesonide, 400 microg twice daily for 8 wk, via dry
powder inhaler through the Aerolizer. Pretreatment and posttreatment values were 
recorded for forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV(1)), forced vital capacity
(FVC), FEV(1)/FVC, C-reactive protein (CRP), blood glucose, serum insulin levels,
area under the curve (AUC) for glucose and insulin in an oral glucose tolerance
test (OGTT), and HOMA-IR Index. The trapezoid technique, the formula for HOMA-IR,
and Wilkinson, Mann-Whitney U, and t tests were used. In the group of patients
with asthma, posttreatment values for the HOMA-IR Index, glucose, and insulin at 
all time points during OGTT and AUC for glucose and AUC for insulin were not
statistically different compared with pretreatment values. In patients with COPD 
who had been given ICS therapy, however, the second hour glucose level during
OGTT increased significantly compared with pretreatment values (P=.46).
Pretreatment and posttreatment second hour insulin values and posttreatment AUC
for glucose were significantly higher in the COPD group than in the asthma group 
(P=.047, P=.044, and P=.031, respectively). A moderate positive correlation was
noted between the percentage of difference in FEV1 and the change in HOMA-IR
(pretreatment mean value of HOMA-IR+/-standard deviation [SD], 2.7+/-2.6) in
asthmatic patients as the result of therapy (r=0.50, P=.138). Investigators
concluded the following: (1) Differences in pathogenesis between asthma and COPD 
seem to offer the most plausible explanation for differences in carbohydrate
metabolism achieved through ICS therapy; (2) the effect of an ICS on IS is
associated not only with dose, treatment period, age, and body mass index (BMI)
but also with the severity of initial mucosal inflammation; and (3) as a result
of improvements in respiratory function noted after treatment had been given, IS 
was increased in asthmatic patients.


PMID: 17660164  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Eur Respir J. 2007 Nov;30(5):848-56. Epub 2007 Jun 27.

Anti-inflammatory activity of beta2-agonists in primary lung epithelial cells is 
independent of glucocorticoid receptor.

Lovén J(1), Svitacheva N, Jerre A, Miller-Larsson A, Korn SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, AstraZeneca, 22187, Lund, Sweden.

In patients with asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, the addition
of long-acting beta(2)-agonists (LABA) to glucocorticosteroids (GCS) results in
better control than increasing the dose of GCS alone. In smooth muscle cells and 
fibroblasts, one apparent underlying mechanism involves the ability of LABAs to
activate the glucocorticoid receptor (GR). The present study investigates the
effects of formoterol (FORM), salmeterol (SALM) and budesonide (BUD) on GR
activation in bronchial epithelial cells via tumour necrosis
factor-alpha-stimulated granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF)
release, GR nuclear translocation and GR-regulated reporter gene activity. Both
BUD and FORM inhibited GM-CSF release by < or = 50%. The combination of these two
drugs, in clinically relevant concentrations, inhibited GM-CSF release by 85%
down to unstimulated levels. A similar inhibition was obtained when combining BUD
and SALM. The ability of FORM to inhibit GM-CSF synthesis was not altered by
small interfering RNA-mediated depletion of GR and FORM nor SALM-induced GR
translocation into the cell nucleus. In addition, FORM did not activate
GR-regulated reporter gene activity (SALM was not tested), in contrast to the
clear effect of BUD. It was concluded that in bronchial epithelial cells,
inhibition of granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor synthesis by
formoterol and salmeterol does not act via previously demonstrated glucocorticoid
receptor-related mechanisms, suggesting an alternative pathway in these cells.

DOI: 10.1183/09031936.00129606 
PMID: 17596271  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. J Int Med Res. 2007 May-Jun;35(3):361-73.

Efficacy of beclomethasone dipropionate HFA 200 microg once daily in chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease and bronchial asthma.

Tatsis G(1), Kotsifas K, Filaditaki V, Makrantoni G, Boulia S.

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonology Clinic, Evangelismos General Hospital, Athens, Greece.
pneumclinevah@yahoo.gr

The efficacy and safety of once-daily beclomethasone dipropionate (BDP; 200
microg), in combination with the propellant hydrofluoroalkane-134a (HFA) was
compared with that of budesonide turbuhaler (BUD-TH) 400 microg twice daily and
fluticasone propionate inhaler (FP-IH) 250 microg twice daily in 40 patients with
bronchial asthma or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. All patients had used 
inhaled corticosteroids for at least 1 month. On randomization, 20 patients were 
switched to HFA-BDP and 20 patients remained on their existing BUD-TH or FP-IH
treatment. After 8 weeks, HFA-BDP demonstrated a greater improvement in
spirometric values, respiratory symptoms and beta2-agonist use. No significant
local adverse effects were observed. Blood cortisol levels remained in the normal
range in both groups. We conclude that HFA-BDP (200 microg once-daily) offered
more benefit in terms of clinical and spirometry indices than BUD-TH (400 microg 
twice daily) or FP-IH (250 microg twice daily) in patients with moderate asthma
and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.


PMID: 17593865  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Eur Respir J. 2007 Oct;30(4):653-61. Epub 2007 May 30.

Inhibition of allergen-induced airway remodelling by tiotropium and budesonide: a
comparison.

Bos IS(1), Gosens R, Zuidhof AB, Schaafsma D, Halayko AJ, Meurs H, Zaagsma J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pharmacology, University of Groningen, Antonius
Deusinglaan 1, 9713 AV, Groningen, The Netherlands.

Chronic inflammation in asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease drives
pathological structural remodelling of the airways. Using tiotropium bromide,
acetylcholine was recently identified as playing a major regulatory role in
airway smooth muscle remodelling in a guinea pig model of ongoing allergic
asthma. The aim of the present study was to investigate other aspects of airway
remodelling and to compare the effectiveness of tiotropium to the
glucocorticosteroid budesonide. Ovalbumin-sensitised guinea pigs were challenged 
for 12 weeks with aerosolised ovalbumin. The ovalbumin induced airway smooth
muscle thickening, hypercontractility of tracheal smooth muscle, increased
pulmonary contractile protein (smooth-muscle myosin) abundance, mucous gland
hypertrophy, an increase in mucin 5 subtypes A and C (MUC5AC)-positive goblet
cell numbers and eosinophilia. It was reported previously that treatment with
tiotropium inhibits airway smooth muscle thickening and contractile protein
expression, and prevents tracheal hypercontractility. This study demonstrates
that tiotropium also fully prevented allergen-induced mucous gland hypertrophy,
and partially reduced the increase in MUC5AC-positive goblet cell numbers and
eosinophil infiltration. Treatment with budesonide also prevented airway smooth
muscle thickening, contractile protein expression, tracheal hypercontractility
and mucous gland hypertrophy, and partially reduced MUC5AC-positive goblet cell
numbers and eosinophilia. This study demonstrates that tiotropium and budesonide 
are similarly effective in inhibiting several aspects of airway remodelling,
providing further evidence that the beneficial effects of tiotropium bromide
might exceed those of bronchodilation.

DOI: 10.1183/09031936.00004907 
PMID: 17537779  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Eur Respir J. 2007 Jun;29(6):1115-9. Epub 2007 Mar 1.

Possible protection by inhaled budesonide against ischaemic cardiac events in
mild COPD.

Löfdahl CG(1), Postma DS, Pride NB, Boe J, Thorén A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine and Allergology, University Hospital,
SE-22185 Lund, Sweden. claes-goran.lofdahl@med.lu.se

Epidemiological studies have indicated that chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD) may be associated with an increased incidence of ischaemic cardiac events.
The current authors performed a post hoc analysis of the European Respiratory
Society's study on Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (EUROSCOP); a 3-yr,
placebo-controlled study of an inhaled corticosteroid budesonide 800
microg.day(-1) in smokers (mean age 52 yrs) with mild COPD. The current study
evaluates whether long-term budesonide treatment attenuates the incidence of
ischaemic cardiac events, including angina pectoris, myocardial infarction,
coronary artery disorder and myocardial ischaemia. Among the 1,175 patients
evaluated for safety, 49 (4.2%) patients experienced 60 ischaemic cardiac events.
Patients treated with budesonide had a significantly lower incidence of ischaemic
cardiac events (18 out of 593; 3.0%) than those receiving placebo (31 out of 582;
5.3%). The results of the present study support the hypothesis that treatment
with inhaled budesonide reduces ischaemic cardiac events in patients with mild
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

DOI: 10.1183/09031936.00128806 
PMID: 17331963  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Can Respir J. 2007 Jan-Feb;14(1):25-9.

Treatment persistence and compliance with medications for chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease.

Cramer JA(1), Bradley-Kennedy C, Scalera A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven,
Connecticut 06516-2770, USA. joyce.cramer@yale.edu

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Inhaled beta-agonist, anticholinergic and
glucocorticoid medications are used to treat asthma and chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD). The present study assessed the patterns of persistence 
with the above mentioned inhaled medications.
METHODS: Prescription claims data from the Ontario Drug Benefit Program were
analyzed to assess persistence (time to discontinuation) and compliance
(percentage of days with doses available divided by days to last refill) of
patients prescribed inhaled medications. Patients were grouped as naive (no
inhaled medication in the previous year) or experienced (previous or current
treatment), and by age (18 to 65 years of age and older than 65 years of age).
Medications included ipratropium, ipratropium plus salbutamol, formoterol,
formoterol plus budesonide, salmeterol, salmeterol plus fluticasone, and
tiotropium.
RESULTS: The database included 31,368 patients (4888 naive and 26,480
experienced) who were prescribed at least one of these medications. Fifteen per
cent to 63% of patients continued on the index drug for more than six months,
which decreased to 7% to 53% at 12 months, and 5% to 47% at 18 months. At 12
months, patients taking tiotropium had significantly longer persistence compared 
with other therapies (53% versus 7% to 30%; all P<0.0001), and fewer switches to 
alternative medications. Most naive patients had significantly shorter treatment 
persistence than experienced patients for all drugs (all P<0.0001), including
tiotropium (27% versus 55%, P<0.0001). Compliance rates were similar for all
drugs (ie, 76% to 94%) but were highest for tiotropium.
CONCLUSIONS: These data demonstrated that persistence with inhaled treatment was 
low overall, but patients treated with tiotropium remained on therapy
significantly longer than when treated with other medications, and patients naive
to inhaled treatment had shorter treatment persistence than experienced patients.


PMCID: PMC2690446
PMID: 17315055  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Eur Respir J. 2007 Apr;29(4):660-7. Epub 2007 Jan 24.

The role of nebulised budesonide in the treatment of exacerbations of COPD.

Gunen H(1), Hacievliyagil SS, Yetkin O, Gulbas G, Mutlu LC, In E.

Author information: 
(1)Dept of Pulmonary Medicine, Turgut Ozal Research Centre, Inonu University,
Malatya 44069, Turkey. hgunen@yahoo.com

Erratum in
    Eur Respir J. 2014 Jul;44(1):272.

Comment in
    Eur Respir J. 2007 Aug;30(2):398; author reply 399-400.

The present study was designed to evaluate the hypothesis that nebulised
budesonide (NB) might be an alternative to systemic corticosteroids (SC) in the
treatment of patients with exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(ECOPD). Patients hospitalised with ECOPD (n = 159) were randomised into three
groups. Group 1 received only standard bronchodilator treatment (SBDT), group 2
received SC (40 mg prednisolone) plus SBDT, and group 3 received NB (1,500 microg
q.i.d.) plus SBDT. Improvement during 10-day hospitalisation was compared with
exacerbation and rehospitalisation rates after discharge. While mean+/-sd age was
64.1+/-8.9 yrs (female/male = 0.1), mean forced expiratory volume in one second
(FEV(1)) at admission was found to be 37.2+/-12.2% predicted. Arterial blood
gases and spirograms recovered faster in groups 2 and 3. While improvements in
arterial oxygen tension (P(a,O(2))) and forced vital capacity (FVC) in group 2,
and improvements in P(a,O(2)), FVC and FEV(1) in group 3, became significant at
24-h control, the first significant improvement in group 1 appeared in arterial
oxygen saturation at 72-h control. The mean improvement of P(a,O(2)) after 10
days was 1.20 and 1.06 kPa (9 and 8 mmHg) higher in group 2 and 3, respectively, 
than in group 1. Blood glucose exhibited an upward trend only in group 2. The
study demonstrates that nebulised budesonide may be an effective and safe
alternative to systemic corticosteroids in the treatment of exacerbations of
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

DOI: 10.1183/09031936.00073506 
PMID: 17251232  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2007 Jan;119(1):98-105. Epub 2006 Oct 18.

Disease-specific expression and regulation of CCAAT/enhancer-binding proteins in 
asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Borger P(1), Matsumoto H, Boustany S, Gencay MM, Burgess JK, King GG, Black JL,
Tamm M, Roth M.

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary Cell Research, Department of Research and Pneumology, Department of 
Internal Medicine, University Hospital Basel, Basel, Switzerland.
pieter.borger@unibas.ch

BACKGROUND: CCAAT/enhancer-binding proteins (C/EBPs) control cell proliferation; 
lack of C/EBPalpha correlates with increased proliferation of bronchial smooth
muscle cells (BSMCs) of asthmatic patients.
OBJECTIVE: We sought to assess disease-specific expression of C/EBPalpha, beta,
delta, and epsilon and the effects of budesonide (10(-8) mol/L) and formoterol
(10(-8) mol/L).
METHODS: Expression and function of C/EBPalpha, beta, delta, and epsilon BSMCs of
control subjects (n = 9), asthmatic patients (n = 12), and patients with chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD; n = 10) were determined.
RESULTS: The control group expressed C/EBPalpha, beta, delta, and epsilon, which 
were upregulated by serum (5%). Budesonide completely inhibited C/EBPalpha and
beta expression; formoterol increased C/EBPalpha expression (2-fold). C/EBPdelta 
and epsilon expression were not affected by the drugs. The asthmatic group did
not appropriately express C/EBPalpha. Basal levels of C/EBPbeta, delta, and
epsilon were upregulated by serum (5%). Budesonide and formoterol increased
C/EBPbeta levels (3.4-fold and 2.5-fold, respectively), leaving C/EBPalpha,
delta, and epsilon levels unaffected. The COPD group normally expressed
C/EBPalpha, beta, and epsilon, which were upregulated by serum treatment (5%).
Basal levels of C/EBPdelta were downregulated by serum in 7 of 10 BSMC lines.
Budesonide inhibited C/EBPalpha and beta expression, upregulated C/EBPdelta
(3.2-fold), and had no effect on C/EBPepsilon. Formoterol upregulated C/EBPalpha 
expression (3-fold) but not the other C/EBPs. Protein analysis and
electrophoretic mobility shift assay confirmed the disease-specific expression
pattern of C/EBPalpha in asthmatic patients and C/EBPdelta in patients with COPD.
CONCLUSIONS: The expression and regulation of C/EBPs in BSMCs of asthmatic
patients and patients with COPD seems disease specific. Budesonide and formoterol
modulate C/EBP expression in a drug- and disease-specific pattern.
CLINICAL IMPLICATIONS: The data could provide a method to discriminate between
asthma and COPD at an early disease stage.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaci.2006.07.056 
PMID: 17208590  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Pulm Pharmacol Ther. 2008;21(1):32-9. Epub 2006 Oct 18.

Comparable long-term safety and efficacy of a novel budesonide/formoterol
pressurized metered-dose inhaler versus budesonide/formoterol Turbuhaler in
adolescents and adults with asthma.

Morice AH(1), Hochmuth L, Ekelund J, Thorén A, Puterman AS.

Author information: 
(1)Respiratory Medicine, Academic Medicine, University of Hull, Castle Hill
Hospital, Castle Road, Cottingham, East Yorkshire HU16 5JQ, UK.
a.h.morice@hull.ac.uk <a.h.morice@hull.ac.uk>

Budesonide/formoterol in one inhaler is an established therapy for asthma and
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. The long-term safety and efficacy profile 
of a novel hydrofluoroalkane (HFA) pressurized metered-dose inhaler (pMDI)
formulation of budesonide/formoterol was compared with that of
budesonide/formoterol in a dry powder inhaler (DPI; Turbuhaler). This
multinational, 52-week, randomized, open, parallel-group study included patients 
aged > or = 12 years with asthma who had a forced expiratory volume in 1s (FEV1)>
or = 50% of predicted normal; all patients used inhaled corticosteroids (400-1200
microg/day) and needed additional short-acting beta 2-agonist therapy. Patients
were randomized to receive budesonide/formoterol pMDI or DPI 160/4.5 microg, two 
inhalations twice daily. Safety endpoints included assessment of adverse events
and laboratory parameters. Efficacy endpoints included change from baseline in
FEV1 and time to first severe asthma exacerbation. Overall, 673 patients
(446pMDI, 227DPI) were included. There were no clinically significant differences
between treatment groups in the nature, incidence or severity of adverse events
or laboratory parameters. The number of patients experiencing adverse events was 
comparable in the pMDI (332/446 [74%]) and DPI (175/227 [77%]) groups; the most
commonly reported adverse event was upper respiratory tract infection. The
proportion of patients discontinuing as a result of adverse events was low in
both groups (pMDI 12/446 [3%], DPI 2/227 [1%]). Lung function was improved to a
similar extent in both groups and there was no detectable difference in time to
first severe asthma exacerbation. The novel HFA pMDI formulation of
budesonide/formoterol is an equally well tolerated and effective treatment for
adults and adolescents with asthma as the budesonide/formoterol DPI.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pupt.2006.10.006 
PMID: 17118686  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Pulm Pharmacol Ther. 2007;20(3):290-303. Epub 2006 May 27.

Advances in asthma and COPD management: delivering CFC-free inhaled therapy using
Modulite technology.

Acerbi D(1), Brambilla G, Kottakis I.

Author information: 
(1)Chiesi Farmaceutici S.p.A, Drug Metabolism and Pharmacokinetics, Via Palermo
26/A, 43100 Parma, Parma, Italy. d.acerbi@chiesigroup.com

Inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) and long-acting beta-agonists (LABA) are currently 
used in the management of asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD). Localized targeted delivery of these drugs into the lungs is achieved by 
means of two types of inhalation devices; pressurized metered-dose inhalers
(pMDIs) and dry powder-inhalers (DPIs). For environmental reasons, the
chlorofluorocarbon (CFC) propellants used in pMDIs are now being replaced by
ozone friendly hydrofluoroalkanes (HFAs). These new generation HFA-based pMDIs,
developed to provide effective lung deposition of the active moiety, have a
favorable safety and tolerability profile. However, HFA-based re-formulation of
LABAs and ICS for pMDIs presents particular technical difficulties, especially in
terms of ensuring dose content uniformity. This review focuses on the technology 
and clinical efficacy of the HFA solution pMDIs using Modulite platform
technology (Chiesi Farmaceutici S.p.A). Modulite technology allows the
development of HFA solution formulations that can mimic the established CFC-based
drug formulations on a microgram to microgram basis and provides formulations
with novel particle size distributions that improve on existing delivery systems;
by manipulation of aerosol clouds and particle size, the delivery of
HFA-formulated drugs can be optimized to either achieve fine particle fractions
and deposition patterns similar to established CFC-based drug formulations, thus 
facilitating the transition to new environment-friendly pMDIs in the clinical
setting, or achieve finer drug particles able to penetrate deeper into the
bronchi for targeted drug delivery as medical need may dictate. Long-term,
multiple-dose clinical studies of Modulite formulations of beclomethasone
dipropionate (BDP), budesonide and formoterol have been demonstrated to be
therapeutically equivalent to their respective previously established CFC or DPI 
formulations. As a result, a number of Modulite pMDIs have either recently gained
regulatory approval in several European countries, or have completed clinical
trials and are in the regulatory submission phase. Availability, in pMDI form, of
drugs like formoterol, ICSs, and ICS/LABA combinations, all central to the
effective management of asthma and COPD, is therefore expected to impact
positively in assuring the continued availability of vital treatment options to
patients and physicians.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pupt.2006.05.005 
PMID: 16890465  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Eur Respir J. 2006 Aug;28(2):311-8. Epub 2006 May 17.

Predictors of COPD symptoms: does the sex of the patient matter?

Watson L(1), Schouten JP, Löfdahl CG, Pride NB, Laitinen LA, Postma DS; European 
Respiratory Society Study on Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease.

Author information: 
(1)Dept of Epidemiology, University Medical Centre Groningen, University of
Groningen, Hanzeplein 1, 9731 GZ Groningen, The Netherlands.

Comment in
    Eur Respir J. 2006 Aug;28(2):259-61.

Although chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) patients frequently report 
symptoms, it is not known which factors determine the course of symptoms over
time and if these differ according to the sex of the patient. The current study
investigated predictors for presence, development and remission of COPD symptoms 
in 816 males and 312 females completing 3-yr-follow-up in the European
Respiratory Society Study on Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (EUROSCOP).
The following were included in generalised estimating equations logistic
regression analyses: explanatory variables of treatment; pack-yrs smoking; age,
forced expiratory volume in one second % predicted (FEV1 % pred); annual increase
in FEV1 and number of cigarettes smoked; body mass index; and phadiatop.
Interaction terms of sex multiplied by explanatory variables were tested. Over 3 
yrs, similar proportions of males and females reported symptoms. In males only,
higher FEV1 % pred was associated with reduction in new symptoms of wheeze and
dyspnoea, and symptom prevalence was reduced with annual FEV1 improvement and
phlegm prevalence reduced with budesonide treatment (odds ratio 0.66; 95%
confidence interval 0.52-0.83). Additionally an increase in the number of
cigarettes smoked between visits increased the risk of developing phlegm (1.40
(1.14-1.70)) and wheeze (1.24 (1.03-1.51)) in males but not females. The current 
study shows longitudinally that symptom reporting is similar by sex. The clinical
course of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease can differ by sex, as males show 
greater response to cigarette exposure and treatment.

DOI: 10.1183/09031936.06.00055805 
PMID: 16707516  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Prim Care Respir J. 2004 Dec;13(4):185-97.

Patient-centred outcomes in primary care management of COPD - what do recent
clinical trial data tell us?

Haughney J(1), Gruffydd-Jones K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Practice and Primary Care, University of Aberdeen,
Foresterhill Health Centre, Westburn Road, Aberdeen AB25 2AY, UK.
j.haughney@abdn.ac.uk

Comment in
    Prim Care Respir J. 2004 Dec;13(4):177-8.

Traditionally, the severity of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and
effectiveness of interventions have been determined using measures of lung
function. However, a relatively small reduction or change in lung function - such
as those observed in mild to moderate COPD - may not always reflect the impact of
the disease or intervention on patients' physical and psychological well-being.
This paper examines the utility of various outcome measures that can be used in
primary care to monitor and manage COPD. In particular, it demonstrates the
importance of measuring patient-centred outcomes, such as health-related quality 
of life and exacerbations, which may reflect more accurately the effects of the
disease and treatment on patients' everyday lives. Recent large-scale clinical
trials of budesonide/formoterol and fluticasone/salmeterol combination therapies 
and tiotropium have utilised these outcome measures to show the significant
benefits these treatments bestow to patients in the presence of relatively modest
gains in lung function.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pcrj.2004.06.006 
PMID: 16701668  [PubMed]


197. Eur Respir J. 2006 May;27(5):964-71. Epub 2006 Jan 30.

Stable COPD: predicting benefit from high-dose inhaled corticosteroid treatment.

Leigh R(1), Pizzichini MM, Morris MM, Maltais F, Hargreave FE, Pizzichini E.

Author information: 
(1)Firestone Institute for Respiratory Health, St. Joseph's Healthcare and
McMaster University, Hamilton, ON, Canada.

The role of inhaled corticosteroids in the management of chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD) remains controversial. The purpose of this study was to 
evaluate whether sputum eosinophilia (defined as eosinophils > or = 3%) predicts 
clinical benefit from inhaled corticosteroid treatment in patients with
smoking-related clinically stable moderate-to-severe COPD. Forty consecutive
patients with effort dyspnoea (mean age 67 yrs; 52 pack-yr smoking history;
post-bronchodilator forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV1) <60% predicted,
consistent with moderate-to-severe smoking-related chronic airflow limitation)
were enrolled. Subjects were treated with inhaled placebo followed by inhaled
budesonide (Pulmicort Turbuhaler 1,600 microg.day(-1)), each given for 4 weeks.
While the treatment was single-blind (subject level), sputum cell counts before
and after treatment interventions were double-blind, thus removing bias. Outcome 
variables included spirometry, quality-of-life assessment and 6-min walk test.
Sputum eosinophilia was present in 38% of subjects. In these, budesonide
treatment normalised the eosinophil counts and, in comparison to placebo
treatment, resulted in clinically significant improvement in the dyspnoea domain 
of the disease-specific chronic respiratory questionnaire (0.8 versus 0.3) and a 
small but statistically significant improvement in post-bronchodilator spirometry
(FEV1 100 mL versus 0 mL; p<0.05). In conclusion, sputum eosinophilia predicts
short-term clinical benefit from high-dose inhaled corticosteroid treatment in
patients with stable moderate-to-severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

DOI: 10.1183/09031936.06.00072105 
PMID: 16446316  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2006 May;290(5):L1036-43. Epub 2005 Dec 9.

Effect of adenosine A2A receptor activation in murine models of respiratory
disorders.

Bonneau O(1), Wyss D, Ferretti S, Blaydon C, Stevenson CS, Trifilieff A.

Author information: 
(1)Respiratory Diseases Area, Novartis Institutes for BioMedical Research,
Horsham, England, UK.

Activation of the adenosine A(2A) receptor has been postulated as a possible
treatment for lung inflammatory diseases such as asthma and chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD). In this report, we have studied the anti-inflammatory
properties of the reference A(2A) agonist CGS-21680, given intranasally at doses 
of 10 and 100 microg/kg, in a variety of murine models of asthma and COPD. After 
an acute ovalbumin challenge of sensitized mice, prophylactic administration of
CGS-21680 inhibited the bronchoalveolar lavage fluid inflammatory cell influx but
not the airway hyperreactivity to aerosolized methacholine. After repeated
ovalbumin challenges, CGS-21680 given therapeutically inhibited the
bronchoalveolar lavage fluid inflammatory cell influx but had no effect on the
allergen-induced bronchoconstriction, the airway hyperreactivity, or the
bronchoalveolar lavage fluid mucin levels. As a comparator, budesonide given
intranasally at doses of 0.1-1 mg/kg fully inhibited all the parameters measured 
in the latter model. In a lipopolysaccharide-driven model, CGS-21680 had no
effect on the bronchoalveolar lavage fluid inflammatory cell influx or TNF-alpha,
keratinocyte chemoattractant, and macrophage inflammatory protein-2 levels, but
potently inhibited neutrophil activation, as measured by bronchoalveolar lavage
fluid elastase levels. With the use of a cigarette smoke model of lung
inflammation, CGS-21680 did not significantly inhibit bronchoalveolar lavage
fluid neutrophil infiltration but reversed the cigarette smoke-induced decrease
in macrophage number. Together, these results suggest that activation of the
A(2A) receptor would have a beneficial effect by inhibiting inflammatory cell
influx and downregulating inflammatory cell activation in asthma and COPD,
respectively.

DOI: 10.1152/ajplung.00422.2005 
PMID: 16339780  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Proc Am Thorac Soc. 2005;2(4):272-81; discussion 290-1.

Combination therapy for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: clinical aspects.

Donohue JF(1).

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary & Critical Care Medicine, University of North Carolina School of
Medicine, 4125 Bioinformatics Building, CB#7020, Chapel Hill, NC 27599-7020, USA.
jdonohue@med.unc.edu

Anticholinergics and beta-agonists reduce bronchoconstriction through different
mechanisms, and there is a long history of combination therapy with short-acting 
agents in these classes for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Such
combinations may allow lower doses and thereby improve safety. Oral theophylline 
has also been combined with short-acting bronchodilators for many years. Most
studies, however, show only mild improvements in bronchodilation at the expense
of increased adverse effects. Professional society guidelines recommend that as
the symptoms of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease progress, the patient
should receive regular treatment with one or more long-acting bronchodilators,
and an inhaled corticosteroid if the patient has repeated exacerbations. The
combination of a short-acting anticholinergic with a long-acting beta-agonist, or
the combination of a long-acting anticholinergic with a short- or long-acting
beta-agonist, has been shown in most studies to improve lung function versus
monotherapy with the individual components. Systematic reviews have concluded
that fluticasone and salmeterol, and budesonide and formoterol, are superior to
placebo and lead to clinically meaningful improvements in lung function,
exacerbation rate, and quality of life. Effects on survival are less clear. Some 
of the other issues to be resolved are the safety of combination therapy, its
pharmacoeconomic impact, and the role of newer agents.

DOI: 10.1513/pats.200505-047SR 
PMID: 16267348  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Expert Opin Pharmacother. 2005 Nov;6(14):2525-34.

Budesonide and formoterol combination for the treatment of chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease.

Centanni S(1), Di Marco F.

Author information: 
(1)Unità Operativa di Malattie dell'Apparato Respiratorio, Ospedale San Paolo,
Università degli Studi di Milano, Via A. di Rudinì 8, 20142, Milan, Italy.
stefano.centanni@unimi.it

Erratum in
    Expert Opin Pharmacother. 2005 Dec;6(15):2779.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a major cause of morbidity and
mortality throughout the world. Current guidelines recommend the addition of
inhaled steroids to bronchodilators, which are central to the symptomatic
management of COPD in patients with severe disease. Budesonide/formoterol is a
combination inhaled steroid and long-acting bronchodilator delivered by a
dry-powder inhaler, approved for use in COPD. Two large, randomised,
double-blind, 12-month studies found that combination budesonide/formoterol is
more effective than either component alone in addressing many important aspects
of the disease, such as pulmonary function, symptoms, use of relief medication,
health-related quality of life and exacerbation in patients suffering from severe
COPD. This review discusses the pharmacological and clinical properties of the
drug.

DOI: 10.1517/14656566.6.14.2525  
PMID: 16259583  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Int J Clin Pract. 2005 Oct;59(10):1187-94.

Evaluating the effectiveness of combination therapy to prevent COPD
exacerbations: the value of NNT analysis.

Halpin DM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Royal Devon and Exeter Hospital, Exeter,
UK. david.halpin@rdehc-tr.swest.nhs.uk

The effective prevention of exacerbations in patients with chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD) has the potential to improve patients' health-related
quality of life, reduce rates of hospitalisation and mortality and lower
healthcare costs. Several pharmacological agents, including inhaled
corticosteroid/long-acting beta2-agonist combination therapies, have demonstrated
beneficial effects on COPD exacerbations. The number needed to treat (NNT)
analysis is a simple, concise method that allows physicians to quantify directly 
the benefits that alternative treatment options have on disease outcomes in terms
of the number of patients who need to be treated before a benefit is observed.
This review evaluates the applicability and clinical relevance of NNT analysis
for determining the effectiveness of combination therapies against COPD
exacerbations, focusing on budesonide/ formoterol in the same inhaler. Physicians
are encouraged to consider NNT data within the context of their limitations and
in conjunction with other analytical methods when selecting treatments for
patients with COPD.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1368-5031.2005.00664.x 
PMID: 16178987  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Eur Respir J. 2005 Sep;26(3):406-13.

Relationship between respiratory symptoms and medical treatment in exacerbations 
of COPD.

Calverley P(1), Pauwels Dagger R, Löfdahl CG, Svensson K, Higenbottam T, Carlsson
LG, Ståhl E.

Author information: 
(1)The University Hospital Aintree, Liverpool Longmoor Lane, L9 7AL, UK.
pmacal@liverpool.ac.uk

Erratum in
    Eur Respir J. 2006 Feb;27(2):440.

Exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) can be defined
symptomatically or by healthcare contacts, yet the relationship between these
events is unknown. Data were collected during a 1-yr study of the
budesonide/formoterol combination in COPD patients, where exacerbations, defined 
by increases in treatment, were compared with daily records of respiratory
symptoms, rescue medication use and peak expiratory flow (PEF). The relationship 
between changes in these variables and the medical event was examined using
different modelling approaches. Data from the first exacerbation treated with
oral corticosteroids and/or antibiotics and/or hospitalisation (event based) were
available in 468 patients. Patients exacerbating were significantly more
breathless and more likely to report cough than healthy patients, but did not
differ in baseline spirometry. Exacerbations defined by changes in individual
symptoms were only weakly related to event-based exacerbations; however, defined 
with 63% of such events being predicted from symptom changes. Changes in rescue
medication use or PEF were poor predictors of event-based exacerbations. The mean
peak change in symptoms was closely related to the onset of therapy. In
conclusion, event-based exacerbations are a valid way of identifying acute
symptom change in a chronic obstructive pulmonary disease population. However,
daily symptom monitoring is too variable using the current diary cards to make
individual management decisions.

DOI: 10.1183/09031936.05.00143404 
PMID: 16135720  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Proc Am Thorac Soc. 2004;1(3):152-60.

Effects of corticosteroids on lung function in asthma and chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease.

Donohue JF(1), Ohar JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, University of North
Carolina at Chapel Hill, 4125 Bioinformatics Bldg., CB 7020, Chapel Hill, NC
27599-7020, USA. jdonohue@med.unc.edu

Both oral and inhaled corticosteroids have clinically significant effects on
symptoms, exacerbations, health status, and lung function in asthma, and to a
lesser extent in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Change in FEV(1)
does not correlate well with functional tests in COPD and may not be the best
measure of response to treatment. Inhaled corticosteroids may be beneficial when 
added to a beta-agonist for treatment of acute asthma, and the efficacy of oral
corticosteroids in this setting is well established. Oral corticosteroids
inconsistently improve lung function in stable outpatients with COPD. Individual 
inhaled corticosteroids do not have a marked effect, but the combination of
fluticasone propionate and salmeterol and the combination of budesonide plus
formoterol seem to improve FEV(1) over treatment with the individual components. 
In addition, there is convincing evidence for the use of systemic corticosteroids
during acute exacerbations of COPD. Some evidence suggests that patients with
COPD who respond to corticosteroids have eosinophilic inflammation and other
attributes of an asthma phenotype.

DOI: 10.1513/pats.200402-003MS 
PMID: 16113428  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Proc Am Thorac Soc. 2004;1(2):121-4.

Reducing the frequency and severity of exacerbations of chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease.

Calverley PM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University Hospital Aintree, Clinical Sciences Centre,
Longmoor Lane, Liverpool L9 7AL, UK. pmacal@liverpool.ac.uk

Exacerbations contribute significantly to impaired health status in chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), but current therapy can prevent these
episodes. Immunization against, for example, influenza offers specific
prophylaxis for a minority of episodes. Pulmonary rehabilitation reduces hospital
attendance, but its effect wanes. Inhaled bronchodilators such as tiotropium
produce similar reductions in exacerbation frequency. Database studies show an
association between prescription of inhaled corticosteroids and reduced
hospitalization in the older population, a finding confirmed by randomized trials
in patients with an FEV(1) of less than 50% predicted. Three 1-year randomized
clinical trials studied the effect of combining a long-acting beta-agonist with
an inhaled corticosteroids. In these studies, exacerbation frequency was lower
with therapy than placebo. Combination therapy had a similar effect to its
monocomponents in the trial of inhaled steroids and long-acting beta agonists
study using salmeterol and fluticasone. However, when patients with more severe
COPD (an FEV(1) of less than 36% predicted) were studied using a combination of
budesonide and formoterol, a clear improvement was seen in the overall
exacerbation rate compared with the beta-agonist alone. In addition, the time to 
first exacerbation was increased compared with either drug alone. Health status
changes mirrored these effects. In summary, combination therapy can effectively
prevent exacerbations in patients with more advanced COPD.

DOI: 10.1513/pats.2306031 
PMID: 16113424  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Semin Respir Crit Care Med. 2005 Apr;26(2):235-45.

The role of corticosteroids in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Calverley PM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Clinical Sciences Centre, University Hospital Aintree,
Liverpool L9 7AL, United Kingdom. pmacal@liverpool.ac.uk

Oral corticosteroids are powerful relatively nonspecific antiinflammatory agents 
with a range of well-characterized side effects. There is good evidence to show
that they accelerate the rate of resolution of exacerbations of COPD and relapse 
is less likely if patients receive these drugs. Maintenance therapy with oral
preparations is associated with worse mortality and skeletal muscle myopathy is a
particular problem. Corticosteroids have little effect on biopsy proven
inflammation or its surrogates in COPD and did not change the rate of decline of 
FEV (1) over a range of spirometric disease severity in a number of trials each
lasting 3 years. However, meta-analysis of the data suggests that a small effect 
(up to 10 ml /year) might be present. There is more consistent evidence for an
effect on postbronchodilator FEV (1) with both fluticasone propionate and
budesonide. In patients with a postbronchodilator FEV (1) < 50% predicted where
self-reported exacerbations become more common, inhaled corticosteroids can
reduce the number of attacks. This effect is the major factor accounting for the 
reduction in deterioration in health status seen in patients who receive inhaled 
corticosteroids. Inhaled corticosteroids are much safer than oral therapy,
although they do have a predictably higher incidence of candidiasis and
hoarseness of the voice. Skin bruising is seen in patients with better lung
function who use these drugs. Triamcinolone use is associated with reduction in
bone density but this was not seen with budesonide. Combining an inhaled
corticosteroid and a long-acting beta-agonist in the same inhaler increases the
efficacy of the latte drug in COPD patients, with a significantly larger
improvement in FEV (1), a larger reduction in reported breathlessness, and a
reduction in exacerbation numbers in those with severe disease where
beta-agonists appear to be less effective. Inhaled corticosteroids are not
suitable for monotherapy in COPD but can be helpfully combined with an inhaled
bronchodilator in patients with symptomatic disease.

DOI: 10.1055/s-2005-869542 
PMID: 16088440  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Clin Pharmacokinet. 2005;44(8):815-36.

Pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic properties of inhaled beclometasone
dipropionate delivered via hydrofluoroalkane-containing devices.

Derom E(1), Pauwels RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Diseases, Ghent University Hospital, De pintelaan
185, B-9000 Gent, Belgium. eric.derom@Ugent.be

Inhaled corticosteroids have a key role in the treatment of asthma and chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease. In recent times, beclometasone dipropionate has
been reformulated in pressurised metered dose inhalers (pMDIs), using
hydrofluoroalkanes (HFAs) as a propellant. Extensive toxicological testing has
shown that HFA-propellants are well tolerated. Among the reformulated
beclometasone dipropionate-containing pMDIs, only the characteristics of the two 
Qvar formulations have been thoroughly explored. Compared to the reference
beclometasone dipropionate formulation, the mass median aerodynamic diameter of
the Qvar formulations are substantially smaller (1.1 vs 4.0 microm), whereas that
of Modulite averages 2.6 microm. Scintigraphic and pharmacokinetic studies
indicate a higher lung deposition for both the Qvar and the Beclazone
formulations, compared with reference beclometasone dipropionate formulation.
Since the 2- to 3-fold increase in pulmonary deposition results in a 2.6- to
3-fold difference in relative efficacy for Qvar, half the dose of the reference
beclometasone dipropionate formulation has been currently recommended in adult
patients with asthma, a recommendation that is supported by a large number of
clinical trials. Conversely, the design of the studies conducted to compare the
efficacy of Qvar with fluticasone propionate and budesonide does not allow
establishing their equivalence on a milligram per milligram basis. Good studies
on the bioequivalence between the reference beclometasone dipropionate
formulation and the Modulite or Beclazone formulations are not available.

DOI: 10.2165/00003088-200544080-00004 
PMID: 16029067  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Med Clin (Barc). 2005 Jun 11;125(2):65-74.

[New treatments for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease].

[Article in Spanish]

Miravitlles M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Neumología, Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i
Sunyer, Red Respira RTIC 03/11 ISCIII, Hospital Clínic, Barcelona, Spain.
marcm@clinic.ub.es

Treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) has underwent a very
important advance in the last five years. It has been developed a new
long-lasting anticholynergic drug, tiotrope bromure, which has been found to
improve lung function and exercise capacity and to decrease relapses. Also the
combined treatment of long lasting beta 2 adrenergics with inhaled steroids
(salmeterol/fluticasone and formoterol/budesonide) has proven similar results.
However, the response to these new drugs is not the same in all patients.
Individual characteristics such as gravity, degree of bronchial
hyperresponsiveness, frequency of relapses, comorbidity, etc will determine the
response to several agents. Thus, it is necessary to perform a detailed
diagnostic study in COPD patients in order to select the best treatment in an
individualized form. In the future, new specific antiinflammatories such as
phosphodiesterase 4 inhibitors or agents with a potential action in tissue
regeneration could lead to new perspectives, as well as to new questions, in COPD
treatment.


PMID: 15970187  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Pulm Pharmacol Ther. 2006;19(2):79-89. Epub 2005 Jun 16.

Single inhaler budesonide/formoterol in exacerbations of chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease.

Cazzola M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Pneumology and Allergology, Department of Respiratory Medicine,
Antonio Cardarelli High Specialty Hospital, Naples, Italy. mcazzola@qubisoftit

Inhaled bronchodilators, particularly short-acting inhaled beta(2)-agonists, and 
systemic glucocorticosteroids are effective treatments for acute exacerbations of
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). However, in the treatment of these 
episodes there may be some advantages to the longer-acting agents in that there
will be prolonged bronchodilation. Moreover, high doses of systemic
glucocorticosteroids are associated with a significant risk of side effects. In
the last few years, evidence is mounting that nebulized budesonide and inhaled
formoterol might be an alternative to oral prednisolone and short-acting
beta(2)-agonists, respectively, in the treatment of acute exacerbations of COPD. 
Interestingly, some new data suggest that a combination therapy with single
inhaler containing budesonide and formoterol may be an alternative to traditional
therapy in the treatment of acute exacerbations of this disorder. However, since 
individual studies are typically statistically underpowered and are remarkably
heterogeneous with regard to their conclusions, larger studies are needed to
confirm these preliminary findings and determine conclusively any impact of
budesonide/formoterol combination in acutely ill COPD patients.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pupt.2005.03.004 
PMID: 15964228  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Respir Med. 2005 Dec;99(12):1494-500. Epub 2005 Jun 8.

The effect of inhaled corticosteroids on bronchoalveolar lavage cells and IL-8
levels in stable COPD patients.

Ozol D(1), Aysan T, Solak ZA, Mogulkoc N, Veral A, Sebik F.

Author information: 
(1)Fatih University, School of Medicine, Department of Chest Disease, Ankara
06510, Turkey. dozol@hotmail.com

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is characterised by a chronic
inflammatory process in the large and small airways, as well as in the lung
parenchyma. Although the role of oral corticosteroids in the management of acute 
exacerbations of COPD is well documented, its role in stable COPD is not clear.
We examined the anti-inflammatory effect of inhaled budesonide on the percentage 
of neutrophils and on interleukin-8 (IL-8) levels in bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL)
and their correlation with spirometry and symptom scores. Twenty-six patients
with stable COPD were randomised, in a double-blinded, placebo-controlled trial
with either 800 microg of inhaled budesonide or placebo for a 6-month period. The
budesonide-treated subjects had significant reductions in IL-8 levels in the BAL 
after therapy (mean+/-sem, 1.53+/-0.72 at baseline vs. 0.70+/-0.48 ng/ml at 6
months, P=0.004) and a reduction in the mean percentages of neutrophils
(17.16+/-2.67% vs. 13.25+/-2.28% P=0.002). The improvement in sputum production
was of borderline (P=0.058) significance but there was no improvement in lung
function. In stable patients with COPD, treatment with inhaled budesonide for a
period of 6 months has a positive effect on markers of lung inflammation, as
assessed by reduction in percentage neutrophils and IL-8 concentration in BAL.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2005.04.025 
PMID: 15946834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Respir Med. 2005 Jul;99(7):836-49. Epub 2005 Mar 23.

Factors guiding the choice of delivery device for inhaled corticosteroids in the 
long-term management of stable asthma and COPD: focus on budesonide.

Thorsson L(1), Geller D.

Author information: 
(1)AstraZeneca R&D, Experimental Medicine, 221 87 Lund, Sweden.
lars.thorsson@astrazeneca.com

Inhaled corticosteroids (ICSs) have become the mainstay of chronic controller
therapy to treat airways inflammation in asthma and to reduce exacerbations in
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. An array of ICSs are now available that
are aerosolized by a range of delivery systems. Such devices include pressurized 
(or propellant) metered-dose inhalers (pMDIs), pMDIs plus valved holding chambers
or spacers, breath-actuated inhalers, and nebulizers. More recently, dry-powder
inhalers (DPIs) were developed to help overcome problems of hand-breath
coordination associated with pMDIs. The clinical benefit of ICSs therapy is
determined by a complex interplay between the nature and severity of the disease,
the type of drug and its formulation, and characteristics of the delivery device 
together with the patient's ability to use the device correctly. The ICSs
budesonide is available by pMDI, DPI, and nebulizer-allowing the physician to
select the best device for each individual patient. Indeed, the availability of
budesonide in three different delivery systems allows versatility for the
prescribing physician and provides continuity of drug therapy for younger
patients who may remain on the same ICSs as they mature.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2005.02.012 
PMID: 15939245  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Int J Clin Pract. 2005 Apr;59(4):385-98.

Asthma and COPD: differences and similarities. With special reference to the
usefulness of budesonide/formoterol in a single inhaler (Symbicort) in both
diseases.

Decramer M(1), Selroos O.

Author information: 
(1)Respiratory Division, U.Z. Gasthuisberg, Katholieke University, Leuven,
Belgium. marc.decramer@uz.kuleuven.ac.be

Asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) both have a high
prevalence worldwide and yet each condition remains underdiagnosed. Despite a
number of common features, these inflammatory respiratory syndromes have distinct
clinical outcomes. COPD represents a greater economic burden than asthma because 
it has a less favourable prognosis and is associated with greater morbidity and
mortality. Therefore, it is important to distinguish between these two diseases
at an early stage, so that appropriate therapy can be prescribed to prevent
deterioration. However, effective treatments that may be used in both conditions 
can minimise the effects of misdiagnosis and maximise the impact of treatment
without the associated complexity when both conditions occur together. The
current review summarises the differences and similarities of asthma and COPD, in
terms of risk factors, pathophysiology, symptoms and diagnosis, to provide
greater understanding of the role of budesonide/formoterol in a single inhaler in
both diseases.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1368-5031.2005.00509.x 
PMID: 15853852  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Pharmacoeconomics. 2005;23(4):365-75.

Cost effectiveness of budesonide/formoterol in a single inhaler for COPD compared
with each monocomponent used alone.

Löfdahl CG(1), Ericsson A, Svensson K, Andreasson E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine and Allergology, Lund University Hospital, 
S-22185 Lund, Sweden. claes-goran.lofdahl@lung.lu.se

OBJECTIVE: To compare the healthcare costs and effects of budesonide/formoterol
in a single inhaler with those of budesonide and formoterol monotherapies, and
placebo, in a multinational study in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD), National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute (NHLBI)/WHO Global
Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease (GOLD) stages III or IV. Previous
analysis of the clinical data from the study had shown that budesonide/formoterol
was associated with better lung function and improved health-related QOL compared
with the monocomponents or placebo and lower frequency of exacerbations compared 
with formoterol and placebo.
METHOD: Patients (n = 1022) were randomised to twice-daily treatment with two
inhalations of budesonide/formoterol (160 microg/4.5 microg) in a single inhaler,
budesonide 200 microg, formoterol 4.5 microg or placebo for 12 months. Data on
medication and healthcare use were combined with Swedish unit cost data to
estimate the total annual healthcare cost per patient from the Swedish healthcare
payer perspective. Costs were valued in Swedish kronor (SEK) [2001 values] and
converted to euros (SEK 1 = euro 0.11, 25th April 2003).
RESULTS: This evaluation estimated the total annual healthcare costs per patient 
to be numerically lower for budesonide/formoterol (euro 2518) than for budesonide
(euro 3194), formoterol (euro 3653) or placebo (euro 3213). Cost-effectiveness
acceptability curves suggest that budesonide/formoterol may be cost effective
compared with formoterol, even if the decision maker is not willing to pay
anything for the additional clinical effects, and that budesonide/formoterol is
cost effective compared with placebo if a decision maker is willing to pay about 
euro 2 per day, per avoided exacerbation.
CONCLUSION: This economic analysis suggests that the clinical benefits of using
budesonide/formoterol in a single inhaler are achieved at a numerically lower
total healthcare cost than either monocomponent or placebo. Budesonide/formoterol
in patients with severe COPD (GOLD stages III or IV) may be cost effective, from 
the healthcare provider perspective, compared with either monocomponent.


PMID: 15853436  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Pharmacology. 2005 Jun;74(3):127-34. Epub 2005 Mar 7.

A combination of budesonide and the SH-metabolite I of erdosteine acts
synergistically in reducing chemiluminescence during human neutrophil respiratory
burst.

Dal Sasso M(1), Culici M, Guffanti EE, Bianchi T, Fonti E, Braga PC.

Author information: 
(1)Center of Respiratory Pharmacology, Department of Pharmacology, School of
Medicine, University of Milan, Milan, Italy.

Activated neutrophils can release superoxide anion and nitric oxide (NO), which
subsequently combine with each other to yield peroxynitrite anions, powerful and 
harmful oxidants that preferentially mediate the oxidation of the thiol groups in
proteins and non-protein molecules. These oxidants play a direct role in the
inflammatory process in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and asthma by
increasing the number of neutrophils and macrophages that induce a
self-sustaining phlogogenic loop. Budesonide (BUD) and erdosteine (a muco-active 
drug which, after metabolization, produces an active metabolite (Met I) with a
sulfhydryl group) are both active in reducing the release of superoxide anion, NO
and peroxynitrite, and can be administered to patients with respiratory diseases.
The aim of this study was to investigate the possible synergistic in vitro effect
of BUD and Met I on chemiluminescence generation during fMLP-stimulated
respiratory bursts of human neutrophils with the NO donor L-arginine, added to
the incubating medium. The investigated BUD concentrations ranged from 6 x 10(-8)
to 1 x 10(-6) mol/l in logarithmic scale and a significant and progressive
reduction in luminol-amplified chemiluminescence (LACL) was observed at
concentrations ranging from 2.5 x 10(-7) to 1 x 10(-6) mol/l. The investigated
concentrations of Met I varied from 0.62 to 10 microg/ml. No significant changes 
were observed at 0.62, 1.25, and 2.5 microg/ml, but a significant decrease in
LACL was observed at 5 and 10 microg/ml. When the two drugs were combined, there 
was a greater significant decrease in LACL versus the single drugs with the
combinations of BUD 1 x 10(-6) mol/l plus Met I 10 microg/ml, BUD 5 x 10(-7)
mol/l plus Met I 5 microg/ml, BUD 2.5 x 10(-7) mol/l plus Met I 2.5 microg/ml,
and BUD 1.25 x 10(-7) mol/l plus Met I 1.25 microg/ml. A further interesting
finding was that the combination of BUD 2.5 x 10(-7) mol/l plus Met I 2.5
microg/ml and BUD 1.25 x 10(-7) mol/l plus Met I 1.25 microg/ml significantly
decreased LACL, whereas the single concentrations had no significant effect, thus
indicating the possibility of extending the duration of the effect. Our findings 
indicate a synergistic antioxidant effect when BUD and Met I are given together, 
which is of interest for counteracting the airway phlogosis involved in many
respiratory diseases.

2005 S. Karger AG, Basel

DOI: 10.1159/000084295 
PMID: 15753624  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Drugs. 2005;65(5):579-91.

Inhaled corticosteroids in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: is there a
clinical benefit?

Man SF(1), Sin DD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Pulmonary Division, St Paul's Hospital, Vancouver,
British Columbia.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a serious illness that affects
over 5% of the adult population. It is one of the few conditions for which the
mortality and morbidity are still increasing. Experts expect COPD to become the
third leading cause of death and the fifth leading cause of disability worldwide 
by the year 2020. Thus far, the only treatments that have been shown to make a
difference to survival are smoking cessation and the use of oxygen supplements
for those who are hypoxaemic at rest. The use of inhaled corticosteroids as
monotherapy or in combination with a long-acting beta2-adrenoceptor agonist for
COPD is controversial. Experimental data indicate that the inflammatory process
in COPD may be resistant to the anti-inflammatory effects of corticosteroids.
However, several large clinical studies have shown that inhaled corticosteroids
in relatively high doses (e.g. budesonide 800 microg/day or fluticasone
propionate 1 mg/day) reduce exacerbations by 20-30% and improve the health status
of COPD patients by a similar amount compared with placebo. Withdrawal of inhaled
corticosteroids may increase clinical exacerbation rates by 50% in COPD patients 
and by 2-fold in those with severe disease. Combined therapy with inhaled
corticosteroids and long-acting beta2-adrenoceptor agonists may be superior to
individual component therapy in reducing exacerbations. However, these
medications must be used cautiously, as they have been associated with certain
adverse effects. Inhaled corticosteroids, for instance, increase the risk for
dysphonia and oral thrush by 2- to 3-fold. Skin bruising is also more common in
users than in non-users of inhaled corticosteroids. On balance, for those with
moderate-to-severe COPD and those who experience frequent exacerbations,
judicious use of inhaled corticosteroids alone or in combination with long-acting
beta2-adrenoceptor agonists appears reasonable.


PMID: 15748094  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Saf. 2005 Mar;14(3):203-9.

Changes in prescribing of inhaled corticosteroids (1999-2002) in Scotland.

Boyter AC(1), Steinke DT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Strathclyde, John
Arbuthnott Building, Glasgow, Scotland, UK. anne.boyter@strath.ac.uk

PURPOSE: To investigate the trend in prescribing of inhaled corticosteroids and
general practitioner (GP) consultations for respiratory diseases.
METHODS: A longitudinal observation study of all prescriptions, from primary
care, for inhaled corticosteroids dispensed in Scotland from January 1999 to May 
2002 was undertaken. The main outcome measures were the trends in prescribing of 
inhaled corticosteroids and GP consultations for respiratory diseases.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS: The prescribing of all inhaled corticosteroids has risen
over the study period. The rise in prescribing of the combination product
containing fluticasone and salmeterol appears not to have been at the expense of 
the prescribing of fluticasone alone while the prescribing of the
budesonide/eformoterol combination may be at the expense of budesonide (BUD)
alone. GP consultations for both asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD) have declined over a similar period. The increased prescribing of inhaled 
corticosteroids over this period is associated with the increased use of the
fluticasone/salmeterol combination rather than an increase in the use of all
inhaled corticosteroids. The accompanying fall in number of consultations with
GPs may be due to this increased prescribing or a move to nurse led clinics.

Copyright 2004 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/pds.1054 
PMID: 15624197  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Chin Med J (Engl). 2004 Nov;117(11):1611-9.

Pathogenesis of cigarette smoke-induced chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and
therapeutic effects of glucocorticoids and N-acetylcysteine in rats.

Xu L(1), Cai BQ, Zhu YJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Peking Union Medical College Hospital,
Peking Union Medical College, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing
100730, China. qlingxu@yahoo.com.cn

BACKGROUND: T lymphocytes and matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) play an important
role in the pathogenesis of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
However, the details of the mechanisms involved are unclear. The aims of this
study were to investigate the changes in interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma),
interleukin-4 (IL-4), MMP-9, MMP-12 and tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase-1
(TIMP-1) levels in a smoke-induced COPD rat model and the therapeutic effects of 
glucocorticoids and N-acetylcysteine.
METHODS: Male Wistar rats were exposed to cigarette smoke for 3.5 months.
Budesonide or N-acetylcysteine was given in the last month. Lung function was
measured at the end of the study. IL-4 and IFN-gamma levels were then determined 
in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid and lung tissue samples by enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay. The expression of MMP-9, MMP-12 and TIMP-1 mRNA in lung
tissue was determined by RT-PCR.
RESULTS: In comparison with the control group, rats exposed to smoke had a
significant increase in IL-4 and MMP-12 levels and a significant decrease in
IFN-gamma levels. In addition, the IL-4/IFN-gamma ratio and MMP-12/TIMP-1 ratio
were both higher. At the same time, the ratio of forced expiratory volume in 0.3 
second to forced vital capacity (FEV(0.3)/FVC) and dynamic compliance (C(dyn))
decreased and expiratory resistance (Re) increased. By measuring pulmonary mean
linear intercept and mean alveolar numbers, obvious emphysematous changes were
observed in the smoke exposed group. After treatment with budesonide, IL-4 and
MMP-12 decreased and IFN-gamma increased. The IL-4/IFN-gamma ratio returned to
normal, though the MMP-12/TIMP-1 ratio remained unchanged. FEV(0.3)/FVC was
significantly higher and Re was significantly lower than that in untreated smoke 
exposed rats. No significant differences were found in pulmonary mean linear
intercept and mean alveolar numbers. After treatment with N-acetylcysteine,
IFN-gamma increased and the IL-4/IFN-gamma ratio decreased. The MMP-12/TIMP-1
ratio remained unchanged. Re and C(dyn) both improved obviously. No significant
differences were found in pulmonary mean linear intercept and mean alveolar
numbers. Correlation analysis indicated that IL-4 levels in lung tissue
correlated negatively with FEV(0.3)/FVC (r = -0.53, P = 0.001), IFN-gamma levels 
in lung tissue correlated negatively with Re (r = -0.63, P = 0.000) and
positively with C(dyn) (r = 0.44, P = 0.009), and that the IL-4/IFN-gamma ratio
correlated negatively with FEV(0.3)/FVC (r = -0.44, P = 0.010) and C(dyn) (r =
-0.42, P = 0.015) and positively with Re (r = 0.58, P = 0.000). Finally, MMP-12
correlated negatively with FEV(0.3)/FVC (r = -0.36, P = 0.026).
CONCLUSIONS: Cigarette smoke exposure increases IL-4 levels and decreases
IFN-gamma levels. This may be the result of smoke-induced changes in lung
function. Budesonide can mitigate the changes in IL-4 and IFN-gamma levels
induced by smoke exposure. N-acetylcysteine has no effect on IL-4, but increases 
IFN-gamma levels and brings the IL-4/IFN-gamma ratio back to normal. Cigarette
smoke can also promote MMP-12 gene expression and elevate the MMP-12/TIMP-1
ratio. This effect may play a role in smoke-induced emphysema. Budesonide and
N-acetylcysteine do not alter the MMP-12/TIMP-1 ratio in this study when given in
the late phase of smoke exposure.


PMID: 15569474  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Zhejiang Da Xue Xue Bao Yi Xue Ban. 2004 Sep;33(5):427-32, 448.

[The expression of transforming growth factor beta-1 in rat model of chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease and the effects of early drugs intervention].

[Article in Chinese]

Wu DQ(1), Liu J, Lu XY, Shen HH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, The Second Affiliated Hospital, College of
Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310009, China.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the expression of transforming growth factor
beta-1(TGF-beta1) and the effects of early drugs intervention of chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease(COPD) in rat model.
METHODS: The COPD rat model (group B) was established by intratracheal
instillation of lipopolysaccharide twice and daily exposure to cigarette smoking.
Drug intervention groups received dongchongxiacao orally daily from the three
days before the experiment (group C) and erythromycin by intraperitoneal
injection since the third week (group D)and inhalation of budesonide since the
forth week (group E). At the end of 10 weeks, all 40 rats including normal
control (group A) were assessed for lung resistance (RL) and dynamic lung
compliance (Cdyn). The expression of TGF-beta1 gene and protein were also
observed by immunohistochemistry and semi-quantitative reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), respectively.
RESULTS: The changes of pathology and pathophysiology in rat COPD model were
similar to those of human COPD. There was a significant increase in the smooth
muscle and collagen thickness in the airway wall of the group B in comparison
with that of the group A. RL in group B was significantly higher than that in
group A (P<0.01), while it was inhibited by early drugs intervention (P<0.01).
Cdyn was decreased in group B as compared with that in group A, which was limited
by erythromycin and budesonide intervention (P<0.01). The relative content for
TGF-beta1 was significantly increased in the epithelial cells of the bronchi,
endothelial cells of the pulmonary small vessel and alveolar macrophages of COPD 
group as compared with those of normal controls (P<0.01).The relative contents
for TGF-beta1 in the epithelial of bronchi in group D and group E were
significantly lower than that in group B, but not found in group C. There was no 
difference between group D and group E. There were statistical positive
relationships between the RL and the relative content for TGF-beta1 in the
bronchial epithelial cells, between the RL and the mRNA level of TGF-beta1 in the
lung tissue (P<0.01 approximately 0.05).
CONCLUSION: This rat COPD model could be helpful to obtain more information about
airway remodeling. TGF-beta1 may play an important role during the process of
airway remodeling, and could be influenced by early drugs intervention such as
budesonide and erythromycin, which may imply their potency in the treatment of
COPD. But there is not same phenomenon found in dongchongxiacao group.


PMID: 15476327  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Drugs Aging. 2004;21(10):631-8.

Inhaled corticosteroids, bone mineral density and fracture in older people.

Hubbard R(1), Tattersfield A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Respiratory Medicine, University of Nottingham, Nottingham, UK.

The efficacy of inhaled corticosteroids in the treatment of asthma has been
firmly established in a variety of settings. The majority of asthma management
plans now recommend the use of inhaled corticosteroids at an early stage. This
means that most patients with asthma will be prescribed an inhaled corticosteroid
at some point in time and many patients with asthma will use these drugs for
several years. Inhaled corticosteroids are also used in the treatment of other
conditions, particularly chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Since
inhaled corticosteroids are absorbed into the systemic circulation, they can have
systemic adverse effects, such as suppression of the
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis and increasing the risk of bruising. However,
perhaps the greatest concern for patients is whether the regular use of inhaled
corticosteroids has an adverse impact on the bone mineral density and increases
the risk of fracture. There is now accumulating evidence from epidemiological
studies that the use of inhaled corticosteroids is inversely related to bone
mineral density in a dose-dependent fashion. However, data from two clinical
trials of moderately high doses of inhaled corticosteroids in patients with COPD 
have produced conflicting results and while the larger study of triamcinolone
found a significant impact of this drug on bone mineral density, a smaller study 
of budesonide found no effect. Epidemiological research into the relationship
between inhaled corticosteroids and fracture is at an early stage. To date, only 
three studies in this area have been reported, all of which have used different
approaches to try to minimise the impact of bias and confounding. There is a lack
of consistency between the final estimates of the impact of inhaled
corticosteroids on fracture risk. However, taken together these data suggest that
the short to medium term use of inhaled corticosteroids is associated with a
small adverse effect on bone. Doctors and patients need to be aware of this risk 
and balance it against the known beneficial effects of inhaled corticosteroids.


PMID: 15287822  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2004;(3):CD003794.

Combined corticosteroid and long acting beta-agonist in one inhaler for chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease.

Nannini L(1), Cates CJ, Lasserson TJ, Poole P.

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary Section, Hospital G. Baigorria, Ruta 11 Y Jm Estrada, G. Baigorria, 
Santa Fe - Rosario, Argentina, 2152. nanninilj@cimero.org.ar

Update in
    Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2007;(4):CD003794.

Update of
    Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2003;(4):CD003794.

BACKGROUND: Long-acting beta-agonists and inhaled corticosteroids have both been 
recommended in guidelines for the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease. Their co-administration in a combined inhaler is intended to facilitate 
adherence to medication regimens, and to improve efficacy.
OBJECTIVES: To assess the efficacy of combined inhaled corticosteroid and
long-acting beta-agonist preparations, compared to placebo or the individual
components, in the treatment of adults with chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease.
SEARCH STRATEGY: We searched the Cochrane Airways Group chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD) trials register. Date of last search April 2004.
SELECTION CRITERIA: Studies were included if they were randomised and
double-blind. Studies could compare a combined inhaled corticosteroids and
long-acting beta-agonist preparation with either component preparation or
placebo.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Two reviewers independently assessed trial quality 
and extracted data. The primary outcome was exacerbations.
MAIN RESULTS: Six randomised trials with 4118 participants were included. Two
different combination preparations (fluticasone/salmeterol and
budesonide/formoterol) were used. Combination treatment was more effective than
placebo for mean exacerbation rates, quality of life and lung function. No trials
were found comparing the combination of drugs in a single inhaler with the same
drugs both given in separate inhalers. Exacerbations: Fluticasone/salmeterol did 
not significantly reduce exacerbations compared with either of its component
treatments in one large study. There was no significant difference when
budesonide/formoterol was compared with budesonide. Budesonide/formoterol was
more effective than formoterol in reducing exacerbations (Rate ratio: 0.78 [0.68 
to 0.90], two studies). A pooled analysis of both combination therapies indicated
that exacerbations were less frequent when compared with either placebo or
long-acting beta-agonist (versus placebo Rate ratio: 0.76 [0.68, 0.84], three
studies, versus beta-agonist, Rate ratio: 0.85 [0.77, 0.95], three studies), but 
not when compared with steroid. The clinical impact of this effect depends on the
frequency of exacerbations experienced by patients. One full exacerbation was
prevented for every two to four years of treatment in the type of patients
included in the trials. Quality of Life: There were conflicting findings in
quality of life and symptoms when fluticasone/salmeterol was compared with
inhaled steroids alone (three studies). There was no significant difference
between fluticasone/salmeterol and long-acting beta-agonist in quality of life
scores (three studies). Budesonide/formoterol improved symptoms when compared
with budesonide but not with formoterol. There were conflicting findings in
quality of life scores when budesonide/formoterol was compared with component
inhaled corticosteroid or beta-agonist. These may be accounted for by different
study design. Lung Function: Treatment with either combination led to small,
significant differences in lung function compared with component steroid
medication. Fluticasone/salmeterol led to small improvements in FEV1 compared
with salmeterol, but budesonide/formoterol treatment did not increase FEV1
significantly when compared with formoterol.
REVIEWERS' CONCLUSIONS: Compared with placebo, combination therapy led to
clinically meaningful differences in quality of life, symptoms and exacerbations.
However, there were conflicting results when the different combination therapies 
were compared with the mono-components alone. In order to draw firmer conclusions
about the effects of combination therapy in a single inhaler more data are
necessary, including the assessment of the comparative effects with separate
administration of the two drugs in double-dummy trials.

DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD003794.pub2 
PMID: 15266502  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Drug Ther Bull. 2004 Mar;42(3):18-21.

Are Seretide and Symbicort useful in COPD?

[No authors listed]

Seretide (fluticasone + salmeterol--Allen & Hanburys) and Symbicort (budesonide +
formoterol--AstraZeneca) inhalers have recently been licensed in the UK for the
symptomatic treatment of patients with severe chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD) and a history of repeated exacerbations. Advertising for Seretide 
depicts a man and states that the drug "has improved his ability to breathe and
reduced his risk of exacerbations", while promotional claims for Symbicort
include benefits in "reducing symptoms" and "improving quality of life". Here we 
assess the place of these fixed-dose combination inhalers containing a
corticosteroid and a long-acting beta 2 agonist in the management of patients
with COPD.


PMID: 15038079  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Drugs. 2004;64(4):431-41; discussion 433-4.

Budesonide/formoterol: in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Reynolds NA(1), Perry CM, Keating GM.

Author information: 
(1)Adis International Limited, Auckland, New Zealand. demail@adis.co.nz

Budesonide/formoterol is a fixed-dose combination of the corticosteroid
budesonide and the long-acting beta2-agonist formoterol, and is inhaled via the
Turbuhaler device. In two large, randomised, double-blind, 12-month studies,
patients with severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) receiving
budesonide/formoterol 320/9 microg twice daily had a significantly higher forced 
expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1) and significantly higher morning and evening
peak expiratory flow at trial endpoint than recipients of budesonide or placebo; 
FEV1 was significantly higher than with formoterol in the larger study. In both
studies, the rate of COPD exacerbations and exacerbations requiring oral
corticosteroids was significantly reduced with budesonide/formoterol versus
formoterol and placebo. Moreover, the time to first exacerbation was
significantly prolonged with budesonide/formoterol versus all other treatment
arms in the larger study. At 12 months, significant improvements in
health-related quality-of-life scores were seen with budesonide/formoterol versus
placebo in both studies. The reduction in total and individual symptom scores was
significantly greater with budesonide/formoterol than with budesonide or placebo 
in the smaller study. Budesonide/formoterol was generally well tolerated by
patients with severe COPD. The tolerability profile of the combination was
similar to that of the individual components with no increase in the incidence of
adverse events.


PMID: 14969576  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Eur Respir J. 2003 Dec;22(6):912-9.

Maintenance therapy with budesonide and formoterol in chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease.

Calverley PM(1), Boonsawat W, Cseke Z, Zhong N, Peterson S, Olsson H.

Author information: 
(1)Dept of Medicine, Clinical Sciences, University Hospital Aintree, Liverpool,
UK. pmacal@liverpool.ac.uk

Erratum in
    Eur Respir J. 2004 Dec;24(6):1075.

Comment in
    Eur Respir J. 2003 Dec;22(6):874-5.
    Eur Respir J. 2004 Dec;24(6):1070; author reply 1070-1.

Lung function in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) can be improved
acutely by oral corticosteroids and bronchodilators. Whether clinical improvement
can be maintained by subsequent inhaled therapy is unknown. COPD patients
(n=1,022, mean prebronchodilator forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV1)
36% predicted) initially received formoterol (9 microg b.i.d.) and oral
prednisolone (30 mg o.d.) for 2 weeks. After this time, patients were randomised 
to b.i.d. inhaled budesonide/formoterol 320/9 microg, budesonide 400 microg,
formoterol 9 microg or placebo for 12 months. Postmedication FEV1 improved by
0.21 L and health-related quality of life using the St George's Respiratory
Questionnaire (SGRQ) by 4.5 units after run-in. Fewer patients receiving
budesonide/formoterol withdrew from the study than those receiving budesonide,
formoterol or placebo. Budesonide/formoterol patients had a prolonged time to
first exacerbation (254 versus 96 days) and maintained higher FEV1 (99% versus
87% of baseline), both primary variables versus placebo. They had fewer
exacerbations (1.38 versus 1.80 exacerbations per patient per year), had higher
prebronchodilator peak expiratory flow, and showed clinically relevant
improvements in SGRQ versus placebo (-7.5 units). Budesonide/formoterol was more 
effective than either monocomponent in both primary variables.
Budesonide/formoterol in a single inhaler (Symbicort) maintains the benefit of
treatment optimisation, stabilising lung function and delaying exacerbations more
effectively than either component drug alone or placebo.


PMID: 14680078  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Drugs. 2003;63(22):2437-45; discussion 2447-8.

Novolizer: a multidose dry powder inhaler.

Fenton C(1), Keating GM, Plosker GL.

Author information: 
(1)Adis International Limited, Auckland, New Zealand. demail@adis.co.nz

Novolizer is a multidose breath-actuated dry powder inhaler (DPI) approved for
use with salbutamol (albuterol) and budesonide. It has multiple patient feedback 
mechanisms and an inspiratory flow rate threshold designed to optimise dosage. In
two studies, children aged 4-11 years with asthma correctly used Novolizer and
generated mean peak inspiratory flow rates (PIFRs) through Novolizer of 76 and
92.7 L/min, well above the Novolizer threshold of 35-50 L/min. In healthy
volunteers, median lung deposition of budesonide administered via Novolizer was
19.9-32.1% at mean PIFRs of 54-99 L/min. In a randomised, double-blind,
single-dose study in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)
and asthma, the 1-hour improvement from baseline in mean maximum forced
expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV(1)) was 21.3% with inhalation of salbutamol
through Novolizer, and 19.5% through Sultanol pressurised metered-dose inhaler
(MDI). FEV(1) increased significantly in patients with asthma and COPD treated
for 4 weeks in a randomised, open-label comparison of salbutamol through either
Novolizer or Sultanol MDI. A randomised open-label study in adults with asthma
treated with inhaled budesonide found equivalent improvements in FEV(1) and
symptoms with Novolizer and Turbuhaler. Novolizer was well accepted overall. Most
patients preferred it to previously used MDIs or DPIs. Only 4-5% found the taste 
feedback unacceptable. Physicians observed improved compliance over 4 weeks in
80% of patients with asthma using Novolizer.


PMID: 14609355  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2003;(4):CD003794.

Combined corticosteroid and longacting beta-agonist in one inhaler for chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease.

Nannini L(1), Lasserson TJ, Poole P.

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary Section, Hospital G. Baigorria, Ruta 11 Y Jm Estrada, G. Baigorria, 
Santa Fe - Rosario, Argentina, 2152. nanninilj@cimero.org.ar

Update in
    Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2004;(3):CD003794.

BACKGROUND: Long-acting beta-agonists and inhaled corticosteroids have been
recommended in guidelines for the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease. However, they have only been available until recently via separate
administration. They have been developed in order to facilitate adherence to
medication regimens, and to improve efficacy.
OBJECTIVES: To assess the efficacy of combined inhaled corticosteroid and
long-acting beta-agonist preparations in the treatment of adults with chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease.
SEARCH STRATEGY: We searched the Cochrane Airways Group chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD) trials register (March 2003), the Cochrane Central
Register of Controlled Trials (The Cochrane Library Issue 1, 2003), LILACS (all
years to March 2003) and reference lists of articles. We also contacted
manufacturers and researchers in the field.
SELECTION CRITERIA: Studies were included if they were randomised, with adequate 
blinding procedures in place. Studies could compare a combined inhaled
corticosteroids and long-acting beta-agonist preparation with either component
preparation or placebo. Studies comparing different members of each class of
combined therapies were included
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Two reviewers independently assessed trial quality 
and extracted data.
MAIN RESULTS: Four randomised trials with 2986 participants were included. Two
different combination preparations (fluticasone/salmeterol and
budesonide/formoterol) were studied in the trials. No meta-analysis on clinical
outcomes was possible due to different outcome assessment across studies. All
studies demonstrated a reduction in exacerbation rates versus placebo.
Budesonide/formoterol was more effective than formoterol in reducing
exacerbations in one study from 1.84 to 1.42 exacerbations per year.
Fluticasone/salmeterol did not significantly reduce exacerbations compared with
either of its component treatments. Fluticasone/salmeterol led to better quality 
of life compared with placebo (two studies), although there were conflicting
results when compared with inhaled corticosteroid alone (two studies). There was 
no significant difference between fluticasone/salmeterol and long-acting
beta-agonist (two studies). Budesonide/formoterol led to statistically
significant differences in quality of life compared with placebo, but not when
compared with component inhaled corticosteroid or beta-agonist (one study).
REVIEWER'S CONCLUSIONS: For the primary outcome of exacerbations,
budesonide/formoterol had a modest advantage over a component medication,
formoterol, in a single trial, but fluticasone/salmeterol did not result in a
significant reduction in exacerbations compared to either of its components. The 
combination of steroids and long-acting beta-agonist in one inhaler was effective
in improving symptoms compared with placebo and on certain clinical outcomes
compared with one of the individual components alone. In order to draw firmer
conclusions about the effects of combination therapy in a single inhaler more
data are necessary, including the assessment of the comparative effects with
separate administration of the two drugs in double-dummy trials.

DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD003794 
PMID: 14583994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Expert Opin Pharmacother. 2003 Aug;4(8):1393-406.

Budesonide/formoterol for the treatment of asthma.

Buhl R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary Division, Mainz University Hospital, Langenbeckstrasse 1, D-55131
Mainz, Germany. R.Buhl@3-med.klinik.uni-mainz.de

Budesonide/formoterol (Symbicort), AstraZeneca plc) is a novel treatment for
asthma, combining an inhaled corticosteroid - budesonide, and a long-acting
beta(2)-agonist - formoterol, in a single inhaler, the Turbuhaler. Randomised,
clinical studies in patients with asthma have demonstrated that
budesonide/formoterol is more effective than the inhaled corticosteroids,
budesonide and fluticasone alone, and at least as effective as both
monocomponents in separate inhalers. Results from clinical studies suggest a
synergistic effect when both drugs are administered via one inhaler, although the
mechanisms for this are not fully understood. Budesonide/formoterol has a rapid
onset of effect, apparent within 1 min of treatment, which is largely because of 
the properties of formoterol. Once- and twice-daily dosing with
budesonide/formoterol are effective treatment options for patients with mild or
moderate asthma. Studies have also shown that the beneficial safety profiles and 
dose relationships of both budesonide and formoterol allow dose adjustments of
budesonide/formoterol in response to variations in the patient's asthma. Findings
from the budesonide/formoterol adjustable maintenance dosing programme, comparing
fixed and adjustable, symptom-guided dosing regimens, demonstrate that patients
achieve equally good asthma control with adjustable dosing (from one inhalation
twice-daily to more than four inhalations twice-daily), but at a significantly
lower overall drug load. Adverse events, mainly expected inhaled corticosteroid
and long-acting beta(2)agonist class effects, have been few in number and mild in
nature. In addition, there is growing evidence that budesonide/formoterol is also
effective in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. The future for 
treatment with budesonide/formoterol may include as-needed administration in
addition to maintenance therapy.

DOI: 10.1517/14656566.4.8.1393   
PMID: 12877646  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Int J Pharm. 2003 Apr 14;255(1-2):175-87.

A novel method for assessing dissolution of aerosol inhaler products.

Davies NM(1), Feddah MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, College of Pharmacy, Washington State
University, P.O. Box 646534, Pullman, WA 99164-6534, USA. ndavies@wsu.edu

Glucocorticoids administered by inhalation remain a first-line treatment of
patients with asthma allergic rhinitis and advanced chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease. Budesonide (BD), fluticasone propionate (FP) and triamcinolone acetonide
(TA) have high hepatic first-pass inactivation of the swallowed fraction of the
inhaled dose, whereas there is no first-pass metabolism in the lung. Hence, the
lung bioavailability will determine the overall systemic absorption and the
systemic bioactivity. Efficacy of inhaled agents in the respiratory tract depends
on the site of deposition and physicochemical properties of the drug, which
dictates rate of dissolution, absorption, metabolism and elimination. However, to
date no official method exists for testing dissolution rates from inhalation
aerosols. An in vitro flow through dissolution method may be useful to provide
information on rate of release and determine formulation differences between
products or in product development. After administration of three glucocorticoids
into a cascade impactor they underwent dissolution in a flow through cell
utilising water, simulated lung fluid (SLF) and modified SLF with
L-alpha-phosphatidylcholine (DPPC) as a dissolution medium, at constant flow and 
temperature. Modified SLF significantly increased the dissolution rate compared
with SLF alone. This novel technique appears to be a useful method of evaluating 
dissolution of these glucocorticoids and may also be applied to other respiratory
products administered via aerosols.


PMID: 12672613  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Expert Rev Pharmacoecon Outcomes Res. 2003 Apr;3(2):121-4. doi:
10.1586/14737167.3.2.121.

Salmeterol/fluticasone combination in COPD: is together better?

Antoniu SA(1), Mititiuc I.

Author information: 
(1)Clinic of Pulmonary Disease, University of Medicine and Pharmacy 'Gr.T.Popa'
Iasi, 30 Dr I Cihac Str., 6600 Iasi, Romania. sabinaantoniu@excite.com

Comment on
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2002 Oct 15;166(8):1084-91.
    Lancet. 2003 Feb 8;361(9356):449-56.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease represents one of the chronic conditions
for which many therapies have become available during the last few decades. They 
are aimed at reducing symptoms such as dyspnea, cough and sputum and many of them
are given on inhalatory route. Among them, bronchodilators, such as; salmeterol
or formoterol and inhaled steroids, such as budesonide or fluticasone have each
proven their effectiveness in improving many clinical outcomes such as dyspnea,
exacerbations number, lung function decline or health status. Currently
combinations of these two classes are available in an attempt to make the
inhalatory therapy more effective. These studies analyse the effectiveness of
salmeterol/fluticasone combination from a clinical point of view and for a short 
period of time.

DOI: 10.1586/14737167.3.2.121 
PMID: 19807359  [PubMed]


228. Eur Respir J. 2003 Jan;21(1):74-81.

Efficacy and safety of budesonide/formoterol in the management of chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease.

Szafranski W(1), Cukier A, Ramirez A, Menga G, Sansores R, Nahabedian S, Peterson
S, Olsson H.

Author information: 
(1)Dept Lung Diseases, Voivodeship Specialist Hospital, Radom, Poland.

Erratum in
    Eur Respir J. 2003 May;21(5):912.

The efficacy and safety of budesonide/formoterol in a single inhaler compared
with placebo, budesonide and formoterol were evaluated in patients with
moderate-to-severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). In a 12-month,
randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, parallel-group study in 812 adults 
(mean age 64 yrs, mean forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV1) 36%
predicted normal), patients received two inhalations twice daily of either
budesonide/formoterol (Symbicort) 160/4.5 microg (delivered dose), budesonide 200
microg (metered dose), formoterol 4.5 microg or placebo. Severe exacerbations and
FEV1 (primary variables), peak expiratory flow (PEF), COPD symptoms,
health-related quality of life (HRQL), mild exacerbations, use of reliever
beta2-agonist and safety variables were recorded. Budesonide/formoterol reduced
the mean number of severe exacerbations per patient per year by 24% versus
placebo and 23% versus formoterol. FEV1 increased by 15% versus placebo and 9%
versus budesonide. Morning PEF improved significantly on day 1 versus placebo and
budesonide; after 1 week, morning PEF was improved versus placebo, budesonide and
formoterol. Improvements in morning and evening PEF versus comparators were
maintained over 12 months. Budesonide/formoterol decreased all symptom scores and
use of reliever beta2-agonists significantly versus placebo and budesonide, and
improved HRQL versus placebo. All treatments were well tolerated. These results
suggest a role for budesonide/formoterol in the long-term management of
moderate-to-severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.


PMID: 12570112  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Clin Drug Investig. 2003;23(1):55-62. doi: 10.2165/00044011-200323010-00007.

Comparison of the efficacy of nebulised budesonide with parenteral
corticosteroids in the treatment of acute exacerbations of chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease.

Mirici A(1), Meral M, Akgun M.

Author information: 
(1)Aziziye Arastirma Hastanesi, Gogus Hastaliklari, Atatürk Universitesi,
Yenisehir Girisi, 25070, Erzurum, Turkey.

OBJECTIVE: To compare the efficacy and safety of nebulised budesonide and
systemic corticosteroid in the treatment of acute exacerbations of chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
DESIGN: Randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, parallel-group trial.
PATIENTS AND INTERVENTIONS: A total of 40 patients who had moderate to severe
acute exacerbations of COPD and required hospitalisation were enrolled in the
study. The patients were randomised to receive either nebulised budesonide 8mg
daily (n = 21) or systemic (intravenous) prednisolone 40mg daily (n = 19). Airway
obstruction (peak expiratory flow rate [PEFR]) and gas exchange (arterial partial
pressure of oxygen [PaO(2)] and carbon dioxide [PaCO(2)], pH and oxygen
saturation [SaO(2)]) were evaluated at 30 min, at 6, 24 and 48 hours, and at day 
10.
RESULTS: There were no significant differences between groups at baseline. In
both groups, differences were significant for PEFR, SaO(2) and PaO(2) (p <
0.001), but not for PaCO(2) and pH, in comparison with their baseline values.
There were no significant differences between groups for all parameters (PEFR,
PaO(2), PaCO(2), pH and SaO(2)) at all time periods. No adverse events were
recorded in either group.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study suggests that nebulised budesonide may be an alternative
to parenteral corticosteroids in the treatment of acute exacerbations of COPD.

DOI: 10.2165/00044011-200323010-00007 
PMID: 23319094  [PubMed]


230. Eur Respir J. 2002 Jun;19(6):1058-63.

Bone mineral density in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
treated with budesonide Turbuhaler.

Johnell O(1), Pauwels R, Löfdahl CG, Laitinen LA, Postma DS, Pride NB, Ohlsson
SV.

Author information: 
(1)Dept of Orthopaedics, Malmö University Hospital, Sweden.
olof.Johnell@orto.mas.lu.se

There is a need for studying the effects of long-term inhaled corticosteroid
therapy on bone mineral density (BMD) and vertebral fracture rates in patients
with mild chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Patients (n=912, mean age
52 yrs) with mild COPD (mean forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV1) 77% of
predicted; mean FEV1/slow vital capacity ratio 62%) were randomized to receive
budesonide 400 microg, or placebo twice daily via Turbuhaler. BMD was measured at
the L2-L4 vertebrae and the femoral neck, trochanter and Ward's triangle by
dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry at baseline and after 6, 12, 24 and 36 months
(n=161). Radiographs of the thoracic and lumbar spine were obtained at the
beginning and end of treatment (n=653). Previous fractures were present at
baseline in 43 budesonide-treated patients (13.4%) and 38 placebo-treated
patients (11.5%). New fractures occurred in five budesonide-treated patients,
compared with three in the placebo group (p=0.50). There were no significant
changes in BMD at any site in budesonide-treated patients, compared with the
placebo group, during the course of the study. Budesonide treatment was
associated with a slight but statistically significant decrease in the area under
the concentration-time curve for serum osteocalcin. In the present study,
involving a large group of patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease,
long-term treatment with budesonide 800 microg x day(-1) via Turbuhaler had no
clinically significant effects on bone mineral density or fracture rates.


PMID: 12108857  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2002 Mar 1;165(5):698-703.

Comparison of nebulized budesonide and oral prednisolone with placebo in the
treatment of acute exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: a
randomized controlled trial.

Maltais F(1), Ostinelli J, Bourbeau J, Tonnel AB, Jacquemet N, Haddon J, Rouleau 
M, Boukhana M, Martinot JB, Duroux P.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Recherche, Hôpital Laval, Institut Universitaire de Cardiologie et
de Pneumologie de l'Université Laval, 2275 Chemin Ste-Foy, Ste-Foy, Quebec G1V
4G5, Canada. medfma@hermes.ulaval.ca

Nebulized budesonide has been used successfully to treat acute asthma
exacerbation, and we hypothesized that it could also be effective for
exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). In this
multicenter, double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled trial, the efficacy of 
nebulized budesonide (Pulmicort Respules/Nebuamp), oral prednisolone, and placebo
was compared in 199 patients with acute exacerbations of COPD requiring
hospitalization. Patients received from randomization (H(0)) to 72 h (H(72)), 2
mg of budesonide every 6 h (n = 71), 30 mg of oral prednisolone every 12 h (n =
62), or placebo (n = 66). All received standard treatment, including nebulized
beta(2)-agonists, ipratropium bromide, oral antibiotics, and supplemental oxygen.
The mean change (95% confidence interval) in postbronchodilator FEV(1) from H(0) 
to H(72) was greater with active treatments than with placebo: budesonide versus 
placebo, 0.10 L (0.02 to 0.18 L); prednisolone versus placebo, 0.16 L (0.08 to
0.24 L). The difference in FEV(1) between budesonide and prednisolone was not
significant, -0.06 L (-0.14 to 0.02 L). The occurrence of serious adverse events 
was similar for all groups. Budesonide had less systemic activity than
prednisolone as indicated by a higher incidence of hyperglycemia observed with
prednisolone. Both budesonide and prednisolone improved airflow in COPD patients 
with acute exacerbations when compared with placebo. Nebulized budesonide may be 
an alternative to oral prednisolone in the treatment of nonacidotic exacerbations
of COPD but further studies should be done to evaluate its long-term impact on
clinical outcomes after an initial episode of COPD exacerbation.

DOI: 10.1164/ajrccm.165.5.2109093 
PMID: 11874817  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Eur J Pharmacol. 2001 Nov 23;431(3):365-71.

Beclomethasone, budesonide and fluticasone propionate inhibit human neutrophil
apoptosis.

Zhang X(1), Moilanen E, Kankaanranta H.

Author information: 
(1)Medical School, University of Tampere, Tampere, Finland.

Inhaled glucocorticoids are widely used to treat chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease without much evidence of efficiency in this disease where neutrophils may
contribute to the pathophysiology. This prompted us to test the effects of
several currently used inhaled and systemic glucocorticoids on human neutrophil
apoptosis. Beclomethasone, budesonide, dexamethasone, fluticasone propionate,
hydrocortisone and prednisolone inhibited apoptosis in a concentration-dependent 
manner as assessed by flow cytometric analysis, annexin-V binding and
morphological analysis. The maximal inhibition of apoptosis was 50-60%. The order
of potency was fluticasone propionate (EC(50) 0.6+/-0.2 nM) approximately equal
to budesonide (EC(50) 0.8+/-0.2 nM)> dexamethasone approximately equal to
prednisolone approximately equal to beclomethasone approximately equal to
hydrocortisone. The inhibitory effects of glucocorticoids were reversed by
mifepristone. Moreover, glucocorticoids slightly enhanced the inhibitory effect
of granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) on neutrophil
apoptosis. The present data suggests that budesonide and fluticasone propionate
prolong human neutrophil survival by inhibiting apoptosis at clinically relevant 
drug concentrations via an effect on glucocorticoid receptor.


PMID: 11730731  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Drugs. 2001;61(11):1535-44.

Should inhaled corticosteroids be used in the long term treatment of chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease?

Burge S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Birmingham Heartlands Hospital, England.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a progressive disease with
alveolar destruction (emphysema) and bronchiolar fibrosis (obstructive
bronchitis) in variable proportions. Reducing disease progression, as assessed by
forced expiratory volume in I second (FEV1) decline, health-related quality of
life, exacerbation rate and mortality, is a more realistic outcome than
physiological improvement. This paper reviews all the published studies of at
least 100 patients followed for at least 2 years. Studies have included patients 
with mild COPD (Copenhagen City Lung Study) to advanced symptomatic disease
[Inhaled Steroids in Obstructive Lung Disease (ISOLDE)], with 2 studies of those 
with relatively early symptoms [European Respiratory Society Study on Chronic
Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (EUROSCOP) and Lung Health-21. Exacerbation
frequency, and probably severity, are reduced by high dose inhaled
corticosteroids. Exacerbations are only frequent in more advanced disease,
limiting the use of this outcome in EUROSCOP and Lung Health-2. Exacerbations are
associated with reduced health-related quality of life. ISOLDE clearly showed a
reduced rate in decline of the disease-specific St George's Respiratory
Questionnaire with fluticasone propionate, partly related to the reduced
exacerbations. The symptom component of the score showed the greatest difference 
between placebo and fluticasone propionate. None of the larger studies were able 
to reproduce the statistically significant reduction in the rate of decline in
FEV1 suggested by the smaller, earlier studies. This might at least in part be as
a result of the statistical modelling used which cannot adequately compensate for
those with more rapidly progressive disease dropping out earlier. The equivalent 
doses of inhaled corticosteroids differed approximately fivefold between the
major studies. The more positive results were obtained with higher doses.
Oropharyngeal adverse effects were similar to those seen in patients with asthma;
bruising was increased in one study with budesonide, otherwise adverse effects
were similar to placebo. Bone loss was specifically studied in subgroups of
patients in EUROSCOP and Lung Health-2. Budesonide 800 microg/day was associated 
with less bone loss than placebo, whereas triamcinolone 1200 microg/day was
associated with excess bone loss. High dose inhaled corticosteroids have a
favourable risk/benefit ratio in patients with advanced disease, particularly
those with frequent exacerbations, and no benefit for those with very mild
disease. It is not possible from the data to make firm recommendations for the
important intermediate group where delaying progression is likely to lead to
greatest benefit. I believe high dose inhaled steroids are warranted for those
with intermediate severity COPD, who have frequent exacerbations or significant
COPD-related symptoms.


PMID: 11577791  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Respir Med. 2001 Aug;95(8):676-84.

Effects on diffusing capacity and ventilation--perfusion relationships of
budesonide inhalations for 2 months in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD).

Sandek K(1), Bratel T, Lagerstrand L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Karolinska Institutet at Huddinge University Hospital,
Sweden. karin.sandek@lungall.hs.sll.se

Forced expiratory volumes are reduced in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD), mainly as a result of inflammatory and morphological changes in the small
airways (with a diameter < 2 mm) and in the alveoli. However, it is difficult to 
detect minor changes in small airways by spirometry measurements. To study the
effects on small airways of inhaled corticosteroids (ICS), 19 stable COPD
patients were investigated; 15 were evaluated by ventilation-perfusion (V(A)/Q)
relationships, assessed by the multiple inert gas elimination technique, and by
diffusing capacity for carbon monoxide (DL(CO)), assessed by the single breath
technique. Measurements were repeated after 2 months of budesonide inhalations
(800 microg) twice daily. Before ICS treatment: mean forced expiratory volume in 
1 sec (FEV1) as a percentage of predicted (% P) was 40.1 (+/- 16.0)%, DL(CO)% P
was 45.7 (+/- 25.0)% and 6.0 (+/- 6.4)% of the ventilation was directed at high
V(A)/Q areas. The mean of the V(A)/Q ratio for ventilation (V-mean) was 2.7 times
higher than normal. After 2 months of ICS: the mean of DL(CO)% P increased by 8.6
(+/- 19.4)%, and FEV1/vital capacity decreased by 6.9 (+/- 11.3)%. Basal morning 
and ACTH-stimulated S-cortisol levels were significantly reduced. All the V(A)/Q 
relationships remained unchanged. In conclusion, a significant increase in
diffusion capacity for carbon monoxide levels after treatment with corticosteroid
inhalations for 2 months was shown, but no significant improvements were found in
forced expiratory airflow, lung volumes, or V(A)/Q relationships.

DOI: 10.1053/rmed.2001.1124 
PMID: 11530957  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Respir Med. 2001 May;95(5):324-30.

Ex-vivo product performance of Diskus and Turbuhaler inhalers using inhalation
profiles from patients with severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Burnell PK(1), Small T, Doig S, Johal B, Jenkins R, Gibson GJ.

Author information: 
(1)GlaxoSmithKline Research and Development, Ware, Hertfordshire, UK.
pkpb8907@glaxowellcome.co.uk

Dosing performance of dry powder inhalers is dependent on patient's inspiratory
effort. This study compares the inhalation profiles generated by patients with
severe obstructive lung disease using Diskus and Turbuhaler inhalers. The patient
profiles are subsequently used to determine the dosing performance of fluticasone
propionate Diskus and budesonide Turbuhaler inhalers. Inhalation profiles were
recorded in COPD patients (FEV1 < or = 30% predicted) as they inhaled with
maximal effort through the inhalers. The profiles were used in an inhalation
simulator to assess the dosing performance by measuring the total emitted dose
and the fine particle mass for each inhaler type. Peak inspiratory flow was
significantly higher through the Diskus (mean 82.31 min(-1)) compared with
Turbuhaler (mean 53.51 min(-1), difference = 28.8 l min(-1); P < 0.0001). In
addition, in direct comparison of the two devices. the Diskus was shown to
deliver a more consistent dose irrespective of flow than the Turbuhaler in this
patient population. These findings may be of importance in optimising selection
of devices for patients with severe airway obstruction.


PMID: 11392571  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Curr Opin Pulm Med. 2001 Apr;7 Suppl 1:S15-7.

Therapeutic equivalence of the Sofotec Novolizer to established standard devices 
in COPD and asthma.

Kunkel G(1), Chuchalin AG.

Author information: 
(1)Allergy and Asthma Clinic, Charité, Campus Virchow, Humboldt University,
Berlin, Germany.

The Novolizer is a breath-actuated multidose dry powder inhaler that was
developed as an alternative to the pressurized metered dose inhalers. The
efficacy, safety and tolerability of the Novolizer has been compared with those
of established inhalational devices for the delivery of salbutamol (Sultanol) in 
patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and for the administration of
budesonide (Pulmicort Turbuhaler) to patients with asthma. In both studies,
improvement in forced expiratory volume in 1 s in patients who were randomly
assigned to use the Novolizer was comparable with that in patients who used the
established devices. Furthermore, no differences in tolerability or safety
between the Novolizer and the control devices were observed. Finally, patient
acceptance of the Novolizer was high, with the majority of patients who used it
stating that they would use the device again.


PMID: 11385811  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Drugs. 2000 Nov;60(5):1141-78.

Budesonide inhalation suspension: a review of its use in infants, children and
adults with inflammatory respiratory disorders.

Hvizdos KM(1), Jarvis B.

Author information: 
(1)Adis International Limited, Auckland, New Zealand. demail@adis.co.nz

Budesonide, a topically active corticosteroid, has a broad spectrum of clinically
significant local anti-inflammatory effects in patients with inflammatory lung
diseases including persistent asthma. In infants and young children with
persistent asthma, day- and night-time symptom scores, and the number of days in 
which beta2-agonist bronchodilators were required, were significantly lower
during randomised, double-blind treatment with budesonide inhalation suspension
0.5 to 2 mg/day than placebo in 3 multicentre trials. Significantly fewer
children discontinued therapy with budesonide inhalation suspension than with
placebo because of worsening asthma symptoms in a study that included children
who were receiving inhaled corticosteroids at baseline. Recent evidence indicates
that budesonide inhalation suspension is significantly more effective than
nebulised sodium cromoglycate in improving control of asthma in young children
with persistent asthma. At a dosage of 2 mg/day, budesonide inhalation suspension
significantly reduced the number of asthma exacerbations and requirements for
systemic corticosteroids in preschool children with severe persistent asthma. In 
children with acute asthma or wheezing, the preparation was as effective as, or
more effective than oral prednisolone in improving symptoms. In children with
croup, single 2 or 4mg dosages of budesonide inhalation suspension were
significantly more effective than placebo and as effective as oral dexamethasone 
0.6 mg/kg or nebulised L-epinephrine (adrenaline) 4mg in alleviating croup
symptoms and preventing or reducing the duration of hospitalisation. Early
initiation of therapy with budesonide inhalation suspension 1 mg/day appears to
reduce the need for mechanical ventilation and decrease overall corticosteroid
usage in preterm very low birthweight infants at risk for chronic lung disease.
In adults with persistent asthma, budesonide inhalation suspension < or =8 mg/day
has been compared with inhaled budesonide 1.6 mg/day and fluticasone propionate 2
mg/day administered by metered dose inhaler. Greater improvements in asthma
control occurred in patients during treatment with budesonide inhalation
suspension than with budesonide via metered dose inhaler, whereas fluticasone
propionate produced greater increases in morning peak expiratory flow rates than 
nebulised budesonide. Several small studies suggest that the preparation has an
oral corticosteroid-sparing effect in adults with persistent asthma and that it
may be as effective as oral corticosteroids during acute exacerbations of asthma 
or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. The frequency of adverse events was
similar in children receiving budesonide inhalation suspension 0.25 to 2 mg/day
or placebo in 12-week studies. During treatment with budesonide inhalation
suspension 0.5 to 1 mg/day in 3 nonblind 52-week studies, growth velocity in
children was generally unaffected; however, a small but statistically significant
decrease in growth velocity was detected in children who were not using inhaled
corticosteroids prior to the introduction of budesonide inhalation suspension.
Hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis function was not affected by short (12 weeks)
or long (52 weeks) term treatment with nebulised budesonide. In conclusion,
budesonide inhalation suspension is the most widely available nebulised
corticosteroid, and in the US is the only inhaled corticosteroid indicated in
children aged > or =1 year with persistent asthma. The preparation is suitable
for use in infants, children and adults with persistent asthma and in infants and
children with croup.


PMID: 11129126  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2000 Dec;106(6):1053-62.

Effects of topical glucocorticoids on in vitro lactoferrin glandular secretion:
comparison between human upper and lower airways.

Roca-Ferrer J(1), Mullol J, Pérez M, Xaubet A, Molins L, de Haro J, Shelhamer J, 
Picado C.

Author information: 
(1)Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS), Barcelona,
Spain.

BACKGROUND: Mucus hypersecretion is a hallmark of upper and lower airway
diseases, such as rhinitis, asthma, and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
Although topical glucocorticoids are widely used to treat mucosal inflammation,
their effect on mucus hypersecretion remains uncertain.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to investigate the effect of budesonide and 
beclomethasone dipropionate on in vitro lactoferrin glandular secretion from both
human nasal and bronchial mucosa and the potential mediating role of lipocortin
1.
METHODS: Nasal and bronchial explants obtained from patients undergoing surgery
were cultured in a controlled atmosphere. Lactoferrin (ELISA) was measured in
culture supernatants, and lipocortin 1 (Western blot) was analyzed in explant
tissues.
RESULTS: Both budesonide and beclomethasone dipropionate (10(-6) mol/L) decreased
spontaneous lactoferrin secretion in nasal and bronchial mucosa. The maximum
effect of cortico-steroids (10(-6) mol/L) was obtained at day 3 in bronchial
mucosa (budesonide: -56% +/- 9%, P <.05; beclomethasone dipropionate: -32% +/-
6%, P <.05) and at day 5 in nasal mucosa (budesonide: -34% +/- 10%, P <.05;
beclomethasone dipropionate: -37% +/- 10%, P <.05). Methacholine (10(-4) mol/L)
increased lactoferrin secretion in both bronchial (248% +/- 72%, P <.05) and
nasal (107% +/- 28%, P <.05) explants, with this effect being completely
abrogated by atropine. Budesonide caused a dose-related inhibitory effect on
methacholine-induced lactoferrin secretion that was similar in both bronchial
(down to -86% at 10(-6) mol/L) and nasal (down to -73% at 10(-6) mol/L) mucosa.
Budesonide (10(-6) mol/L) did not show any effect on lipocortin 1 expression.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that glucocorticoid effects on airway
inflammation may include a reduction of mucus hypersecretion in both nasal and
bronchial mucosa.


PMID: 11112886  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Ugeskr Laeger. 2000 Jan 24;162(4):493-7.

[Long-term effect of inhaled budesonide in patients with mild to moderate chronic
obstructive lung disease. The Osterbro Study].

[Article in Danish]

Vestbo J(1), Sørensen T, Lange P, Brix A, Torre P, Viskum K.

Author information: 
(1)Lungemedicinsk Klinik, H:S Hvidovre Hospital.

We compared the effect of inhaled budesonide with placebo on decline in lung
function and respiratory symptoms in a three-year study of patients with chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). We used a parallel-group, randomized,
double-blind, placebo-controlled design, nested in an ongoing epidemiological
survey. Patients were non-asthmatic subjects with a decreased ratio between
forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV1) and vital capacity (VC); i.e.,
FEV1/VC < or = 0.7. All included patients had an FEV1 which was irreversible to
both inhaled terbutaline and prednisolone. Two hundred and ninety patients were
randomized to receive either budesonide, 1200 mcg. daily for six months followed 
by 800 mcg. daily for 30 months, or placebo for 36 months. Patients had a mean
age of 59 years and their mean FEV1 was 2.37 liters or 86% of predicted. Crude
FEV1 declines were 41.8 ml/year in the placebo group and 45.1 ml/year in the
budesonide group. Using a regression model in the intention-to-treat population, 
patients in the placebo group had an FEV1 decline of 49.1 ml/year in contrast to 
46.0 ml/year in the budesonide group; the estimated difference 3.1 ml/year (95%
confidence interval--12.8-19.0) was statistically insignificant, p = 0.70. No
effect of inhaled budesonide was seen on respiratory symptoms or number of
exacerbations. These findings question the role of longterm inhaled
corticosteroids in the treatment of mild-moderate COPD.


PMID: 10697447  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Respir Med. 1999 Oct;93(10):715-8.

Steroid reversibility test followed by inhaled budesonide or placebo in
outpatients with stable chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. The Danish Society
of Respiratory Medicine.

Senderovitz T(1), Vestbo J, Frandsen J, Maltbaek N, Nørgaard M, Nielsen C,
Kampmann JP.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Pharmacology Unit, Bispebjerg University Hospital, Copenhagen,
Denmark.

The aim of this study was evaluate the predictive value of a 2 week course of
prednisolone on the effect of 6 months treatment with inhaled budesonide in
patients with stable chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Forty patients
with stable COPD entered the study, and received prednisolone (37.5 mg o.d.) for 
2 weeks. They were subsequently divided into steroid-irreversible and
steroid-irreversible, using 15% of baseline as a dividing point. In each group
patients were randomized to receive budesonide 400 micrograms b.i.d. or placebo
for 6 months. During treatment with prednisolone, three patients dropped out
because of side effects. Of the remaining 37, only two patients (5%) were
reversible with prednisolone forced expiratory volume in 1s [(FEV1) > 15% of
baseline], and among the steroid-irreversible, 26 patients were evaluated after 6
months treatment with either placebo or budesonide. No significant differences in
spirometry values, symptoms, or number of exacerbations were found between these 
two groups. Reversibility with prednisolone is rarely seen in COPD. In
outpatients with stable COPD and no signs of asthma or atopy, 2 weeks treatment
with prednisolone seems to be of no value in choosing subsequent long-term
therapy.


PMID: 10581660  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. N Engl J Med. 1999 Jun 24;340(25):1948-53.

Long-term treatment with inhaled budesonide in persons with mild chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease who continue smoking. European Respiratory Society 
Study on Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease.

Pauwels RA(1), Löfdahl CG, Laitinen LA, Schouten JP, Postma DS, Pride NB, Ohlsson
SV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Diseases, University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium.
romain.pauwels@rug.ac.be

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 1999 Jun 24;340(25):1990-1.

BACKGROUND: Although patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)
should stop smoking, some do not. In a double-blind, placebo-controlled study, we
evaluated the effect of the inhaled glucocorticoid budesonide in patients with
mild COPD who continued smoking. After a six-month run-in period, we randomly
assigned 1277 subjects (mean age, 52 years; mean forced expiratory volume in one 
second [FEV1], 77 percent of the predicted value; 73 percent men) to twice-daily 
treatment with 400 microg of budesonide or placebo, inhaled from a dry-powder
inhaler, for three years.
RESULTS: Of the 1277 subjects, 912 (71 percent) completed the study. Among these 
subjects, the median decline in the FEV1 after the use of a bronchodilator over
the three-year period was 140 ml in the budesonide group and 180 ml in the
placebo group (P=0.05), or 4.3 percent and 5.3 percent of the predicted value,
respectively. During the first six months of the study, the FEV1 improved at the 
rate of 17 ml per year in the budesonide group, as compared with a decline of 81 
ml per year in the placebo group (P<0.001). From nine months to the end of
treatment, the FEV1 declined at similar rates in the two groups (P=0.39). Ten
percent of the subjects in the budesonide group and 4 percent of those in the
placebo group had skin bruising (P<0.001). Newly diagnosed hypertension, bone
fractures, postcapsular cataracts, myopathy, and diabetes occurred in less than 5
percent of the subjects, and the diagnoses were equally distributed between the
groups.
CONCLUSIONS: In patients with mild COPD who continue smoking, the use of inhaled 
budesonide is associated with a small one-time improvement in lung function but
does not appreciably affect the long-term progressive decline.

DOI: 10.1056/NEJM199906243402503 
PMID: 10379018  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Lancet. 1999 May 29;353(9167):1819-23.

Long-term effect of inhaled budesonide in mild and moderate chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease: a randomised controlled trial.

Vestbo J(1), Sørensen T, Lange P, Brix A, Torre P, Viskum K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Hvidovre Hospital, Denmark.
jvestbo@inet.uni2.dk

BACKGROUND: Little is known about the long-term efficacy of inhaled
corticosteroids in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). We investigated 
the efficacy of inhaled budesonide on decline in lung function and respiratory
symptoms in a 3-year placebo-controlled study of patients with COPD.
METHODS: We used a parallel-group, randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled
design in a singlecentre study, nested in a continuing epidemiological survey
(the Copenhagen City Heart Study). Inclusion criteria were as follows: no asthma;
a ratio of forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1) and vital capacity of 0.7 or
less; FEV1 which showed no response (<15% change) to 1 mg inhaled terbutaline or 
prednisolone 37.5 mg orally once daily for 10 days. 290 patients were randomly
assigned budesonide, 800 microg plus 400 microg daily for 6 months followed by
400 microg twice daily for 30 months, or placebo for 36 months. The mean age of
the participants was 59 years and the mean FEV1 2.37 L or 86% of predicted. The
main outcome measure was rate of FEV1 decline. Analyses were by intention to
treat.
FINDINGS: The crude rates of FEV1 decline were slightly smaller than expected
(placebo group 41.8 mL per year, budesonide group 45.1 mL per year). The
estimated rates of decline from the regression model did not differ significantly
(49.1 mL vs 46.0 mL per year; difference 3.1 mL per year [95% CI -12.8 to 19.0]; 
p=0.7). Before the study, the minimum relevant difference was defined as 20 mL
per year; this difference was outside the 95% CI. No effect of inhaled budesonide
was seen on respiratory symptoms. 316 exacerbations occurred during the study
period, 155 in the budesonide group and 161 in the placebo group. Treatment was
well tolerated.
INTERPRETATION: Inhaled budesonide was of no clinical benefit in COPD patients
recruited from the general population by screening. We question the role of
long-term inhaled corticosteroids in the treatment of mild to moderate COPD.


PMID: 10359405  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Thorax. 1999 Jan;54(1):7-14.

Long term effects of inhaled corticosteroids in chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease: a meta-analysis.

van Grunsven PM(1), van Schayck CP, Derenne JP, Kerstjens HA, Renkema TE, Postma 
DS, Similowski T, Akkermans RP, Pasker-de Jong PC, Dekhuijzen PN, van Herwaarden 
CL, van Weel C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Practice and Social Medicine, University of Nijmegen,
The Netherlands.

Comment in
    Thorax. 1999 Jan;54(1):3-4.
    Thorax. 1999 Jul;54(7):655-6.

BACKGROUND: The role of inhaled corticosteroids in the long term management of
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is still unclear. A meta-analysis of
the original data sets of the randomised controlled trials published thus far was
therefore performed. The main question was: "Are inhaled corticosteroids able to 
slow down the decline in lung function (FEV1) in COPD?"
METHODS: A Medline search of papers published between 1983 and 1996 was performed
and three studies were selected, two of which were published in full and one in
abstract form. Patients with "asthmatic features" were excluded from the original
data. Ninety five of the original 140 patients treated with inhaled
corticosteroids (81 with 1500 micrograms beclomethasone daily, six with 1600
micrograms budesonide daily, and eight with 800 micrograms beclomethasone daily) 
and 88 patients treated with placebo (of the initial 144 patients) were included 
in the analysis. The effect on FEV1 was assessed by a multiple repeated
measurement technique in which points of time in the study and treatment effects 
(inhaled corticosteroids compared with placebo) were investigated.
RESULTS: No baseline differences were observed (mean age 61 years, mean FEV1 45% 
predicted). The estimated two year difference in prebronchodilator FEV1 was
+0.034 l/year (95% confidence interval (CI) 0.005 to 0.063) in the inhaled
corticosteroid group compared with placebo. The postbronchodilator FEV1 showed a 
difference of +0.039 l/year (95% CI -0.006 to 0.084). No beneficial effect was
observed on the exacerbation rate. Worsening of the disease was the reason for
drop out in four patients in the treatment group compared with nine in the
placebo group. In the treatment group six of the 95 subjects dropped out because 
of an adverse effect which may have been related to the treatment compared with
two of the 88 patients in the placebo group.
CONCLUSIONS: This meta-analysis in patients with clearly defined moderately
severe COPD showed a beneficial course of FEV1 during two years of treatment with
relatively high daily dosages of inhaled corticosteroids.


PMCID: PMC1745350
PMID: 10343624  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. J Intern Med. 1999 Jan;245(1):83-9.

The response to inhaled and oral steroids in patients with stable chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease.

Weiner P(1), Weiner M, Rabner M, Waizman J, Magadle R, Zamir D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine A, Hillel-Yaffe Medical Center, Hadera, Israel.

Comment in
    J Intern Med. 1999 Oct;246(4):422.

BACKGROUND: A significant minority of patients with COPD have favourable response
to corticosteroid treatment. In addition, the benefit of corticosteroid treatment
may be outweighed by the side-effects. Long-term administration of inhaled
steroids is a safe means of treatment. However, only a few studies have addressed
the role of inhaled steroids in patients with COPD, with conflicting results.
METHODS: Forty-four patients with stable COPD were defined as 'responders to
bronchodilators' (increase in FEV1 > or = 20% following administration of beta
2-agonist) (group A), and 124 as 'non-responders to bronchodilators' (group B).
All patients were randomized to receive a 6-week course of either a daily dose of
800 micrograms of inhaled budesonide or placebo, separated by 4 weeks when no
medication was taken; were randomized again to receive a 6-week course of either 
1600 micrograms day-1 of inhaled budesonide, or 800 micrograms day-1 of inhaled
budesonide plus placebo; and were randomized once again to receive a 6-week
course of either 40 mg day-1 of prednisone or placebo. All stages were performed 
in a double-blind cross-over design.
RESULTS: Following administration of 800 micrograms day-1 of inhaled budesonide, 
there was an increase in the mean FEV1 from 1.40 +/- 0.20 to 1.92 +/- 0.22 L (P <
0.001) and a significant decrease in inhaled beta 2 agonist consumption in group 
A. These changes remained almost stable during the increased dose of inhaled
budesonide or during prednisone treatment. The mean FEV1 did not change during
the placebo period, or in group B in either treatments.
CONCLUSIONS: Treatment with inhaled steroids improved spirometry data and inhaled
beta 2-agonist consumption in about one-quarter of patients with stable COPD, and
this rate increased to about three-quarters in patients who responded to beta
2-agonist inhalation. There was no additional benefit in using a higher dose of
inhaled budesonide or prednisone.


PMID: 10095821  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Clin Exp Allergy. 1998 Oct;28(10):1210-8.

The importance of serum IgE for level and longitudinal change in airways
hyperresponsiveness in COPD.

Renkema TE(1), Kerstjens HA, Schouten JP, Vonk JM, Koëter GH, Postma DS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonology, University of Groningen, The Netherlands.

Comment in
    Clin Exp Allergy. 1998 Oct;28(10):1174-7.

BACKGROUND: Airways hyperresponsiveness (AHR) is an important feature of patients
with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Little is known about factors 
that modulate AHR in COPD.
OBJECTIVE: To study these factors, we performed a long-term, double-blind,
parallel intervention study in 58 male, non-allergic patients with COPD.
METHODS: During a period of 2 years, patients were treated with inhaled
budesonide (1600 microg/day), inhaled budesonide (1600 microg/day) plus oral
prednisolone (5 mg/day), or placebo. PC20 histamine was measured at 4-monthly
intervals. The influence of treatment, smoking, age, level of lung function,
initial serum IgE level and peripheral blood eosinophils on level and
longitudinal change of PC20 histamine was analysed.
RESULTS: During follow-up, PC20 decreased in our group, and this decrease was not
influenced by treatment. PC20 tended to decrease faster in current smokers than
in ex-smokers. PC20 was significantly associated with pre-challenge FEV1 at each 
time point. Level nor decline of PC20 were significantly related to age. A higher
initial serum IgE level was independently associated with a lower PC20. Moreover,
a higher initial serum IgE level was associated with a slower annual decline of
PC20, regardless of treatment, pre-challenge FEV1, and other modulating factors. 
No significant associations were found between initial blood eosinophils and
level or decline of PC20.
CONCLUSION: We conclude that AHR increases over time in non-allergic patients
with COPD. Treatment with an inhaled corticosteroid alone or in combination with 
oral prednisolone does not change this increase. Our study suggests an important 
role for IgE in the course of the disease, since a higher initial serum IgE level
predicts a more favourable course with regard to annual decline of PC20
histamine.


PMID: 9824387  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Thorax. 1998 Jun;53(6):477-82.

Randomised controlled trial of inhaled corticosteroids in patients with chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease.

Bourbeau J(1), Rouleau MY, Boucher S.

Author information: 
(1)McGill University Health Centre, McGill University, Montreal, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Inhaled corticosteroids are known to be beneficial for patients with 
asthma, but their role in treating patients with stable chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD) remains controversial. A study was undertaken to
determine whether inhaled corticosteroids are of functional benefit in patients
who did not show improvement with a trial of oral corticosteroids.
METHODS: In phase I patients with stable COPD were given a two week course of
oral placebo followed by two weeks of prednisone 40 mg per day in a single blind 
manner to distinguish between responders and non-responders to oral
corticosteroids. In phase II a double blind, randomised, parallel group trial of 
inhaled budesonide 1600 micrograms per day versus placebo was carried out in 79
nonresponders to oral corticosteroids. The primary outcome measure was forced
expiratory volume in one second (FEV1), and secondary outcome measures were
exercise capacity, dyspnoea with exertion, quality of life, peak expiration flow 
rate, and respiratory symptoms.
RESULTS: Randomisation allocated 39 subjects to inhaled corticosteroids and 40 to
placebo. There was no difference in the change in FEV1 from baseline between the 
treatment and placebo groups; mean difference -12 ml (95% CI -88 to 63) at three 
months and -4 ml (95% CI -95 to 87) at six months. The proportion of patients
with a 15% or greater improvement was no higher among those receiving inhaled
corticosteroids than in the placebo group at any of the follow up visits. Changes
in secondary outcomes were also no different.
CONCLUSIONS: Inhaled corticosteroids, even at high doses, were of no
physiological or functional benefit in these patients with advanced COPD.


PMCID: PMC1745246
PMID: 9713447  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 1998 Mar;157(3 Pt 1):880-6.

Short-term treatment with budesonide does not improve hyperresponsiveness to
adenosine 5'-monophosphate in COPD.

Rutgers SR(1), Koëter GH, van der Mark TW, Postma DS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonology, University Hospital Groningen, The Netherlands.

The role of inhaled corticosteroids in the treatment of chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD) is unclear. We investigated the effects of budesonide on
airway hyperresponsiveness (AHR) to methacholine (MCh) and adenosine
5'-monophosphate (AMP), to which we hypothesized the existence of greater
sensitivity. Additionally, we studied the effects of budesonide on terfenadine
and ipratropium bromide and on serum levels of interleukin-8 (IL-8) and
histamine. Forty-four hyperresponsive smokers with moderate to severe COPD
participated in the study. MCh and AMP challenges were given on three study days,
after pretreatment with single doses of ipratropium bromide, terfenadine, or
placebo. Thereafter, subjects were randomized to 6 wk treatment with either 1,600
microg budesonide or placebo, and the same three study days were repeated.
Budesonide, as compared with placebo, did not significantly change PC20AMP,
PC20MCh, or FEV1 after placebo pretreatment. Budesonide increased PC20MCh after
ipratropium bromide pretreatment, from 5.05 to 10.20 mg/ml (p = 0.036).
Budesonide decreased serum IL-8 from 9.2 +/- 3.7 to 6.2 +/- 2.1 pg/ml (p <
0.001). We conclude that AMP did not elicit greater sensitivity than MCh in
assessing short-term effects of budesonide on AHR in smokers with COPD. We
suggest that long-term treatment with inhaled corticosteroids might be
beneficial, by reducing neutrophil load in the airways and improving the action
of anticholinergic drugs.

DOI: 10.1164/ajrccm.157.3.9709100 
PMID: 9517606  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Neth J Med. 1997 Jun;50(6):233-7.

The effects of inhaled glucocorticoids on bone mass and biochemical markers of
bone homeostasis: a 1-year study of beclomethasone versus budesonide.

Struijs A(1), Mulder H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, St. Clara Hospital, Rotterdam, Netherlands.

Comment in
    Neth J Med. 1998 Jan;52(1):48-9.

Bone mass and biochemical bone markers were prospectively studied in 33 patients 
with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease treated for 1 year with inhaled
beclomethasone 200 micrograms/q.i.d. (group A, 8 men and 4 women), inhaled
budesonide 200 micrograms/q.i.d. (group B, 6 men and 5 women), or not requiring
steroids (group C, 6 men and 4 women). Both inhaled corticosteroids decreased
serum concentrations of the osteoblastic markers, osteocalcin and
carboxy-terminal propeptide of type I collagen (PICP). The osteoclastic marker
cross-linked carboxy-terminal telopeptide of type I collagen (ICTP) increased
significantly more in patients on beclomethasone than in those on budesonide. The
decrease in bone mineral density was more pronounced in patients treated with
beclomethasone (1.1% in the spine 1.7% in the hip P < 0.05) compared to those
treated with budesonide (0.6% in both spine and hip) or in the control group.
Inhaled corticosteroids affect biochemical bone markers and bone mineral density,
but there is a different effect for the two corticosteroids evaluated in the
present study.


PMID: 9232087  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Harefuah. 1997 Jun 1;132(11):756-9, 823.

[Inhaled budesonide for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease].

[Article in Hebrew]

Weiner P(1), Zamir D, Beckerman M.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Dept A, Hillel Yaffe Medical Center, Hadera.

A significant, large minority of patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD) respond favorably to corticosteroid treatment; but the benefit may
be outweighed by its side effects. Long-term administration of inhaled steroids
is a safe means of treatment. We hypothesized that treatment with inhaled
budesonide would improve clinical symptoms and pulmonary function in subjects
with COPD, and that the response to an inhaled B2-agonist would individualize
steroid responders. In 44 patients with stable COPD in a double- blind crossover 
trial, we compared a 6-week course of inhalations of 800 micrograms/d budesonide 
with a placebo, separated by a 4-week interval when no medication was taken. In
33 out of 42 responders to the B2-agonist who remained in the study, there was a 
significant improvement in FEV1 of greater than 20% following budesonide
inhalation, as compared to placebo. There was also a significant difference
between the 2 periods of treatment as to the mean number of B2-agonist
inhalations. We conclude that about 1/4 of patients with stable COPD respond to
bronchodilators, and treatment with inhaled steroids improves spirometry data and
inhaled B2-agonist consumption in about 3/4.


PMID: 9223815  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Respir Med. 1997 May;91(5):275-9.

The effect of inhaled glucocorticosteroids in emphysema due to alpha1-antitrypsin
deficiency.

Wilcke JT(1), Dirksen A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonary Medicine P, Bispebjerg Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark.

Despite the success of inhaled steroids in controlling asthma, the benefit in
patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) remains controversial.
Five subjects with moderate to severe emphysema due to alpha 1-antitrypsin
deficiency (phenotype PiZ) were followed with daily home spirometry in a 2 x 8
weeks, randomized double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover study of inhaled
budesonide 0.8 mg b.i.d. In three of the five patients, there was a statistically
significant increase in the mean forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1), and in
two of these patients, there was also a statistically significant increase in the
mean forced vital capacity (FVC) during budesonide treatment. A significant
diurnal variation in FEV1 and FVC was found in three and two patients,
respectively, but did not change significantly during treatment. These findings
emphasize the need for renewed evaluation of inhaled steroids in the treatment of
patients with emphysema, and indicate that individual patients may have
significant clinical improvement.


PMID: 9176645  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 1997 Feb;155(2):542-8.

Effects of inhaled and oral glucocorticoids on inflammatory indices in asthma and
COPD.

Keatings VM(1), Jatakanon A, Worsdell YM, Barnes PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Medicine, National Heart and Lung Institute, London,
United Kingdom.

The role of glucocorticoids in the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD) is controversial. We have previously described high numbers of
neutrophils and high concentrations of the inflammatory cytokines interleukin-8
(IL-8) and tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha), and of the cell activation
markers eosinophil cationic protein (ECP), eosinophil peroxidase (EPO),
myeloperoxidase (MPO), and human neutrophil lipocalin (HNL) in COPD patients as
compared with controls, and have postulated that the cytokines TNF-alpha and IL-8
play a role in propagating the inflammatory response in COPD. We have now studied
the effects of inhaled and oral glucocorticoids on these inflammatory indices in 
induced sputum. Initially, we studied the effect of a 2-wk course of inhaled
budesonide (800 mg twice daily for 2 wk) in 13 patients with severe COPD (mean
FDV1: 35% predicted). There was no clinical benefit in either lung function or
symptom scores, and no significant change in the inflammatory indices as measured
by total and differential cell counts and concentrations of TNF-alpha eosinophil 
activation markers ECP and EPO, and neutrophil activation markers MPO and HNL.
Because the lack of anti-inflammatory effect might have been due to poor drug
delivery as a result of severe airflow limitation, we undertook a study examining
the antiinflammatory effect of oral prednisolone (30 mg daily for 2 wk) in
patients with COPD and undertook the same measurements in 10 patients with atopic
asthma. Sputum eosinophil numbers, ECP, and EPO were significantly reduced in the
asthmatic patients but were not modified in COPD. This confirms the clinical
impression that inhaled steroids have little antiinflammatory effect, at least in
the short term in this group of patients, and suggests that the inflammatory
process in COPD is resistant to the antiinflammatory effect of glucocorticoids.

DOI: 10.1164/ajrccm.155.2.9032192 
PMID: 9032192  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Ned Tijdschr Geneeskd. 1996 Jan 13;140(2):94-8.

[Opportunistic lung infections in patients with chronic obstructive lung disease;
a side effect of inhalation corticosteroids?].

[Article in Dutch]

Smeenk FW(1), Klinkhamer PJ, Breed W, Jansz AR, Jansveld CA.

Author information: 
(1)Afd. Longziekten, Catharina Ziekenhuis, Eindhoven.

Comment in
    Ned Tijdschr Geneeskd. 1996 Mar 2;140(9):511-2.
    Ned Tijdschr Geneeskd. 1996 May 11;140(19):1041.

In four patients, men of 64, 66 and 69 years old and a woman of 65 years, who
suffered from chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and used inhalation
corticosteroids in a relatively high dose (800-1600 micrograms of budesonide per 
day), a pulmonary infection was diagnosed caused by Mycobacterium malmoense (the 
first two patients) and Aspergillus (the other two) respectively. Inhalation
corticosteroids are of great importance in the treatment of asthmatic patients.
Their place in the treatment of patients with COPD is much less clear. The
patients did not have an immunological deficiency or anatomical pulmonary or
bronchial deformation which could have explained the occurrence of these
infections. The high dosages of inhalation corticosteroids may have been involved
in the cause of these infections by suppressing the T-cell response locally. In
view of this, longterm inhalation corticosteroid treatment should be prescribed
in COPD patients only if the efficacy of the medication has been proved in the
individual patient involved.


PMID: 8569928  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Eur Respir J. 1992 Nov;5(10):1254-61.

European Respiratory Society study on chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(EUROSCOP): hypothesis and design.

Pauwels RA(1), Löfdahl CG, Pride NB, Postma DS, Laitinen LA, Ohlsson SV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Diseases, University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium.

Comment in
    Eur Respir J. 1992 Nov;5(10):1169-70.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a common disease in
industrialised countries and responsible for a considerable morbidity and
mortality. Cigarette smoking is the most important aetiological factor. The
EUROSCOP trial aims at investigating the hypothesis that airway inflammation
plays an important pathogenic role in the development of chronic obstructive
airway disease in smokers. In cigarette smokers with poorly reversible airflow
obstruction, the effect over 3 yrs of an inhaled glucocorticosteroid, budesonide 
400 micrograms b.i.d., on the decline of lung function, measured as
postbronchodilator forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV1), will be
compared with that of placebo. The trial has been designed to detect a difference
in yearly decline of at least 30 ml.year-1. The study is a parallel group,
randomised, double-blind, multicentre study. Patients will be recruited from 47
centres in 12 countries in Europe. It will start with a run-in consisting of two 
3 month periods. During the first 3 months, the patients will be offered a
smoking cessation programme. All patients who have not stopped smoking during
this period will enter the second half of the run-in where compliance with the
dosage regimen will be tested. After these two periods, patients will be
randomised to receive either inhaled budesonide, 400 micrograms b.i.d., or
placebo for a period of 3 yrs.


PMID: 1486974  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Agents Actions Suppl. 1988;23:239-60.

Developments in anti-asthma glucocorticoids.

Andersson PT(1), Persson CG.

Author information: 
(1)Pharmacological Laboratory, AB Draco, Lund, Sweden.

Studies carried out by Swedish and English workers in the mid 1950s appear to be 
the first successful uses of topical glucocorticoids in asthma. As shown with
beclomethasone dipropionate during the 1970s, and expanded with budesonide during
the 1980s, inhaled glucocorticoids have a very broad clinical efficacy and are
safe to use. With increasing lung selectivity glucocorticoid drugs may well
become a primary treatment for asthma. Even prolonged treatment with large doses 
of budesonide may not affect the contractile and relaxant characteristics of
airway smooth muscle suggesting that this tissue is not a direct target for
glucocorticoid actions. In IgE-sensitized guinea-pigs, as in atopic asthmatics,
inhalational budesonide and other glucocorticoids inhibit both immediate and late
phase pulmonary reactions occurring after allergen provocation. The
anti-anaphylactic lung effects of glucocorticoids are not necessarily associated 
with inhibition of histamine and leukotriene release and, although PAF release
was reduced by budesonide, the importance of this effect is as yet unknown.
Airway eosinophilia is seen at the late phase reaction but may not consistently
be reduced by glucocorticoids. These drugs reduce plasma leakage that is
associated with both atopic and non-atopic asthma. Hence, a stabilising effect on
airway endothelial-epithelial barriers may be one of the significant actions of
glucocorticoids in the inflamed airways of patients with asthma or chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease.


PMID: 3051934  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


1. J Korean Med Sci. 2015 Oct;30(10):1453-8. doi: 10.3346/jkms.2015.30.10.1453. Epub
2015 Sep 12.

Effect of Indacaterol on Cough and Phlegm in Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary
Disease Patients: A Meta-Analysis of Five Randomized Controlled Trials.

Park J(1), Lee JS(2), Rhee C(3), Oh YM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Critical Care, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University
School of Medicine, Seoul, Korea. (2)Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care
Medicine, Asan Medical Center, University of Ulsan College of Medicine, Seoul,
Korea. ; Clinical Research Center for Chronic Obstructive Airway Diseases, Asan
Medical Center, University of Ulsan College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul St. Mary's Hospital, College of
Medicine, The Catholic University of Korea, Seoul, Korea.

We investigated the effects of indacaterol on cough and phlegm in patients with
stable chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). We performed a meta-analysis
with five randomized controlled trials (RCTs) of indacaterol in stable COPD
patients. The symptom severity was defined using the St. George's Respiratory
Questionnaire (SGRQ). We analyzed patients treated with 150 µg (n = 945) and 300 
µg (n = 832) out of 3,325 patients who completed the SGRQ from five RCTs. After a
12-week treatment of 150 µg indacaterol, cough improvement was reported in 36.5% 
(316/866) of patients treated with indacaterol vs. 32.2% (259/804) patients
treated with placebo (Relative Ratio [RR], 1.13; 95% confidence interval [CI],
0.99-1.29). Phlegm improvement was reported in 31.0% (247/798) of patients
treated with indacaterol vs. 30.6% (225/736) of patients treated with placebo
(RR, 1.01; 95% CI, 0.87-1.18). Dyspnea improvement was reported in 39.5%
(324/820) of patients treated with indacaterol vs. 31.5% (237/753) patients
treated with placebo (RR, 1.33; 95% CI, 1.03-1.71; P = 0.001, I(2) = 55.1%). Only
dyspnea improvement was significant compared to placebo even at the 300 µg
indacaterol dose. Compared to placebo, a 12-week treatment of the long-acting
beta-agonist, indacaterol might not have a significant effect on cough or phlegm 
in stable COPD.

DOI: 10.3346/jkms.2015.30.10.1453 
PMCID: PMC4575934
PMID: 26425042  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. J Asthma. 2015 Apr;52(3):240-5. doi: 10.3109/02770903.2014.957766. Epub 2014 Sep 
10.

UGT1A1*28 is associated with greater decrease in serum K⁺ levels following oral
intake of procaterol.

Yokoe N(1), Yamaguchi E, Nishimura M, Tanaka H, Takahashi A, Baba K, Gosho M,
Okada S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Respiratory Medicine and Allergology, Department of Internal
Medicine, Aichi Medical University , Nagakute , Japan .

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Procaterol is a potent β2-agonist frequently used for
the management of asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. The efficacy 
and adverse effects of β2-agonists are heterogeneous in individual patients,
which may be partly caused by genetic variations in metabolizing enzymes and
receptor molecules. The present study was designed to analyze the relationship
between gene polymorphisms and physiological effects of procaterol in healthy
subjects.
METHODS: Ninety-two non-smoking healthy volunteers were given 1 µg/kg body weight
(max 50 µg) of procaterol as a dry syrup preparation, and the serum
concentrations of procaterol, serum K(+), and the physical responses were
monitored for 240 min. We genotyped β2-adrenergic receptor (ADRB2) (Arg16Gly and 
Gln27Glu), cytochrome P450 3A4 (rs2246709, rs4646437), and uridine diphosphate
glucuronosyltransferase 1A1 (UGT1A1) (rs4148323 [allele A, *6], rs12479045,
rs4148328, rs4663971, rs12052787, rs4148329, A (TA)6/7 TAA [seven-repeat allele, 
*28]). Procaterol concentrations in serum were measured by liquid
chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry.
RESULTS: No gene polymorphisms affected serum procaterol concentrations.
Meanwhile, overall serum K(+) level changes were significantly lower in carriers 
of UGT1A1*28 than in non-carriers after correcting for strong effects of serum
procaterol concentrations and baseline K(+) levels. No other polymorphisms were
associated with serum K(+) levels. None of polymorphisms of ADRB2 were associated
with any physical responses.
CONCLUSION: The present study indicates that significant hypokalemia may occur in
carriers of UGT1A1*28 by systemic administration of procaterol and potentially by
other β2-agonists metabolized in the liver.

DOI: 10.3109/02770903.2014.957766 
PMID: 25171434  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. J Pharmacol Sci. 2014;125(1):39-50. Epub 2014 Apr 16.

Procaterol but not dexamethasone protects 16HBE cells from H₂O₂-induced oxidative
stress.

Deng Z(1), Zhou JJ, Sun SY, Zhao X, Sun Y, Pu XP.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Natural and Biomimetic Drugs, School of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Peking University, China.

Oxidative stress is an important pathophysiological factor of asthma and chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). We hypothesized that procaterol and
dexamethasone might treat inflammation through inhibiting oxidative stress in
vitro. This study evaluated procaterol and dexamethasone in the hydrogen peroxide
(H2O2)-induced immortal human bronchial epithelial cell model of oxidative stress
and investigated the underlying mechanisms. Results showed that exposure to 125
μM H2O2 for 2 h led to a 50% reduction in the cell viability, significantly
increased the percentage of apoptosis, and elevated levels of malondialdehyde and
reactive oxygen species. Pretreatment with procaterol (25 - 200 nM) could reduce 
these effects in a dose-dependent manner. In contrast, pretreatment with
dexamethasone (100 nM, 1000 nM) was inefficient. Pretreatment with procaterol
plus dexamethasone (100 nM procaterol + 1000 nM dexamethasone) was effective, but
the combined effect was not more effective than the sole pretreatment with 100 nM
procaterol. The nuclear factor kappa-B (NF-κB) pathway was involved in the
pathogenic mechanisms of H2O2. Procaterol may indirectly inhibit H2O2-induced
activation of the NF-κB pathway due to its capability of antioxidation.
Glucocorticoids may be not recommended to treat asthma or COPD complicated with
severe oxidative stress.


PMID: 24739282  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Biol Pharm Bull. 2013;36(8):1348-55.

Treatment responses of procaterol and CD38 inhibitors in an ozone-induced airway 
hyperresponsiveness mice model.

Deng Z(1), Gao ZC, Ge HQ, Zhang LR, Zhou JJ, Zhu ZP, Wu DY, Sun SY, Chen L, Pu
XP.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Natural and Biomimetic Drugs, Peking University,
Beijing 100191, P. R. China.

Airway hyperresponsiveness (AHR) and airway inflammation are key
pathophysiological features of many respiratory diseases, such as asthma and
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). To evaluate the treatment responses
of procaterol and CD38 inhibitors in an ozone-induced AHR mice model, we
hypothesized that procaterol and two synthetic CD38 inhibitors (Compounds T and
H) might have therapeutic effects on the ozone-induced AHR mice model, and the
nuclear factor-kappaB (NF-κB) pathway and the CD38 enzymatic activity might be
involved in the mechanisms. With the exception of the Control group, ozone
exposure was used to establish an AHR model. Male Kunming mice in the Procaterol 
and CD38 inhibitors groups were treated with an emulsifier of procaterol
hydrochloride, Compound T or H. Results indicated that (1) no drug showed severe 
toxicity in this study; (2) ozone exposure induced airway inflammation and AHR;
(3) intragastric treatment with procaterol and Compound T achieved potent
therapeutic effects, but Compound H did not show any therapeutic effect; (4) the 
NF-κB pathway was involved in both the pathogenic mechanisms of ozone and
therapeutic mechanisms of procaterol and Compound T; (5) however, the in vivo
effect of Compound T was not caused by its inhibitory activity on CD38. Taken
together, procaterol and Compound T are potentially good drugs to treat asthma
and COPD complicated with ozone exposure.


PMID: 23902978  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Respiration. 2014;87(1):45-53. doi: 10.1159/000350228. Epub 2013 Jul 10.

Effects of bronchodilators on regional lung sound distribution in patients with
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Mineshita M(1), Matsuoka S, Miyazawa T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Respiratory and Infectious Diseases, Department of Internal
Medicine, St. Marianna University School of Medicine, Kawasaki, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Bronchodilators have been reported to influence regional lung
ventilation in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), which 
may change regional lung sound distribution. Vibration response imaging (VRI) is 
a lung imaging system for the assessment of breath sounds.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the effects of a short-acting β2-agonist (SABA) on the
regional distribution of lung sounds in COPD patients.
METHODS: A double-blind crossover trial was performed to compare the treatment of
COPD patients with an SABA (20 µg of inhaled procaterol) versus a placebo. The
percentage of regional lung sound energy [quantitative lung data (QLD)] was
evaluated with VRI. VRI, spirometry, and impulse oscillometry (IOS) were
performed immediately before and 30 min after SABA administration.
RESULTS: Ten male patients (69.6 ± 14.2 years of age, percentage predicted forced
expiratory volume in 1 s: 43.8 ± 16.9%) were evaluated. The use of an SABA
produced significant functional improvements in the spirometric and IOS
measurements. Among the homogeneous emphysema patients (n = 7), the upper-lung
QLD decreased (from 24.2 ± 5.8 to 18.8 ± 6.1%, p < 0.05) and the lower-lung QLD
increased (from 37.9 ± 12.7 to 46.1 ± 14.3%, p < 0.05) following SABA inhalation.
However, the significant redistribution of the regional lung QLD to the
lower-lung field was not observed in 2 of the 3 inhomogeneous emphysema patients.
CONCLUSION: The additional use of an SABA by COPD patients improved their
pulmonary function, which was accompanied by changes in regional lung air flow.
The distribution of emphysematous lesions and the bronchial reactivity to SABA
appeared to affect the redistribution of the lung sounds following bronchodilator
administration.

Copyright © 2013 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000350228 
PMID: 23860295  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Respir Investig. 2012 Dec;50(4):135-9. doi: 10.1016/j.resinv.2012.08.003. Epub
2012 Sep 13.

Influence of inhaled procaterol on pulmonary rehabilitation in chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease.

Hasegawa M(1), Dobashi K, Horie T, Wada N, Shirakura K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rehabilitation, Gunma University Hospital, Japan.
m.hasegawa@gunma-u.ac.jp

BACKGROUND: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a progressive
condition that classically causes dyspnea during physical activity. Destruction
of alveoli and bronchostenosis are thought to lead to shortness of breath and
result in decreased physical activity. In this study, we examined the influence
of inhaled procaterol on exercise therapy for pulmonary rehabilitation.
METHODS: Patients with moderate to severe stable COPD were randomly divided into 
2 groups those who inhaled procaterol before exercise (n=10) and those who did
not (control group) (n=11). For 12 weeks, all patients performed their pulmonary 
rehabilitation exercises at home. We measured the 6-minute walking distance
(6MWD) to assess exercise tolerance and used St. George's respiratory
questionnaire (SGRQ) to assess health-related quality of life (HRQOL) before and 
after the 12-week exercise program.
RESULTS: Compared to the control group, the group receiving inhaled procaterol
showed significant improvement of 6MWD and SGRQ scores.
CONCLUSION: Our data suggest that a pulmonary rehabilitation program combined
with inhaled procaterol can improve both HRQOL and exercise tolerance in COPD
patients.

Copyright © 2012 The Japanese Respiratory Society. Published by Elsevier B.V. All
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.resinv.2012.08.003 
PMID: 23199977  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Int J Gen Med. 2012;5:517-24. doi: 10.2147/IJGM.S20833. Epub 2012 Jun 15.

Pretreatment with inhaled procaterol improves symptoms of dyspnea and quality of 
life in patients with severe COPD.

Ohbayashi H(1), Adachi M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Allergy and Respiratory Medicine, Tohno-Kousei Hospital, Gifu.

BACKGROUND: The clinical efficacy of short-acting β(2)-agonists administered
before performing daily activities in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD) is unclear. The aim of this study was to investigate the clinical effect
of supplementary inhaled procaterol hydrochloride in patients with COPD.
METHODS: Thirty outpatients with moderate to severe COPD (Stage II-IV) regularly 
using inhaled tiotropium bromide alone and with dyspnea during daily activities
were enrolled. Subjects self-administered 20 μg of inhaled procaterol before
daily activities no more than four times daily. Dyspnea symptom scores, St
George's Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ) activity domains, impulse oscillometry 
system parameters, and pulmonary function tests were recorded at the beginning
and end of the 2-week study.
RESULTS: At baseline, more than 80% of subjects reported dyspnea when walking up 
a slope (100.0%), climbing stairs (100.0%), gardening (93.3%), walking on flat
ground (90.0%), bathing (86.7%), getting on a bus or train (83.3%), and changing 
clothes (80.0%). After 2 weeks, subjects with Stage III symptoms had
significantly improved dyspnea scores on walking up a slope (P = 0.047), climbing
stairs (P = 0.014), gardening (P = 0.034), walking on flat ground (P = 0.006),
getting on a bus or train (P = 0.039), and changing clothes (P = 0.045). Both
symptom and activity SGRQ domains improved significantly in subjects with Stage
III symptoms (P = 0.036 and P = 0.028, respectively). Resistance of small airways
and low-frequency reactance area values improved significantly in subjects with
Stage III symptoms (P = 0.003 and P = 0.004, respectively). No significant
changes were found in pulmonary function tests.
CONCLUSION: Use of supplementary inhaled procaterol before performing daily
activities improved dyspnea symptoms in subjects with Stage III COPD.

DOI: 10.2147/IJGM.S20833 
PMCID: PMC3396116
PMID: 22807639  [PubMed]


8. Arzneimittelforschung. 2011;61(1):8-13. doi: 10.1055/s-0031-1296162.

Inhibitory effect of procaterol on exercise dynamic lung hyperinflation during
the 6-min walk test in stable patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease.

Satake M(1), Takahashi H, Sugawara K, Kawagoshi A, Tamaki A, Homma M, Morita R,
Sato K, Sano M, Shioya T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physical Therapy, Akita University Graduate School of Health
Sciences, Akita, Japan.

The purpose of this study was to evaluate the inhibitory effect of procaterol
(procaterol hydrochloride, CAS 62929-91-3) on exercise dynamic lung
hyperinflation during the 6-min walk test (6MWT) in stable chronic obstructive
disease (COPD) patients. Fourteen patients with stable COPD who were referred to 
our clinic between July 2008 and October 2009 were evaluated in this study. After
the inhalation of procaterol, values for the lung function test, including vital 
capacity, inspiratory capacity, forced vital capacity, and FEV1/FEV1pred showed a
significant improvement. Compared to the baseline assessment, the 6-min walk
distance increased by a mean of 20.5 m when measured after inhalation of
procaterol (512.4 +/- 90.7 m vs. 532.9 +/- 79.8 m, p < 0.05). During the 6MWT,
inspiratory capacity decreased significantly with time. The inspiratory capacity 
after inhalation of procaterol was improved significantly compared with placebo. 
The Borg scale increased significantly during the 6MWT and was attenuated after
inhaling procaterol hydrochloride, though the difference between the two groups
was not statistically significant. In the present study, there was a significant 
attenuation in exercise dynamic lung hyperinflation, suggesting the important
role of the beta2-receptor agonist procaterol in the treatment of COPD. It is
therefore likely that most patients with COPD may derive considerable benefit
from bronchodilator therapy with procaterol.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0031-1296162 
PMID: 21355441  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Eur J Pharmacol. 2011 Jan 10;650(1):431-44. doi: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2010.09.056.
Epub 2010 Oct 15.

Procaterol inhibits rhinovirus infection in primary cultures of human tracheal
epithelial cells.

Yamaya M(1), Nishimura H, Hatachi Y, Yoshida M, Fujiwara H, Asada M, Nakayama K, 
Yasuda H, Deng X, Sasaki T, Kubo H, Nagatomi R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Advanced Preventive Medicine for Infectious Disease, Tohoku
University Graduate School of Medicine, Japan. myamaya@med.tohoku.ac.jp

β(2) agonists reduce the frequency of exacerbations in patients with bronchial
asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease caused by respiratory virus
infection. β(2) agonists reduce the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines.
However, the inhibitory effects of β(2) agonists on the infection of rhinovirus, 
the major cause of exacerbations, have not been well studied. To examine the
effects of a β(2) agonist, procaterol, on rhinovirus infection and rhinovirus
infection-induced airway inflammation, human tracheal epithelial cells were
infected with a major group rhinovirus, type 14 rhinovirus. Rhinovirus infection 
increased viral titers and the content of pro-inflammatory cytokines, including
interleukin-1β and interlukin-6, in supernatant fluids and rhinovirus RNA in the 
cells. Procaterol reduced rhinovirus titers and RNA, cytokine concentrations, and
susceptibility to rhinovirus infection. Procaterol reduced the expression of
intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1), the receptor for type 14 rhinovirus, 
and the number of acidic endosomes in the cells from which rhinovirus RNA enters 
into the cytoplasm. Procaterol inhibited the activation of nuclear factor kappa-B
(NF-κB) proteins including p50 and p65 in the nuclear extracts, while it
increased the cytosolic amount of the inhibitory kappa B-α and intracellular
cyclic AMP (cAMP) levels. A selective β(2)-adrenergic receptor antagonist ICI
118551 [erythro-dl-1-(7-methylindan-4-yloxy)-3-isopropylaminobutan-2-ol] reversed
the inhibitory effects of procaterol on rhinovirus titers and RNA, susceptibility
to rhinovirus infection, pro-inflammatory cytokines production, ICAM-1
expression, acidic endosomes, and NF-κB. ICI 118551 also reversed the effects of 
procaterol on cAMP levels. Procaterol may inhibit rhinovirus infection by
reducing ICAM-1 and acidic endosomes as well as modulate airway inflammation in
rhinovirus infection.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2010.09.056 
PMID: 20940011  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Nihon Kokyuki Gakkai Zasshi. 2009 Sep;47(9):772-80.

[Effect of proactive use of inhaled procaterol on dyspnea in daily activities and
quality of life in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease].

[Article in Japanese]

Satoh H(1), Iwashima A, Endo Y, Nakayama H, Hasegawa T, Suzuki E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Nagaoka Chuo General Hospital.

AIM: To examine the effects of inhaled procaterol (Meptin Air : MA), a
short-acting beta2-agonist, for proactive use rather than rescue use in dyspnea
and health-related quality of life in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD), who complained of dyspnea in daily activities despite treatment
with long-acting bronchodilators.
METHODS: Patients with moderate to most severe COPD who were on maintenance
therapy with tiotropium and other long-acting bronchodilators were studied.
Severity of dyspnea was evaluated with the Shortness of Breath Questionnaire
(SOBQ) and patients were recommended to use MA on an as-needed basis before daily
activities which had caused dyspnea. The effects of MA were evaluated with the
St. George's Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ) and MRC dyspnea scale. Baseline and
post-administrative lung functions and exercise capacity (6-minute walking test) 
were measured.
RESULTS: SOBQ revealed that all patients still had dyspnea in daily activities
despite maintenance therapy. Inhalation of MA to prevent dyspnea in daily
activities on an as-needed basis significantly improved QOL in SGRQ, lung
function and MRC scales. Six-minute walking distances showed a tendency to
improve.
CONCLUSION: Proactive use of MA as needed (assist use) improved QOL and
continuing dyspnea despite maintenance drugs. Assist use of MA before effort
improved exercise capacity, suggesting that it might improve the ability of
activity of daily living (ADL).


PMID: 19827580  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Inflammation. 2009 Dec;32(6):387-92. doi: 10.1007/s10753-009-9147-x.

Procaterol inhibits lung fibroblast migration.

Kohyama T(1), Yamauchi Y, Takizawa H, Itakura S, Kamitani S, Desaki M, Kawasaki
S, Nagase T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine, The
University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. koyama-tky@umin.ac.jp

Fibroblasts are important cells that are involved in modulation of fibrosis after
injuries. In some uncontrollable inflammatory processes, excess fibroblasts
migrate around the small airway. The pathogenesis of chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease is related to fibrosis around the small airways. The aim of the
current study was to investigate the effect of procaterol, a second-generation
beta (2)-agonist, on migration of human fetal lung fibroblasts (HFL-1) induced by
human plasma fibronectin (HFn). Using the blindwell chamber technique, 10(-8) M
procaterol inhibited migration of HFL-1 (control, 100%; 10(-8) M, 73.2 +/- 4.9%; 
n = 6, p < 0.05). The inhibitory effect of procaterol was
concentration-dependent. Although a beta 2-receptor inhibitor, ICI 181551,
blocked the inhibitory effect of procaterol, a beta 1-receptor inhibitor,
atenolol, did not. Because a cyclic AMP-dependent protein kinase (PKA) inhibitor,
KT5720, blocked the effect of procaterol, the cyclic AMP-PKA pathway may be
involved in the migration inhibitory process. Procaterol, which is prescribed
mainly for treatment of bronchial asthma, might be a useful drug for inhibiting
lung fibrosis following injuries to the lung.

DOI: 10.1007/s10753-009-9147-x 
PMID: 19728063  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Arzneimittelforschung. 2008;58(1):24-8. doi: 10.1055/s-0031-1296462.

Long-term effect of the beta2-receptor agonist procaterol on daily life
performance and exercise capacity in patients with stable chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease. Clinical study with special reference to health-related
quality of life and activities of daily living.

Shioya T(1), Satake M, Sato K, Sano MA, Sugawara K, Takahashi H, Honma M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physical Therapy, Akita University School of Health Sciences,
Akita, Japan. shioya@hos.akita-u.ac.jp

The present study was undertaken to evaluate the long-term effect of procaterol
hydrochloride (CAS 62929-91-3, Meptin), a third generation beta2-receptor agonist
on lung function, exercise capacity, health-related quality of life (HRQOL) and
activities of daily living (ALDs) in patients with stable chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD). Twenty patients were randomly assigned to the
procaterol group or to the control group, who received oxitropium bromide (CAS
30286-75-0), an anticholinergic agent. Procaterol was inhaled three times a day
at a dose of 20 pg, while oxitropium was inhaled three times a day at a dose of
200 microg. The subjects were evaluated based on spirometry, exercise capacity,
the Borg Scale, HRQOL, and ADLs before and after 12, 24 and 52 weeks of therapy. 
The values of forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1), forced vital capacity 
(FVC), total lung capacity (TLC), functional residual capacity (FRC), residual
volume (RV), maximal inspiratory pressure (PImax), and maximal expiratory
pressure (PEmax) were significantly improved at 12, 24 and 52 weeks compared with
baseline values in the procaterol group (p < 0.05, p < 0.01), while these values 
did not differ from baseline values at any point in the oxitropium group (p >
0.05). Additionally, 6-min walking distances and Borg Scale values showed
significant improvement at 12, 24 and 52 weeks compared with baseline values in
the procaterol group (p < 0.05, p < 0.01), but did not significantly differ from 
baseline values in the oxitropium group at any point (p > 0.05). Likewise, the
scores for dyspnea, fatigue, emotional function, mastery, total scores and ADLs
were significantly higher at 12, 24 and 52 weeks compared with the baseline
values in the procaterol group (p < 0.05, p < 0.01), but did not differ at any
point in the oxitropium group (p > 0.05). These results suggest the effectiveness
of long-term regular bronchodilator therapy with the beta2-receptor agonist
procaterol in patients with stable COPD.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0031-1296462 
PMID: 18368947  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Int J Clin Pharmacol Res. 1987;7(5):363-8.

Procaterol metered aerosol in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease.

Baronti A(1), Lelli M, Manini G, Verdiani P.

Author information: 
(1)Respiratory Physiopathology Department, General Hospital, Grosseto, Italy.

The activity and tolerability of procaterol, a recently introduced beta
2-adrenergic drug, were evaluated in comparison with fenoterol and a placebo in a
single blind, cross-over study, using a metered aerosol formulation. Twelve
patients suffering from chronic obstructive pulmonary disease with reversible
bronchial obstruction were enrolled. Before and 30, 120, 240, 360, 480 min after 
drug administration, forced vital capacity (FVC), forced expiratory volume at the
first second, forced expiratory flow at 25-75% and 75-85% respectively of the
FVC, thoracic gas volume and the specific airways conductance were calculated.
Procaterol 20 mcg showed a significant bronchodilating activity as well as
fenoterol 400 mcg. This activity was already significant within 30 min, achieved 
its maximum after two hours and lasted more than eight hours. Side-effects were
complained of by 41% of patients treated with procaterol and by 50% treated with 
fenoterol; procaterol showed less cardiovascular effects than fenoterol.


PMID: 2889678  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]

1. Respir Med Case Rep. 2016 May 12;19:135-136. eCollection 2016.

Shortness of breath: Patient history not always indicative of the cause.

Brar TS(1), Akhavan N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Florida, USA.

This is a 78 year old male with a past medical history of coronary artery disease
(CAD), chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), hypertension (HTN), and
gastroesophageal reflux disorder (GERD) who presented to the emergency room with 
worsening shortness of breath (SOB) and low-grade fevers for one week prior to
admission. He was originally diagnosed with healthcare associated pneumonia
(HCAP) and an acute on chronic COPD exacerbation and treated with prednisone,
inhalers, ipratropium/albuterol, and broad-spectrum antibiotics. His symptoms
were slow to respond to therapy and he continued to have end-expiratory wheezes
with persistent SOB. A CT of his chest was ordered to rule out a possible
pulmonary embolus (PE) and instead showed an obstructing mass in the bronchus.
Pulmonology was consulted and performed a bronchoscopy, which revealed a foreign 
body (bean) causing the obstruction, which was removed, and the patient's
symptoms improved shortly thereafter.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmcr.2016.04.003 
PMID: 27722084  [PubMed - in process]


2. J Asthma Allergy. 2016 Aug 26;9:145-54. doi: 10.2147/JAA.S111170. eCollection
2016.

Historical cohort study examining comparative effectiveness of albuterol inhalers
with and without integrated dose counter for patients with asthma or chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease.

Price DB(1), Rigazio A(2), Buatti Small M(3), Ferro TJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Academic Primary Care, Institute of Applied Health Sciences, University of
Aberdeen, Aberdeen, UK; Research in Real-Life Ltd, Cambridge, UK. (2)Research in 
Real-Life Ltd, Cambridge, UK. (3)Teva Pharmaceuticals, Frazer, PA, USA.

BACKGROUND: Using a metered-dose inhaler (MDI) beyond the labeled number of
actuations may result in inadequate dosing of medication, which can lead to poor 
clinical outcomes. This study compared respiratory-related emergency department
(ED) visit rates in patients with asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, 
or both when they used albuterol MDIs with versus without dose counters.
METHODS: This retrospective study used US claims data to identify patients (ages 
4-64 years) with asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, or both, using
albuterol MDIs with or without an integrated dose counter. The study comprised a 
1-year baseline period for patient characterization and confounder definition and
a 1-year outcome period following the first albuterol prescription. The primary
end point was the incidence rate of respiratory-related ED visits, compared using
a reduced zero-inflated Poisson regression model. We also compared severe
exacerbation rates and rescue medication use.
RESULTS: A total of 93,980 patients were studied, including 67,251 (72%) in the
dose counter cohort and 26,729 (28%) in the non-dose-counter cohort. The cohorts 
were broadly similar at baseline (55,069 [59%] female patients; median age, 37
years). The incidence rate of respiratory-related ED visits during the outcome
year was 45% lower in the dose counter cohort than in the non-dose-counter cohort
(adjusted rate ratio: 0.55; 95% confidence interval: 0.47-0.64). Exacerbation
rates and short-acting β-agonist use were similar between cohorts.
CONCLUSION: These findings suggest that dose counter integration into albuterol
MDIs is associated with decreased ED visit rates. The presence of integrated dose
counters on rescue inhalers can help patients avoid using an empty or near-empty 
inhaler during exacerbations, thereby ensuring available medication for relief of
their symptoms. Integrated dose counters on rescue MDIs could represent a simple 
and effective tool to improve clinical outcomes during exacerbations, with a
potential for cost savings to health care systems.

DOI: 10.2147/JAA.S111170 
PMCID: PMC5008637
PMID: 27616891  [PubMed]


3. Clin Drug Investig. 2016 Aug 18. [Epub ahead of print]

Umeclidinium Plus Vilanterol Versus Placebo, Umeclidinium, or Vilanterol
Monotherapies for Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease: A Meta-Analysis of
Randomized Controlled Trials.

Wang L(1), Zhai CJ(1), Liu Y(2), Liu Y(3), Jiang SJ(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Electrocardiogram, Shandong Provincial Hospital Affiliated to
Shandong University, No. 324 Jing Wu Road, Jinan, 250021, Shandong, China.
(2)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Shandong Provincial Hospital Affiliated to
Shandong University, No. 324 Jing Wu Road, Jinan, 250021, Shandong, China.
(3)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Shandong Provincial Hospital Affiliated to
Shandong University, No. 324 Jing Wu Road, Jinan, 250021, Shandong, China.
258553368@qq.com. (4)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Shandong Provincial
Hospital Affiliated to Shandong University, No. 324 Jing Wu Road, Jinan, 250021, 
Shandong, China. 179440573@qq.com.

BACKGROUND: The role of umeclidinium plus vilanterol as a combination therapy for
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) has not yet been clearly defined.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this meta-analysis was to evaluate the efficacy and safety 
of umeclidinium plus vilanterol, in contrast to either monotherapy or placebo.
METHODS: Systematic searches were conducted in Pubmed, Embase, Cochrane Central
Register of Controlled Trials (CENTRAL), and the Chinese Biomedical Literature
Database (CBM). Randomized clinical trials pertaining to the treatment of COPD
with the combination of umeclidinium and vilanterol, versus umeclidinium,
vilanterol or placebo, were reviewed. Studies were pooled to mean differences
(MDs), with 95 % confidence intervals (CIs).
RESULTS: Six studies were included in our meta-analysis. The application of
umeclidinium plus vilanterol compared with umeclidinium alone showed increases in
trough forced expiratory volume in 1 s [FEV1] (MD 0.05 L, 95 % CI 0.04-0.07;
p < 0.00001) and forced vital capacity [FVC] (MD 0.07 L, 95 % CI 0.04-0.10;
p < 0.00001). Similarly, versus vilanterol alone, the application of umeclidinium
plus vilanterol showed increases in trough FEV1 (MD 0.10, 95 % CI 0.08-0.12;
p < 0.00001) and FVC (MD 0.16 L, 95 % CI 0.13-0.20; p < 0.00001). Compared with
placebo, umeclidinium plus vilanterol also showed increases in trough FEV1 (MD
0.21 L, 95 % CI 0.19-0.22; p < 0.00001) and FVC (MD 0.31 L, 95 % CI 0.26-0.35;
p < 0.00001). In addition, umeclidinium plus vilanterol has beneficial effects on
dyspnea, albuterol use, and health-related quality of life compared with the
other three groups.
CONCLUSIONS: Compared with the other three groups, i.e. placebo, umeclidinium and
vilanterol, umeclidinium plus vilanterol improves lung function and quality of
life in patients with COPD, reduces the use of albuterol, and does not increase
the incidence of adverse events and serious adverse events.

DOI: 10.1007/s40261-016-0449-0 
PMID: 27539612  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


4. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2016 May 9;11:971-9. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S102962. 
eCollection 2016.

A randomized, parallel-group study to evaluate the efficacy of
umeclidinium/vilanterol 62.5/25 μg on health-related quality of life in patients 
with COPD.

Siler TM(1), Donald AC(2), O'Dell D(3), Church A(2), Fahy WA(4).

Author information: 
(1)Midwest Chest Consultants, PC, St Charles, MO, USA. (2)GSK, Research Triangle 
Park, NC, USA. (3)GSK, Research Triangle Park, NC, USA; Pearl Therapeutics, Inc.,
Durham, NC, USA. (4)GSK, Respiratory Medicines Development Centre, Stockley Park,
Middlesex, UK.

BACKGROUND: The combination of the inhaled muscarinic antagonist umeclidinium
(UMEC) with the long-acting β2-agonist vilanterol (VI) has been shown to provide 
significant improvements in lung function compared with UMEC, VI, or placebo
(PBO) in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). This study
was specifically designed to support these findings by assessing health-related
quality of life and symptomatic outcomes in a similar population.
METHODS: This was a 12-week multicenter, randomized, double-blind,
parallel-group, placebo-controlled study. Eligible patients were randomized 1:1
to receive once-daily UMEC/VI 62.5/25 μg (via ELLIPTA(®) dry powder inhaler) or
PBO for 12 weeks. The primary endpoint was St George's Respiratory Questionnaire 
(SGRQ) total score at day 84. Secondary efficacy endpoints included rescue
albuterol use (puffs/day) over weeks 1-12 and trough forced expiratory volume in 
1 second on day 84. Adverse events were also assessed.
RESULTS: A total of 496 patients were included in the intent-to-treat population 
in the UMEC/VI (n=248) and PBO (n=248) treatment groups. UMEC/VI 62.5/25 μg
provided a significant and clinically meaningful improvement in SGRQ total score 
at day 84 versus PBO (difference between treatments in SGRQ total score change
from baseline: -4.03 [95% confidence interval {CI}: -6.28, -1.79]; P<0.001).
UMEC/VI 62.5/25 μg resulted in a statistically significant reduction in rescue
albuterol use versus PBO (-0.7 puffs/day [95% CI: -1.1, -0.4]; P<0.001). UMEC/VI 
62.5/25 μg provided a significant and clinically meaningful improvement in trough
forced expiratory volume in 1 second on day 84 versus PBO (122 mL [95% CI: 71,
172]; P<0.001). The incidence of adverse events was similar between treatments
(32% and 30% of patients in the UMEC/VI 62.5/25 μg and PBO groups, respectively).
CONCLUSION: The results of this study demonstrate that treatment with UMEC/VI
62.5/25 μg provides clinically important improvements in SGRQ and rescue
medication use versus PBO in patients with moderate-to-very-severe COPD.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S102962 
PMCID: PMC4869636
PMID: 27274218  [PubMed - in process]


5. J Investig Med High Impact Case Rep. 2015 Oct 14;3(4):2324709615612847. doi:
10.1177/2324709615612847.

Stress Cardiomyopathy in the Setting of COPD Exacerbation.

Landefeld K(1), Saleh Q(1), Sander GE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Tulane University School of Medicine, New Orleans, LA, USA.

Introduction. Stress cardiomyopathy, or takotsubo cardiomyopathy, is an acute,
reversible left ventricular dysfunction usually initiated by a psychological or
physical stress. We report this case of stress cardiomyopathy following a chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease exacerbation and the subsequent treatment. Case
Description. A 49-year-old white female with a history of chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease presented to the emergency room via emergency medical services 
with worsening severe shortness of breath and productive cough for 2 weeks but
denied any chest pain on arrival. On presentation, she was noted to be
tachypneic, using her accessory muscles and with bilateral coarse expiratory
wheezing on lung auscultation. Initial electrocardiogram demonstrated sinus
tachycardia. She was treated with multiple albuterol treatments. Soon afterwards,
the course was complicated by hypoxic respiratory failure eventually requiring
intubation. Her repeat electrocardiogram showed acute changes consistent with
myocardial infarction, and an echocardiograph demonstrated apical akinesia with
an ejection fraction of 25% to 30%. The patient was urgently taken for cardiac
catheterization, which showed no angiographic evidence of coronary artery
disease. Three days after initial presentation, a repeat transthoracic
echocardiogram showed overall left ventricular systolic function improvement.
Discussion. This case provided a unique look at the difficulty of balancing
catecholamines in a patient with bronchospasm and stress cardiomyopathy.

DOI: 10.1177/2324709615612847 
PMCID: PMC4748508
PMID: 26904708  [PubMed]


6. Allergy Asthma Proc. 2016 May;37(3):199-206. doi: 10.2500/aap.2016.37.3938. Epub 
2016 Jan 29.

Prospective, open-label evaluation of a new albuterol multidose dry powder
inhaler with integrated dose counter.

Given J(1), Taveras H, Iverson H.

Author information: 
(1)Allergy and Respiratory Center, Canton, Ohio, and 2Teva Pharmaceuticals,
Miami, Florida, USA.

BACKGROUND: Albuterol multidose dry powder inhaler (MDPI) with an integrated dose
counter allows patients to track the number of remaining doses and to simplify
dosing by eliminating the need to coordinate inhalation with actuation associated
with metered-dose inhalers.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the functionality, reliability, and accuracy of the
albuterol MDPI integrated dose counter in a real-world clinical setting.
METHODS: This open-label, phase III study enrolled patients ages ≥4 years with
asthma or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Patients who demonstrated
adequate MDPI inhaler technique and ≥90% compliance with dosing and diary
completion during a run-in period qualified for treatment with albuterol MDPI
with a dose counter (2 inhalations/dose; 90 μg/inhalation) twice daily for up to 
50 days. Patient-reported counter readings and patient-reported actuations were
recorded in daily diaries and were used to assess dose counter accuracy. An
ease-of-use and satisfaction questionnaire was given at the final visit.
RESULTS: A total of 317 patients were enrolled in the study. The dose-cycle
undercount (i.e., actuation occurred, but the counter display did not count down)
was 2.05 per 200 actuations. The estimated mean ± standard error absolute value
of the total discrepancy size after 200 actuations was 2.07 ± 0.140. Most
patients (83%) were somewhat or very satisfied, and >90% were satisfied with ease
of holding and/or handling, using and taking, and inhaling a dose from the
device. The albuterol MDPI was generally well tolerated.
CONCLUSION: The albuterol MDPI dose counter functioned reliably and accurately.
Albuterol MDPI was well tolerated, with a high degree of patient satisfaction in 
a real-world setting.
CLINICAL TRIAL NUMBER: NCT01857323.

DOI: 10.2500/aap.2016.37.3938 
PMID: 26831652  [PubMed - in process]


7. COPD. 2016;13(1):1-10. doi: 10.3109/15412555.2015.1034256. Epub 2015 Oct 9.

Efficacy and Safety of Umeclidinium Added to Fluticasone Propionate/Salmeterol in
Patients with COPD: Results of Two Randomized, Double-Blind Studies.

Siler TM(1), Kerwin E(2), Singletary K(3), Brooks J(4), Church A(3).

Author information: 
(1)a Midwest Chest Consultants, PC, St. Charles , Missouri , USA. (2)b Clinical
Research Institute of Southern Oregon , Medford , Oregon , USA. (3)c GSK,
Respiratory and Immuno-Inflammation, Research Triangle Park , North Carolina ,
USA. (4)d GSK, Respiratory Medicines Development Centre, Stockley Park , Uxbridge
, United Kingdom.

Combinations of drugs with distinct and complementary mechanisms of action may
offer improved efficacy in the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD). In two 12-week, double-blind, parallel-group studies, patients with COPD 
were randomized 1:1:1 to once-daily umeclidinium (UMEC; 62.5 μg and 125 μg) or
placebo (PBO), added to twice-daily fluticasone propionate/salmeterol (FP/SAL;
250/50 μg). In both studies, the primary efficacy measure was trough forced
expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1) at Day 85. Secondary endpoints were
weighted-mean (WM) FEV1 over 0-6 hours post-dose (Day 84) and rescue albuterol
use. Health-related quality of life outcomes (St. George's Respiratory
Questionnaire [SGRQ] and COPD assessment test [CAT]) were also examined. Safety
was assessed throughout. Both UMEC+FP/SAL doses provided statistically
significant improvements in trough FEV1 (Day 85: 0.127-0.148 L) versus
PBO+FP/SAL. Similarly, both UMEC+FP/SAL doses provided statistically-significant 
improvements in 0-6 hours post-dose WM FEV1 versus PBO+FP/SAL (Day 84:
0.144-0.165 L). Rescue use over Weeks 1-12 decreased with UMEC+FP/SAL in both
studies versus PBO+FP/SAL (Study 1, 0.3 puffs/day [both doses]; Study 2, 0.5
puffs/day [UMEC 125+FP/SAL]). Decreases from baseline in CAT score were generally
larger for both doses of UMEC+FP/SAL versus PBO+FP/SAL (except for Day 84 Study
2). In Study 1, no differences in SGRQ score were observed between UMEC+FP/SAL
and PBO+FP/SAL; however, in Study 2, statistically significant improvements were 
observed with UMEC 62.5+FP/SAL (Day 28) and UMEC 125+FP/SAL (Days 28 and 84)
versus PBO+FP/SAL. The incidence of on-treatment adverse events across all
treatment groups was 37-41% in Study 1 and 36-38% in Study 2. Overall, these data
indicate that the combination of UMEC+FP/SAL can provide additional benefits over
FP/SAL alone in patients with COPD.

DOI: 10.3109/15412555.2015.1034256 
PMID: 26451734  [PubMed - in process]


8. Hosp Pharm. 2015 May;50(5):386-90. doi: 10.1310/hpj5005-386.

Inhaler Use in Hospitalized Patients with Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease
or Asthma: Assessment of Wasted Doses.

Sakaan S(1), Ulrich D(2), Luo J(2), Finch CK(3), Self TH(4).

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Pharmacist, Methodist University Hospital , Memphis, Tennessee.
(2)University of Tennessee Health Science Center , Memphis. (3)Assistant
Director, Clinical Pharmacy Services, Methodist University Hospital , Memphis,
Tennessee ; Associate Professor of Clinical Pharmacy, University of Tennessee
Health Science Center , Memphis. (4)Professor of Clinical Pharmacy, University of
Tennessee Health Science Center , Memphis ; Program Director, PGY2 Internal
Medicine Pharmacy Residency, Methodist University Hospital , Memphis, Tennessee.

BACKGROUND: Hospitalized patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD) or asthma routinely have inhaled medications ordered for acute and
maintenance therapy. Treatment may be administered via metered-dose inhaler (MDI)
or dry-powder inhaler (DPI). These products must be appropriately labeled to be
released home with the patient or discarded before discharge.
OBJECTIVE: To assess the amount and estimated cost of wasted doses of medications
via MDI or DPI for hospitalized patients with COPD/asthma.
METHODS: A retrospective study was conducted at a university-affiliated hospital.
Patients admitted between January 2011 and June 2012 with a primary diagnosis of 
COPD or COPD with asthma and who were ≥40 years of age were included. Information
collected included use of albuterol, ipratropium, inhaled corticosteroids,
long-acting beta agonist, or tiotropium and whether treatments were given by
nebulizer, MDI, MDI plus valved holding chamber (VHC), or DPI. The number of
doses dispensed, as well as doses not used, via MDI, MDI + VHC, or DPI were
collected from electronic medical records. Costs associated with wasted
medications were evaluated.
RESULTS: Of 555 patient admissions screened, 478 (mean age, 66 years; 58% women; 
74% African American) met study criteria. Of the total MDI or DPI doses
dispensed, 87% were wasted, and associated hospital cost was approximately
$86,973.
CONCLUSIONS: Substantial waste of inhaled medications was found in our study.
Practical strategies are needed to reduce wasted inhalers. Further assessment of 
this problem is needed in other US hospitals.

DOI: 10.1310/hpj5005-386 
PMCID: PMC4567205
PMID: 26405325  [PubMed]


9. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2015 Sep 2;10:1753-67. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S81053.
eCollection 2015.

Efficacy and safety of once-daily inhaled umeclidinium/vilanterol in Asian
patients with COPD: results from a randomized, placebo-controlled study.

Zheng J(1), Zhong N(1), Newlands A(2), Church A(3), Goh AH(4).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Lab of Respiratory Disease, National Clinical Research Centre of
Respiratory Disease, First Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou Medical University,
Guangzhou, People's Republic of China. (2)GlaxoSmithKline, London, UK.
(3)GlaxoSmithKline, Research Triangle Park, NC, USA. (4)GlaxoSmithKline,
Shanghai, People's Republic of China.

BACKGROUND: Combination of the inhaled long-acting muscarinic antagonist
umeclidinium (UMEC; GSK573719) with the long-acting β2-agonist vilanterol (VI) is
an approved maintenance treatment for COPD in the US and EU. We compared the
efficacy and safety of UMEC/VI with placebo in patients with COPD of Asian
ancestry.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: In this 24-week, Phase III, multicenter, randomized,
double-blind, placebo-controlled, parallel-group study, patients were randomized 
1:1:1 to UMEC/VI 125/25 μg, UMEC/VI 62.5/25 μg, or placebo. The primary efficacy 
end point was trough forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1) on day 169;
secondary end points were Transition Dyspnea Index (TDI) focal score at week 24
and weighted mean (WM) FEV1 over 0-6 hours postdose on day 1. Additional end
points and safety were also assessed.
RESULTS: Both UMEC/VI 125/25 μg and UMEC/VI 62.5/25 μg statistically
significantly improved trough FEV1 at day 169 versus placebo (UMEC/VI 125/25 μg, 
0.216 L, [95% confidence interval [CI] 0.175-0.257]; UMEC/VI 62.5/25 μg, 0.151 L,
95% CI 0.110-0.191; both P<0.001). Statistically significant improvements in TDI 
score were observed for both UMEC/VI groups versus placebo (UMEC/VI 125/25 μg,
0.9, 95% CI 0.3-1.4, P=0.002; UMEC/VI 62.5/25 μg, 0.7, 95% CI 0.1-1.2, P=0.016). 
On day 1, both UMEC/VI groups improved 0-6-hour WM FEV1 versus placebo (UMEC/VI
125/25 μg, 0.182 L 95% CI 0.161-0.203; UMEC/VI 62.5/25 μg, 0.160 L, 95% CI
0.139-0.181; both P<0.001). Statistically significant improvements for UMEC/VI
groups versus placebo were observed for rescue albuterol use at weeks 1-24
(puffs/day, both P<0.001). The incidence of adverse events was similar across
groups.
CONCLUSION: In Asian patients with COPD, once-daily UMEC/VI 125/25 μg and UMEC
62.5/25 μg resulted in clinically meaningful and statistically significant
improvements in lung-function end points versus placebo. Symptomatic and quality 
of life measures also improved. The safety profile of UMEC/VI was consistent with
previous studies.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S81053 
PMCID: PMC4562726
PMID: 26366068  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Clin Respir J. 2015 Jun 16. doi: 10.1111/crj.12340. [Epub ahead of print]

Albuterol inhalation increases FeNO level in steroid-naive asthmatics but not
COPD patients with reversibility.

Zhao H(1), Li R(1), Lv Y(1), Dong H(1), Yao L(1), Wu Y(1), Xiao G(1), Cai S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, Chronic Airways Diseases
Laboratory, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, 510515,
China.

INTRODUCTION: Fractional exhaled nitric oxide (FeNO) has been used as a marker of
airway inflammation. Airway caliber is related to the level of FeNO in
asthmatics.
OBJECTIVES: This study aimed to investigate whether airway obstruction could
interfere with real FENO levels and if different FeNO changes after albuterol
inhalation could assist in distinguishing asthma from chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD).
METHODS: FeNO and spirometry measurements were performed before and after
albuterol inhalation in the following three patient groups: 30 steroid-naive
asthmatics, 25 asthmatics inhaling corticosteroids/long-acting β(2)-adrenergic
agonists for at least 1 month and 20 COPD patients. Bronchodilator test (BDT)
results were positive in all patients enrolled. The correlations among FeNO
levels, pulmonary function and sputum eosinophil counts were analyzed.
RESULTS: FeNO increased significantly after albuterol inhalation in steroid-naive
asthmatics but not in ICS-treated asthmatics or COPD patients. The FeNO levels
demonstrated no significant correlation with spirometry results or sputum
eosinophil counts before or after inhaling bronchodilator in all three groups.
Both the levels of FeNO and changes in FENO after albuterol inhalation in
steroid-naive asthma patients were higher than those in ICS-treated asthmatics
and COPD patients (P < 0.001). The differences remained after proper adjustment
for confounding factors (gender, age, smoking pack-years, ICS-treated and
pulmonary function index).
CONCLUSIONS: Our results support the role of FeNO in differentiating asthmatics
from COPD patients with positive BDT. FeNO detection after albuterol inhalation
should be encouraged in steroid-naive asthma patients with airway obstruction.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/crj.12340 
PMID: 26077165  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


11. Am J Health Syst Pharm. 2015 Jun 15;72(12):1026-35. doi: 10.2146/ajhp140551.

Clinical outcomes and treatment cost comparison of levalbuterol versus albuterol 
in hospitalized adults with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease or asthma.

Brunetti L(1), Poiani G(1), Dhanaliwala F(1), Poppiti K(1), Kang H(1), Suh DC(2).

Author information: 
(1)Luigi Brunetti, Pharm.D., M.P.H., is Clinical Associate Professor, Ernest
Mario School of Pharmacy, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey,
Piscataway, and Clinical Pharmacy Specialist, Internal Medicine, Robert Wood
Johnson University Hospital-Somerset, Somerville, NJ. George Poiani, M.D., FACP, 
FCCP, is Attending Physician, Department of Medicine, Robert Wood Johnson
University Hospital-Somerset, and Clinical Associate Professor, Division of
Pulmonary/Critical Care Medicine, Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, New
Brunswick, NJ. Fatema Dhanaliwala, B.S.Pharm., is Pharmacy Supervisor, Department
of Pharmacy, Robert Wood Johnson University Hospital-Somerset. Kristen Poppiti,
Pharm.D., is Postgraduate Year 1 Pharmacy Resident, Inova Fairfax Hospital, Falls
Church, VA; at the time of writing, she was a Pharm.D. student in the Honors
Research Program at Ernest Mario School of Pharmacy, Rutgers, The State
University of New Jersey. Haenam Kang, B.S., is Graduate Student, College of
Pharmacy; and Dong-Churl Suh, M.B.A., Ph.D., is Professor, College of Pharmacy,
Chung-Ang University, Seoul, South Korea. (2)Luigi Brunetti, Pharm.D., M.P.H., is
Clinical Associate Professor, Ernest Mario School of Pharmacy, Rutgers, The State
University of New Jersey, Piscataway, and Clinical Pharmacy Specialist, Internal 
Medicine, Robert Wood Johnson University Hospital-Somerset, Somerville, NJ.
George Poiani, M.D., FACP, FCCP, is Attending Physician, Department of Medicine, 
Robert Wood Johnson University Hospital-Somerset, and Clinical Associate
Professor, Division of Pulmonary/Critical Care Medicine, Robert Wood Johnson
Medical School, New Brunswick, NJ. Fatema Dhanaliwala, B.S.Pharm., is Pharmacy
Supervisor, Department of Pharmacy, Robert Wood Johnson University
Hospital-Somerset. Kristen Poppiti, Pharm.D., is Postgraduate Year 1 Pharmacy
Resident, Inova Fairfax Hospital, Falls Church, VA; at the time of writing, she
was a Pharm.D. student in the Honors Research Program at Ernest Mario School of
Pharmacy, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey. Haenam Kang, B.S., is
Graduate Student, College of Pharmacy; and Dong-Churl Suh, M.B.A., Ph.D., is
Professor, College of Pharmacy, Chung-Ang University, Seoul, South Korea.
dongsuh75@gmail.com.

PURPOSE: Results of a prospective study comparing clinical outcomes and costs of 
levalbuterol versus albuterol therapy for exacerbations of asthma or chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) are presented.
METHODS: In a single-center open-label study, selected adults hospitalized for
asthma or COPD exacerbations over a 21-month period were randomly assigned to
receive levalbuterol 1.25 mg three times daily (n = 55) or albuterol 2.5 mg four 
times daily (n = 57); dosage reductions and other respiratory therapies were
permitted. Study outcomes included scheduled and rescue nebulizations, total
treatment costs, hospital length of stay, and change in heart rate from baseline.
RESULTS: The numbers of scheduled nebulizations were similar in the levalbuterol 
and albuterol groups (mean ± S.D., 19.6 ± 13.4 versus 20.7 ± 14.4; p = 0.692), as
were the numbers of rescue nebulizations (mean ± S.D., 0.7 ± 1.4 versus 0.8 ±
2.0; p = 0.849). The mean change from baseline in heart rate did not differ
significantly between groups. Mean total treatment costs per patient were
significantly greater with the use of levalbuterol ($8003, bootstrap 95%
confidence interval [CI], $6628-$9379) versus albuterol ($5772, bootstrap 95% CI,
$5051-$6494; p = 0.006). Hospital length of stay was significantly greater in the
levalbuterol group (mean ± S.D., 8.5 ± 5.2 days versus 6.8 ± 3.6 days with
albuterol use; p = 0.040).
CONCLUSION: Clinical outcomes were similar with the use of levalbuterol versus
albuterol for exacerbations of COPD or asthma. On average, patients receiving
levalbuterol had longer and more costly hospital stays.

Copyright © 2015 by the American Society of Health-System Pharmacists, Inc. All
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.2146/ajhp140551 
PMID: 26025994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Curr Med Res Opin. 2015 Jun;31(6):1191-200. doi: 10.1185/03007995.2015.1036016.

Efficacy and safety of fluticasone furoate/vilanterol (50/25 mcg; 100/25 mcg;
200/25 mcg) in Asian patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: a
randomized placebo-controlled trial.

Zheng J(1), de Guia T, Wang-Jairaj J, Newlands AH, Wang C, Crim C, Zhong N.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Lab of Respiratory Disease, National Clinical Research Centre of
Respiratory Disease, 1st Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou Medical University ,
Guangzhou , China.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Three strengths of fluticasone furoate/vilanterol
(FF/VI) were previously evaluated for the treatment of chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD) in a program of global Phase 3 studies that included
only a small subgroup of Asian patients. This study further evaluated the
efficacy and safety of the same three strengths of FF/VI exclusively in Asian
patients.
METHODS: A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, parallel-group,
multicenter study. Patients with post-bronchodilator FEV1/FVC ≤0.70, FEV1 ≤70%
predicted and modified Medical Research Council score ≥2 were randomized
(1:1:1:1) to placebo, FF/VI 50/25 mcg, 100/25 mcg or 200/25 mcg once daily via
the ELLIPTA dry powder inhaler. The primary efficacy endpoint was change from
baseline in trough FEV1 at Week 24.
RESULTS: The intent-to-treat population comprised 643 patients. Statistically
significant (p < 0.001) improvements in trough FEV1 were observed with all
strengths of FF/VI versus placebo at Week 24 (0.14-0.19 L). Reduction of
supplemental albuterol use was observed with all strengths of FF/VI versus
placebo. The incidence of on-treatment adverse events (AEs) was 48% with FF/VI
200/25 mcg and 37-40% with other treatments. The incidence of on-treatment
serious AEs was 4-9% with FF/VI treatments versus 9% with placebo; however, the
study only covered a 6 month treatment period and was not powered to assess
effects on exacerbations. No clinically significant treatment effects versus
placebo were identified for electrocardiogram, vital signs, 24 hour urinary
cortisol excretion and pneumonia.
CONCLUSIONS: All strengths of FF/VI improved lung function with an acceptable
safety profile. There is no evidence to suggest that dose adjustment may be
required in Asian patients using FF/VI 100/25 mcg for the treatment of COPD.
CLINICAL TRIAL REGISTRATION: NCT01376245.

DOI: 10.1185/03007995.2015.1036016 
PMID: 25830381  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. J Asthma Allergy. 2015 Jan 14;8:1-13. doi: 10.2147/JAA.S76639. eCollection 2015.

Long-acting muscarinic antagonist use in adults with asthma: real-life
prescribing and outcomes of add-on therapy with tiotropium bromide.

Price D(1), Kaplan A(2), Jones R(3), Freeman D(4), Burden A(5), Gould S(5), von
Ziegenweidt J(5), Ali M(5), King C(5), Thomas M(6).

Author information: 
(1)Academic Centre of Primary Care, University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen ; Research
in Real-Life, Cambridge, UK. (2)Family Physician Airways Group of Canada,
Richmond Hill, ON, Canada. (3)Centre for Clinical Trials and Health Research,
Plymouth University, Plymouth, UK. (4)Norfolk Community Health and Care NHS
Trust, Norwich, UK. (5)Research in Real-Life, Cambridge, UK. (6)Primary Care
Research, University of Southhampton, Southhampton, UK.

BACKGROUND: Randomized controlled trials indicate that addition of a long-acting 
muscarinic antagonist (LAMA) such as tiotropium may improve asthma control and
reduce exacerbation risk in patients with poorly controlled asthma, but broader
clinical studies are needed to investigate the effectiveness of LAMA in real-life
asthma care.
METHODS: Medical records of adults with asthma (aged ≥18 years) prescribed
tiotropium were obtained from the UK Optimum Patient Care Research Database for
the period 2001-2013. Patients diagnosed with chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease were excluded, but no other clinical exclusions were applied. Two primary
outcomes were compared in the year before (baseline) and the year after (outcome)
addition of tiotropium: exacerbations (asthma-related hospital emergency
department attendance or inpatient admission, or acute oral corticosteroid
course) and acute respiratory events (exacerbation or antibiotic prescription
with lower respiratory consultation). Secondary outcomes included lung function
test results and short-acting β2 agonist usage. The Wilcoxon signed-rank test was
used for variables measured on the interval scale, the marginal homogeneity test 
for categorized variables, and the paired t-test for lung function indices.
RESULTS: Of the 2,042 study patients, 83% were prescribed an inhaled
corticosteroid and 68% a long-acting β2 agonist during the baseline year; 67%
were prescribed both. Comparing baseline and outcome years, the percentage of
patients having at least one exacerbation decreased from 37% to 27% (P<0.001) and
the percentage having at least one acute respiratory event decreased from 58% to 
47% (P<0.001). There were no significant changes in lung function, and usage of
short-acting β2 agonists (in salbutamol/albuterol equivalents) increased from a
median (interquartile range) of 274 (110, 548) to 329 (110, 603) μg/day (P=0.01).
CONCLUSION: In this real-life asthma population, addition of LAMA therapy was
associated with significant decreases in the incidence of exacerbations and
antibiotic prescriptions for lower respiratory tract infections in the following 
year.

DOI: 10.2147/JAA.S76639 
PMCID: PMC4298307
PMID: 25609985  [PubMed]


14. Pulm Pharmacol Ther. 2015 Apr;31:85-91. doi: 10.1016/j.pupt.2014.08.010. Epub
2014 Sep 6.

Daily variation in lung function in COPD patients with combined albuterol and
ipratropium: results from a 4-week, randomized, crossover study.

Singh D(1), Zhu CQ(2), Sharma S(3), Church A(3), Kalberg CJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)University of Manchester, Medicines Evaluation Unit, University Hospital of
South Manchester NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester, UK. Electronic address:
dsingh@meu.org.uk. (2)GlaxoSmithKline, Clinical Statistics (Respiratory),
Stockley Park, UK. (3)GlaxoSmithKline, Respiratory and Immuno-Inflammation,
Research Triangle Park, NC, USA.

BACKGROUND: The bronchodilator response to short-acting β2-agonist and
short-acting muscarinic antagonist monotherapies varies on a day-to-day basis
within individual patients. The objective of this study was to compare daily
variation in bronchodilator response to the combined use of albuterol and
ipratropium with monotherapies in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD).
METHODS: This was a 4-week, randomized, open-label, two-period crossover study in
patients with COPD. Patients were randomized 1:1 to receive albuterol via metered
dose inhaler followed by ipratropium or vice versa during treatment Period 1
(10-14 days). The order of treatments was then reversed during treatment Period 2
(10-14 days). Pre-defined efficacy endpoints were: forced expiratory volume in
1 s (FEV1), derived FEV1, inspiratory capacity (IC) and daily variability of FEV1
and IC as measured by coefficient of variation (CV).
RESULTS: Albuterol and ipratropium improved FEV1 when administered as the first
bronchodilator, compared with pre-dose values (0.269 and 0.243 L, respectively). 
Administration of the second bronchodilator provided further improvements in lung
function, but to a lesser magnitude than the first bronchodilator (0.094 L for
both treatments). A statistically significant reduction in daily variability in
FEV1 was observed for dual bronchodilator therapy compared with monotherapy
(difference in CV = 0.007; p = 0.019) and pre-dose values (no treatment;
difference in CV = 0.022; p < 0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: The free combination of albuterol and ipratropium resulted in
greater improvements and lower day-to-day variability in FEV1 compared with
either monotherapy or no bronchodilator therapy. The reduced daily variability
may be an important therapeutic advantage of using different classes of
bronchodilators in COPD.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: NCT01691482.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pupt.2014.08.010 
PMID: 25197005  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Respir Med. 2014 Sep;108(9):1310-20. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2014.07.002. Epub 2014
Jul 14.

A simple rule to identify patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease who
may need treatment reevaluation.

Sharafkhaneh A(1), Altan AE(2), Colice GL(3), Hanania NA(4), Donohue JF(5),
Kurlander JL(6), Rodriguez-Roisin R(7), Altman PR(8).

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary and Critical Care, Baylor College of Medicine, MEDVA Medical Center 
Bldg. 100 (111i), Houston, TX 77030, USA. Electronic address: amirs@bcm.edu.
(2)Health Economics and Outcomes Research, OptumInsight, 13625 Technology Drive, 
Eden Prairie, MN 55344, USA. Electronic address: Aylin.Altan@optum.com.
(3)Pulmonary, Critical Care and Respiratory Services, Washington Hospital Center,
110 Irving Street, Washington DC, 20010, USA. Electronic address:
Gene.Colice@Medstar.net. (4)Pulmonary and Critical Care, Baylor College of
Medicine, One Baylor Plaza-BCM621, Houston, TX 77030, USA. Electronic address:
hanania@bcm.tmc.edu. (5)Pulmonary Diseases and Critical Care Medicine, University
of North Carolina School of Medicine, 4125 BioInformatics Building, 130 Mason
Farm Road, CB 7020, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA. Electronic address:
james_donohue@med.unc.edu. (6)Health Economics and Outcomes Research,
OptumInsight, 13625 Technology Drive, Eden Prairie, MN 55344, USA. Electronic
address: Jonathan.Kurlander@optum.com. (7)Thorax Institute, Hospital
Clinic-CIBERES, IDIBAPS, Universitat de Barcelona, Villarroel, 170 (Esc 2 -
Planta 2), 08036 Barcelona, Spain. Electronic address: rororo@clinic.ub.es.
(8)Mylan Specialty, L.P., 110 Allen Road, 4th Floor, Basking Ridge, NJ 07920,
USA. Electronic address: Pablo.Altman@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: A simple rule based on short-acting inhaled β2-agonist (SABA) use
could identify patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) at
increased risk of exacerbations and signal the need for maintenance therapy
change, similar to asthma "Rules of Two(®)".
METHODS: Associations between SABA use, COPD exacerbations, and health care costs
over 1 year were examined retrospectively using de-identified patient data from
the Optum Research Database (ORD; N = 56,581) and the Impact National Benchmark
Database (IMPACT™; N = 9423). Nebulized and metered-dose inhaler (MDI) SABA doses
were normalized to 2.5 mg and 90 mcg albuterol equivalents, respectively.
RESULTS: The GOLD initiative establishes ≥2 exacerbations/year as indicative of
increased risk in COPD. We identified a correlation (p < 0.0001) between 1.5 SABA
doses/day and this frequency of exacerbations. In ORD, patients using ≥1.5 versus
<1.5 SABA doses/day experienced significantly more exacerbations: 1.92
(95% confidence interval [CI], 1.89-1.96) versus 1.36 (95% CI, 1.34-1.38) per
patient year (PPY). Above-threshold use was associated with higher average annual
COPD-related costs (2010 $US): $21,868 (standard deviation [SD], $53,910) versus 
$11,686 (SD, $32,707) for nebulized SABA only, $9216 (SD, $30,710) versus $7334
(SD, $24,853) for MDI SABA only, and $15,806 (SD, $35,260) versus $11,233 (SD,
$27,006) for both nebulized and MDI SABA. IMPACT™ validated these findings.
CONCLUSION: Patients with COPD using ≥1.5 SABA doses/day were at increased risk
of exacerbations. Our results suggest a "Rule of 3-2": SABA use ≥3 times in 2
days should be considered a clinical marker for needing treatment reevaluation.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2014.07.002 
PMID: 25130680  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Expert Opin Investig Drugs. 2014 Aug;23(8):1149-56. doi:
10.1517/13543784.2014.928284. Epub 2014 Jun 18.

Bedoradrine for treating asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Antoniu S(1).

Author information: 
(1)University of Medicine and Pharmacy Grigore, T Popa Iasi, Department of
Interdisciplinarity - Palliative Care Nursing , 16 Universităţii Str, Iasi,
700115 , Romania sabina.antonela.antoniu@pneum.umfiasi.ro.

INTRODUCTION: In severe asthma attacks or in severe chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD) exacerbations, inhaled short-acting bronchodilators, such as
salbutamol (albuterol), terbutaline or ipratropium, often have a limited
effectiveness due to significantly impaired ventilation. For these reasons, the
use of a systemic bronchodilator medication might be more appropriate as
therapeutic options. However, such formulations, especially salbutamol, are
usually, and unfortunately, associated with a high risk of cardiovascular events.
For this reason, they are only seldom used, especially in the case of paediatric 
populations.
AREAS COVERED: This drug evaluation paper reviews the potential therapeutic agent
bedoradrine, an ultraselective β2 agonist, which is currently under development
for treating exacerbated asthma and COPD. The article includes a review of both
in vitro and in vivo studies as well as a review of the pharmacokinetics,
efficacy, safety and tolerability.
EXPERT OPINION: The intravenous use of bedoradrine has demonstrated promising
preliminary efficacy in existing clinical trials for exacerbated asthma. However,
the efficacy of bedoradrine is still uncertain in exacerbated COPD. Further
clinical studies should assess the efficacy and safety of bedoradrine as an
add-on therapy to usual standardised approach and exacerbation-related variables 
should be used as outcome measures.

DOI: 10.1517/13543784.2014.928284 
PMID: 24938936  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. J Aerosol Med Pulm Drug Deliv. 2014 Dec;27(6):478-87. doi:
10.1089/jamp.2013.1114.

Safety and tolerability of inhaled loxapine in subjects with asthma and chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease--two randomized controlled trials.

Gross N(1), Greos LS, Meltzer EO, Spangenthal S, Fishman RS, Spyker DA, Cassella 
JV.

Author information: 
(1)1 St. Francis Hospital, Hartford CT, and University Medical Research ,
Farmington, CT.

BACKGROUND: Loxapine, a first-generation antipsychotic, delivered with a novel
inhalation delivery device developed for the acute treatment of agitation in
patients with schizophrenia or bipolar disorder was evaluated in subjects with
asthma or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
METHODS: Separate randomized, double-blind, parallel-arm, placebo-controlled
trials compared two administrations of inhaled loxapine (10 mg) 10 hr apart with 
placebo in 52 subjects with asthma and in 53 subjects with COPD. A
thermally-generated drug aerosol of loxapine was delivered to the deep lung for
rapid systemic absorption. Controller medications were continued throughout the
study, but quick-relief bronchodilators were withheld from 6-8 hr before through 
34 hr after dose 1, unless indicated as rescue.
RESULTS: All airway adverse events (AEs) were of mild or moderate severity.
Symptomatic bronchospasm occurred in 53.8% of subjects with asthma after inhaled 
loxapine and 11.5% after placebo; and in 19.2% of COPD subjects after inhaled
loxapine and 11.1% after placebo. Subjects required inhaled albuterol as follows:
asthma: 53.8% after inhaled loxapine and 11.5% after placebo; and COPD: 23.1%
after inhaled loxapine and 14.8% after placebo. Respiratory signs/symptoms
requiring treatment responded to rescue bronchodilator [forced expiratory volume 
in 1 sec (FEV(1)) return to within 10% of baseline] within 1 hr in 11 of 15
events in asthma subjects and four of seven events in COPD subjects, the
remainder by the last spirometry.
CONCLUSIONS: In subjects with either asthma or COPD, FEV(1) decline and
bronchospasm can occur following inhaled loxapine, but more frequently in
asthmatic subjects. Most subjects with bronchospasm responded to rescue
bronchodilator within 1 hr. No treatment-related serious AE occurred. Although
inhaled loxapine is contraindicated in patients with active airways disease per
the current approved US labeling, these studies demonstrated that rescue
bronchodilator mitigated the symptomatic bronchospasms that may occur in case of 
inadvertent use.

DOI: 10.1089/jamp.2013.1114 
PMCID: PMC4273199
PMID: 24745666  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Chest. 2014 May;145(5):981-91. doi: 10.1378/chest.13-1579.

Once-daily umeclidinium/vilanterol 125/25 mcg in COPD: a randomized, controlled
study.

Celli B(1), Crater G, Kilbride S, Mehta R, Tabberer M, Kalberg C, Church A.

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary Division, Brigham and Women's Hospital, 75 Francis St, PBB Clinics
3, Boston, MA 02115; e-mail: BCelli@copdnet.org.

BACKGROUND: Combination long-acting bronchodilator therapy may be more effective 
than long-acting bronchodilator monotherapy in chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD).
OBJECTIVES: To compare the efficacy and safety of once-daily
umeclidinium/vilanterol (UMEC/VI) 125/25 mcg with placebo and UMEC or VI
monotherapy in COPD.
METHODS: This was a double-blind, placebo-controlled, parallel-group study. A
total of 1493 patients were randomized (3:3:3:2) to 24 weeks of treatment with
UMEC/VI 125/25 mcg, UMEC 125 mcg, VI 25 mcg, or placebo once-daily via dry powder
inhaler.
RESULTS: Primary efficacy endpoint was trough forced expiratory volume in one
second (FEV1) on Day 169 (23-24 h post-dose). Additional lung-function,
symptomatic and health-related quality of life endpoints were also assessed.
Safety evaluations included: adverse events, vital signs, electrocardiography and
clinical laboratory measurements. All active treatments significantly improved
trough FEV1 vs placebo (0.124-0.238 L, all p<0.001). Improvements with UMEC/VI
125/25 mcg were significantly greater than for UMEC 125 mcg or VI 25 mcg (0.079 L
and 0.114 L; both p≤0.001). Improvements for UMEC/VI 125/25 mcg vs placebo were
observed for the transition dyspnea index (1.0 unit; p<0.001), rescue albuterol
use at Weeks 1-24 (-1.5 puffs/day) and St. George's Respiratory Questionnaire
(-3.60 units, p<0.001). No safety signals were observed.
CONCLUSIONS: Once-daily UMEC/VI 125/25 mcg was well tolerated and provided
greater improvements in lung function, health status, and dyspnea scores compared
with monotherapy components and placebo over 24 weeks. This study supports the
use of UMEC/VI 125/25 mcg for the maintenance treatment of COPD.
CLINICAL TRIAL REGISTRATION: protocol number: DB2113361; ClinicalTrials.gov
identifier: NCT01313637.

DOI: 10.1378/chest.13-1579 
PMID: 24385182  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2013;8:631-9. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S52557. Epub
2013 Dec 5.

Hospital readmissions following initiation of nebulized arformoterol tartrate or 
nebulized short-acting beta-agonists among inpatients treated for COPD.

Bollu V(1), Ernst FR(2), Karafilidis J(1), Rajagopalan K(1), Robinson SB(2),
Braman SS(3).

Author information: 
(1)Sunovion Pharmaceuticals, Inc., Marlborough, MA. (2)Premier healthcare
alliance, Charlotte, NC. (3)The Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New
York, NY, USA.

BACKGROUND: Inpatient admissions for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)
represent a significant economic burden, accounting for over half of direct
medical costs. Reducing 30-day readmissions could save health care resources
while improving patient care. Recently, the Patient Protection and Affordable
Care Act authorized reduced Medicare payments to hospitals with excess
readmissions for acute myocardial infarction, heart failure, and pneumonia.
Starting in October 2014, hospitals will also be penalized for excess COPD
readmissions. This retrospective database study investigated whether use of
arformoterol, a nebulized long-acting beta agonist, during an inpatient
admission, had different 30-day all-cause readmission rates compared with
treatment using nebulized short-acting beta agonists (SABAs, albuterol, or
levalbuterol).
METHODS: A US nationally representative hospital database was used to study
adults aged ≥40 years, discharged between January, 2006 and March, 2010, and with
a diagnosis of COPD. Patients receiving arformoterol on ≥80% of days following
treatment initiation were compared with patients receiving a nebulized SABA
during hospitalization. Arformoterol and nebulized SABA patients were matched
(1:2) for age, sex, severity of inpatient admission, and primary/secondary COPD
diagnosis. Logistic regression compared the odds of readmission while adjusting
for age, sex, race, admission type, severity, primary/secondary diagnosis, other 
respiratory medication use, respiratory therapy use, oxygen use, hospital size,
and teaching status.
RESULTS: This retrospective study compared 812 arformoterol patients and 1,651
nebulized SABA patients who were discharged from their initial COPD hospital
admission. An intensive care unit stay was more common among arformoterol
patients (32.1% versus 18.4%, P<0.001), suggesting more severe symptoms during
the initial admission. The observed readmission rate was significantly lower for 
arformoterol patients than for nebulized SABA patients (8.7% versus 11.9%,
P=0.017), as were the adjusted odds of readmission (odds ratio 0.69, 95%
confidence interval 0.51-0.92).
CONCLUSION: All-cause 30-day readmission rates were significantly lower for
arformoterol patients than nebulized SABA patients, both before and after
adjusting for patient and hospital characteristics.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S52557 
PMCID: PMC3858026
PMID: 24353413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. BMJ Case Rep. 2013 Oct 14;2013. pii: bcr2013201015. doi: 10.1136/bcr-2013-201015.

Inhaled β-agonist therapy and respiratory muscle fatigue as under-recognised
causes of lactic acidosis.

Lau E(1), Mazer J, Carino G.

Author information: 
(1)Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

A 49-year-old man with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) presented
with significant tachypnoea, fevers, productive cough and increased work of
breathing for the previous 4 days. Laboratory data showed elevated lactate of 3.2
mEq/L. Continuous inhaled ipratropium and albuterol nebuliser treatments were
administered. Lactate levels increased to 5.5 and 3.9 mEq/L, at 6 and 12 h,
respectively. No infectious source was found and the lactic acidosis cleared as
the patient improved. The lactic acidosis was determined to be secondary to
respiratory muscle fatigue and inhaled β-agonist therapy, two under-recognised
causes of lactic acidosis in patients presenting with respiratory distress.
Lactic acidosis is commonly used as a clinical marker for sepsis and shock, but
in the absence of tissue hypoperfusion and severe hypoxia, alternative
aetiologies for elevated levels should be sought to avoid unnecessary and
potentially harmful medical interventions.

DOI: 10.1136/bcr-2013-201015 
PMCID: PMC3822143
PMID: 24127377  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Thorax. 2013 Nov;68(11):1021-8. doi: 10.1136/thoraxjnl-2013-203538. Epub 2013 Jul
11.

Combined effects of parental and active smoking on early lung function deficits: 
a prospective study from birth to age 26 years.

Guerra S(1), Stern DA, Zhou M, Sherrill DL, Wright AL, Morgan WJ, Martinez FD.

Author information: 
(1)Arizona Respiratory Center, University of Arizona, , Tucson, Arizona, USA.

BACKGROUND: Cross-sectional reports have suggested that, among active smokers,
previous exposure to parental smoking may increase susceptibility to development 
of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. We assessed prospectively whether
parental smoking enhances the effects of active smoking on early deficits of lung
function in young adults.
METHODS: We used data from the prospective birth cohort, the Tucson Children's
Respiratory Study. Maternal and paternal smoking was assessed via questionnaires 
completed by the parents at the time of the participant's birth. Active smoking
by participants was assessed via personal questionnaires completed at ages 16
(YR16), 22 and 26 years. Four groups were generated based on the combination of
parental and active smoking. Lung function parameters, including forced
expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1)/forced vital capacity (FVC) ratio, were assessed 
by spirometry before and after inhalation of 180 μg of albuterol at YR11, YR16,
YR22 and YR26.
RESULTS: Complete data were available for 519 participants. Pre-bronchodilator
FEV1/FVC values did not differ at YR11, YR16 or YR22 by parental or active
smoking. However, at YR26 participants with exposure to parental and active
smoking had pre-bronchodilator FEV1/FVC levels that were, on average, 2.8% (0.9% 
to 4.8%; p=0.003) lower than participants who were not exposed to parental or
active smoking. In contrast, subjects who were only exposed to active smoking or 
only exposed to parental smoking did not differ from those who were not exposed
to either. Between YR11 and YR26, participants with exposure to parental and
active smoking had the steepest decline in sex, age and height adjusted residuals
of FEV1/FVC, FEV1, forced expiratory flow between 25% and 75% of the FVC
(FEF25-75) and FEF25-75/FVC (all p values between 0.03 and <0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: Parental and active smoking act synergistically to affect early lung
function deficits in young adulthood.

DOI: 10.1136/thoraxjnl-2013-203538 
PMCID: PMC4706750
PMID: 23847259  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2013;8:221-30. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S31246. Epub
2013 Apr 30.

Efficacy and safety of eco-friendly inhalers: focus on combination ipratropium
bromide and albuterol in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Panos RJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary, Critical Care, and Sleep Medicine Division, Cincinnati Veterans
Affairs Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH 45220, USA. ralph.panos@va.gov

BACKGROUND: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a major cause of
morbidity and mortality and its treatment is critical to improve quality of life,
reduce symptoms, and diminish the frequency of COPD exacerbations. Due to the
harmful environmental effects of pressurized metered-dose inhalers (pMDIs)
containing chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs), newer systems for delivering respiratory
medications have been developed.
METHODS: A search of the literature in the PubMed database was undertaken using
the keywords "COPD," "albuterol," "ipratropium bromide," and "Respimat® Soft Mist
Inhaler™"; pertinent references within the identified citations were included.
The environmental effect of CFC-pMDIs, the invention of the Respimat® Soft Mist
Inhaler™ (SMI) (Boehringer Ingelheim, Ingelheim, Germany), and its use to deliver
the combination of albuterol and ipratropium bromide for the treatment of COPD
were reviewed.
RESULTS: The adverse environmental effects of CFC-pMDIs stimulated the invention 
of novel delivery systems including the Respimat SMI. This review presents its
development, internal mechanism, and use to deliver the combination of albuterol 
and ipratropium bromide.
CONCLUSION: CFC-pMDIs contributed to the depletion of the ozone layer and the
surge in disorders caused by harmful ultraviolet B radiation. The banning of CFCs
spurred the development of novel delivery systems for respiratory medications.
The Respimat SMI is an innovative device that produces a vapor of inhalable
droplets with reduced velocity and prolonged aerosol duration that enhance
deposition within the lower airway and is associated with improved patient
satisfaction. Clinical trials have demonstrated that the Respimat SMI can achieve
effects equivalent to pMDIs but with lower medication doses. The long-term safety
and efficacy remain to be determined. The Respimat SMI delivery device is a
novel, efficient, and well-received system for the delivery of aerosolized
albuterol and ipratropium bromide to patients with COPD; however, the presence of
longer-acting, less frequently dosed respiratory medications provide patients and
providers with other therapeutic options.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S31246 
PMCID: PMC3643287
PMID: 23658481  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2013;8:139-50. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S38577. Epub
2013 Mar 19.

COPD patient satisfaction with ipratropium bromide/albuterol delivered via
Respimat: a randomized, controlled study.

Ferguson GT(1), Ghafouri M, Dai L, Dunn LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary Research Institute of Southeast Michigan, Livonia, MI 48152, USA.
garytferguson@msn.com

BACKGROUND: Ipratropium bromide/albuterol Respimat inhaler (CVT-R) was developed 
as an environmentally friendly alternative to ipratropium bromide/albuterol
metered-dose inhaler (CVT-MDI), which uses a chlorofluorocarbon propellant.
OBJECTIVE: The objective of this study was to evaluate patient satisfaction,
device usage, and long-term safety of CVT-R compared to CVT-MDI, and to the
simultaneous administration of ipratropium bromide hydrofluoroalkane (HFA; I) and
albuterol HFA (A) metered-dose inhalers as dual monotherapies (I + A).
DESIGN: This is a 48-week, open-label, randomized, active-controlled,
parallel-group study (n = 470) comparing CVT-R to CVT-MDI and to I + A.
PARTICIPANTS: Patients were at least 40 years of age, diagnosed with chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), and current or exsmokers.
INTERVENTIONS: Patients were randomized to receive: (1) CVT-R, one inhalation
four times daily (QID); or (2) CVT-MDI, two inhalations QID; or (3) I + A two
inhalations of each inhaler QID.
MAIN MEASURES: Patient Satisfaction and Preference Questionnaire (PASAPQ)
performance score (primary endpoint) and adverse events.
KEY RESULTS: PASAPQ performance score was significantly higher (CVT-R versus
CVT-MDI, 9.6; and CVT-R versus I + A, 6.2; both P < 0.001) when using CVT-R
compared to CVT-MDI or I + A at all visits starting from week 3, while CVT-MDI
and I + A treatment groups were similar. Time to first COPD exacerbation was
slightly longer in the CVT-R group compared to the other treatment groups,
although it did not reach statistical significance (CVT-R versus CVT-MDI, P =
0.57; CVT-R versus I + A, P = 0.22). Rates of withdrawal and patient refusal to
continue treatment were lower in CVT-R compared with CVT-MDI and I + A groups
(CVT-R versus CVT-MDI, P = 0.09; CVT-R versus I + A, P = 0.005). The percentage
of patients reporting adverse events and serious adverse events was similar
across all three treatment groups.
CONCLUSION: CVT-R is an effective, environmentally friendly inhaler that provides
patients with a high level of user satisfaction and may positively impact
clinical outcomes while having no adverse impacts on patients using the device.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S38577 
PMCID: PMC3607534
PMID: 23658479  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2013;8:169-73. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S38320. Epub
2013 Mar 28.

Inspiratory drive is related to dynamic pulmonary hyperinflation in COPD
patients.

Gatta D(1), Fredi M, Aliprandi G, Pini L, Tantucci C.

Author information: 
(1)Respiratory Medicine Unit, Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences,
University of Brescia, Brescia, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Baseline high neuromuscular drive is present in chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD). In moderate-to-very severe COPD patients, both static
and/or dynamic pulmonary hyperinflation have been demonstrated at rest.
AIM: To assess the influence of dynamic hyperinflation on neuromuscular drive at 
rest.
METHODS: We recruited 22 patients with severe-to-very severe COPD showing resting
dynamic pulmonary hyperinflation, as assessed by the baseline reduction of
inspiratory capacity (IC) (<80% of predicted). IC, occlusion pressure (P₀.₁),
maximal inspiratory pressure (MIP), and their ratio were measured at
end-expiratory lung volume (EELV) before and after acute inhalation of 400 mcg of
albuterol (metered-dose inhaler plus spacer). In these patients the
bronchodilator response was assessed also as lung volume changes.
RESULTS: Only in COPD patients with a marked increase in IC (>12% of baseline and
at least 200 mL) after bronchodilator, resting P0.1 showed a clinically
significant decrease, despite the EELV diminution (P < 0.001). MIP was augmented 
following EELV reduction and therefore the P₀.₁/MIP ratio was markedly decreased 
(P < 0.001). In contrast, no changes in these indices were found after
bronchodilator in COPD patients with insignificant variations of IC. Breathing
pattern parameters did not vary in both sub-groups after albuterol.
CONCLUSION: Following bronchodilator, significant P₀.₁ decrease, MIP increase,
and reduction of the P₀.₁/MIP ratio were found only in COPD patients with a
marked IC increase and these changes were closely related. These findings suggest
that bronchodilators, by decreasing dynamic hyperinflation, may control
exertional and/or chronic dyspnea partly through a reduction of central
neuromuscular drive.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S38320 
PMCID: PMC3615919
PMID: 23569371  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Allergy Asthma Proc. 2013 Jan-Feb;34(1):42-51. doi: 10.2500/aap.2012.33.3647.
Epub 2012 Dec 20.

Prospective, open-label assessment of albuterol sulfate hydrofluoroalkane
metered-dose inhaler with new integrated dose counter.

Given J(1), Taveras H, Iverson H, Lepore M.

Author information: 
(1)Allergy and Respiratory Center, Canton, OH, USA. JohnG@GivenMD.com

Metered-dose inhalers (MDIs) allow patients who require therapy for various
respiratory diseases to deliver these therapies directly to the airways via
inhalation. MDIs are designed to contain more propellant than required for
administration of the labeled number of actuations; therefore, the amount of
active medication/actuation remaining after administration of the labeled number 
of actuations may result in a lower than therapeutic dose of active medication.
An MDI with an integrated dose counter provides the only reliable means by which 
a patient can track the amount of medication remaining in the MDI. This study
evaluated the functionality, reliability, accuracy, and patient satisfaction with
albuterol sulfate hydrofluoroalkane (HFA) MDI with a new integrated dose counter 
in the clinical setting. Patients aged ≥4 years with asthma, chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease, or both, participated in this phase 4, prospective, open-label
study. Treatment was twice-daily dosing with albuterol HFA MDI at 90 micrograms
with dose counter for either 5 or 7 weeks. Concordance/agreement between daily
patient recordings of actuations and counter readings was assessed with five
discrepancy types: fire not count (undercount; primary end point), count not fire
(overcount), fire count up within a dose (counter reading increased, instead of
decreased, after MDI was actuated), count unknown fire (counter number at the
beginning of a dosing session was less than counter number at the end of the
previous session), and count up unknown fire (counter number at the beginning of 
a dosing session was greater than counter number at the end of the previous
session). Responses to twelve questions designed to evaluate confidence, ease of 
use, and patient satisfaction were also analyzed. Overall discrepancy rate was
1.87 per 200 actuations. Primary end point (fire not count rate) was 0.30 per 200
actuations. Overall, ~95-97% of patients were "very satisfied" or "somewhat
satisfied" with the albuterol HFA MDI with dose counter, its ease of use, and the
ability to tell when it should be replaced. The albuterol HFA MDI with new
integrated dose counter functioned reliably and accurately in the clinical
setting. Overall patient satisfaction was high with the albuterol HFA MDI with
new integrated dose counter and the device was shown to function reliably and
accurately. Clinicaltrials.gov identifier: NCT01302587.

DOI: 10.2500/aap.2012.33.3647 
PMID: 23265285  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Ann Pharmacother. 2012 Dec;46(12):1717-21. doi: 10.1345/aph.1R283. Epub 2012 Nov 
20.

Concomitant use of ipratropium and tiotropium in chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease.

Cole JM(1), Sheehan AH, Jordan JK.

Author information: 
(1)Purdue University College of Pharmacy, Indianapolis, IN, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To describe the current data evaluating the efficacy and safety of
ipratropium used in combination with tiotropium in patients with chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease.
DATA SOURCES: A literature search using MEDLINE (1966-August 2012) and EMBASE
(1973-August 2012) was conducted using the search terms ipratropium, tiotropium, 
combination drug therapy, and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. References
of identified articles were reviewed for additional relevant citations.
STUDY SELECTION AND DATA EXTRACTION: All English-language articles regarding the 
concomitant use of ipratropium and tiotropium were reviewed.
DATA SYNTHESIS: Two prospective randomized controlled trials have demonstrated
increases in bronchodilation with ipratropium when added to maintenance
tiotropium therapy, suggesting potential benefits during short-term, combined
use. One study reported significantly higher peak forced expiratory volume in 1
second (FEV(1)) responses with both ipratropium (230 mL) and fenoterol (315 mL)
compared to placebo (178 mL) when added to maintenance tiotropium. The peak
response with fenoterol was significantly higher than with ipratropium (FEV(1)
difference = 84 mL). Another study reported a mean difference in FEV(1) of 81 mL 
(95% CI 27 to 136) with albuterol versus placebo and a mean difference in FEV(1) 
of 68 mL (95% CI 3 to 132) with ipratropium versus placebo. The difference
between albuterol and ipratropium when added to maintenance tiotropium was not
significant. One large observational study reported a significantly higher risk
of acute urinary retention in individuals receiving combination therapy with a
short- and long-acting anticholinergic agent compared to those receiving
monotherapy (OR 1.84; 95% CI 1.25 to 2.71). Individuals at highest risk were men 
and those with evidence of benign prostatic hypertrophy.
CONCLUSIONS: While ipratropium may provide spirometric improvements in lung
function for patients receiving tiotropium maintenance therapy, the clinical
significance of these improvements has not been documented and the risk of
anticholinergic adverse effects is increased with combination therapy. Further
studies evaluating the safety and efficacy of concomitant ipratropium and
tiotropium are warranted before combination use can be recommended for select
patients.

DOI: 10.1345/aph.1R283 
PMID: 23170031  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2012 Dec;47(6):729-37. doi: 10.1165/rcmb.2012-0057OC. 
Epub 2012 Oct 4.

Attenuation of inhibitory prostaglandin E2 signaling in human lung fibroblasts is
mediated by phosphodiesterase 4.

Michalski J(1), Kanaji N, Liu X, Nogel S, Wang X, Basma H, Nakanishi M, Sato T,
Gunji Y, Fahrid M, Nelson A, Muller KC, Holz O, Magnussen H, Rabe KF, Toews ML,
Rennard SI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Section of Pulmonary, Critical Care, Sleep
and Allergy, University of Nebraska Medical Center, 985910 Nebraska Medical
Center, Omaha, NE 68198-5910, USA.

The etiology of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is complex and
involves an aberrant inflammatory response. Prostaglandin (PG)E2 is elevated in
COPD, is a key modulator of lung fibroblast functions, and may influence COPD
progression. Most studies evaluating the effects of PGE2 on lung fibroblasts have
used acute exposures. The current study evaluated whether longer-term exposure
would induce attenuation of PGE2 signaling as part of an autoregulatory pathway. 
Human fetal lung fibroblasts were pretreated with PGE2 for 24 hours, and
migration and cAMP accumulation in response to acute stimulation with PGE2 were
assessed. Fibroblasts from adults with and without COPD were pretreated, and
migration was assessed. PGE2 pretreatment attenuated subsequent PGE2-mediated
inhibition of chemotaxis and cAMP stimulation. This attenuation was predominantly
due to an increase in phosphodiesterase (PDE)4-mediated degradation of cAMP
rather than to decreased activation of PGE2 receptors (receptor desensitization).
Albuterol- and iloprost-mediated signaling were also attenuated after PGE2
pretreatment, suggesting that activation of PDE4 was able to broadly modulate
multiple cAMP-coupled pathways. Lung fibroblasts from adult control subjects
pretreated with PGE2 also developed attenuation of PGE2-mediated inhibition of
chemotaxis. In contrast, fibroblasts obtained from patients with COPD maintained 
inhibitory PGE2 signaling after PGE2 pretreatment. These data identify a
PDE4-mediated attenuation of PGE2 inhibitory signaling in normal fibroblasts that
appears to be altered in COPD fibroblasts. These alterations may contribute to
COPD pathogenesis and could provide novel therapeutic targets.

DOI: 10.1165/rcmb.2012-0057OC 
PMID: 23043089  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. J Aerosol Med Pulm Drug Deliv. 2012 Aug;25(4):243-7. doi: 10.1089/jamp.2012.0970.

The US and EU regulatory landscapes for locally acting generic/hybrid inhalation 
products intended for treatment of asthma and COPD.

Fuglsang A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Fuglsang Pharma, 07407 Rudolstadt, Germany. anfu@fuglsangpharma.com

This is a review of the current regulatory requirements associated with
development and submission of abridged dossiers for locally acting inhalation
drugs intended for the treatment of asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease. The current EU law does not provide for submission of such products as
generics due to the definition of bioequivalence and bioavailability; instead
they must be submitted as hybrids. A guideline from 2009 is available that
suggests a stepwise approach toward approval. An applicant should first consider 
the degree of in vitro match with the reference product; provided that the match 
is extensive, approval may be granted. If the in vitro match cannot be proven,
the next step is comparison of lung deposition and systemic exposure. If this
match is proven, approval may be granted; otherwise, the final step is
pharmacodynamic evaluation. In the United States, submission as a generic is
possible, but only a single specific guidance document from 1989 is in force. It 
describes in vitro requirements for comparison of albuterol and metaproterenol
pressurized metered dose inhalers. Applicants are encouraged to seek dialogue
with regulators prior to and during development. Although parallel scientific
advice procedures have been established between the US Food and Drug
Administration and the European Medicines Agency, the two authorities give
independent and individual advice.

DOI: 10.1089/jamp.2012.0970 
PMID: 22857274  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Lung. 2012 Aug;190(4):411-7. doi: 10.1007/s00408-012-9387-7. Epub 2012 Apr 13.

β2-adrenergic receptor haplotype may be associated with susceptibility to
desensitization to long-acting β2-agonists in COPD patients.

Mochizuki H(1), Nanjo Y, Kawate E, Yamazaki M, Tsuda Y, Takahashi H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Respiratory Medicine, Tokyo Metropolitan Geriatric Hospital, 35-2 
Sakae-cho, Itabashi-ku, Tokyo 173-0015, Japan.

PURPOSE: Τhat β2-adrenergic receptor (β2AR) haplotypes may play a key role in
clinical response to β2-agonists and haplotype Cys-19Gly16Gln27 (CysGlyGln) is
reported to be associated with desensitization of β2AR to β-agonists in
lymphocytes isolated from patients with asthma and septic shock. We sought to
determine whether haplotypic variation of the β2AR affects the functional
outcomes of long-acting β2-agonist (LABA) treatment for chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD) when used as monotherapy.
METHODS: Treatment-naïve patients with COPD (n = 36) were prospectively treated
with two kinds of LABA--inhaled salmeterol and transdermal tulobuterol patch--for
12 weeks in crossover study, and changes in pulmonary function data and 6-minute 
walk distance (6 MWD) were compared between groups stratified by the CysGlyGln.
RESULTS: Frequencies of haplotype and diplotype for the CysGlyGln were 0.51 and
0.36, respectively. The individuals homozygous for CysGlyGln showed less
improvement in FEV(1), %FEF(25-75 %), and IC/TLC than those with 0 or 1 copy of
CysGlyGln after treatment with both LABAs despite initial bronchodilator
responses to albuterol being similar in these groups. The response in these
parameters was not significantly different between two types of LABA. Overall
changes in 6 MWD in individuals with 2 copies of CysGlyGln versus 0 or 1 copy for
salmeterol were 2.8 and 11 m, and for tulobuterol were -1.3 and 16 m,
respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: Homozygous haplotype for the CysGlyGln of β2AR may be associated
with susceptibility to desensitization to LABA in patients with COPD.

DOI: 10.1007/s00408-012-9387-7 
PMID: 22526864  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2012;7:221-33. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S27569. Epub
2012 Mar 22.

Clinical and economic outcomes in an observational study of COPD maintenance
therapies: multivariable regression versus propensity score matching.

Roberts MH(1), Dalal AA.

Author information: 
(1)Lovelace Respiratory Research Institute, Albuquerque, NM, USA.
melissa.roberts@lcfresearch.org

PURPOSE: To investigate equivalency of results from multivariable regression (MR)
and propensity score matching (PSM) models, observational research methods used
to mitigate bias stemming from non-randomization (and consequently unbalanced
groups at baseline), using, as an example, a large study of chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD) initial maintenance therapy.
METHODS: Patients were 32,338 health plan members, age ≥40 years, with COPD
initially treated with fluticasone propionate/salmeterol combination (FSC),
tiotropium (TIO), or ipratropium (IPR) alone or in combination with albuterol.
Using MR and PSM methods, the proportion of patients with COPD-related health
care utilization, mean costs, odds ratios (ORs), and incidence rate ratios (IRRs)
for utilization events were calculated for the 12 months following therapy
initiation.
RESULTS: Of 12,595 FSC, 9126 TIO, and 10,617 IPR patients meeting MR inclusion
criteria, 89.1% (8135) of TIO and 80.2% (8514) of IPR patients were matched to
FSC patients for the PSM analysis. Methods produced substantially similar
findings for mean cost comparisons, ORs, and IRRs for most utilization events. In
contrast to MR, for TIO compared to FSC, PSM did not produce statistically
significant ORs for hospitalization or outpatient visit with antibiotic or
significant IRRs for hospitalization or outpatient visit with oral
corticosteroid. As in the MR analysis, compared to FSC, ORs and IRRs for all
other utilization events, as well as mean costs, were less favorable for IPR and 
TIO.
CONCLUSION: In this example of an observational study of maintenance therapy for 
COPD, more than 80% of the original treatment groups used in the MR analysis were
matched to comparison treatment groups for the PSM analysis. While some sample
size was lost in the PSM analysis, results from both methods were similar in
direction and statistical significance, suggesting that MR and PSM were
equivalent methods for mitigating bias.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S27569 
PMCID: PMC3324998
PMID: 22500122  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Clin Epidemiol. 2011;3:315-23. doi: 10.2147/CLEP.S26350. Epub 2011 Nov 23.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease prevalence in Lebanon: a cross-sectional
descriptive study.

Waked M(1), Khayat G, Salameh P.

Author information: 
(1)Saint George Hospital University Medical Center, Beirut, Lebanon.

BACKGROUND: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) continues to increase
worldwide. The objective of this study was to determine the prevalence of COPD in
Lebanese adults.
METHODS: A cross-sectional study was carried out using a multistage cluster
sample from all over Lebanon. Residents aged 40 years and over were enrolled.
Subjects underwent baseline spirometry and answered a questionnaire. After an
albuterol + ipratropium bromide bronchodilator, a posttest was performed.
RESULTS: Of 2201 individuals, only 33.3% had never smoked. The prevalence of COPD
by the Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease definition, was
9.7% (95% confidence interval [CI]: 8.5%-10.9%). According to the 5% lower limit 
of normal definition of COPD, the prevalence was 12.5% (95% CI: 11.2%-13.9%). A
total of 20.2% were already diagnosed by a physician. No differences in symptoms 
across stages of COPD were found, but there was a significant trend for a higher 
number of visits to the emergency room and to the doctor (P < 0.001), and a
higher number of hospitalizations (P < 0.001). Older individuals had an increased
risk of COPD (adjusted odds ratio [OR(a)] = 1.05); so did "ever" cigarette
smokers (OR(a) = 4.88) and water-pipe smokers (OR(a) = 2.53).
CONCLUSION: This is the first epidemiological study in Lebanon that determined
COPD prevalence and the link with water-pipe smoking.

DOI: 10.2147/CLEP.S26350 
PMCID: PMC3257901
PMID: 22253549  [PubMed]


32. Clin Ther. 2011 Dec;33(12):1974-84. doi: 10.1016/j.clinthera.2011.11.009.

Efficacy and tolerability of indacaterol 75 μg once daily in patients aged ≥40
years with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: results from 2 double-blind,
placebo-controlled 12-week studies.

Kerwin EM(1), Gotfried MH, Lawrence D, Lassen C, Kramer B.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Research Institute of Southern Oregon PC, Medford, Oregon 97504, USA.
ekerwin@allergyasthmaso.com

BACKGROUND: Indacaterol is the first once-daily, long-acting, inhaled
β(2)-agonist bronchodilator for maintenance treatment of chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD). Two studies (previously reported in a Congress
abstract) were performed in 2010 to provide efficacy and tolerability data to
support the application for approval in the United States of indacaterol 75 μg
once daily, a dose lower than that previously investigated in most studies.
OBJECTIVE: The primary objective was to evaluate the efficacy of indacaterol 75
μg once daily in terms of 24-hour post-dose ("trough") forced expiratory volume
in the first second of respiration (FEV(1)) compared with placebo after 12 weeks 
of treatment.
METHODS: Patients with moderate to severe COPD were randomized to receive
double-blind treatment with indacaterol 75 μg once daily (n = 163 and 159) or
placebo (n = 160 and 159) for 12 weeks. In addition to trough FEV(1) after 12
weeks, rescue albuterol use, health status (St. George's Respiratory
Questionnaire [SGRQ]), and tolerability were evaluated. Clinically relevant
differences between active and placebo treatments were defined as ≥120 mL for
trough FEV(1) and a decrease of ≥4 units in SGRQ total score.
RESULTS: Of patients enrolled in the 2 studies, 54% were men, and 90% and 94%
were white, with mean age 64 and 61 years. Mean duration of COPD was 7 years;
smoking history was 52 pack-years; and 45% and 37% of patients were receiving
inhaled corticosteroid therapy. At week 12, indacaterol demonstrated clinically
relevant bronchodilator efficacy, increasing trough FEV(1) by ≥120 mL versus
placebo (P < 0.001), with significant bronchodilation maintained at all time
points from 5 minutes to 24 hours post-dose. Over 12 weeks, relative to placebo, 
in patients receiving indacaterol therapy, rescue albuterol use was reduced by
1.2 and 0.7 puffs per day (P < 0.01), and the percentage of rescue-free days was 
increased by 13.7 and 8.4 (P < 0.01). At week 12, the SGRQ total score differed
in the indacaterol group versus the placebo group by -3.8 and -3.6, respectively 
(P ≤ 0.01). Adverse events were reported for 49% and 45% of patients receiving
indacaterol therapy, and for 46% and 41% receiving placebo.
CONCLUSIONS: Compared with placebo, indacaterol 75 μg once daily provided
statistically significant and clinically relevant 24-hour bronchodilation and was
well tolerated. In patients receiving indacaterol, the reduction in rescue
albuterol use was statistically significant. Changes in health status also were
statistically significant compared with placebo, although the differences of 3.6 
and 3.8 units were below the predefined 4-unit level of clinical relevance. The
results of these studies suggest that indacaterol 75 μg once daily is an
effective maintenance treatment in patients with moderate to severe COPD.
ClinicalTrials.gov identifiers: NCT01072448 and NCT01068600.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier HS Journals, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clinthera.2011.11.009 
PMID: 22177371  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2011;6:431-8. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S21073. Epub
2011 Aug 18.

Bronchodilator efficacy and safety of indacaterol 150 μg once daily in patients
with COPD: an analysis of pooled data.

Bleecker ER(1), Siler T, Owen R, Kramer B.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Genomics and Personalized Medicine Research and Translational
Medicine Institute, Wake Forest University Health Sciences, Winston-Salem, NC
27157, USA. ebleeck@wakehealth.edu

BACKGROUND: Indacaterol is an inhaled, once-daily long-acting β(2)-agonist
bronchodilator for regular use in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD). As indacaterol is the first once-daily β(2)-agonist to be
developed, it is relevant to evaluate its bronchodilator efficacy, safety, and
tolerability.
METHODS: Data were pooled from three randomized, double-blind, clinical studies
in patients with moderate-to-severe COPD treated with indacaterol 150 μg qd (n = 
627) or placebo (n = 1021). Bronchodilator efficacy was assessed as trough
(24-hour post-dose) forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV(1)) after 12 weeks 
(primary endpoint in individual studies) and FEV(1) measured serially post-dose. 
Rescue use of albuterol was monitored.
RESULTS: At week 12, indacaterol increased trough FEV(1) by 160 mL compared with 
placebo (P < 0.001), exceeding the 120 mL level prespecified as clinically
important. FEV(1) during the first 12-hour post-dose at week 12 averaged 210 mL
higher with indacaterol than with placebo (P < 0.001). Patients receiving
indacaterol recorded 53% of days without use of rescue albuterol, compared with
38% of days in the placebo group (P < 0.001). Adverse events (mostly mild or
moderate) were reported for 52% and 46% of patients receiving indacaterol and
placebo, respectively, and serious adverse events for 4% and 5%. Worsening of
COPD was the most frequent adverse event (10% indacaterol; 15% placebo).
Indacaterol had little effect on pulse or blood pressure or measures of systemic 
β(2)-adrenoceptor activity (blood glucose, serum potassium, and corrected QT
interval).
CONCLUSION: Indacaterol was an effective bronchodilator and was well tolerated,
with a good safety profile over 12 weeks of treatment. It should prove a useful
treatment for patients with moderate-to-severe COPD.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S21073 
PMCID: PMC3186741
PMID: 22003288  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Respir Med. 2011 Aug;105(8):1176-88. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2011.02.020. Epub 2011
Apr 30.

Bronchodilator responsiveness and onset of effect with budesonide/formoterol pMDI
in COPD.

Celli BR(1), Tashkin DP, Rennard SI, McElhattan J, Martin UJ.

Author information: 
(1)Harvard University, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Pulmonary and Critical Care 
Medicine, Boston, MA 02115, USA. bcelli@copdnet.org

BACKGROUND: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) patients are thought to 
have limited bronchodilator response, determined by changes in forced expiratory 
volume in 1s (FEV(1)). In this study, we assessed bronchodilator response in
patients with COPD using not only FEV(1) but also changes in lung volume
expressed as forced vital capacity (FVC) and inspiratory capacity (IC). We also
evaluated the speed of onset of bronchodilation.
METHODS: Data were from 2 randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled studies
(6-months [NCT00206154]; 12-months [NCT00206167]) in patients with moderate to
very severe COPD.
TREATMENTS: twice daily budesonide/formoterol pressurized metered-dose inhaler
(pMDI) 320/9μg, budesonide/formoterol pMDI 160/9μg, formoterol dry powder inhaler
(DPI) 9μg, placebo.
RESULTS: The percentage of patients with FEV(1) improvement (≥12% and ≥200mL;
American Thoracic Society [ATS] criterion) was 34-39% post-albuterol (screening).
On day of randomization (DOR), a larger proportion receiving
formoterol-containing treatment exhibited reversibility within 60min: FEV(1)
(57-59%). Similar results were seen for IC (50-61%) and FVC (57-67%) using the
same improvement criteria. The time to ≥15% FEV(1) improvement on DOR was 5.0,
4.8, and 7.3min for budesonide/formoterol 320/9, budesonide/formoterol 160/9, and
formoterol, respectively. Time to ≥15% FEV(1) improvement was better maintained
with budesonide/formoterol than formoterol at treatment end (6 and 12 months).
CONCLUSIONS: Most patients with moderate to very severe COPD exhibit ATS-defined 
bronchodilator reversibility based on flow and lung volume measures after
budesonide/formoterol pMDI or formoterol treatment. Budesonide/formoterol pMDI
also has a rapid (within 5min) onset of bronchodilation that is maintained over
time compared with formoterol alone.

Copyright © 2011. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2011.02.020 
PMID: 21531124  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Am J Geriatr Pharmacother. 2010 Dec;8(6):571-82. doi:
10.1016/S1543-5946(10)80006-6.

Albuterol and levalbuterol use and spending in Medicare beneficiaries with
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Puig A(1), McElligott S, Bergquist H, Doshi JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health Care Management and Economics, Wharton School, University
of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, 19104–6021, USA.

Comment in
    Am J Geriatr Pharmacother. 2010 Dec;8(6):483-4.

BACKGROUND: The evidence for the benefits of branded levalbuterol over generic
albuterol in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is
inconclusive. However, there are significant cost differences between these
products.
OBJECTIVES: This study examined use and spending on albuterol and levalbuterol in
a nationally representative sample of Medicare beneficiaries with COPD enrolled
in Part D in 2006. It also examined differences in patient characteristics and
use of other COPD drugs among recipients of these 2 short-acting β-agonists.
METHODS: Data were obtained from the 5% Medicare files for 2005-2006 linked to
the 2006 Medicare Part D files. The sample consisted of all fee-for-service
beneficiaries with COPD enrolled in stand-alone Part D plans in 2006. Patient
characteristics and other COPD medication use were compared across albuterol-only
users, levalbuterol-only users, and users of both albuterol and levalbuterol.
Multinomial logistic regressions were used to identify factors independently
associated with levalbuterol use.
RESULTS: There were 5.5 times more albuterol users than levalbuterol users in
2006; however, mean annual spending on levalbuterol was 18.6 times higher per
user in 2006 than spending on albuterol ($1876 vs $101 per user, respectively).
Levalbuterol-only users were more likely to be older than albuterol-only users
(mean age: 71.5 vs 68.7 years; P < 0.05), as well as sicker (mean prescription
drug hierarchical condition category score: 1.72 vs 1.55; P < 0.05) and residing 
in the South (67.9% vs 41.6%; P < 0.05). Levalbuterol-only users were more likely
to use nebulizer forms covered under Part B than inhaler forms covered under Part
D (78.6% vs 26.8%, respectively; P < 0.05), whereas albuterol-only users were
more likely to use inhaler forms covered under Part D than nebulizer forms
covered under Part B (82.2% vs 33.0%, respectively; P < 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: In this sample of Medicare beneficiaries with COPD enrolled in Part 
D, mean annual spending in 2006 was significantly higher for levalbuterol than
for albuterol. The differences between levalbuterol and albuterol users in terms 
of patient characteristics, geographic region, and drug formulation/device type, 
coupled with the inconclusive evidence for efficacy differences in the
literature, highlight the need for further comparative clinical and
cost-effectiveness studies of these agents.

Copyright © 2010. Published by EM Inc USA.

DOI: 10.1016/S1543-5946(10)80006-6 
PMID: 21356506  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. BMC Health Serv Res. 2011 Feb 16;11:37. doi: 10.1186/1472-6963-11-37.

The validity of using ICD-9 codes and pharmacy records to identify patients with 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Cooke CR(1), Joo MJ, Anderson SM, Lee TA, Udris EM, Johnson E, Au DH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, University of Michigan, Ann 
Arbor, USA. cookecr@umich.edu

BACKGROUND: Administrative data is often used to identify patients with chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), yet the validity of this approach is
unclear. We sought to develop a predictive model utilizing administrative data to
accurately identify patients with COPD.
METHODS: Sequential logistic regression models were constructed using 9573
patients with postbronchodilator spirometry at two Veterans Affairs medical
centers (2003-2007). COPD was defined as: 1) FEV1/FVC <0.70, and 2) FEV1/FVC <
lower limits of normal. Model inputs included age, outpatient or inpatient
COPD-related ICD-9 codes, and the number of metered does inhalers (MDI)
prescribed over the one year prior to and one year post spirometry. Model
performance was assessed using standard criteria.
RESULTS: 4564 of 9573 patients (47.7%) had an FEV1/FVC < 0.70. The presence of ≥1
outpatient COPD visit had a sensitivity of 76% and specificity of 67%; the AUC
was 0.75 (95% CI 0.74-0.76). Adding the use of albuterol MDI increased the AUC of
this model to 0.76 (95% CI 0.75-0.77) while the addition of ipratropium bromide
MDI increased the AUC to 0.77 (95% CI 0.76-0.78). The best performing model
included: ≥6 albuterol MDI, ≥3 ipratropium MDI, ≥1 outpatient ICD-9 code, ≥1
inpatient ICD-9 code, and age, achieving an AUC of 0.79 (95% CI 0.78-0.80).
CONCLUSION: Commonly used definitions of COPD in observational studies
misclassify the majority of patients as having COPD. Using multiple diagnostic
codes in combination with pharmacy data improves the ability to accurately
identify patients with COPD.

DOI: 10.1186/1472-6963-11-37 
PMCID: PMC3050695
PMID: 21324188  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2010 Dec 31;6:13-22. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S15455.

Comparative cost-effectiveness of a fluticasone-propionate/salmeterol combination
versus anticholinergics as initial maintenance therapy for chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease.

Dalal AA(1), Roberts MH, Petersen HV, Blanchette CM, Mapel DW.

Author information: 
(1)US Health Outcomes, GlaxoSmithKline, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709, USA.
anand.a.dalal@gsk.com

PURPOSE: Relative costs and utilization-related outcomes of a fluticasone
propionate 250 μg + salmeterol 50 μg combination (FSC), tiotropium bromide, and
ipratropium as initial maintenance therapy in COPD have not been compared in a
commercially-insured population.
METHODS: This retrospective, observational cohort study used health care claims
data from January 2004 to June 2009 from a large administrative database for
patients aged ≥40 years with COPD. Time-to-first COPD-related health care event
beginning 30 days following therapy initiation with FSC (n = 16,684), ipratropium
alone or in fixed dose combination with albuterol (n = 14,449), or tiotropium (n 
= 12,659) was estimated using Cox proportional hazard models that controlled for 
differences in patient demographic characteristics, health care utilization, and 
comorbidities at baseline. Mean adjusted costs and numbers of COPD-related health
care encounters and prescription medication fills were compared among patients
with 12 months of follow-up (FSC, n = 12,595; ipratropium, n = 10,617;
tiotropium, n = 9126).
RESULTS: With FSC as the reference, risk for a COPD-related hospitalization
and/or emergency department visit was significantly higher for ipratropium
(hazard ratio [HR] 1.64, 95% confidence interval [CI] 1.50-1.79) and tiotropium
(HR 1.29, CI 1.17-1.41). Mean adjusted 12-month COPD-related total health care
costs were lower for FSC ($2068, standard deviation [SD] $1190) than for
ipratropium ($2841, SD $1858) and tiotropium ($2408, SD $1511, both P <0.05).
Mean number of COPD-related hospitalizations, emergency department visits, and
outpatient visits associated with an oral corticosteroid or antibiotic were also 
lower for FSC than for ipratropium and tiotropium (all P <0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: In this retrospective "real-world" observational sample of COPD
patients, initiating treatment with FSC was associated with significantly better 
clinical and economic outcomes compared with short- and long-acting
anticholinergic therapy. Consistent with the goal of preventing and reducing
exacerbations advocated by global guidelines, the findings suggest that
initiation of maintenance treatment with FSC may afford clinical benefits at a
lower cost than anticholinergic treatment.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S15455 
PMCID: PMC3034283
PMID: 21311689  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Open Respir Med J. 2010 Oct 21;4:86-91. doi: 10.2174/1874306401004010086.

Safety and efficacy of fluticasone propionate/salmeterol hydrofluoroalkane 134a
metered-dose-inhaler compared with fluticasone propionate/salmeterol diskus in
patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Koser A(1), Westerman J, Sharma S, Emmett A, Crater GD.

Author information: 
(1)Greenville Pharmaceutical Research, Greenville, SC 864-770-0890, USA.

PURPOSE: To provide information on the efficacy and safety of Fluticasone
Propionate/Salmeterol Hydrofluoroalkane 134a Metered-Dose-Inhaler 230/42mcg (FSC 
MDI) and its comparable dose of Fluticasone Propionate/Salmeterol DISKUS
250/50mcg (FSC DISKUS) in patients with COPD.
METHODS: This multicenter, randomized, double-blind, 12 week study was designed
to evaluate FSC MDI treatment responses as compared with FSC DISKUS. The primary 
comparison of interest was non-inferiority between the FSC MDI treatment group
and the FSC DISKUS treatment group assessed in terms of 2-hour post-dose FEV(1)
change from baseline at endpoint. The non-inferiority criterion bound was 75mL
(lower confidence limit of -75mL).
INCLUSION CRITERIA: Male or female aged ≥ 40, post-bronchodilator FEV(1) ≤ 70%
predicted normal, FEV(1)/FVC ≤ 70% and ≥ 10 pack years smoking history. Adverse
events were recorded by patients throughout the study on daily diary cards.
Adverse events were collected in eCRFs at all clinic visits and during a final
follow-up phone call.
RESULTS: Patients (N=247) were randomized to FSC MDI (FEV(1)% 49.3 ± 12.3,
FEV(1)/FVC 50.5 ± 10.0) and FSC DISKUS (FEV(1)% 48.4 ± 11.0, FEV(1)/FVC 50.3 ±
10.3). From an ANCOVA model the least squares (LS) mean difference (FSC MDI- FSC 
DISKUS) for the 2-hour post dose FEV(1) at endpoint was -2.0mL (95% CI -64mL,
59mL). Pre-dose FEV(1), FVC, PEF, and albuterol use were also similar between the
two formulations. The most common adverse events (AE) during treatment were
headache (8% and 6% of patients), nasopharyngitis (4% and 6%), cough (3% and 4%),
and sinusitis (2% and 5%) for FSC MDI and FSC DISKUS, respectively. Pneumonia was
recorded as an AE for 2 (2%) patients in the FSC DISKUS arm.
CONCLUSION: This is the first study to demonstrate that FSC MDI has a similar
efficacy and safety profile to FSC DISKUS in COPD patients.

DOI: 10.2174/1874306401004010086 
PMCID: PMC3023060
PMID: 21253451  [PubMed]


39. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2010 Nov 9;5:395-9.

Cardiac injury in patients with COPD presenting with dyspnea: a pilot study.

Odigie-Okon E(1), Jordan B, Dijeh S, Wolff A, Dadu R, Lall P, Zarich S,
Amoateng-Adjepong Y, Manthous CA.

Author information: 
(1)Bridgeport Hospital and Yale University School of Medicine, Bridgeport, CT
06610, USA.

PURPOSE: The aim of this pilot study was to test the hypothesis that myocardial
ischemia complicates the management of some patients with chest-pain-free chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) exacerbations.
METHODS: In this prospective, observational, cohort study, patients admitted to a
350-bed community teaching hospital, with dyspnea and a primary diagnosis of COPD
exacerbation, were followed for enzymatic and electrocardiographic evidence of
myocardial ischemia for the first 24 hours of hospital admission.
RESULTS: A total of 114 patients were studied. Overall, four patients had
definite myocardial infarctions, one had definite myocardial ischemia and 14 had 
possible myocardial ischemia. In multiple logistic regression models, age, number
of coronary risk factors, and amount of administered albuterol were not
associated with myocardial injury.
CONCLUSION: While unrecognized myocardial injury is relatively rare in patients
with an exacerbation of COPD, it occurs frequently enough to warrant some caution
since beta-agonists are the mainstays of therapy.


PMCID: PMC2981154
PMID: 21103406  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Chin Med J (Engl). 2010 Jul;123(13):1652-7.

Salmeterol/fluticasone treatment reduces circulating C-reactive protein level in 
patients with stable chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Tang YJ(1), Wang K, Yuan T, Qiu T, Xiao J, Yi Q, Feng YL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, West China Hospital, Sichuan University,
Chengdu, Sichuan 610041, China.

BACKGROUND: Evidence suggests that systemic inflammation may play an important
role in the progression and morbidity of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
It remains controversial whether inhaled corticosteroid in combination with a
long-acting beta(2)-adrenoceptor agonist can attenuate systemic inflammation. We 
evaluated the effect of salmeterol/fluticasone propionate on circulating
C-reactive protein level in stable chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
patients.
METHODS: An open-label clinical trial was conducted to recruit 122 outpatients
with stable moderate-to-severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease from
department of respiratory medicine in two teaching hospitals between June 2007
and March 2008. Patients were randomized into two groups (1:1) to receive either 
the combination of 50 microg salmeterol and 500 microg fluticasone twice daily (n
= 61), or the combination of 206 microg albuterol and 36 microg ipratropium q.i.d
(n = 61) over 6 months. Circulating C-reactive protein concentrations were
measured before randomization and during the follow-up. The efficacy of treatment
was also assessed by spirometry, as well as health status and dyspnea score at
baseline and after 6-month treatment.
RESULTS: Baseline characteristics of two groups were similar. Compared with
ipratropium/albuterol, the combination of salmeterol/fluticasone significantly
reduced circulating level of C-reactive protein (-1.73 vs. 0.08 mg/L,
respectively, P < 0.05) after 6-month treatment. Forced expiratory volume in one 
second (FEV(1)) and health status also improved significantly in
salmeterol/fluticasone group compared with ipratropium/albuterol.
Salmeterol/fluticasone treatment subjects who had a decrease of circulating
C-reactive protein level had a significant improvement in FEV(1) and St George's 
Respiratory Questionnaire total scores compared with those who did not (185 vs.
83 ml and -5.71 vs. -1.79 units, respectively, both P < 0.01).
CONCLUSION: Salmeterol/fluticasone treatment reduced circulating C-reactive
protein concentration in clinically stable moderate-to-severe chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease patients after 6-month treatment.


PMID: 20819623  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. J Prim Health Care. 2010 Mar;2(1):22-8.

Use of the inhaled corticosteroid to bronchodilator ratio in an audit of the
treatment of asthma in an academic family medicine residency programme.

Pisarik P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Family Medicine, University of Oklahoma, School of Community Medicine, Tulsa, 
OK 74120-5440, USA. paul-pisarik@ouhsc.edu

INTRODUCTION: Asthma affects around 5% of the United States population, with 50% 
having uncontrolled symptoms.
AIM: To improve asthma care by seeing if the inhaled corticosteroid to
bronchodilator ratio (RATIO) is associated with asthma control and if
non-clinical factors were associated with adherence to asthma guidelines.
METHOD: A retrospective study using University of Oklahoma-Tulsa, School of
Community Medicine Family Medicine Clinic electronic medical records of a random 
sample of 49 patients with asthma who were seen at least twice from July 2003
through June 2007 and did not have a diagnosis of chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease or exercise-induced asthma.
RESULTS: The RATIO for those prescribed corticosteroid inhalers was directly
related to the actual step of asthma care (STEP) but inversely related to the
number of prednisone courses prescribed per year (R2 =.30, p = 0.0012). The
difference between the actual STEP and ideal STEP (had corticosteroid inhalers
been prescribed for all the months in the study) was directly related to the
percent of available salbutamol (albuterol) inhalersthat non-clinicians refilled 
and inversely related to the actual STEP (R2 = .45, p = 1.8 x 10(-5)). The
available corticosteroid inhalers prescribed was directly related to the actual
STEP and inversely related to the number of comorbid diagnoses addressed at the
last asthma visit (R2 = .70, p = 5.8 x 10(-10)).
DISCUSSION: Efforts to both limit salbutamol medications, especially by
non-clinicians, and simultaneously prescribe appropriate amounts of inhaled
corticosteroids, through a dedicated asthma visit, should improve asthma control.
A higher RATIO implies better asthma control.


PMID: 20690399  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. J Appl Physiol (1985). 2010 Oct;109(4):1019-26. doi:
10.1152/japplphysiol.00147.2010. Epub 2010 Jul 22.

Airway distensibility and volume recruitment with lung inflation in COPD.

Baldi S(1), Dellacà R, Govoni L, Torchio R, Aliverti A, Pompilio P, Corda L,
Tantucci C, Gulotta C, Brusasco V, Pellegrino R.

Author information: 
(1)Fisiopatologia Respiratoria, Centro Medico di Riabilitazione di Montescano,
Fondazione Salvatore Maugeri IRCCS, Via per Montescano, 31, 27040 Montescano
(Pavia), Italy. simonetta.baldi@fsm.it

The effects of full lung inflation on respiratory conductance (Grs) and reactance
(Xrs) were measured in 15 subjects with moderate to severe chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD) and 11 matched healthy control subjects. Airway
distensibility was estimated from the ratio of the difference of Grs between
functional residual capacity and total lung capacity to the relevant changes in
lung volume (ΔGrs/ΔVl) or transpulmonary pressure (ΔGrs/ΔPtp). Similar analysis
was applied to Xrs to estimate lung volume recruitment (ΔXrs/ΔVl or ΔXrs/ΔPtp).
The extent of emphysema in COPD subjects was estimated from the percentage of low
attenuation area (LAA) at high-resolution computed tomography. At baseline,
ΔGrs/ΔVl and ΔXrs/ΔVl were significantly less in COPD than control subjects,
indicating less distensibility and volume recruitment in the former. In COPD,
ΔGrs/ΔPtp and ΔXrs/ΔPtp were uncorrelated with LAA but correlated with 1-s forced
expiratory volume and with each other. After albuterol, both ΔGrs/ΔPtp and
ΔGrs/ΔVl became significantly and negatively correlated with LAA, while ΔXrs/ΔPtp
and ΔXrs/ΔVl decreased significantly independently of LAA. Moreover, ΔGrs/ΔPtp
and ΔXrs/ΔPtp with lung inflation were no longer correlated with each other,
suggesting that airway distensibility and volume recruitment were affected
differently by airway smooth muscle tone. Assuming that Grs mainly reflects
airway caliber and Xrs the number of ventilated lung units, we conclude that
airway smooth muscle contributes to airway stiffness and ventilation
inhomogeneities in COPD subjects with prevailing bronchitis but only to the
latter in those with more emphysema. We suggest that changes of airway
distensibility and volume recruitment with a bronchodilator may be useful for
disease phenotyping.

DOI: 10.1152/japplphysiol.00147.2010 
PMID: 20651219  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Semin Respir Crit Care Med. 2010 Jun;31(3):321-33. doi: 10.1055/s-0030-1254072.
Epub 2010 May 21.

Mono- and combination therapy of long-acting bronchodilators and inhaled
corticosteroids in advanced COPD.

Ohar JA(1), Donohue JF.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Pulmonary, Critical Care, Allergy, and Immunologic Diseases,
Department of Internal Medicine, Wake Forest University School of Medicine,
Winston-Salem, North Carolina, USA.

Beta-2 adrenergic agonists are sympathomimetic agents that stimulate
bronchodilation by activation of adenyl cyclase to produce cyclic 3'5' adenosine 
monophosphate (AMP). Short-acting beta-agonists (SABAs) have a 3- to 6-hour
duration of action, and the duration of action of long-acting beta-agonists
(LABAs) exceeds 12 hours. Because of their rapid onset of action, SABAs are
effective for rescue from symptoms of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD). LABAs-salmeterol and formoterol-have been shown to significantly improve 
lung function, health status, and symptom reduction, compared with ipratropium.
Despite safety concerns over the use of LABAs as monotherapy in asthma the use of
these medications in COPD has generally been described as safe. Novel
bronchodilators for COPD in late-stage development include the beta-agonists
indacterol and carmoterol. Parasympathetic activity in the large and medium-size 
airways is mediated through the muscarinic receptors and results in airway
smooth-muscle contraction, mucus secretion, and possibly increased ciliary
activity. Although short-acting ipratropium has been used as monotherapy or in
combination with albuterol the use of long-acting antimuscarinics is superior in 
improving health outcomes. The use of tiotropium results in improved health
status, dyspnea, and exercise capacity, and reduced hyperinflation and COPD
exacerbation rate in patients with moderate to severe COPD. Analysis of
prospective clinical trial data shows a mortality reduction in subjects treated
with tiotropium, despite retrospective review of insurance claims that show an
enhanced mortality. Theophylline is a nonselective phosphodiesterase inhibitor
that acts as both a weak bronchodilator and a respiratory stimulant. Novel
approaches include using the inhalation route to reduce side effects and
combination with inhaled corticosteroids (ICS). However, because of its potential
adverse effects and narrow therapeutic index, it should only be used when
symptoms persist despite optimal bronchodilator therapy. Current guidelines
highlight that for COPD patients uncontrolled by bronchodilator monotherapy,
combination therapy is recommended. These include LABA/ICS and LAMA/LABA
combinations. Bronchodilators and their combination with ICS are central to the
management of COPD. The choice of agents is based primarily on disease stage,
individual response, cost, side effect profile, and availability.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0030-1254072 
PMID: 20496301  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. BMC Pulm Med. 2010 May 14;10:30. doi: 10.1186/1471-2466-10-30.

beta2-agonists promote host defense against bacterial infection in primary human 
bronchial epithelial cells.

Gross CA(1), Bowler RP, Green RM, Weinberger AR, Schnell C, Chu HW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, National Jewish Health, 1400 Jackson Street, Denver,
Colorado 80206, USA.

BACKGROUND: Airway epithelial cells are critical in host defense against bacteria
including Mycoplasma pneumoniae (Mp) in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD) and asthma. beta2-agonists are mainstay of COPD and asthma therapy, but
whether beta2-agonists directly affect airway epithelial host defense functions
is unclear.
METHODS: Epithelial cells from bronchial brushings of normal (n = 8), asthma (n =
8) and COPD (n = 8) subjects were grown in air-liquid interface cultures, and
treated with cigarette smoke extract (CSE) and/or Th2 cytokine IL-13, followed by
Mp infection and treatment with beta2-agonists albuterol and formoterol for up to
seven days. Mp and host defense proteins short palate, lung, and nasal epithelial
clone 1 (SPLUNC1) and beta-defensin-2 were quantified. Expression of
beta2-adrenergic receptors was also measured by real-time quantitative RT-PCR.
RESULTS: (R)- or racemic albuterol and (R,R)- or racemic formoterol significantly
decreased Mp levels in normal and asthma epithelial cells. Normal cells treated
with Mp and (R)- or racemic albuterol showed an increase in SPLUNC1, but not in
beta-defensin-2. COPD cells did not respond to drug treatment with a significant 
decrease in Mp or an increase in SPLUNC1. IL-13 attenuated drug effects on Mp,
and markedly decreased SPLUNC1 and beta2-adrenergic receptors.
CONCLUSIONS: These results for the first time show that beta2-agonists enhance
host defense functions of primary bronchial epithelial cells from normal and
asthma subjects, which is attenuated by IL-13.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2466-10-30 
PMCID: PMC2881900
PMID: 20470412  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Am Fam Physician. 2010 Mar 1;81(5):607-13.

Management of COPD exacerbations.

Evensen AE(1).

Author information: 
(1)University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health, 100 N. Nine
Mound Rd., Verona, WI 53593, USA. ann.evensen@uwmf.wisc.edu

Erratum in
    Am Fam Physician. 2010 Aug 1;82(3):230.

Summary for patients in
    Am Fam Physician. 2010 Mar 1;81(5):616.

Exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease contribute to the high
mortality rate associated with the disease. Randomized controlled trials have
demonstrated the effectiveness of multiple interventions. The first step in
outpatient management should be to increase the dosage of inhaled short-acting
bronchodilators. Combining ipratropium and albuterol is beneficial in relieving
dyspnea. Oral corticosteroids are likely beneficial, especially for patients with
purulent sputum. The use of antibiotics reduces the risk of treatment failure and
mortality in moderately or severely ill patients. Physicians should consider
antibiotics for patients with purulent sputum and for patients who have
inadequate symptom relief with bronchodilators and corticosteroids. The choice of
antibiotic should be guided by local resistance patterns and the patient's recent
history of antibiotic use. Hospitalized patients with exacerbations should
receive regular doses of short-acting bronchodilators, continuous supplemental
oxygen, antibiotics, and systemic corticosteroids. Noninvasive positive pressure 
ventilation or invasive mechanical ventilation is indicated in patients with
worsening acidosis or hypoxemia.


PMID: 20187597  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Expert Opin Drug Metab Toxicol. 2010 Mar;6(3):381-92. doi:
10.1517/17425251003649549.

Inhaled albuterol/salbutamol and ipratropium bromide and their combination in the
treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Gordon J(1), Panos RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Cincinnati Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Pulmonary, Critical Care, and
Sleep Division, Cincinnati, OH 45220, USA.

IMPORTANCE OF THE FIELD: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a major 
cause of morbidity and mortality throughout the world. Combination therapy with
albuterol and ipratropium bromide was approved > 15 years ago for the treatment
of COPD. We review the mechanism of action, clinical efficacy, and safety of
albuterol, ipratropium and combined albuterol-ipratropium therapy.
AREAS COVERED IN THIS REVIEW: We conducted a PubMed literature search using the
keywords COPD, albuterol, ipratropium bromide and Combivent (Boehringer Ingelheim
Corp., Ridgefield, CT, USA); pertinent references within the identified citations
are included in the review. Data from the manufacturers are also evaluated.
WHAT THE READER WILL GAIN: At the time of its approval, albuterol/ipratropium
bromide was an innovative combination of existing medications for the treatment
of COPD. The combined formulation provides better improvement in airflow than
either component alone and, by reducing the number of separate inhalers,
simplifies therapy and improves compliance compared with the individual
components.
TAKE HOME MESSAGE: The recent development and approval of longer acting and more 
potent beta agonists, anticholinergics and newer combination treatments have
surpassed many of the advantages of combined albuterol-ipratropium for the
treatment of patients with stable COPD.

DOI: 10.1517/17425251003649549 
PMID: 20163324  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Adv Ther. 2009 Nov;26(11):1024-34. doi: 10.1007/s12325-009-0080-z. Epub 2009 Dec 
2.

Nebulized formoterol provides added benefits to tiotropium treatment in chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease.

Tashkin DP(1), Hanania NA, McGinty J, Denis-Mize K, Chaudry I.

Author information: 
(1)David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles, California 90095, USA.
dtashkin@mednet.ucla.edu

INTRODUCTION: The use of one or more long-acting bronchodilators is key in the
maintenance therapy of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). This
analysis pooled the results of two double-blind studies evaluating the efficacy
and safety of adding nebulized formoterol fumarate inhalation solution (FFIS) to 
maintenance tiotropium (TIO) treatment.
METHODS: Following a run-in period of 7-14 days with once-daily TIO 18 microg,
COPD subjects (> or =25% to <65% predicted forced expiratory volume in 1 second
[FEV(1)]) were randomized to twice-daily FFIS 20 microg (n=145) or nebulized
placebo (PLA, n=140) while continuing on maintenance TIO for 6 weeks. Efficacy
was measured using serial spirometry, transition dyspnea index (TDI), rescue
albuterol use, and St. George's Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ).
RESULTS: The mean standardized area under the curve for FEV(1) over 3 hours
(FEV(1)AUC(0-3)), the primary efficacy variable, was significantly higher in the 
FFIS/TIO group than the PLA/TIO group on day 1 (140 mL difference, P<0.0001) and 
week 6 (192 mL difference, P<0.0001). Mean TDI scores in the FFIS/TIO and PLA/TIO
groups were 1.97 and 0.67, respectively (P=0.0001). Mean albuterol use declined
in the FFIS/TIO group from 2.6 to 1.5 puffs/day compared with little change in
the PLA/TIO group (P<0.0001). SGRQ scores were similar between treatment groups
with the exception of the symptoms score, which improved in the FFIS/TIO group
(-5.8) compared with PLA/TIO (-1.0), and more FFIS/TIO-treated subjects
experienced a clinically significant improvement in total SGRQ score. More
PLA/TIO-treated subjects than FFIS/TIO-treated subjects experienced adverse
events (AEs) (45.7% vs. 31.0%) and COPD exacerbations (7.9% vs. 3.4%).
CONCLUSIONS: The addition of FFIS to maintenance TIO treatment for moderate to
severe COPD results in significantly improved FEV(1) and dyspnea, decreased
rescue medication use, and a lower incidence of AEs and COPD exacerbations. The
addition of FFIS to TIO yields clinically and statistically significant benefits 
for COPD patients and might be of long-term benefit.

DOI: 10.1007/s12325-009-0080-z 
PMID: 19953349  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Am J Geriatr Pharmacother. 2009 Oct;7(5):262-70. doi:
10.1016/j.amjopharm.2009.11.003.

Burden of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease in Medicare beneficiaries
residing in long-term care facilities.

Simoni-Wastila L(1), Blanchette CM, Qian J, Yang HW, Zhao L, Zuckerman IH, Pak
GH, Silver H, Dalal AA.

Author information: 
(1)Peter Lamy Center on Drug Therapy and Aging, University of Maryland Baltimore 
School of Pharmacy, Baltimore, Maryland 21201, USA. lsimoniw@rx.umaryland.edu

BACKGROUND: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a leading cause of
morbidity and mortality worldwide. COPD increases health care resource
utilization and spending and adversely affects quality of life. Data from the
clinical and economic outcomes in Medicare beneficiaries with COPD who reside in 
long-term care (LTC) facilities are limited.
OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this study was to investigate the clinical and economic
outcomes associated with COPD in Medicare beneficiaries residing in LTC
facilities.
METHODS: This retrospective cohort study analyzed data from MarketScan Medicaid, 
a large US administrative claims database containing data on Medicaid programs in
8 states. The study cohort comprised LTC facility residents aged > or =60 years
who had a diagnosis of COPD. Eligible patients also had a prescription filled
between January 1, 2003, and June 30, 2005, for one of the following COPD
treatments: fluticasone propionate + salmeterol xinafoate, tiotropium bromide,
ipratropium bromide, or ipratropium bromide + albuterol sulfate. The date of the 
first prescription fill was considered the index date. Measures of health care
resource utilization included COPD-related and all-cause hospitalizations and
emergency department (ED) visits. Cost analysis outcomes included COPD-related
and all-cause inpatient, outpatient, pharmacy, LTC, and total costs during the
12-month postindex period.
RESULTS: Data from 3037 patients were included (63.0% women; 82.2% white; mean
[SD] age, 78.1 [10.0] years). A total of 43.3% of patients had > or =1
hospitalization; 90.0%, > or =1 ED visit. With the exception of age <70 years,
age was associated with all-cause hospitalization (age 70-<75 years, hazard ratio
[HR] = 1.31 [95% CI, 1.03-1.68]; age 75-<80 years, HR = 1.40 [95% CI, 1.11-1.78];
age > or =80 years, HR = 1.48 [95% CI, 1.19-1.85]). Age was not associated with
COPD-related hospitalization, all-cause ED visits, or COPD-related ED visits. The
risk for all-cause hospitalization in white patients was significantly lower
compared with that in nonwhite patients (HR = 0.79 [95% CI, 0.69-0.91]). Patients
with comorbid asthma had a higher risk for a COPD-related ED visit (HR = 1.34
[95% CI, 1.08-1.66]) than did patients without asthma. Preindex all-cause
hospitalization was associated with COPD-related hospitalization (HR = 1.78 [95% 
CI, 1.49-2.14]) and all-cause hospitalization (HR = 2.05 [95% CI, 1.932.19]).
Twelve-month COPD-related and all-cause direct expenditures per beneficiary were 
US $7391 and $48,183. In COPD-related and all-cause estimates, mean (SD) LTC
costs were the largest cost components ($5629 [$12,562] and $32,966 [$14,871],
respectively), followed by pharmacy costs ($956 [$957] and $5565 [$3873]),
inpatient costs ($466 [$3393] and $6436 [$22,603]), and outpatient costs ($341
[$1793] and $3216 [$6458]).
CONCLUSION: This study found that the utilization of health care resources and
economic burden of LTC residents with COPD were primarily due to LTC, pharmacy,
and inpatient costs.

DOI: 10.1016/j.amjopharm.2009.11.003 
PMID: 19948302  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. J Med Econ. 2009;12(4):339-47. doi: 10.3111/13696990903369135.

Healthcare costs associated with initial maintenance therapy with fluticasone
propionate 250 μg/salmeterol 50 μg combination versus anticholinergic
bronchodilators in elderly US Medicare-eligible beneficiaries with COPD.

Dalal AA(1), Petersen H, Simoni-Wastila L, Blanchette CM.

Author information: 
(1)GlaxoSmithKline, Research Triangle Park, NC, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To compare, in elderly Medicare beneficiaries, chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD)-related healthcare costs for patients initiating
treatment with fluticasone propionate/salmeterol 250 μg/50 μg (FSC) with those
for patients initiating treatment with ipratropium bromide/albuterol (IPA),
ipratropium bromide (IPR), and tiotropium bromide (TIO).
METHODS: In this retrospective, observational, cohort study, COPD-related medical
costs (inpatient/emergency department, outpatient) and pharmacy costs were
assessed in Medicare beneficiaries ≥ 65 years old who were enrolled in a
commercial Medicare health maintenance organization plan and had a diagnosis of
COPD (ICD-9-CM codes 491.xx, 492.xx, or 496.xx) within 12 months before initial
treatment with FSC, IPA, IPR, or TIO.
RESULTS: In these ≥ 65-year-old patients (N=14,689), initial maintenance
treatment with FSC was associated with total COPD-related cost savings (medical +
pharmacy) of $295 versus IPA, $1,235 versus IPR, and $110 versus TIO (p<0.05,
each comparison) over a 1-year follow-up period.
CONCLUSIONS: Initiation of maintenance therapy with FSC was associated with
significant reduction in total costs (medical + pharmacy) relative to costs
associated with the short-acting anticholinergic bronchodilators IPR and IPA and 
the long-acting anticholinergic bronchodilator TIO in an elderly
Medicare-eligible population. These data considered in the context of the
substantial efficacy and effectiveness data suggest that early introduction of
maintenance treatment with FSC has both clinical and economic benefits.
Limitations inherent in handling of administrative data include lack of objective
clinical measures such as spirometry and smoking status. Furthermore, accuracy of
diagnosis codes cannot be verified.

DOI: 10.3111/13696990903369135 
PMID: 19827993  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Pulm Pharmacol Ther. 2009 Dec;22(6):587-92. doi: 10.1016/j.pupt.2009.08.006. Epub
2009 Sep 6.

Therapeutic conversion of the combination of ipratropium and albuterol to
tiotropium in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Niewoehner DE(1), Lapidus R, Cote C, Sharafkhaneh A, Plautz M, Johnson P, Kesten 
S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine at Veterans Affairs Medical Centers in Minneapolis,
Minneapolis, MN 55417, USA. niewo001@umn.edu

BACKGROUND: Ipratropium and albuterol, combined in a single formulation, is
widely used as three to four times daily maintenance therapy in COPD. This trial 
compared tiotropium, once daily, as a potential alternative to patients already
taking the ipratropium/albuterol combination.
METHODS: 676 patients with moderate to very severe stable COPD (mean FEV(1)=39%
of predicted) maintained on ipratropium/albuterol were randomized to receive over
an 84 day period either tiotropium (18 mcg) each morning, or continue with
ipratropium (26 mcg)/albuterol (206 mcg), 2 actuations 4 times daily, using a
parallel group, double-blind, double-dummy design. Six-hour spirometry was
assessed on study days 1, 22, and 84, along with safety assessments and other
efficacy measures.
RESULTS: In terms of primary outcomes, mean trough FEV(1) at 84 days was larger
in the tiotropium arm, as compared with the ipratropium/albuterol arm
(difference=86 ml; 95% CI, 49 to 123 ml, p<0.0001). The mean FEV(1) AUC(0-6) at
84 days was also larger in the tiotropium arm (difference=17 ml; 95% CI, -21 to
56 ml), this difference being statistically non-inferior to the
ipratropium/albuterol arm (p<0.001), but not statistically superior (p=0.37).
Other efficacy measures were similar in the two groups. Lower respiratory adverse
events were reported in 40 tiotropium patients vs. 52 ipratropium/albuterol
patients. Safety reporting was otherwise similar.
CONCLUSION: Patients previously maintained on the ipratropium/albuterol
combination taken four times daily can be switched to tiotropium once daily with 
the reasonable expectation of at least equivalent bronchodilation during daytime 
hours and superior bronchodilation during early morning hours.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pupt.2009.08.006 
PMID: 19737620  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Drugs. 2009 Jun 18;69(9):1205-16. doi: 10.2165/00003495-200969090-00005.

Efficacy and safety of nebulized formoterol as add-on therapy in COPD patients
receiving maintenance tiotropium bromide: Results from a 6-week, randomized,
placebo-controlled, clinical trial.

Hanania NA(1), Boota A, Kerwin E, Tomlinson L, Denis-Mize K.

Author information: 
(1)Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030, USA. hanania@bcm.tmc.edu

Current guidelines for the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD) recommend the use of long-acting bronchodilators in the maintenance
management of COPD. Combining bronchodilators that work through different
mechanisms is recommended in patients with continuous symptoms. We conducted this
study to confirm and further investigate the efficacy and safety of nebulized
formoterol as an add-on therapy to maintenance tiotropium in patients with COPD. 
This randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, parallel-group study
(NCT00507234) was conducted at 24 US sites from March to October 2007 in 155
patients aged > or =40 years with post-bronchodilator forced expiratory volume in
1 second (FEV(1)) > or =25% to <65% predicted normal. COPD patients receiving
open-label tiotropium bromide 18 microg once daily during a 1- to 2-week run-in
period were randomized to receive either formoterol fumarate inhalation solution 
20 microg or placebo by nebulization twice daily for 6 weeks while continuing
treatment with tiotropium. Outcomes included serial spirometry, inspiratory
capacity (IC), baseline dyspnoea index/transition dyspnoea index (BDI/TDI), daily
symptom scores, salbutamol (albuterol) use and health status measured by the St
George's Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ). The primary efficacy endpoint was
standardized absolute FEV(1) area under the curve over 3 hours (AUC(0-3)) at week
6. Treatment groups (formoterol plus tiotropium, n = 78; placebo plus tiotropium,
n = 77) were comparable at baseline. At 6 weeks, FEV(1) AUC(0-3) was
significantly greater in the formoterol group compared with the placebo group
(1.57 vs 1.38 L [p < 0.0001]). Similarly, formoterol plus tiotropium improved
other lung function measures, including FEV(1), forced vital capacity and
post-dose IC at day 1, and maintained efficacy through week 6. Formoterol plus
tiotropium decreased rescue albuterol use throughout the study (p < 0.05). Mean
TDI, SGRQ and most symptom scores did not differ between the two treatment
groups. Overall, 37% of formoterol plus tiotropium recipients experienced adverse
events versus 51% of those receiving placebo plus tiotropium. The addition of
nebulized formoterol to tiotropium in maintenance treatment of COPD provided
clinically meaningful, statistically significant and sustained improvements in
pulmonary function without additional adverse effects.


PMID: 19537837  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. COPD. 2009 Feb;6(1):17-25. doi: 10.1080/15412550902724073.

Formoterol and tiotropium compared with tiotropium alone for treatment of COPD.

Tashkin DP(1), Pearle J, Iezzoni D, Varghese ST.

Author information: 
(1)David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, University of California-Los Angeles,
10833 Le Conte Avenue, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA. dtashkin@mednet.ucla.edu

Combined use of beta(2)-agonists and anticholinergic bronchodilators may have
complementary benefits in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD). The objective of this study was to compare combination treatment with
formoterol (FORM) plus tiotropium (TIO) versus treatment with TIO alone in
patients with COPD. In this active-controlled, double-blind, multicenter trial, a
total of 255 subjects with diagnosed COPD were randomized to 12 weeks of either a
combination of FORM 12 microg twice-daily plus TIO 18 microg once-daily in the
morning (QD AM) or monotherapy with TIO 18 microg QD AM. The primary efficacy
variable was the area under the curve for forced expiratory volume in 1 second
measured 0 to 4 hours after AM dosing (FEV(1) AUC(0-4h)). Significantly greater
improvements in the FEV(1) AUC(0-4h) were seen with FORM + TIO (n = 116) versus
TIO (n = 124) at all time points. The increase in FEV(1) 5 minutes after the
first dose was 180 mL with FORM + TIO versus 40 mL with TIO (p < 0.001). At
endpoint, FEV(1) AUC(0-4h) increased 340 mL with FORM + TIO versus 170 mL with
TIO (p < 0.001). Improvements in trough FEV(1) with FORM + TIO versus TIO were
180 mL and 100 mL, respectively (p < 0.01). Significantly greater reductions from
baseline in symptom scores (p < 0.05) and daytime albuterol use (p < 0.04) were
seen at endpoint with combination FORM + TIO versus TIO monotherapy. Both
treatments were well tolerated. This study demonstrated that concurrent treatment
with FORM + TIO results in greater therapeutic benefits than TIO alone.

DOI: 10.1080/15412550902724073 
PMID: 19229704  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Eur Respir J. 2009 Apr;33(4):771-7. doi: 10.1183/09031936.00145208. Epub 2009 Feb
12.

Endogenous opioids modify dyspnoea during treadmill exercise in patients with
COPD.

Mahler DA(1), Murray JA, Waterman LA, Ward J, Kraemer WJ, Zhang X, Baird JC.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Dartmouth Medical School,
Hanover, NH, USA. Donald.a.mahler@hitchcock.org

Exogenous opioid drugs, such as morphine, relieve breathlessness. The present
study hypothesis was that endogenous opioids, released during the stress of
exercise, modify dyspnoea in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
After familiarisation, patients performed an incremental treadmill exercise test 
followed by constant work on the treadmill for 10 min. At subsequent visits (2 to
3 days apart), patients received two puffs of albuterol, had a catheter placed in
an arm vein for removal of blood to measure beta-endorphin immunoreactivity,
received normal saline or 10 mg of naloxone intravenously in randomised order,
and then performed high-intensity constant work rate exercise on the treadmill.
The mean+/-sd age of the 17 patients (eight females and nine males) was 63+/-7
yrs, and post-bronchodilator forced expiratory volume in one second was 50+/-17% 
predicted. In both conditions, beta-endorphin levels increased three-fold from
rest to end-exercise. The regression slope of breathlessness as a function of
oxygen consumption (primary outcome), mean ratings of breathlessness throughout
exercise and peak ratings of breathlessness were significantly higher with
naloxone than normal saline. There were no differences in physiological responses
throughout exercise between conditions. In conclusion, endogenous opioids modify 
dyspnoea during treadmill exercise in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease by apparent alteration of central perception.

DOI: 10.1183/09031936.00145208 
PMID: 19213787  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Ther Adv Respir Dis. 2008 Apr;2(2):37-48. doi: 10.1177/1753465808089455.

Arformoterol and salmeterol in the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease: a one year evaluation of safety and tolerance.

Donohue JF(1), Hanania NA, Sciarappa KA, Goodwin E, Grogan DR, Baumgartner RA,
Hanrahan JP.

Author information: 
(1)University of North Carolina School of Medicine, Chapel Hill, NC, USA.

INTRODUCTION: Concerns have been raised regarding the safety of extended use of
long-acting beta2-agonists (LABAs). The safety of arformoterol (50 microg QD),
and salmeterol (42 microg BID), was assessed over 12 months in subjects with
COPD. The study also examined the occurrence of tolerance with these agents, i.e.
whether improvement in airway function diminished or frequency of exacerbations
increased with 12-months of use.
METHODS: Subjects with COPD (mean FEV1 1.2 L, ~41% predicted) were enrolled in
the study and randomized to receive nebulized arformoterol 50 microg QD (n = 528)
or salmeterol 42 microg BID (MDI; n = 265) in a prospective, multicenter,
open-label, 12-month trial. The frequency of adverse events, COPD exacerbations, 
and use of short-acting bronchodilator agents were assessed throughout the study 
period. Pulmonary function was also examined.
RESULTS: Among treated subjects, the frequency of adverse events was similar for 
those taking arformoterol (90.5%) and salmeterol (88.3%). Tremor was more
frequent among subjects treated with arformoterol (13.4%) than those treated with
salmeterol (1.1%). The frequency of COPD exacerbations did not increase over 12
months for arformoterol and salmeterol (weeks 0-13: 15.7% and 11.7%,
respectively; weeks 39-52: 10.0% and 9.4%, respectively). Supplemental
ipratropium bromide and rescue racemic albuterol use decreased for both groups by
0.8 to 1.5 actuations/day, decreases that remained stable throughout the 52-week 
study. Mean predose (trough) FEV1 improved for arformoterol and salmeterol at
week 13 (7.1% +/- 17.0 and 7.6% +/- 17.8, respectively) and the improvement
continued at week 52 (5.9% and 6.2%, respectively). Mean peak percent predicted
postdose FEV1 over the course of the 52-week study declined by about 2% for both 
treatments, but throughout was higher for arformoterol than for salmeterol.
CONCLUSION: In this trial, both arformoterol 50 microg QD and salmeterol 42
microg BID were well tolerated in patients with COPD. Both LABAs produced
effective bronchodilation and their use was not associated with the development
of clinically meaningful tolerance over a 1-year treatment period.

DOI: 10.1177/1753465808089455 
PMID: 19124357  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Pharmacotherapy. 2008 Nov;28(11):1325-34. doi: 10.1592/phco.28.11.1325.

Risk of adverse gastrointestinal events from inhaled corticosteroids.

Hansen RA(1), Tu W, Wang J, Ambuehl R, McDonald CJ, Murray MD.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pharmaceutical Outcomes and Policy, University of North Carolina
at Chapel Hill, School of Pharmacy, Chapel Hill, North Carolina 27599-7360, USA.

STUDY OBJECTIVE: To determine whether patients prescribed inhaled corticosteroids
are at risk for adverse gastrointestinal effects.
DESIGN: Retrospective cohort study.
SETTING: Urban health center with an academic affiliation.
PATIENTS: A total of 19,443 adults (mean age 31.8 yrs) with airways disease,
defined as a diagnosis of asthma or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, and
who were prescribed both an inhaled corticosteroid and albuterol (7156 patients) 
or inhaled albuterol alone (12,287 patients) between November 1977 and February
2002.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: The frequency of adverse gastrointestinal events
in the patients who used inhaled corticosteroids and albuterol was compared with 
that in the patients who used albuterol alone. Adverse gastrointestinal outcomes 
included events such as gastritis, ulcers, and bleeding. Cox proportional hazards
models were used to determine the risk of adverse events, controlling for
possible confounders such as alcohol use or nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drug
use. Adverse gastrointestinal events were observed in 461 (6.4%) patients using
inhaled corticosteroids and albuterol and in 302 (2.5%) patients using only
albuterol. After controlling for potential confounders, patients who used inhaled
corticosteroids and albuterol had an increased risk for adverse gastrointestinal 
events compared with patients who used only inhaled albuterol (hazard ratio [HR] 
1.26, 95% confidence interval [CI] 1.02-1.56). A prescription for a spacer device
reduced this risk among patients using an inhaled corticosteroid (HR 0.26, 95% CI
0.20-0.34).
CONCLUSION: Patients using inhaled corticosteroids appear to have a slight risk
for adverse gastrointestinal events that is mitigated in patients who used a
spacer device.

DOI: 10.1592/phco.28.11.1325 
PMCID: PMC2648528
PMID: 18956992  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2008 Oct;122(4):734-40. doi: 10.1016/j.jaci.2008.07.040. 
Epub 2008 Sep 5.

Steroids completely reverse albuterol-induced beta(2)-adrenergic receptor
tolerance in human small airways.

Cooper PR(1), Panettieri RA Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and the Airways Biology Initiative, University of
Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

BACKGROUND: Evidence suggests that chronic stimulation of beta(2)-adrenergic
receptors (beta(2)-ARs) induces receptor tolerance that limits the efficacy of
beta-agonists in the treatment of asthma. The precise mechanisms that induce
beta(2)-AR tolerance remain unclear.
OBJECTIVE: We sought to determine whether steroids modulate albuterol-induced
beta(2)-AR tolerance in human small airways.
METHODS: beta(2)-AR responsiveness to isoproterenol was characterized in human
precision-cut lung slices (PCLSs) precontracted to carbachol after pretreatment
with albuterol.
RESULTS: Incubation of PCLSs with albuterol for 3, 6, or 12 hours attenuated
subsequent isoproterenol-induced relaxation in a dose- and time-dependent manner.
A 40% decrease (P < .0001) in maximum relaxation and a 45% decrease (P = .0011)
in airway sensitivity from control values occurred after the maximum time and
concentration of albuterol incubation. Desensitization was not evident when
airways were relaxed to forskolin. Dexamethasone pretreatment of PCLSs (1 hour)
prevented albuterol-induced beta(2)-AR desensitization by increasing the maximum 
drug effect (P = .0023) and decreasing the log half-maximum effective
concentration values (P < .0001) from that of albuterol alone. Albuterol (12-hour
incubation) decreased the beta(2)-AR cell-surface number (P = .013), which was
not significantly reversed by 1 hour of preincubation with dexamethasone.
CONCLUSION: These data suggest that beta(2)-AR desensitization occurs with
prolonged treatment of human small airways with albuterol through mechanisms
upstream of protein kinase A and that steroids prevent or reverse this
desensitization. Clarifying the precise molecular mechanisms by which beta(2)-AR 
tolerance occurs might offer new therapeutic approaches to improve the efficacy
of bronchodilators in asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaci.2008.07.040 
PMID: 18774166  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. COPD. 2008 Aug;5(4):221-7. doi: 10.1080/15412550802237408.

A double-blind crossover study comparing the safety and efficacy of three weeks
of Flu/Sal 250/50 bid plus albuterol 180 ug prn q4 hours to Flu/Sal 250/50 bid
plus albuterol/Ipratropium bromide 2 puffs prn q4 hours in patients with chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease.

Balkissoon R(1), Make B.

Author information: 
(1)National Jewish Medical and Research Center, Denver, Colorado 80206, USA.
balkissoonr@njc.org

Erratum in
    COPD. 2009 Apr;6(2):145. Dosage error in article text.

The Federal Drug Administration (FDA) approved the use of Fluticasone 250
microg/Salmeterol 50 microg 1 puff bid for maintenance therapy in patients with
COPD associated with chronic bronchitis. Short-acting beta agonists (SABA) have
been the recommended rescue medication; however, previous studies have shown that
combination short-acting Albuterol (alb) /Ipratropium bromide (IB) has superior
bronchodilator properties to albuterol alone in patients with COPD. The safety
and efficacy of Albuterol compared to Albuterol/Ipratropium bromide as rescue
medications for COPD patients on maintenance combination therapy of ICS/LABA has 
not been evaluated. Double-blind randomized crossover trial with COPD subjects
receiving Fluticasone/ Salmeterol 500 microg/50 microg (Flu/Sal) 1 puff twice
daily and 2 puffs of Albuterol Sulfate (90 microg micrograms per inhalation) or 2
puffs of Albuterol (90 microg/puff and Ipratropium Bromide 18 microg/puff. Either
Albuterol Sulfate (90 micrograms/puff) or Alb (90 micrograms/puff)/IB used prn
for 3 weeks before crossing over to the other rescue formulation. This is a
non-inferiority study where safety and efficacy outcomes were serially assessed, 
including adverse events, Baseline (BDI)/Transition Dyspnea Index (TDI), St.
George Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ), SF36, diary cards, 24-hour cardiac
monitoring, potassium and glucose levels and other adverse events. Twenty
subjects completed the study. The mean age was 62.5 (+/- 14.5); 12 were males.
The mean baseline FEV(1) (range) was 1.12 L (0.56-1.67) or 40.6 (21-65)%
predicted. There were no statistically significant differences between either
rescue inhaler formulation with regard to measures neither of lung function or
dyspnea nor in terms of safety parameters of cardiac monitoring, glucose and
potassium levels and other adverse events. SABA and combination SABA/Ipratropium 
bromide are equally safe and efficacious as rescue inhalers for patients on
combination Fluticasone 500 microg/Salmeterol 50 microg.

DOI: 10.1080/15412550802237408 
PMID: 18671147  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Clin Ther. 2008;30 Spec No:989-1002. doi: 10.1016/j.clinthera.2008.06.010.

Comparison of levalbuterol and racemic albuterol in hospitalized patients with
acute asthma or COPD: a 2-week, multicenter, randomized, open-label study.

Donohue JF(1), Hanania NA, Ciubotaru RL, Noe L, Pasta DJ, Schaefer K, Claus R,
Andrews WT, Roach J.

Author information: 
(1)School of Medicine, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North Carolina 
27599-7020, USA. jdonohue@med.unc.edu

BACKGROUND: The National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute guideline recommends
that dosing racemic albuterol be administered every 1 to 4 hours for treating
patients with asthma or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) in the
hospital. Previously published preliminary and retrospective studies suggested
that levalbuterol can be administered every 8 hours for the treatment of
bronchoconstriction in hospitalized patients. However, it is unclear how the
different dosing regimens affect the total number of nebulizations (scheduled
plus as-needed treatments) and the costs of treatment of bronchoconstriction in a
hospital setting. Moreover, it is not clear how the different dosing regimens
affect symptom outcomes and health status in hospitalized patients with asthma or
COPD.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to evaluate these issues in hospitalized
patients with acute asthma or COPD.
METHODS: In this prospective, multicenter, randomized, open-label study,
hospitalized patients aged > or = 18 years were randomly assigned to receive
14-day treatment with levalbuterol 1.25 mg q6-8h or racemic albuterol 2.5 mg
q1-4h, administered per routine hospital practice at each institution. The
primary efficacy end point was total number of nebulizations during
hospitalization. Pulmonary function, symptom evaluation (subject general
well-being score [SGWB], disease symptom assessment [DSA], and beta-mediated
adverse effect scores), hospital costs (excluding medication costs) and hospital 
length of stay (LOS) were also evaluated.
RESULTS: In the intent-to-treat population (n = 479; levalbuterol, 241;racemic
albuterol, 238), the mean (SE) age was 55.3 (16.9) years, the majority of
patients were white (57.8%), and the mean (SE) weight was 80.9 (24.5) kg.
Demographic characteristics were similar between the 2 treatment groups, except
that there were more females with COPD in the levalbuterol treatment group
(63.88%) compared with the racemic albuterol treatment group (45.5%) (P = 0.005).
Patients treated with levalbuterol required significantly fewer median total
nebulizations (10 vs 12; P = 0.031) and scheduled nebulizations (9 vs 11; P =
0.009) compared with those in the racemic albuterol group. The 2 treatment groups
required 0 rescue nebulizations. Mean (SD) forced expiratory volume in 1 second
improved from baseline with both levalbuterol and racemic albuterol (0.06 [0.43] 
and 0.10 [0.37] L, respectively); these improvements were maintained throughout
the hospital stay (0.11 [0.48] and 0.16 [0.52] L). DSA and SGWB scores improved
significantly from baseline in both treatment groups, and beta-mediated adverse
effects mean scores were significantly greater with levalbuterol versus racemic
albuterol (P < 0.001). In the levalbuterol and racemic albuterol treatment
groups, hospital LOS (70.6 and 65.7 hours, respectively), time to discharge (66.0
and 62.8 hours), and total hospital costs (least squares mean [SE], US $4869.30
[$343.58] and $4899.41 [$343.20]) were similar.
CONCLUSIONS: In these hospitalized patients with acute asthma or COPD treated
with levalbuterol every 6 to 8 hours or racemic albuterol every 1 to 4 hours,
significantly fewer total nebulizations were required with levalbuterol, without 
an increased need for rescue nebulizations during 14 days of hospitalization.
Both treatments were associated with improvements from baseline in symptoms and
health status. The costs of treating bronchoconstriction in hospitalized patients
were similar between the levalbuterol and racemic albuterol groups.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clinthera.2008.06.010 
PMID: 18640474  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Am J Manag Care. 2008 Jul;14(7):438-48.

Economic assessment of initial maintenance therapy for chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease.

Akazawa M(1), Hayflinger DC, Stanford RH, Blanchette CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health Policy and Administration, University of North Carolina
at Chapel Hill, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To compare the effects of initial maintenance therapy with fluticasone
250 microgram plus salmeterol 50 microgram in a single inhaler versus other
inhaled medications on exacerbation risks and treatment costs among chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) patients.
STUDY DESIGN: A retrospective observational analysis was conducted by using
medical/pharmacy claims from a large managed care database between January 2000
and February 2004. Patients age 40 years or older with a primary diagnosis of
COPD (International Classification of Diseases, Ninth Revision, Clinical
Modification code 490, 491, 492, or 496), at least 18 months of continuous
eligibility, and an index prescription for fluticasone/salmeterol combination,
salmeterol alone, inhaled corticosteroid alone, ipratropium/albuterol
combination, or ipratropium alone (reference) were identified.
METHODS: Time to first COPD-related hospitalization or emergency department (ED) 
visit was estimated by using Cox proportional hazard models. All-cause and
COPD-related treatment costs were estimated by using generalized linear models
with a gamma distribution and log link. Multivariable regressions were used,
controlling for age, sex, comorbidities, COPD subtype, preindex medications, and 
hospitalizations and ED visits.
RESULTS: Initial maintenance therapy with fluticasone/salmeterol combination was 
associated with a 31% to 56% lower risk of hospitalization or ED visit compared
with ipratropium alone, adjusting for baseline characteristics and preindex
resource utilization. Fluticasone/salmeterol combination therapy was related to
lower medical costs, higher pharmacy costs, and almost similar total costs in all
populations studied.
CONCLUSION: Fluticasone/salmeterol combination therapy was considered to be
cost-effective compared with ipratropium alone because it achieved better
clinical outcomes with similar or lower treatment costs.


PMID: 18611095  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. J Emerg Med. 2011 Feb;40(2):135-45. doi: 10.1016/j.jemermed.2007.11.056. Epub
2008 Jun 24.

Should acute treatment with inhaled beta agonists be withheld from patients with 
dyspnea who may have heart failure?

Maak CA(1), Tabas JA, McClintock DE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Emergency Medicine, Oregon Health & Science University,
Portland, Oregon, USA.

In patients with dyspnea, prehospital and emergency providers make therapeutic
decisions before a diagnosis is established. Inhaled beta-2 agonists are
frontline treatment for patients with dyspnea due to asthma or chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) exacerbations. However, these agents have
been associated with increased adverse events when administered chronically to
heart failure patients. Our goal was to determine the safety and efficacy of
acute administration of inhaled beta-2 agonists to patients with heart failure.
MEDLINE and EMBASE searches were performed using the terms "beta agonists,"
"albuterol," "congestive heart failure," and "pulmonary edema." Bibliographies of
relevant articles were searched. Only studies addressing acute effects of beta-2 
agonists were included for analysis. Twenty-four studies comprising 434 patients 
were identified that addressed the acute delivery of beta-2 agonists in subjects 
with heart failure--five studies with inhaled administration and 19 with systemic
administration. No study directly evaluated the effects of inhaled beta-2
agonists to patients with acutely decompensated heart failure. Treatment of heart
failure patients with beta-2 agonists resulted in transient improvements in
pulmonary function and cardiovascular hemodynamics. Only one investigation
reported an association between beta-2 agonist use and an increase in malignant
dysrhythmias. Investigations in animal models of heart failure and acute lung
injury demonstrated resolution of pulmonary edema with beta agonist
administration. There is insufficient evidence to suggest that acute treatment
with inhaled beta-2 agonists should be avoided in patients with dyspnea who may
have heart failure. Based on small studies and indirect evidence, administration 
of beta-2 agonists to patients with heart failure seems to improve pulmonary
function, cardiovascular hemodynamics, and resorption of pulmonary edema.
Although an increase in adverse effects with the use of beta-2 agonists cannot be
ruled out based on these data, there was no evidence of an increase in clinically
significant dysrhythmias, especially when administered by inhalation. Based on
these findings, further study should focus on the clinical outcomes of patients
with acutely decompensated heart failure who are treated with inhaled beta-2
agonist therapy.

Copyright © 2011. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jemermed.2007.11.056 
PMID: 18572345  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Hemodial Int. 2008 Jan;12(1):30-3. doi: 10.1111/j.1542-4758.2008.00236.x.

Asymmetric breast enlargement minus central venous thrombosis in a hemodialysis
patient.

Youssef JJ(1), Brown CD, Friedman EA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, SUNY-Downstate Medical Center, Brooklyn, New York,
U.S.A. jacqueyoussef@hotmail.com

A 76-year-old woman hemodialysis patient was hospitalized for community-acquired 
pneumonia complicating chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. End-stage renal
disease secondary to hypertension had been diagnosed at the age of 64 for which
the patient was initiated on maintenance hemodialysis. Then, she received a
deceased donor kidney transplant at the age of 68 that succumbed to chronic
rejection 4 years later when she was restarted on hemodialysis. Hemodialysis was 
performed via a right subclavian vein double lumen catheter for 2 months when a
right brachio-axillary graft was inserted. Severe venous congestion, swelling,
and nipple tenderness of her right breast noted on admission had been increasing 
for 6 weeks before hospital admission. No arm swelling was evident. Initial
management of the patient's pneumonia and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
consisted of intravenous ceftriaxone and albuterol inhaler to which intravenous
oxacillin (1 g q 6 hr) was added for presumed right mastitis. Radiological
work-up for masses and malignancies was negative. An angiogram of the right upper
extremity detected stenosis of the dialysis access graft at its anastomosis with 
the axillary vein. Angioplasty of the stenosis was performed without incident or 
evidence of central vein stenosis. Rapid resolution over 10 days of the
unilateral breast congestion followed without complication.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1542-4758.2008.00236.x 
PMID: 18271837  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. J Bras Pneumol. 2007 Jul-Aug;33(4):389-96.

Inspiratory capacity, exercise limitation, markers of severity, and prognostic
factors in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

[Article in English, Portuguese]

Freitas CG(1), Pereira CA, Viegas CA.

Author information: 
(1)Universidade de Brasília, Brasilia, DF, Brasil. claricegfs@terra.com.br

OBJECTIVE: To correlate the postbronchodilator (post-BD) inspiratory capacity
(IC), % of predicted, with other markers of severity and prognostic factors in
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
METHODS: Eighty stable patients with COPD performed forced vital capacity and
slow vital capacity maneuvers, as well as the 6-min walk test, prior to and after
receiving albuterol spray (400 microg). Patients were divided into four groups,
based on post-BD forced expiratory volume in one second. Several variables were
tested to establish correlations with the post-BD distance walked, using
univariate and multivariate analysis. Post-BD IC was found to correlated with
Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease (GOLD) staging and with
the Body mass index, airway Obstruction, Dyspnea, and Exercise capacity (BODE)
index.
RESULTS: Multivariate regression analysis revealed that the distance walked, %
predicted, correlated significantly with the IC post-BD, % predicted (p = 0.001),
long-term oxygen use (p = 0.014), and number of medications used in the treatment
(p = 0.044). IC < 70% was observed in 56% patients in GOLD stages 3 or 4 vs. 20% 
in GOLD 1 or 2 (p < 0.001). IC < 70% was observed in (60%) patients with BODE
score 3 or 4 vs. (33%) BODE score 1 or 2 (p = 0.02).
CONCLUSION: Post-BD IC% predicted is the best functional predictor of distance
walked and is significantly associated with GOLD staging and BODE index.
Therefore, We propose that the inspiratory capacity should be added to the
routine evaluation of the COPD patients.


PMID: 17982530  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Adv Ther. 2007 Jul-Aug;24(4):757-71.

Exploratory economic evaluation of patients with COPD on a combination product
versus individual components (ipratropium bromide and albuterol).

York JM(1), Smeeding J, Brook RA, Hoehler F, Klein GL.

Author information: 
(1)Akita Biomedical Consulting, San Clemente, California 92672, USA.
jyork1@cox.net

A population-based, retrospective claims analysis was undertaken to explore the
economic profile of a nebulized ipratropium and albuterol combination product
(DuoNeb(R) [DN], DEY, L.P., Napa, Calif). This analysis was performed to review
expenditures and resource utilization of patients with chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD) who were taking DN or generic ipratropium and albuterol 
(dual single agents [DSA]). Cohort selection criteria applied to the PharMetrics 
managed care claims database yielded 1531 patients: 468 DN and 1063 DSA. Total
per-member-per-month (PMPM) expenditures were $1,840.36 for DN and $2,046.73 DSA 
(Delta$206.37; P=.22). Emergency department (ED) costs were $36.67 for DN and
$52.84 for DSA (Delta$16.17; P=.03). Differences in regression analysis adjusted 
least squares means between DSA and DN were $264.62 (P=.083) for total
expenditures and $20.81 (P=.03) for ED costs. Resource utilization reflected
expenditure observations; ED visits were 0.93 for DN and 1.33 for DSA (P<.001).
Inpatient expenditures (DN $874.97, DSA $1,105.80; Delta$230.83) represented the 
largest portion of total costs: 45% with DN and 54% with DSA. The DN cohort was
associated with statistically fewer individuals who reported interruptions (0.78 
vs 0.85; P=.003). The DN cohort did not appear to be more expensive than the DSA 
group, was associated with statistically lower ED expenditures, and included
fewer individuals with therapy interruptions. Future analyses should include
clinical data to better elucidate the full impact of DN on healthcare resources
and compliance in the COPD population.


PMID: 17901025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Lancet. 2007 Sep 1;370(9589):758-64.

Poor airway function in early infancy and lung function by age 22 years: a
non-selective longitudinal cohort study.

Stern DA(1), Morgan WJ, Wright AL, Guerra S, Martinez FD.

Author information: 
(1)Arizona Respiratory Center, University of Arizona, Tucson, Arizona, USA.

Comment in
    Lancet. 2007 Sep 1;370(9589):717-9.

BACKGROUND: Together with smoking, the lung function attained in early adulthood 
is one of the strongest predictors of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. We
aimed to investigate whether lung function in early adulthood is, in turn,
affected by airway function measured shortly after birth.
METHODS: Non-selected infants were enrolled at birth in the Tucson Children's
Respiratory Study between 1980 and 1984. We measured maximal expiratory flows at 
functional residual capacity (Vmax(FRC)) in 169 of these infants by the chest
compression technique at a mean of 2.3 months (SD 1.9). We also obtained
measurements of lung function for 123 of these participants at least once at ages
11, 16, and 22 years. Indices were forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1), forced
vital capacity (FVC), and forced expiratory flow between 25% and 75% of FVC
(FEF25-75), both before and after treatment with a bronchodilator (180 microg of 
albuterol).
FINDINGS: Participants who had infant Vmax(FRC) in the lowest quartile also had
lower values for the FEV1/FVC ratio (-5.2%, p<0.0001), FEF25-75 (-663 mL/s,
p<0.0001), and FEV1 (-233 mL, p=0.001) up to age 22, after adjustment for height,
weight, age, and sex, than those in the upper three quartiles combined. The
magnitude and significance of this effect did not change after additional
adjustment for wheeze, smoking, atopy, or parental asthma.
INTERPRETATION: Poor airway function shortly after birth should be recognised as 
a risk factor for airflow obstruction in young adults. Prevention of chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease might need to start in fetal life.

DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(07)61379-8 
PMCID: PMC2831283
PMID: 17765525  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Am J Med. 2007 May;120(5):435-41.

Comparing COPD treatment: nebulizer, metered dose inhaler, and concomitant
therapy.

Tashkin DP(1), Klein GL, Colman SS, Zayed H, Schonfeld WH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles, 
Calif 90095-1690, USA. dtashkin@mednet.ucla.edu

PURPOSE: Patients using albuterol and ipratropium for treating chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) can use either nebulizers or metered dose
inhalers. This study compared the 2 methods of delivering medication and the
concomitant use of both nebulizer and inhaler, with respect to health-related
quality of life, patient symptoms, and efficacy.
SUBJECTS AND METHODS: Patients over 50 years old with COPD were randomized into 3
groups: nebulizer, inhaler, or concomitant treatment. Quality of life was
assessed using the St. George's Respiratory Questionnaire at baseline, and at 6
and 12 weeks. Other efficacy measurements at these time-points included pre- and 
post-dose forced expired volume in 1 second (FEV1). Symptom scores and peak flow 
measurements were recorded in patient diaries.
RESULTS: Of 140 patients enrolled, 126 completed at least one post-baseline
assessment. At week 6, both groups using a nebulizer achieved statistically
significant improvements from baseline in questionnaire symptoms, and the
concomitant treatment group had clinically and statistically significant
improvement in total questionnaire score. At week 12, the concomitant group still
maintained significant improvement in symptom sub-scores. The 3 groups showed
little change over time in peak flow or FEV1, with no significant difference
among groups. Both groups using a nebulizer had significant improvement over time
in diary symptom scores, although differences between groups were not
significant.
CONCLUSIONS: Patients using combined nebulizer therapy morning and night with
mid-day inhaler use had the most statistically significant improvements in
quality of life indices. This concomitant regimen provides the additional symptom
relief offered by a nebulizer with the convenience of an inhaler when patients
are away from home.

DOI: 10.1016/j.amjmed.2006.07.043 
PMID: 17466655  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. COPD. 2006 Aug;3(3):125-32.

Evaluation of the efficacy and safety of levalbuterol in subjects with COPD.

Donohue JF(1), Parsey MV, Andrews C, D'Urzo T, Sharma S, Schaefer K, Claus R,
Baumgartner RA; Levalbuterol COPD Study Group.

Author information: 
(1)University of North Carolina School of Medicine at Chapel Hill, USA.
jdonohue@med.unc.edu

The efficacy and safety of nebulized levalbuterol in adults with chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) was evaluated in this multicenter,
randomized, double-blind, parallel design study. Randomized subjects (n = 209)
received levalbuterol (LEV) 0.63 mg or 1.25 mg, racemic albuterol (RAC) 2.5 mg,
or placebo (PBO) TID for 6 weeks. Serial spirometry was completed in-clinic after
study drug alone (weeks 0, 2, and 6) or in combination with ipratropium bromide
0.5 mg (week 4). The primary endpoint was the averaged FEV1 AUC(0-8 hrs) over
weeks 0, 2 and 6 compared with placebo. Other endpoints included rescue
medication use, safety parameters, COPD exacerbations, and global evaluations.
All active treatments demonstrated improvements in the percent change in FEV1
AUC(0-8 hrs) over the double-blind period and at each visit vs PBO (p < 0.05).
Rescue medication use vs. baseline (doses/day) changed over time: PBO +0.38 +/-
3.3; LEV 0.63 mg +0.07 +/- 3.3; LEV 1.25 mg -0.84 +/- 3.8 (p = 0.02 vs. RAC); RAC
+0.97 +/- 2.5. The overall rate of adverse events was PBO 56.4%, LEV 0.63 mg
56.6%, LEV 1.25 mg 67.3%, and RAC 65.4%. Protocol-defined COPD exacerbations
occurred in all groups (PBO 12.7%, LEV 0.63 mg 11.3%; LEV 1.25 mg 18.4%; RAC
21.2%). Withdrawals due to COPD exacerbations were significantly higher in the
RAC group compared with PBO (PBO 0%; LEV 0.63 mg 1.9%; LEV 1.25 mg 4.1%; RAC 9.6%
p = 0.01 vs. PBO). In this study, levalbuterol treatment in subjects with COPD
was generally well tolerated, produced significant bronchodilation compared with 
PBO, and improved clinical control of COPD as evidenced by reductions in rescue
medication use compared with PBO and/or RAC.


PMID: 17240614  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Allergy Asthma Proc. 2006 Nov-Dec;27(6):486-92.

Real-world assessment of a metered-dose inhaler with integrated dose counter.

Wasserman RL(1), Sheth K, Lincourt WR, Locantore NW, Rosenzweig JC, Crim C.

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Allergy/Immunology Associates, PA, Dallas, Texas, USA.
richw3@swbell.net

Currently available metered dose inhalers (MDIs) do not track the remaining
number of doses, indicating the need for a device that accurately monitors
medication use. In an open-label study at 37 outpatient centers, patients > or =4
years old with asthma or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease requiring
short-acting 32-agonists received two actuations of albuterol hydrofluoroalkane
(HFA) [Ventolin HFA: GlaxoSmithKline], 90 microg twice daily, via a novel MDI
with an integrated dose counter until all 200 actuations were completed.
Concordance between counter readings, diary card-recorded actuations, and
canister weights were measured in patients who completed > or =90% of the labeled
actuations (n = 224). Adverse events and patient satisfaction were assessed in
the intent-to-treat population (n = 268). In 43,865 recorded actuations, 333
counter versus diary discrepancies occurred (discrepancy rate of 0.76%), and 88% 
of discrepancies were by one to two actuations. Forty-seven percent of patients
had no discrepancies. Incidence of the device firing without changes in counter
readings was very low (0.09%). Mean expected actuations based on canister weights
(184) were slightly lower than mean counter and diary-reported actuations (200
each). At baseline, 62% of patients reported anxiety about not knowing the
quantity of medication remaining in their inhaler. On study completion, 92%
expressed satisfaction with the dose counter and 92% agreed it would help prevent
them from running out of medication. The adverse event profile showed that
albuterol HFA was well tolerated. Integrated MDI counters are a useful and
reliable tool for tracking a patient's medication supply.


PMID: 17176783  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. COPD. 2004;1(2):205-14.

Initial treatment regimen and risk of hospitalization in patients with chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease.

Anzueto A(1), McLaughlin T, Stanford RH.

Author information: 
(1)University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio, San Antonio, Texas
78229, USA. Anzueto@uthscsa.edu

STUDY OBJECTIVES: Compare hospitalization risk of various initial treatment
regimens for COPD.
DESIGN: Retrospective observational cohort design.
SETTING: Patients enrolled in 24 different managed care plans across the United
States during 1997-2000.
PATIENTS: Aged at least 45 years with a primary diagnosis of COPD identified.
Initiation date was the date the first inhaler was dispensed. Patients were
required to have filled this prescription within 60 days of the first documented 
COPD diagnosis in the database.
INTERVENTIONS: Five therapy cohorts were identified 1) ipratropium alone or in
combination with albuterol (IPR), 2) long-acting beta agonists (LABA), 3) inhaled
corticosteroid (ICS), 4) ICS+IPR and 5) ICS+LABA.
MEASUREMENTS: Subjects were observed for 12 months or until a COPD-related
hospitalization was observed, whichever came first. A sensitivity analysis was
conducted by varying the observation period from >60, >90 and >180 days to
determine if this would impact the results.
RESULTS: 3616 patients were identified, 1754 (49%) on IPR alone, 1032 (29%) on
ICS alone, 357 (10%) on ICS+IPR, 266 (7%) on LABA alone and 207 (6%) on ICS+LABA.
Compared with IPR alone, patients in the ICS alone and ICS plus LABA groups had a
36% and 47% reductions in the risk of a COPD hospitalization, (HR: 0.643; 95% CI 
0.512, 0.808 and HR: 0.533; 95% CI 0.328, 0.865) respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: The results of this analysis suggest that initial treatment with an 
ICS alone or in combination with a LABA , compared to IPR alone, was associated
with a significant decrease in the risk of COPD hospitalization 12 months
following the start of therapy independent of concomitant asthma diagnosis.
Similar outcomes were observed when the observation period was varied from >60,
>90 and >180 days.


PMID: 17136988  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2007 Feb 15;175(4):330-5. Epub 2006 Nov 16.

The confounding effects of thoracic gas compression on measurement of acute
bronchodilator response.

Sharafkhaneh A(1), Babb TG, Officer TM, Hanania NA, Sharafkhaneh H, Boriek AM.

Author information: 
(1)Baylor College of Medicine, MED VAMC, Bldg 100 (111i), Houston, TX 77030, USA.
amirs@bcm.tmc.edu

RATIONALE: Improvement in FEV(1) is a main endpoint in clinical trials assessing 
the efficacy of bronchodilators. However, the effect of bronchodilators on
maximal expiratory flow may be confounded by thoracic gas compression (TGC).
OBJECTIVE: To determine whether TGC confounds effect of albuterol on FEV(1).
METHODS: We evaluated the response to albuterol inhalation in 10 healthy
subjects, 9 subjects with asthma, and 15 subjects with chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD) with mean (SD) age in years of 38 (SD, 11), 45 (SD, 11),
and 64 (SD, 8), respectively. Lung mechanics were measured at baseline and 20
minutes after inhalation of 180 micro g of albuterol. We then applied a novel
method to calculate FEV(1) corrected for the effect of TGC (NFEV(1)).
RESULTS: Prior to albuterol administration, NFEV(1) was significantly higher than
FEV(1). However, post-albuterol inhalation, FEV(1) increased more than NFEV(1)
because of reduced TGC. In multiple regression analysis, the changes in TGC,
inspiratory lung resistance, and ratio of residual volume to total lung capacity 
postalbuterol predicted more than 75% of FEV(1) improvement in patients with
COPD.
CONCLUSION: Improvements in FEV(1) after albuterol in patients with COPD are due 
to reduction of lung resistance, hyperinflation, and TGC. The latter is
negligible during tidal breathing. Thus, although reduction of lung resistance
and hyperinflation may result in improved dyspnea with a bronchodilator, the
contribution of TGC reduction to improvement of FEV(1) may not exert any
meaningful clinical effect during tidal breathing. This fact has to be taken into
consideration when assessing the efficacy of new bronchodilators.

DOI: 10.1164/rccm.200602-255OC 
PMCID: PMC1899266
PMID: 17110648  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Pharmacotherapy. 2006 Sep;26(9 Pt 2):175S-80S.

Outcomes and humanistic issues related to treatment of acute bronchospasm.

Okamoto LJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Health Economics and Policy, United BioSource Corporation,
Bethesda, Maryland 20814, USA. lynn.okamoto@unitedbiosource.com

Because of emergency department visits and hospitalizations, the economic costs
associated with asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), and
bronchospasm are a significant portion of total overall treatment costs. A small 
proportion of patients account for most of the costs, due to disease severity and
acute exacerbations. Disease management programs, sponsored by insurance groups
and employers, are lowering health and disability costs and reducing days missed 
from work and school because of exacerbations. Quality-of-life patient
assessments are available to assist practitioners in evaluating disease status.
Evidenced-based medicine analysis can show that less expensive therapies are not 
necessarily cost-effective. A study of the rate of hospital admissions from the
emergency department showed that although levalbuterol therapy in the emergency
department was more costly than racemic albuterol therapy, total overall
treatment costs were reduced because of decreased hospitalizations in the
levalbuterol-treated patients. Thus, providers, payers, and patients should
examine all the scientific evidence (safety, efficacy or effectiveness,
economics, and humanistic benefits) to make the most informed health care
decision.

DOI: 10.1592/phco.26.9part2.175S 
PMID: 16945064  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Pharmacotherapy. 2006 Sep;26(9 Pt 2):164S-74S.

Risk versus benefit considerations for the beta(2)-agonists.

Kelly HW(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, New Mexico
87131, USA. hwkelly@unm.edu

Short-acting beta(2)-agonists are the mainstay of therapy for acute bronchospasm 
associated with asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, whereas
long-acting beta(2)-agonists are used in maintaining disease control in these
respiratory disorders. This review describes and compares the pharmacology of the
beta(2)-agonists and explains how these differences translate into differences in
efficacy and beta(2)-adrenergic-mediated adverse effects. Questions commonly
asked by clinicians regarding the efficacy and safety of short- and long-acting
beta(2)-agonists include issues about cardiovascular effects, tolerance to their 
bronchodilator and bronchoprotective effects, blunting of albuterol response by
long-acting beta(2)-agonists, potential masking of worsening asthma control, and 
the role of long-acting beta(2)-agonists as adjunctive therapy with inhaled
corticosteroids in maintaining asthma control. Pharmacogenetics may play a role
in determining which patients may be at risk for a reduced response to a
beta(2)-agonist. The continued use of racemic albuterol, which contains a mixture
of R-albuterol and S-albuterol, has been questioned because of data from
preclinical and clinical studies suggesting that S-albuterol causes
proinflammatory effects and may increase bronchial hyperreactivity. The
preclinical and clinical effects of these two stereoisomers are reviewed. Data
describing the efficacy and safety of levalbuterol (R-albuterol) and racemic
albuterol are presented.

DOI: 10.1592/phco.26.9part2.164S 
PMID: 16945063  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. MedGenMed. 2006 Mar 29;8(1):86.

Management of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease associated with chronic
bronchitis with inhaled fluticasone propionate/salmeterol (ADVAIR DISKUS) 250/50:
results of a patient experience trial.

Stoloff S(1), Samuels S, Kerney D, Brown CP.

Author information: 
(1)The University of Nevada School of Medicine, Reno, Nevada, USA.

CONTEXT: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is recognized as a major
healthcare problem in the United States and around the world.
OBJECTIVE: This survey regarding initial experience in patients with COPD
collected feedback about newly initiated therapy with fluticasone
propionate/salmeterol (FSC; ADVAIR DISKUS).
DESIGN: Three telephone surveys were conducted; Survey 1 prior to initiating
therapy with FSC 250/50, and Surveys 2 and 3 at 2 weeks and 30 days after
initiating therapy with FSC 250/50, respectively.
SETTING: One thousand primary care physicians recruited outpatients into the
trial.
PATIENTS: Patients were either newly diagnosed with COPD associated with chronic 
bronchitis or were still experiencing breathing difficulties on an
anticholinergic medication.
INTERVENTIONS: Patients initiated FSC 250/50 and received a 1-month supply of FSC
250/50 with an albuterol inhaler for rescue use.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Outcome measures were patient perceptions of satisfaction,
compliance, and convenience and changes in breathing on 1 (negative) to 9
(positive) point scales.
RESULTS: Five hundred sixteen patients completed all 3 surveys. The mean age was 
61 years, 63% were female, and 62% had been diagnosed with COPD associated with
chronic bronchitis for 3 years or less (Table 1).
CONCLUSION: Patients reported high satisfaction, compliance, and convenience with
FSC 250/50 within 2 weeks of initiating therapy, all maintained over the trial
period. Additionally, patients had positive changes in breathing, including
improvements in the ability to breathe upon awakening in the morning.


PMCID: PMC1681960
PMID: 16915216  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Br J Clin Pharmacol. 2006 Aug;62(2):153-7.

Effects of rac-albuterol on arterial blood gases in patients with stable
hypercapnic chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Whale CI(1), Sovani MP, Mortimer K, Oborne J, Cooper S, Harrison TW, Tattersfield
AE.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Respiratory Medicine, University of Nottingham, Nottingham City
Hospital, Nottingham NG5 1PB, UK. chris.whale@nottingham.ac.uk

AIMS: Many patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) are treated
with high dose beta(2)-adrenoceptor agonists, which can increase
ventilation/perfusion mismatching, and tremor and cardiac output, thereby
increasing oxygen uptake and carbon dioxide output (VCO(2)). Patients with severe
COPD and hypercapnia may be unable to increase ventilation in response to
increased VCO(2), in which case arterial carbon dioxide tension (P(a)CO(2)) may
rise. Our aim was to determine whether high dose nebulized rac-albuterol could
increase P(a)CO(2) in patients with COPD, limited bronchodilator reversibilty and
hypercapnia.
METHODS: We compared 10 mg and 400 microg rac-albuterol, given in two doses 1 h
apart on nonconsecutive days, in a double-blind randomized crossover study in 14 
patients with severe COPD. P(a)CO(2), arterial oxygen tension (P(a)O(2)) and
heart rate were measured over 120 min and change from baseline was plotted
against time to obtain an area under the curve.
RESULTS: Mean P(a)CO(2) fell slightly over 120 min, with no difference between
treatments (0.03 kPa h(-1) (95% confidence interval 0.02, 0.04)) and only three
subjects had an increase in P(a)CO(2) after high dose rac-albuterol. High dose
rac-albuterol caused a greater fall in P(a)O(2)[0.1 kPa h(-1) (95% confidence
interval 0, 0.2)] and increase in heart rate than the low dose, although the
differences were small.
CONCLUSIONS: Under stable conditions most subjects with severe COPD and
hypercapnia will have a fall in P(a)CO(2) and P(a)O(2) following 10 mg
rac-albuterol, suggesting that they maintain capacity to respond to any increase 
in VCO(2) and prevent a rise in P(a)CO(2).

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2125.2006.02604.x 
PMCID: PMC1885093
PMID: 16842389  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Eur J Pharmacol. 2006 Mar 8;533(1-3):36-9. Epub 2006 Feb 20.

Anticholinergic agents in asthma and COPD.

Gross NJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Stritch-Loyola School of Medicine, Voluntary Attending Physician, Hines VA
Hospital, Chicago, Hines, IL 60141, USA. Nicholas.gross@med.va.gov

Anticholinergic agents have important uses as bronchodilators for the treatment
of obstructive airway diseases, both asthma and, more particularly, chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Those in approved clinical use are
synthetic quaternary ammonium congeners of atropine, and include ipratropium
bromide, oxitropium bromide, and tiotropium bromide, each of which is very poorly
absorbed when given by inhalation. Ipratropium and oxitropium have relatively
short durations of action (4-8 h). They have been widely used for many years,
either alone or in combination with short-acting beta-adrenergic agents such as
albuterol and fenoterol, for both maintenance treatment of stable disease and for
acute exacerbations of airway obstruction. Tiotropium, which was introduced in
the early 2000s, has a duration of action of at least 1-2 days making it suitable
for once-daily maintenance treatment of COPD. All of the above agents have a wide
therapeutic margin and are safe and well tolerated by patients.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2005.12.072 
PMID: 16488410  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Postgrad Med. 2005 Dec;118(6 Suppl Acute):34-7; discussion 38. doi:
10.3810/pgm.12.2005.suppl44.236.

Treatment of acute bronchospasm in elderly patients.

Berger WE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of pediatrics, division of allergy and immunology, College of
Medicine, University of California, Irvine, USA. weberger@uci.edu

Both asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) are often
underdiagnosed and undertreated among the elderly. Patient compliance with
treatments plans and medication schedules are often less than ideal. This paper
presents results from clinical studies examining levalbuterol and racemic
albuterol use among elderly patients who have asthma or COPD.

DOI: 10.3810/pgm.12.2005.suppl44.236 
PMID: 19667714  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Pharmacotherapy. 2005 Dec;25(12):1708-18.

Absence of electrocardiographic findings and improved function with once-daily
tiotropium in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Covelli H(1), Bhattacharya S, Cassino C, Conoscenti C, Kesten S.

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary Consultants of North Idaho, Coeur d'Alene, Idaho 83814, USA.
hdomc@imbris.net

STUDY OBJECTIVES: To examine electrocardiographic findings after short- and
long-term tiotropium therapy in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD), and to establish previously reported symptomatic efficacy.
DESIGN: Randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, parallel-group study.
SETTING: Twelve outpatient investigational centers in the United States.
PATIENTS: One hundred ninety-six patients with COPD.
INTERVENTIONS: Patients received either tiotropium 18 mug once/day or placebo,
delivered by the HandiHaler device.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: Electrocardiography (predose and 5 min postdose)
and 24-hour Holter monitoring were performed at baseline and after 8 and 12 weeks
of treatment with tiotropium 18 microg once/day or placebo. Efficacy measures
(spirometry, global COPD ratings, scores on the EuroQol Health Questionnaire
[EQ-5D], albuterol inhaler as needed) were included to demonstrate that the study
population exhibited the characteristic improvements observed in previous
tiotropium studies. Mean baseline forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1) was
1.03 L. Mean changes in heart rate from baseline were similar in both groups. No 
differences were noted in the percentage of patients developing rhythm or
conduction abnormalities detected with electrocardiography or Holter monitoring. 
Frequency of premature beats and mean maximal changes in PR, QRS, QT, QTcB, and
QTcF intervals were similar in both groups. No patients developed new-onset QT or
QTc intervals greater than 500 msec, and no differences were noted in the
percentage of patients developing new QT prolongation less than 30 msec, 30-60
msec, or greater than 60 msec. At 12 weeks, predose and postdose improvements in 
FEV1 were 184 and 265 ml, respectively, with tiotropium versus placebo (p<0.001).
Physician and patient global COPD ratings and the EQ-5D visual analog scale
scores were improved with tiotropium (p<0.05); as-needed albuterol was reduced by
25% relative to placebo (p<0.05).
CONCLUSION: Tiotropium provided spirometric and symptomatic benefits in patients 
with COPD and was not associated with evidence of electrocardiographic changes in
heart rate, rhythm, QT intervals, or conduction.

DOI: 10.1592/phco.2005.25.12.1708 
PMID: 16305289  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Ann Pharmacother. 2005 Nov;39(11):1924-7. Epub 2005 Sep 20.

Paradoxical bronchoconstriction with albuterol administered by metered-dose
inhaler and nebulizer solution.

Spooner LM(1), Olin JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy Practice and Administration, Ernest Mario School of
Pharmacy at Rutgers University, Piscataway, NJ 01608-1715, USA.
linda.spooner@wor.mcphs.edu

OBJECTIVE: To report a case of a patient who experienced bronchoconstriction
following both a single dose of albuterol via metered-dose inhaler and a
subsequent rechallenge with nebulized albuterol and review previously published
case reports of albuterol-induced paradoxical bronchoconstriction.
CASE SUMMARY: A 92-year-old white man with a history of chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease was prescribed an albuterol inhaler for treatment of cold
symptoms. Within 30 minutes of his first inhalation, he became short of breath
and had difficulty speaking. During emergency department examination for the
initial event, the bronchospasm improved with administration of oxygen 15 L/min
via a non-rebreather mask. Two hours later, the patient received albuterol via
nebulizer and experienced stridor, shortness of breath, and severe bronchospasm. 
He was admitted, treated with methylprednisolone, and discharged the following
day.
DISCUSSION: Paradoxical bronchoconstriction is a rare complication of
bronchodilator therapy. Although theories have been proposed about components of 
albuterol solutions and preservatives as causative agents, the true mechanism of 
the phenomenon remains unknown. Several previous case reports described
bronchospasm with albuterol given via tablet, inhaler, and nebulizer. In 2 of
these cases, symptoms recurred upon rechallenge; however, none of these cases
demonstrates rechallenge using albuterol as both the index and challenge agent.
In our patient, paradoxical bronchoconstriction was considered to be probable
according to the Naranjo probability scale.
CONCLUSIONS: beta(2)-Agonists are generally well-tolerated medications. However, 
clinicians should remain vigilant in their monitoring of adverse effects so they 
will be able to provide immediate care and minimize the chance of an unfavorable 
outcome.

DOI: 10.1345/aph.1G248 
PMID: 16174783  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Clin Ther. 2005 May;27(5):531-42.

The efficacy and safety of inhaled fluticasone propionate/salmeterol and
ipratropium/albuterol for the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease:
an eight-week, multicenter, randomized, double-blind, double-dummy,
parallel-group study.

Make B(1), Hanania NA, ZuWallack R, Kalberg C, Emmett A, Brown CP, Knobil K.

Author information: 
(1)National Jewish Medical and Research Center, Denver, Colorado 80206, USA.
makeb@njc.org

BACKGROUND: The pathology of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)
includes both obstructive and inflammatory components.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to confirm the findings of a previous study 
that compared the efficacy of a combination of 2 short-acting bronchodilators
with the use of an inhaled corticosteroid and a long-acting beta-agonist in the
treatment of COPD.
METHODS: We conducted an 8-week, multicenter, randomized, double-blind,
double-dummy, parallel-group study of subjects with moderate to severe COPD to
compare fluticasone propionate/salmeterol 250/50 microg BID (FSC) with
ipratropium/albuterol 36/206 microg QID (IB/ALB). The primary efficacy measure
was morning preadministration forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV(1)).
Secondary measures were morning peak expiratory flow (PEF), 6-hour FEV(1) AUC,
percentage of symptom-free nights, Transition Dyspnea Index (TDI) score, and
overall daytime symptom score. Additional measures included sleep symptoms,
supplemental albuterol use, and nighttime awakenings due to respiratory symptoms.
Safety evaluations were based on clinical adverse events and COPD exacerbations.
RESULTS: Baseline characteristics were similar between the FSC (n = 180) and
IB/ALB (n = 181) groups, including mean age (63.7 and 65.4 years, respectively), 
mean body weight (81 and 79 kg, respectively), screening pulmonary function (mean
[SD], 43.7% [14.2%] and 41.6% [13.4%] of predicted FEV(1)), race (82% and 91%
white), and sex (64% and 62% male). FSC resulted in greater improvements in
morning preadministration FEV(1), morning PEF, and 6-hour FEV(1) AUC (all, P <
0.001), TDI score (P = 0.026), overall daytime symptom score (P = 0.024),
percentage of symptom-free nights (P = 0.010), nighttime awakenings due to
respiratory symptoms (P = 0.002), sleep symptom score (P = 0.003), and percentage
of days and nights without rescue albuterol use compared with IB/ALB (P = 0.021
and P < 0.001, respectively). Compared with day 1, the FEV(1) AUC at week 8
increased by 0.38 L-h with FSC and decreased by 0.18 L-h with IB/ALB (P < 0.001
between groups). The type and incidence of adverse events were similar between
the 2 groups. One or more adverse event was reported for 81 (45%) and 85 (47%)
subjects in the FSC and IB/ALB groups, respectively.
CONCLUSION: In this 8-week study, subjects with moderate to severe COPD
experienced greater improvements in lung function and symptom measures with FSC
than with IB/ALB.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clinthera.2005.05.009 
PMID: 15978302  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Am J Health Syst Pharm. 2005 May 15;62(10):1053-61.

Automatic replacement of albuterol nebulizer therapy by metered-dose inhaler and 
valved holding chamber.

Hendeles L(1), Hatton RC, Coons TJ, Carlson L.

Author information: 
(1)Pharmacy and Pediatrics, University of Florida (UF), Gainesville, USA.
hendeles@cop.ufl.edu

PURPOSE: Evidence supporting the delivery of bronchodilators with a metered-dose 
inhaler and a valved holding chamber (MDI+VHC) in place of a small-volume
nebulizer (SVN) is discussed, and the steps taken to accomplish such a conversion
program at one institution are described.
SUMMARY: Double-blind, randomized studies in patients with acute exacerbations of
asthma have demonstrated that higher doses of albuterol delivered by MDI+VHC
(4-10 puffs per dose) are as effective as 2.5 mg of albuterol sulfate delivered
by SVN. Three double-blind studies support the conclusion that the two methods
are equivalent with respect to both efficacy and adverse effects in patients with
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. MDI+VHC offers practical advantages over
SVN, including the capacity for home use by the patient, portability, less setup 
time, and no need for daily disinfection. Pharmacists and respiratory therapists 
obtained approval through the pharmacy and therapeutics committee for respiratory
therapists to convert orders for bronchodilators delivered by SVN to
administration by MDI+VHC. The conversion policy allows physicians to override
it, but none have exercised this option. On intensive care units (ICUs), the
policy resulted in a 53% increase in the use of MDI+VHC during the six-month
period after it went into effect. Respiratory therapists have been less thorough 
in implementing the policy for non-ICU patients.
CONCLUSION: Delivery of bronchodilators by MDI+VHC is as effective as delivery by
SVN but offers several advantages. A policy to switch patients from SVN to
MDI+VHC for bronchodilator administration met with limited success.


PMID: 15901590  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2005 Apr;37(4):529-35.

Responsiveness of continuous ratings of dyspnea during exercise in patients with 
COPD.

Mahler DA(1), Fierro-Carrion G, Mejia-Alfaro R, Ward J, Baird JC.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Pulmonary & Critical Care Medicine, Dartmouth Medical School,
Lebanon, NH 03756-0001, USA. Donald.a.mahler@hitchcock.org

PURPOSE: To examine the responsiveness of a new computerized method for patients 
to provide continuous ratings of dyspnea during exercise in patients with chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
METHODS: In this randomized, double-blind study the effects of an inhaled
bronchodilator (BD), albuterol/ipratropium bromide solution, were compared with
normal saline (NS) in 30 patients with COPD (age, 66+/-9 yr; forced expiratory
volume in 1 s, 48+/-14% pred). At visit 1, patients were familiarized with the
cycle ergometer and computer, monitor, and mouse system to provide continuous
ratings of dyspnea during exercise. At subsequent visits 2-3 d apart, patients
performed pulmonary function tests followed by incremental ramp (15 W.min-1) and,
1 h later, constant work (at 55% of maximal work capacity) exercise tests.
RESULTS: During incremental exercise the slopes of VO2:dyspnea and VE:dyspnea
regressions were significantly lower, and patients exercised longer (Delta=0.4
min; P=0.003) with BD therapy compared with NS. During constant work exercise
there was a significant reduction in dyspnea at the same exercise duration
(5.0+/-2.8 vs 6.2+/-2.8 units on the 0-10 category-ratio scale; P=0.02) and
patients exercised longer (Delta=0.9 min; P=0.04) with BD therapy. Changes in
lung function at rest did not correlate significantly with changes in dyspnea
ratings during exercise.
CONCLUSIONS: Continuous ratings of dyspnea were responsive to inhaled
bronchodilator therapy during both incremental and constant work exercise tests
in patients with symptomatic COPD.


PMID: 15809548  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. J Asthma. 2005 Feb;42(1):29-34.

A respiratory therapist-directed protocol for managing inpatients with asthma and
COPD incorporating a long-acting bronchodilator.

Colice GL(1), Carnathan B, Sung J, Paramore LC.

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary Service, Washington Hospital Center, Washington, District of
Columbia, 20010, USA. Gene.Colice@Medstar.net

This prospective study was designed to determine whether incorporating formoterol
into a standardized respiratory therapist-directed protocol for administering
bronchodilators to hospitalized patients with obstructive airway disease would
reduce health care resource use and provide a safety advantage. All patients
admitted to Washington Hospital Center with asthma and chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (CODP) are administered bronchodilators under a standardized
respiratory therapist-directed protocol. Formoterol was the primary
bronchodilator for the intervention period from January through March 2002, with 
levalbuterol, albuterol, and ipratropium available as needed. Results for the
intervention period were compared against two historical control periods. From
January through March 2000, the bronchodilators in the protocol were albuterol
and ipratropium, and from January through March 2001 levalbuterol, albuterol, and
ipratropium were available. Health care resource use was determined by the number
of bronchodilator treatments administered per admission. Costs (adjusted to 2002 
dollars) for supplies, therapist time, and drugs were calculated for the three
time periods. Adverse events related to bronchodilator administration were
recorded in a standardized manner for all three time periods. Bronchodilator
treatments per admission, respiratory therapist visits per admission, and time
spent per admission, and cost per bronchodilator treatment significantly
decreased in 2002. Significantly fewer adverse events related to bronchodilator
treatments were reported in 2002 than 2000. The addition of formoterol to a
respiratory therapist-directed protocol for administering bronchodilators reduced
health care resource use and adverse events for patients with asthma and COPD.


PMID: 15801325  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Ann Pharmacother. 2004 Dec;38(12):2045-9. Epub 2004 Oct 19.

Acute myocardial infarction associated with albuterol.

Fisher AA(1), Davis MW, McGill DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Geriatric Medicine, The Canberra Hospital, Woden ACT 2606,
Australia.

OBJECTIVE: To report a case of acute myocardial infarction (AMI) following the
use of albuterol (salbutamol) in a patient without preexisting coronary artery
disease and to review the related literature.
CASE SUMMARY: An 84-year-old white woman with no history of cardiac disease was
treated for an exacerbation of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease with
albuterol 5 mg and ipratropium bromide 500 microg nebulized with oxygen; the
albuterol was given in the same dose every 2 hours. Her respiratory condition
improved, but soon after the sixth dose of albuterol, she developed increasing
chest tightness. The electrocardiogram (ECG) showed ST segment elevation in the
chest leads (V(2,3)) and, subsequently, the troponin I concentration and creatine
kinase rose. Urgent coronary angiography showed smooth coronary arteries with no 
obstructive coronary artery disease or thrombosis. Left ventriculography showed
anterior hypokinesia consistent with anterior myocardial injury. A subsequent
echocardiogram also revealed normal left ventricular size but anterior,
anteroseptal, and apical hypokinesia. An objective causality assessment revealed 
that albuterol had a probable likelihood of causing the AMI in this patient.
DISCUSSION: A MEDLINE search (1966-February 2004) revealed 6 other case reports
of AMI associated with albuterol treatment. The possible pathogenesis of
albuterol-induced myocardial necrosis includes activation of cardiac and
peripheral beta(2)-adrenoceptors, inducing positive chronotropic and inotropic
effects and vasodilation with coronary blood flow redistribution. Albuterol can
also cause hypokalemia and other metabolic and electrical changes, including
prolonged QT interval. These effects may be especially detrimental in patients
with hypoxia, hypercapnea, and preexisting heart diseases.
CONCLUSIONS: Although myocardial injury is a rare complication following
albuterol therapy, clinicians should use high-dose beta(2)-agonists with caution.
Close monitoring of ECG and metabolic changes is recommended before early
repeated high doses are administered.

DOI: 10.1345/aph.1E150 
PMID: 15494380  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. J Am Osteopath Assoc. 2004 Jul;104(7):288-93.

Levalbuterol in the treatment of patients with asthma and chronic obstructive
lung disease.

Dalonzo GE Jr(1).

Author information: 
(1)Temple University Hospital, Pulmonary and Critical Care, Philadelphia, PA
19140, USA. dalong@temple.edu

Effective asthma control requires long-term (anti-inflammatory) controller
medications for patients with mild-persistent to severe-persistent disease, and
quick-relief bronchodilator medication for all patients with asthma to control
intermittent symptoms of cough, wheeze, and bronchoconstriction, as well as acute
exacerbations. For patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease,
quick-relief and long-acting bronchodilators are primarily used in the
maintenance and treatment of associated symptoms, including shortness of breath. 
For many years, the most widely used bronchodilator has been racemic (R,
S)-albuterol, a short-acting beta2-adrenergic agonist, commonly dispensed as an
inhaled aerosol or solution. Until the introduction of levalbuterol inhalation
solution (Xopenex) in 1999, all marketed forms of albuterol (including Ventolin
and Proventil brands) were racemic mixtures composed of a 1:1 ratio of (R)- and
(S)-stereoisomers. Administered as a proportionally equivalent nebulized dose,
levalbuterol [(R)-albuterol] provides greater bronchodilation than racemic
albuterol and, in the appropriate clinical setting, offers the possibility for
improving clinical outcomes in patients with asthma and other obstructive airway 
diseases. Additionally, levalbuterol can be given at lower doses than racemic
albuterol to provide comparable bronchodilation, with the potential for reduced
beta-mediated adverse effects in adults and children. Only since the past decade 
has the technology to separate stereoisomers become available, and thus the
biologic activities of the albuterol stereoisomers had not been established.
Binding studies have demonstrated that (R)-albuterol binds to the
beta2-adrenergic receptor with a high affinity, whereas (S)-albuterol binds with 
100-fold less affinity than (R)-albuterol. Other evaluations have suggested that 
(R)-albuterol possesses the bronchodilatory, bronchoprotective, and
ciliary-stimulatory properties of racemic albuterol, while (S)-albuterol does not
contribute beneficially to the therapeutic effects of the racemate and was
originally assumed to be inert. However, preclinical evaluations have shown that 
(S)-albuterol has effects that work in opposition to (R)-albuterol and may
diminish the therapeutic effects of (R)-albuterol.


PMID: 15293593  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. J Manag Care Pharm. 2004 Jul;10(4 Suppl):S11-6.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease treatment options.

George DL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cerner Health Insights, 9100 Wilshire Blvd., Suite 655 East, Beverly Hills, CA
90212, USA. dgeorge@cerner.com

OBJECTIVE: To discuss current therapies for the treatment of chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD) and their efficacy and use according to current
treatment guidelines.
SUMMARY: The overall approach to the management of stable COPD is a stepwise
increase in treatment, depending on disease severity. Inhaled bronchodilators are
the cornerstone of symptomatic management of COPD and include beta 2-agonists,
anticholinergics, and methylxanthines. Short-acting beta 2-agonist
bronchodilators (e.g., albuterol) have a quick onset of action and are useful for
rescue. Long-acting bronchodilators are taken on a regular basis to prevent or
reduce symptoms and include beta 2-agonists saleterol and formoterol and
anticholinergics ipratropium bromide and tiotropium bromide. Methylxanthines have
decreased in usage due to potential toxicity. The Global Initiative for Chronic
Obstructive Lung Disease (GOLD) guidelines are an international initiative,
updated in 2003. GOLD staging consists of 5 levels of severity; treatment
guidelines recommend a step-wise approach, with short- and long-acting
bronchodilators as the cornerstone of therapy.
CONCLUSION: Appropriate pharmacologic treatment of symptomatic COPD can result in
reduced patient limitations and health care utilization and improved
health-related quality of life.


PMID: 15253682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Ann Pharmacother. 2004 Feb;38(2):286-93. Epub 2003 Dec 30.

Beta-blocker underuse in secondary prevention of myocardial infarction.

Everly MJ(1), Heaton PC, Cluxton RJ Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pharmacy Practice, College of Pharmacy, University of Cincinnati, 
Cincinnati, OH, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To review the clinical benefits of beta-blockers as secondary
prevention following a myocardial infarction (MI) and to address the reasons that
clinicians are reluctant to use beta-blockers in specific patient populations.
DATA SOURCES: MEDLINE was searched for articles published from January 1966 to
October 2002. Relevant studies were identified by systematic searches of the
literature for all reported studies of associations between beta-blocker underuse
and secondary prevention of MI. Additional studies were identified by a hand
search of references of original or review articles.
STUDY SELECTION AND DATA EXTRACTION: English-language human studies were selected
and analyzed.
DATA SYNTHESIS: Associations were observed in studies of beta-blocker use as
secondary prevention of MI. A lower rate of beta-blocker treatment occurred in
older patients and in patients with comorbid conditions such as diabetes, heart
failure, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, asthma, and peripheral arterial
disease. In addition, underuse was attributed to the perception of high rates of 
adverse events associated with beta-blockers. beta-Blocker use as secondary
prevention of an MI can lead to a 19-48% decrease in mortality and up to a 28%
decrease in reinfarction rates. Nonetheless, beta-blockers are significantly
underused in many patient populations due to concomitant disease states. Due to
their normal physiologic deterioration, the elderly are at an increased risk of
low cardiac output and bradycardia when given a beta-blocker; therefore, they
should be started on a low dose that is then slowly titrated. In diabetic
patients, beta-blockers can impair glucose control leading to hypoglycemia;
therefore, post-MI diabetic patients must routinely monitor their blood glucose
levels. In patients with decompensated heart failure, beta-blocker use can lead
to further cardiac depression, but lower oral starting doses with slow titration 
can reduce this risk. beta-Blockers can induce bronchospasm in patients with
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease or asthma, but cardioselective
beta-blockers and appropriate use of medications such as albuterol can minimize
these effects. Finally, in patients with peripheral arterial disease, with the
exception of hypertensive patients with Reynaud's phenomenon, beta-blockers can
be used safely. The only absolute contraindications to beta-blockers are severe
bradycardia, preexisting sick sinus syndrome, second- and third-degree
atrioventricular block, severe left ventricular dysfunction, active peripheral
vascular disease with rest ischemia, or reactive airway disease so severe that
airway support is required.
CONCLUSIONS: Overall, the cardiovascular benefits of beta-blockers as secondary
prevention of MI significantly outweigh the risks associated with their use.

DOI: 10.1345/aph.1C472 
PMID: 14742768  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Am J Respir Med. 2002;1(4):285-300.

Formoterol: a review of its use in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Cheer SM(1), Scott LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Adis International Inc, Langhorne, Pennsylvania 19047, USA. demail@adis.com

Inhaled formoterol is a long-acting selective beta2-adrenoceptor agonist, with an
onset of action of 5 minutes postdose and a bronchodilator effect that lasts for 
at least 12 hours. Statistically significant and clinically relevant (>120 ml)
improvements in lung function [assessed using standardized/normalized area under 
the forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1) versus time curve (AUC FEV1)]
were observed with inhaled formoterol 12 microg twice daily (the approved dosage 
in the US) compared with placebo in 12-week and 12-month, randomized,
double-blind trials in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD). The bronchodilator efficacy of formoterol 12 microg twice daily was
greater than that of oral slow-release theophylline (individualized dosages) in a
12-month trial or inhaled ipratropium bromide 40 microg four times daily in a
12-week trial. Improvement in AUC FEV1 with formoterol, but not theophylline,
compared with placebo was observed in patients with irreversible or
poorly-reversible airflow obstruction. Formoterol also significantly improved
health-related quality of life compared with ipratropium bromide or placebo and
significantly reduced symptoms compared with placebo. Combination therapy with
formoterol 12 microg twice daily plus ipratropium bromide 40 microg four times
daily was significantly more effective than albuterol (salbutamol) 200 microg
four times daily plus the same dosage of ipratropium bromide in a 3-week,
randomized, double-blind, double-dummy, crossover trial. Inhaled formoterol was
well tolerated in clinical trials. The incidence of investigator-determined
drug-related adverse events with inhaled formoterol 12 microg twice daily was
similar to that with placebo and inhaled ipratropium bromide 40 microg four times
daily but lower than that with oral slow-release theophylline (individualized
dosages). Importantly, there were no significant differences between formoterol
and placebo or comparator drugs in cardiovascular adverse events in patients with
COPD and corrected QT interval values within the normal range. In conclusion,
inhaled formoterol improved lung function and health-related quality of life and 
reduced symptoms relative to placebo in clinical trials in patients with COPD.
The drug had greater bronchodilator efficacy than oral slow-release theophylline 
or inhaled ipratropium bromide and showed efficacy in combination with
ipratropium bromide. The adverse events profile (including cardiovascular adverse
events) with formoterol was similar to that with placebo. Thus, inhaled
formoterol may be considered as a first-line option for the management of
bronchoconstriction in patients with COPD who require regular bronchodilator
therapy for the management of symptoms.


PMID: 14720051  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Prehosp Emerg Care. 2004 Jan-Mar;8(1):34-40.

Albuterol sulfate administration by EMT-basics: results of a demonstration
project.

Markenson D(1), Foltin G, Tunik M, Cooper A, Treiber M, Caravaglia K.

Author information: 
(1)Program for Pediatric Preparedness, National Center for Disaster Preparedness,
Mailman School of Public Health, Columbia University, New York, NY 10021, USA.
dsm2002@columbia.edu

OBJECTIVES: 1) To evaluate the ability to train emergency medical
technicians-basic (EMT-Bs) to accurately identify bronchospasm and, based on a
treatment protocol, administer albuterol sulfate via nebulization as a standing
order. 2) To measure the improvement in patient condition after treatment.
METHODS: Following approval by the Commissioner of Health and Institutional
Review Board, EMS agencies were enrolled to participate in the study and EMT-Bs
were trained using a four-hour curriculum. For each patient, a prehospital data
collection form was completed including identifying data for the EMT-B, patient
assessment, and history information; and pre- and posttreatment assessments and a
hospital data collection form were completed including the emergency department
physician's diagnosis, assessment of bronchospasm, number of albuterol treatments
received in the emergency department, and final disposition of the patient.
RESULTS: During a one-year study period, EMT-Bs treated 190 patients as part of
the project. Across all values patients showed a clinical improvement as a result
of the therapy. Concurrence in the assessment of bronchospasm by the EMT-B with
an emergency department physician was found in 87.4% of the cases. When including
allergic reaction, anaphylaxis, bronchiolitis, and chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease in the diagnosis list of bronchospasm, the accuracy rate increased to
more than 94%.
CONCLUSION: This study indicated EMT-Bs were highly successful in their
evaluation of bronchospasm. Based on this level of accuracy, the authors suggest 
that it is safe for emergency medical service systems and medical directors to
develop protocols that allow EMT-Bs to administer albuterol via nebulizer for
bronchospasm based on their assessment.


PMID: 14691785  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Drugs. 2003;63(22):2437-45; discussion 2447-8.

Novolizer: a multidose dry powder inhaler.

Fenton C(1), Keating GM, Plosker GL.

Author information: 
(1)Adis International Limited, Auckland, New Zealand. demail@adis.co.nz

Novolizer is a multidose breath-actuated dry powder inhaler (DPI) approved for
use with salbutamol (albuterol) and budesonide. It has multiple patient feedback 
mechanisms and an inspiratory flow rate threshold designed to optimise dosage. In
two studies, children aged 4-11 years with asthma correctly used Novolizer and
generated mean peak inspiratory flow rates (PIFRs) through Novolizer of 76 and
92.7 L/min, well above the Novolizer threshold of 35-50 L/min. In healthy
volunteers, median lung deposition of budesonide administered via Novolizer was
19.9-32.1% at mean PIFRs of 54-99 L/min. In a randomised, double-blind,
single-dose study in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)
and asthma, the 1-hour improvement from baseline in mean maximum forced
expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV(1)) was 21.3% with inhalation of salbutamol
through Novolizer, and 19.5% through Sultanol pressurised metered-dose inhaler
(MDI). FEV(1) increased significantly in patients with asthma and COPD treated
for 4 weeks in a randomised, open-label comparison of salbutamol through either
Novolizer or Sultanol MDI. A randomised open-label study in adults with asthma
treated with inhaled budesonide found equivalent improvements in FEV(1) and
symptoms with Novolizer and Turbuhaler. Novolizer was well accepted overall. Most
patients preferred it to previously used MDIs or DPIs. Only 4-5% found the taste 
feedback unacceptable. Physicians observed improved compliance over 4 weeks in
80% of patients with asthma using Novolizer.


PMID: 14609355  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Drugs. 2003;63(14):1481-8.

Acute exacerbations in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: current strategies 
with pharmacological therapy.

Hall CS(1), Kyprianou A, Fein AM.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, North Shore University
Hospital, Mahasset, New York 11030, USA. chshall@hotmail.com

In acute exacerbation of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (AECOPD),
short-acting inhaled bronchodilators, such as salbutamol (albuterol) and
ipratropium bromide, have proven useful. In patients who are refractory to these 
agents, intravenous aminophylline should be considered. Corticosteroids should
also be used, either in the outpatient or inpatient setting. The duration of
corticosteroids should probably not exceed 2 weeks and the optimum dosage is yet 
to be determined. Antibacterials, especially in patients with purulent or
increased sputum, should be used, guided by the local antibiogram of the key
microbes. Controlled oxygen therapy improves outcome in hypoxaemic patients and
arterial blood gases should be performed to ensure hypercarbia is not becoming
excessive. Should patients be in distress despite the above measures or if there 
is acidaemia or hypercarbia, noninvasive positive pressure ventilation could be
used to improve outcomes without resorting to invasive mechanical ventilation.
Mucous-clearing drugs and chest physiotherapy have no proven beneficial role in
AECOPD.


PMID: 12834365  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. J Clin Epidemiol. 2003 Mar;56(3):248-55.

Meaningful effect size and patterns of response of the transition dyspnea index.

Witek TJ Jr(1), Mahler DA.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical and Scientific Affairs, Boehringer Ingelheim Pharmaceuticals, Inc.,
900 Ridgebury Road, Ridgefield, CT 06877, USA.
ted.witek@ing.boehringer-ingelheim.com

Ths object of this study was to examine validity, meaningful effect sizes, and
patterns of response of the Transition Dyspnea Index (TDI) in a clinical trial
cohort of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) patients. The design was a
retrospective analysis of data from a randomized, double-blind placebo-controlled
clinical trial. We analyzed fifty clinical investigation sites in United States. 
There were 921 patients with stable COPD. Tiotropium 18 microg dry powder or
matching placebo was used. Patients were allowed to remain on usual care less
ipratropium bromide. Construct validity was demonstrated by significant
correlations (P <.05) between Baseline Dyspnea Index (BDI) and other baseline
measures, as well as between TDI and changes in other measures at the end of 1
year. Concurrent validity was observed by the significant correlation between TDI
and dyspnea diary responses. Changes in TDI focal score were in the range of one 
unit when the group was stratified by a minimal change in the physician's global 
evaluation. Significantly less (P <.05) supplemental albuterol was observed in
the group of responders defined by a one-unit improvement in TDI. Responders also
had few exacerbations and better health status. The validity of the TDI is
supported in a large clinical trial setting. A one-unit change in the TDI focal
score represented the minimal important difference.


PMID: 12725879  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Eur Respir J. 2003 Mar;21(3):439-43.

Slower rise of exhaled breath temperature in chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease.

Paredi P(1), Caramori G, Cramer D, Ward S, Ciaccia A, Papi A, Kharitonov SA,
Barnes PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Dept of Thoracic Medicine, Imperial College School of Medicine at the National
Heart and Lung Institute and Lung Function Unit, Royal Brompton Hospital, London,
UK.

Comment in
    Eur Respir J. 2003 Aug;22(2):393-4; author reply 394-5.

In chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) there is decreased vascularity of
the bronchi and inflammation of the airways that may have opposite effects on the
regulation of heat loss. Exhaled air temperature increase (delta(e) T) was
measured in 23 patients with moderate COPD (18 male, mean age +/- SEM 70 +/- 1
yrs; forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV1) 45 +/- 3%, FEV1/forced vital
capacity 54 +/- 4%) and 16 normal volunteers (64 +/- 4 yr) and compared to
exhaled nitric oxide (eNO) and inflammatory cells in induced sputum as a marker
of airway inflammation. Delta(e) T was measured during a flow- and
pressure-controlled single exhalation with a fast-response thermometer. delta(e) 
T was reduced in patients with COPD (1.86 +/- 0.15 delta C x s(-1)) compared to
normal subjects (4.00 +/- 0.26 delta C x s(-1)). There was no difference in
delta(e) T between patients treated with inhaled steroids and those who were
steroid naïve. Delta(e) T was correlated with eNO (r=0.60) but not with sputum
neutrophilia. In COPD patients, delta(e) T was increased (2.26 +/- 0.16 delta C x
s(-1)) after the inhalation of 200 microg of albuterol, which is a known
vasodilator, indicating that delta(e) T and bronchial blood flow may be
correlated. Exhaled temperature increase is reduced in chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease patients and is increased by the inhalation of vasodilators and
therefore may be related to changes of bronchial blood flow and tissue
remodelling.


PMID: 12661998  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2002 Dec;110(6 Suppl):S298-303.

The effect of inhaled beta2-agonists on clinical outcomes in chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease.

Mahler DA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Section of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical
Center, Lebanon, NH 03756, USA.

The major clinical outcomes measured in evaluating the responses to
pharmacotherapy in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)
include the severity of dyspnea, exercise capacity, exacerbations, and health
status. Various studies have demonstrated that testing for acute bronchodilator
reversibility in the pulmonary function laboratory does not predict the clinical 
responses to a trial of bronchodilator therapy in patients with COPD. Separate
studies have shown that inhaled albuterol, both a single dose (300 microg) and 2 
weeks of therapy (200 microg/4x/day), reduces dyspnea. There is more published
information available about the effects of long-acting (>/=12 hours' duration of 
action) inhaled beta(2)-agonists because of greater interest in considering
clinical outcomes at the time of drug testing. In one randomized clinical trial, 
formoterol reduced symptoms (as recorded in a home diary) and improved health
status. Nine clinical studies have examined the effects of salmeterol on clinical
outcomes. Salmeterol reduced the perception of breathlessness (in 6 of 9 studies)
and improved health status (in 3 of 4 studies). These results collectively
demonstrate that long-acting inhaled beta(2)-agonists not only relax bronchial
smooth muscle but also provide important clinical benefits in symptomatic
patients with COPD.


PMID: 12464939  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Am J Manag Care. 2002 Oct;8(10):902-11.

Delivery of ipratropium and albuterol combination therapy for chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease: effectiveness of a two-in-one inhaler versus separate
inhalers.

Chrischilles E(1), Gilden D, Kubisiak J, Rubenstein L, Shah H.

Author information: 
(1)University of Iowa, Iowa City, USA. echrischilles@uiowa.edu

OBJECTIVE: To determine whether a combined formulation consisting of ipratropium 
and an inhaled beta2 agonist (2-in-1 therapy) leads to lower respiratory-related 
healthcare use and charges and improved compliance compared with treatment with
separate ipratropium and beta2-agonist inhalers (separate inhaler therapy).
STUDY DESIGN: Retrospective inception cohort study.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Healthcare use, charges, and treatment compliance were
examined for adults age 38 years or older who initiated ipratropium therapy on or
after July 1997, based on health claims data for United Healthcare enrollees from
5 health plans from July 1997 through December 1998. A total of 428 patients
received 2-in-1 therapy, and 658 patients received separate inhaler therapy. To
adjust for disease severity and other confounders, the following were determined 
for the preinitiation period: age; sex; use of oral steroids, antibiotics, or
albuterol; respiratory-related healthcare use; and respiratory diagnoses.
Compliance was defined as not interrupting or discontinuing therapy during the
follow-up period.
RESULTS: After adjusting for baseline covariates, 2-in-1 therapy users had a
significantly lower risk of emergency department use or hospitalization (relative
risk = 0.58, 95% confidence interval [CI] = 0.36, 0.94), lower mean monthly
healthcare charges (P= .015), shorter hospital stays (2.05 vs 4.61 days, P =
.040), and greater likelihood of compliance (odds ratio = 1.77, 95% CI = 1.46,
2.14).
CONCLUSION: A single inhaler containing both ipratropium and albuterol can
increase compliance and decrease respiratory morbidity and charges over and above
the effects achieved with separate inhalers for these 2 agents.


PMID: 12395958  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. J Appl Physiol (1985). 2002 Dec;93(6):2053-8. Epub 2002 Sep 6.

Effects of exercise and beta 2-agonists on lung function in chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease.

Corsico A(1), Fulgoni P, Beccaria M, Zoia MC, Barisione G, Pellegrino R, Brusasco
V, Cerveri I.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio di Fisiopatologia Respiratoria, Clinica Malattie Apparato
Respiratorio, Università di Pavia, Istituto di Ricovero e Cura a Carattere
Scientifico Policlinico S. Matteo, 27100 Pavia, Italy.

The effects of inhaled bronchodilators at rest and during exercise were studied
in 15 subjects with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. In a crossover study
against placebo, albuterol caused a significant increase in expiratory flow and
reduced lung hyperinflation and dyspnea at rest, but this was not associated with
differences in symptoms with exercise or any relevant parameter of physical
performance. Dynamic hyperinflation occurred during exercise similarly after
placebo or albuterol and was associated with a reduction of forced expiratory
flows. This, in turn, was correlated with the bronchoconstrictor effect of deep
inhalation determined at rest. In a parallel group study, expiratory flow was
increased by 3-wk treatment with salmeterol (n = 9) but not with placebo (n = 6).
However, in neither group was the response to exercise different from baseline.
These results suggest that in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease effective
pharmacological bronchodilation at rest may not be predictive of benefits of
exercise tolerance. This may be related to the occurrence of airway narrowing
during exercise, particularly when a deep inhalation at rest is followed by a
decrease in expiratory flow.

DOI: 10.1152/japplphysiol.00490.2002 
PMID: 12391117  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Pharmacotherapy. 2002 Sep;22(9):1129-39.

Formoterol therapy for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: a review of the
literature.

Friedman M(1), Della Cioppa G, Kottakis J.

Author information: 
(1)Tulane University School of Medicine, New Orleans, Louisiana, USA.

Numerous clinical trials have investigated the use of formoterol, a long-acting
beta2-agonist, for the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
Formoterol provides bronchodilation as rapidly as albuterol, yet its efficacy and
duration of action are similar to those of salmeterol. It demonstrates better
spirometric efficacy than either ipratropium or theophylline alone, and its
efficacy improves when administered in combination with ipratropium. Formoterol
improves patients' quality of life and has a good safety profile. It is better
tolerated than theophylline and has a similar tolerability to albuterol,
salmeterol, and ipratropium. In short, formoterol is a bronchodilator with rapid 
onset of action and prolonged duration of action with a favorable efficacy,
safety, and tolerability profile when used in patients with COPD. It provides a
valid therapeutic option in the pharmacologic treatment of this disease.


PMID: 12222549  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2002;(2):CD003571.

Heliox for treatment of exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Rodrigo G(1), Pollack C, Rodrigo C, Rowe B.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Emergencia, Hospital Central de las FF.AA., Av. 8 de Octubre
3020', Montevideo, Uruguay, 11600. gurodrig@adinet.com.uy

BACKGROUND: Due to its low density properties, helium-oxygen mixtures have the
potential to decrease the work of breathing and possibly avoid the need for
intubation and mechanical ventilation in patients with respiratory failure.
OBJECTIVES: To determine the effect of the addition of helium/oxygen mixtures
(heliox) to standard medical care during ventilated and nonventilated acute
exacerbations of COPD.
SEARCH STRATEGY: Randomized controlled trials were identified from the Cochrane
Airways Review Group asthma Register. Primary authors and experts were contacted.
References from included and excluded studies, known reviews and texts were also 
searched.
SELECTION CRITERIA: Studies were selected for inclusion if they compared
treatment with heliox to placebo (oxygen or air) in randomized controlled trials 
in adults with an exacerbation of COPD.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Data from all trials were combined using the Review
Manager (version 4.1). We planned to perform: 1) random effects weighted mean
difference (WMD), with 95% confidence intervals (95% CI), 2) Homogeneity of
effect sizes with the Dersimonian and Laird method with p<0.1 as the cut point
for significance, and 3) sensitivity analysis on different helium-oxygen mixtures
(80/20 vs 70/30), and 4) methodological quality (Jadad score >2 vs. <3).
MAIN RESULTS: Four studies, all published between 1997 and 2000 met the inclusion
criteria. Two studies compared heliox-oxygen vs. air-oxygen in decompensated COPD
patients who were not ventilated. One study was performed in mechanical
ventilated patients and one in patients undergoing noninvasive pressure support
(NIPSV) ventilated patients. Data could be obtained for only two of the studies. 
One was a randomized crossover study of 70:30 helium-oxygen vs air-oxygen that
involved nineteen patients with acute severe COPD, hospitalized in an intensive
care unit for NIPSV. In the patients receiving heliox, arterial PCO2 fell more;
WMD 0.8 kPa (95% CI 0.26, -1.34). The second was a randomized trial involved 47
patients with acute COPD, who presented to an Emergency Department randomized to 
receive updraft nebulization of albuterol and ipratropium bromide using 80%
helium and 20% oxygen or compressed air as the driving gas. Treatments were
administered at 0, 20, 40, and 120 minutes after randomization. There were no
significant differences in the change of FEV1 and FVC between the two groups by
either the 1 or 2 hours point. although a small improvement in FEF 25-75 was
significantly greater in the heliox group than in the air group.
REVIEWER'S CONCLUSIONS: There is currently insufficient evidence to support the
use of helium-oxygen mixtures to treat acute exacerbations of COPD in either
ventilated or nonventilated patients. Suitably designed randomised controlled
trials with the endpoint being the avoidance of mechanical ventilation may be
justified.

DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD003571 
PMID: 12076487  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Respir Care. 2002 Feb;47(2):154-8.

Treatment of patients hospitalized for exacerbations of chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease: comparison of an oral/metered-dose inhaler regimen and an
intravenous/nebulizer regimen.

Shortall SP(1), Blum J, Oldenburg FA, Rodgerson L, Branscombe JM, Harrow EM.

Author information: 
(1)Penobscot Respiratory, 417 State Street, Suite 400, Bangor ME 04401, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Compare the therapeutic efficacy of an oral/metered-dose inhaler
(oral/MDI) regimen to an intravenous/nebulizer (I.V./neb) regimen of
methylprednisolone, cefuroxime, and inhaled albuterol and ipratropium bromide in 
patients hospitalized for exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
(COPD).
DESIGN: Randomized, nonblinded, therapeutic trial.
SETTING: Two community hospitals in Bangor, Maine.
PATIENTS: 34 individuals with severe COPD. The mean admission forced expiratory
volume in the first second was 0.75 L (oral/MDI 0.78 L, I.V./neb 0.71 L).
RESULTS: Baseline demographic, laboratory, comorbidity, and ventilatory values
determined in 19 patients who received the oral/MDI regimen and 15 patients
treated with the I.V./neb regimen indicated comparability of the two groups.
Outcome variables that compared oral/MDI to I.V./neb, including mean change in
forced expiratory volume in the first second (0.12 L vs 0.13 L), mean length of
stay (4.3 vs 5.1 d), and treatment failures (32% vs 33%), showed no significant
differences.
CONCLUSION: Patients hospitalized for COPD exacerbations can be successfully (and
potentially less expensively) treated with an oral/MDI treatment regimen.


PMID: 11812271  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Pharmacoeconomics. 2001;19(6):623-42.

An economic overview of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Ruchlin HS(1), Dasbach EJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Public Health, Weill Medical College of Cornell University, New 
York, NY 10021, USA. hsruchli@mail.cornell.edu

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a major cause of mortality and
morbidity. Relatively few pharmacoeconomic studies have been conducted on this
disease. This article reviews available information about the utilisation of
healthcare resources and cost of care, and the cost or cost effectiveness of
therapeutic interventions reported for this disease. Burden-of-illness data
indicate that hospital care, medications and oxygen therapy were the major cost
drivers in these studies. Mean annual Medicare expenditures in the US were
$US11,841 (2000 values) for patients with COPD compared with $US4,901 for all
covered patients. Utilisation was skewed; the most expensive 10% of the Medicare 
beneficiaries accounted for nearly 50% of total expenditures for this disease.
Costs are associated with health status, age, physician specialty, geographic
location and type of insurance coverage. Six types of interventions were assessed
in the literature--pharmacotherapy, oxygen therapy, home care, surgery, exercise 
and rehabilitation and health education. The studies used different analytic
strategies (e.g. cost-minimisation and cost-effectiveness analyses) and even
within the realm of cost-effectiveness analyses, no uniformity existed as to how 
outcome was measured. Patient severity was not always delineated, and the length 
of the follow-up period, while quite short, varied. Only 11 of the 34 evaluations
were based on randomised controlled trials. Cost-minimisation studies generally
found no significant difference in the cost of antimicrobial treatment for
first-line, second-line and third-line agents. Studies of bronchodilators
indicated that ipratropium bromide alone or in combination with salbutamol
(albuterol) was the preferred medication. The major area for achieving cost
savings is by reducing hospital utilisation. As the annual rate of
hospitalisation is relatively low, large patient samples will be required to
demonstrate an economic advantage for a new therapy. The major challenges will be
financing such a study, and selecting an outcome measure that satisfies both
clinical and economic conventions.


PMID: 11456211  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Drugs Aging. 2001;18(6):441-72.

Inhaled salmeterol: a review of its efficacy in chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease.

Jarvis B(1), Markham A.

Author information: 
(1)Adis International Limited, Mairangi Bay, Auckland, New Zealand.
demail@adis.co.nz

Inhaled salmeterol is a long-acting, selective beta2-adrenoceptor agonist
bronchodilator. The drug has been compared with placebo, ipratropium bromide and 
oral theophylline in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)
in randomised, clinical trials. Inhaled salmeterol 50 microg twice daily produced
significant improvement in forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1),
equivalent to that obtained with inhaled ipratropium bromide 40 microg 4 times
daily and greater than that obtained with placebo or oral theophylline in
randomised trials. Use of as-needed salbutamol (albuterol) was significantly
reduced during treatment with inhaled salmeterol or ipratropium bromide compared 
with placebo or oral theophylline. The time to first COPD exacerbation was
significantly longer during 12 weeks of treatment with inhaled salmeterol 50
microg twice daily than ipratropium bromide 40 microg 4 times daily. Compared
with baseline and placebo, patients treated for 16 weeks with salmeterol 50
microg (but not 100 microg) twice daily reported significant improvement in total
St George's Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ) scores. Similarly, more patients
treated with inhaled salmeterol 50 microg twice daily or ipratropium bromide 40
microg 4 times daily experienced an increase of > or = 10 points in Chronic
Respiratory Disease Questionnaire (CRQ) scores, the minimum clinically
significant increment. Compared with placebo, inhaled salmeterol 50 microg twice 
daily alone, or concurrent with ipratropium bromide 40 microg 4 times daily
improved lung function and reduced symptoms in patients with stable COPD in a
12-week, randomised, double-blind study. Clinically meaningful improvement in CRQ
scores was documented in significantly more patients treated with the combination
of the 2 drugs than either salmeterol monotherapy or placebo. Inhaled salmeterol 
50 microg twice daily plus oral theophylline had additive effects on lung
function, increased the proportion of symptom-free days and decreased
requirements for as-needed salbutamol compared with either agent alone according 
to a pooled analysis of 2 multicentre, randomised, double-blind
studies.CONCLUSION: When used at the optimal dosage, 50 microg twice daily,
salmeterol provides symptomatic relief and improves lung function and
health-related quality of life in patients with COPD. Available evidence suggests
that the drug is as effective as ipratropium bromide and more effective than oral
theophylline in patients with COPD. Moreover salmeterol has additive effects when
used in combination with inhaled ipratropium bromide or oral theophylline. These 
qualities make the drug suitable for first-line use in patients with COPD who
require regular bronchodilator therapy to manage symptoms.


PMID: 11419918  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2001;(2):CD002984.

Inhaled short-acting beta2-agonists versus ipratropium for acute exacerbations of
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

McCrory DC(1), Brown CD.

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Duke University Medical Center, Box
3221, 350 Bell Building, Durham, North Carolina, 27710, USA.

BACKGROUND: Inhaled short acting beta2 adrenergic agonists and ipratropium
bromide are both used in the treatment of acute exacerbations of chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease.
OBJECTIVES: In patients with acute exacerbations of COPD to: 1. To assess the
efficacy of short-acting beta-2 agonists against placebo; 2. Compare the efficacy
of short-acting beta-2 agonists and ipratropium.
SEARCH STRATEGY: A comprehensive search of the literature was carried out of
EMBASE, MEDLINE, CINAHL and the Cochrane COPD trials register was carried out
using the terms: bronchodilator* OR albuterol OR metaproterenol OR terbutaline OR
isoetharine OR pirbuterol OR salbutamol OR beta-2 agonist.
SELECTION CRITERIA: All trials that appeared to be relevant were assessed by two 
reviewers who independently selected trials for inclusion. Differences were
resolved by consensus.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: All trials that appeared to be relevant were
assessed by two reviewers who independently selected trials for inclusion.
Differences were resolved by consensus. References listed in each included trial 
were searched for additional trial reports. Trials were combined using Review
Manager using a fixed effects model. The size of the treatment effects were
tested for heterogeneity.
MAIN RESULTS: We identified no placebo-controlled comparisons of beta-2 agonists.
Three studies permitted comparison of ipratropium to an inhaled beta-2 agonist.
These studies included a total of 103 patients. The beta2-agonists used were:
fenoterol and metaproterenol. One study was a parallel group trial of regular
therapy for seven days. The other two were cross over studies of single dose
treatments, with efficacy measured 90 min post dose. There was no washout period 
between treatments. Both treatments produced an improvement in forced expiratory 
volume (FEV1) after 90 min in the range 150-250 ml. The was no difference between
treatments, mean difference in FEV1 10 ml; 95% CI -220, 230 ml. In one small
crossover study (n=10) there was a significant improvement in arterial PaO2 after
30 minutes with ipratropium (+5.8 mm Hg +/- 3.0 (SEM)) compared to metaproterenol
(-6.2 +/- 1.2 mm Hg), but this was not significant at 90 min. There were no data 
concerning respiratory symptoms. The crossover studies showed no evidence of an
additive effect of the two treatments, although they were not designed
specifically to test this.
REVIEWER'S CONCLUSIONS: There are few controlled trial data concerning the use of
inhaled beta2-agonist agents in acute exacerbations of COPD and none that have
compared these agents directly with placebo. None of the studies used the more
modern beta2-agonists used most widely in this setting (salbutamol and
terbutaline). Beta2-agonists and ipratropium both produce small improvements in
FEV1, but beta2-agonists may worsen PaO2 for a period. We could not draw
conclusions concerning possible additive effects.

DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD002984 
PMID: 11406052  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Am J Emerg Med. 2001 May;19(3):206-7.

Lidocaine inhalation for cough suppression.

Udezue E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Internal Medicine Unit, Al-Hasa Specialty Services Division, Saudi
Aramco-Al-Hasa Health Center, Box 6030 Mubarraz 31311, Saudi Arabia.
manevans@yahoo.com

The purpose of this study was to observe the effectiveness of lidocaine in
suppressing cough which is a logical extension of its established use in
bronchoscopy. Nebulized lidocaine, preceded by standard nebulized albuterol
inhalation driven by oxygen was given to suppress cough in a selected group of
patients with intractable cough severe enough to disrupt daily life activities,
especially sleep. Patients included those with asthma, reactive airways disease, 
and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). In these selected patients,
nebulized lidocaine was very effective in suppressing cough, and thus buying time
for more definitive therapies to work. This observation merits further study and 
confirmation for the benefit of patients.(Am J Emerg Med 2001;19:206-207.

Copyright 2001 by W. B. Saunders Company

DOI: 10.1053/ajem.2001.21724 
PMID: 11326346  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2001 Apr;163(5):1087-92.

Use of a long-acting inhaled beta2-adrenergic agonist, salmeterol xinafoate, in
patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Rennard SI(1), Anderson W, ZuWallack R, Broughton J, Bailey W, Friedman M,
Wisniewski M, Rickard K.

Author information: 
(1)University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, Nebraska, USA.
srennard@mail.unmc.edu

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a condition in which continuous
bronchodilation may have clinical advantages. This study evaluated salmeterol, a 
beta-agonist bronchodilator with a duration of action substantially longer than
that of short-acting beta-agonists, compared with ipratropium, an anticholinergic
bronchodilator, and placebo in patients with COPD. Four hundred and five patients
with COPD received either salmeterol 42 microg twice daily, ipratropium bromide
36 microg four times daily, or placebo for 12 wk in this randomized,
double-blind, parallel-group study. Patients were stratified on the basis of
bronchodilator response to albuterol (> 12% and > 200-ml improvement) and were
randomized within each stratum. Bronchodilator response was measured over 12 h
four times during the treatment period. Salmeterol provided similar maximal
bronchodilatation to ipratropium but had a longer duration of action and a more
constant bronchodilatory effect with no evidence of bronchodilator tolerance.
Both active treatments were well tolerated. Salmeterol was an effective
bronchodilator with a consistent effect over this 12-wk study in patients with
COPD, including those "unresponsive" to albuterol. The long duration of action of
salmeterol offers the advantage of twice daily dosing compared with the required 
four times a day dosing with ipratropium.

DOI: 10.1164/ajrccm.163.5.9903053 
PMID: 11316640  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Pharmacoeconomics. 2001;19(3):245-54.

Economic burden of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Impact of new treatment
options.

Friedman M(1), Hilleman DE.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Pulmonary Disease, Critical Care Medicine, and Environmental
Medicine, Tulane University Medical Center, School of Medicine, New Orleans, LA, 
USA. mfriedm@tulane.edu

The incidence, morbidity and mortality of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD) is rising throughout the world. The total economic cost of COPD in the US 
in 1993 was estimated to be over $US15.5 billion, with $US6.1 billion for
hospitalisation, $US4.4 billion for physician and other fees, $US2.5 billion for 
drugs, $US1.5 billion for nursing home care and $US1.0 billion for home care.
Office visits, hospital outpatient visits and emergency department visits
accounted for 17.3% of the direct costs for COPD in the US. When stratified by
severity, COPD treatment costs strongly correlate with disease severity. The
American Thoracic Society, the European Respiratory Society and the British
Thoracic Society have developed guidelines for the pharmacological treatment of
COPD. However, the guidelines establish inhaled bronchodilators (anticholinergic 
agents and beta 2-adrenergic agonists) as the mainstay of therapy for patients
with COPD. The guidelines were not based on cost analyses and thus are not a
priori cost-effective guidelines. Since the publication of these guidelines,
several new pharmacological products have been approved for use in patients with 
COPD including a combination of an anticholinergic and selective beta
2-adrenergic agonist [ipratropium/salbutamol (albuterol)] and a long-acting beta 
2-adrenergic agonist (salmeterol). Both products are effective bronchodilators in
COPD. The purpose of this report is to place these new agents in an updated
pharmacological guideline scheme, utilising recently published data on clinical
efficacy as well as pharmacoeconomics. The annualised healthcare costs were
computed to be $US788/patient/year for the combination ipratropium/salbutamol
inhaler and $US1059/patient/year for salmeterol (1999 values). Based upon an
improved understanding of the complexity of COPD, the response of patients to
newer bronchodilators (given individually or in combination), and recent
pharmacoeconomic data for COPD treatment, a new treatment algorithm with
associated costs is proposed. The use of an algorithm, based on medical and
pharmacoeconomic data, will improve lung function in patients with COPD, improve 
patient satisfaction (e.g. quality of life, dyspnoea) and outcomes (e.g.
exacerbations). It will also result in a positive effect on healthcare costs.


PMID: 11303413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2001 Jan;163(1):85-90.

Regular versus as-needed short-acting inhaled beta-agonist therapy for chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease.

Cook D(1), Guyatt G, Wong E, Goldstein R, Bedard M, Austin P, Ramsdale H,
Jaeschke R, Sears M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.
debcook@fhs.csu.mcmaster.ca

Regular short-acting inhaled beta-agonist therapy is of uncertain benefit in
patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). We conducted a
randomized, concealed, double-blind, placebo-controlled crossover trial in two
periods, each of 3-mo duration, involving 53 patients with a smoking history of >
20 pack-years, an FEV1 of < 70% predicted, and an FEV1/VC ratio of < 0.7 after
inhalation of 200 microg albuterol. All patients received regular ipratropium
bromide at 20 microg per puff in 2 puffs four times daily, beclomethasone at 250 
microg per puff or equivalent corticosteroid in 2 puffs twice daily, and
open-label inhaled albuterol as needed. Interventional therapy consisted of
regular inhaled albuterol (100 microg per puff, in 2 puffs four times daily)
versus placebo. Patients used twice as much active albuterol in the regular use
period (mean: 8.07 puffs of coded and 4.68 puffs of open-label medication; total:
12.75 puffs daily) than during the as-needed period (mean: 6.34 puffs of
open-label albuterol daily). Despite greater beta-agonist use, patients showed
similar results during treatment and control periods for all outcomes.
Differences between active and placebo periods were: FEV1: -0.04 L (95%
confidence interval [CI]: -0.09 to 0.01 L); slow vital capacity: 0.04 L (95% CI: 
-0.12 to 0.20 L); 6-min walk test distance: -3.1 m (95% CI: -16.8 to 10.5 m); and
Chronic Respiratory Questionnaire scores for dyspnea: 0.02 (95% CI: -0.13 to
0.16); fatigue: -0.02 (95% CI: -0.25 to 0.20); mastery: 0.01 (95% CI: -0.20 to
0.24); and emotional function: 0.02 (95% CI: -0.20 to 0.24). We found that in
patients with COPD, use of regular short-acting inhaled beta-agonists resulted in
twice as much beta-agonist use without physiologic or clinical benefit as did use
on an as-needed basis.

DOI: 10.1164/ajrccm.163.1.2004214 
PMID: 11208630  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Ann Emerg Med. 2000 Nov;36(5):427-31.

The bronchodilator effect of intravenous glucagon in asthma exacerbation: a
randomized, controlled trial.

Wilber ST(1), Wilson JE, Blanda M, Gerson LW, Meerbaum SO, Janas G.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Emergency Medicine, Summa Health System, Northeastern Ohio
Universities College of Medicine, of Medicine, Akron, OH, 44304, USA.
wilbers@summa-health.org

STUDY OBJECTIVE: Glucagon is a rapid-acting smooth muscle relaxant with a short
half-life. Previous studies suggested glucagon may have bronchodilator effects.
We sought to determine whether intravenous glucagon produces clinically important
immediate bronchodilation in emergency department patients with asthma
exacerbation.
METHODS: We conducted a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study at 2
university-affiliated community teaching hospital EDs (annual census 90,000). ED 
patients 18 to 50 years old with asthma exacerbation and peak expiratory flow
rate (PEFR) less than 350 L/min were eligible. Exclusion criteria were need for
intubation, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, diabetes mellitus, insulinoma,
pheochromocytoma, pregnancy, lactation, or current oral steroid treatment.
Patients were randomly assigned to receive glucagon 0.03 mg/kg or an equivalent
volume of saline solution intravenously. At 10 minutes, PEFR was measured and all
patients began standardized albuterol therapy. Successful bronchodilation was a
PEFR increase of 60 L/min at 10 minutes.
RESULTS: Success occurred in 2 (9.5%) of 21 glucagon-treated patients and 3 (12%)
of 25 placebo-treated patients (95% confidence interval [CI] for difference of
-2.5% [-20.4% to 15. 4%]). Mean PEFR improvement for glucagon was 2 L/min versus 
9 L/min for placebo (95% CI for difference of -7 L/min [-36 L/min to 23 L/min]).
CONCLUSION: Glucagon alone provided no clinically important immediate
bronchodilation in ED patients with asthma exacerbation.

DOI: 10.1067/mem.2000.110823 
PMID: 11054194  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Crit Care Med. 2000 Sep;28(9):3177-80.

Randomized trial of the use of heliox as a driving gas for updraft nebulization
of bronchodilators in the emergent treatment of acute exacerbations of chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease.

deBoisblanc BP(1), DeBleiux P, Resweber S, Fusco EE, Summer WR.

Author information: 
(1)Sections of Pulmonary Critical Care Medicine, Louisiana State University
Medical School, New Orleans, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To determine whether the bronchodilator effects of albuterol and
ipratropium bromide are greater if updraft nebulization is driven by 80% helium
and 20% oxygen (HELIOX) than if driven by compressed room air (AIR) during the
treatment of an acute exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD).
SETTING: The emergency department of a 750-bed inner-city community hospital.
METHODS: Over a 12-month period, a convenience sample of 50 normoxic patients
presenting with signs and symptoms of an acute exacerbation of COPD were
prospectively randomized to receive either HELIOX or AIR as the driving gas for
updraft nebulization of a mixture of albuterol 2.5 mg and ipratropium bromide 0.5
mg. Additional aerosol treatments with albuterol 2.5 mg were given at 20, 40, and
120 mins after randomization using the assigned gas. Spirometry was obtained
while breathing room air before the first treatment (baseline) and at 1 hr and 2 
hrs after the initiation of treatment. The primary measure of efficacy was the
change in percent of predicted forced expiratory volume in 1 sec (FEV1) over the 
treatment period. A secondary measure of efficacy was the change in percentage of
predicted forced expiratory flow after 25% to 75% of vital capacity had been
expelled (FEF25-75).
RESULTS: Twenty-five patients were randomized to each treatment group. Three
patients (1 HELIOX, 2 AIR) were unable to complete the study. The baseline
FEV1was 44% (95% confidence interval, 35% to 52%) of predicted in the HELIOX
group and 39 (31% to 46%) of predicted in the AIR group. There were no adverse
outcomes observed in either the HELIOX group or the AIR group. There were no
significant differences in the change of FEV1 between the two groups by either
the 1 hr or 2 hr time point (1 hr, HELIOX + 10% [7% to 13%], AIR + 9% [5% to
13%]; 2 hr HELIOX + 10% [6% to 15%], AIR + 10% [6% to 14%]). The improvement in
FEF25-75 was significantly greater in the HELIOX group than in the AIR group at
both the 1 hr time point (HELIOX + 14% [7% to 22%] vs. AIR + 7% [3% to 10%], p = 
.05) and at the 2 hr time point (HELIOX + 15% [8% to 21%] vs. AIR + 7% [4% to
11%], p = .05).
CONCLUSION: Use of HELIOX as a driving gas for the updraft nebulization of
bronchodilators during the first 2 hrs of treatment of an acute COPD exacerbation
failed to improve FEV1 faster than the use of AIR. The faster improvement in
FEF25-75 during the first 2 hrs of treatment was small and of uncertain clinical 
significance.


PMID: 11008978  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Respir Care. 2000 Jul;45(7):817-23.

Bronchodilator therapy with metered-dose inhaler and spacer versus nebulizer in
mechanically ventilated patients: comparison of magnitude and duration of
response.

Duarte AG(1), Momii K, Bidani A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonary Care, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston
77555-0561, USA. aduarte@utmb.edu

Comment in
    Respir Care. 2000 Jul;45(7):815-6.

OBJECTIVE: Four-hour comparison of the bronchodilator response of albuterol
administered via metered-dose inhaler (MDI) with spacer versus small-volume
nebulizer (SVN) to mechanically ventilated patients with chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD).
DESIGN: Prospective randomized clinical trial.
SETTING: Medical intensive care unit in a university hospital.
PATIENTS: Thirteen mechanically ventilated COPD patients.
INTERVENTION: Albuterol administration of 4 puffs (0.4 mg) or 10 puffs (1.0 mg)
via MDI with spacer or 2.5 mg via SVN to mechanically ventilated patients in
order to assess the bronchodilator response over 4 hours.
MEASUREMENTS AND RESULTS: Mechanically ventilated patients were enrolled in a
randomized crossover study wherein one group received 4 puffs (0.4 mg) or 2.5 mg 
of albuterol and another group received 10 puffs (1.0 mg) or 2.5 mg of albuterol 
on separate days. Respiratory mechanics measurements were obtained over 4 hours. 
Total airway resistance declined by 14.4 +/- 3.8% after 4 MDI puffs, 18.3 +/-
1.8% after 10 MDI puffs, or 13.7 +/- 2.6% after 2.5 mg via SVN, compared to
baseline (p < 0.01). After albuterol delivery, airway resistance remained
improved for 90-120 minutes (p < 0.05) and returned to baseline by 4 hours with
all treatments.
CONCLUSION: The airway response to albuterol administration via MDI and SVN to
mechanically ventilated patients was similar in magnitude and duration, returning
to baseline by 240 minutes. In stable, mechanically ventilated COPD patients,
albuterol may be administered via MDI with spacer or via SVN every 4 hours.


PMID: 10926377  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 1999 Dec;160(6):1916-21.

Does inhaled albuterol improve diaphragmatic contractility in patients with
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease?

Hatipoğlu U(1), Laghi F, Tobin MJ.

Author information: 
(1)The Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Edward Hines Jr.
Veterans Administration Hospital, and Loyola University of Chicago Stritch School
of Medicine, Hines, Illinois 60141, USA.

We tested the hypothesis that the decrease in dyspnea in patients with COPD with 
inhaled albuterol is in part due to increased diaphragmatic contractility. Eleven
patients with COPD inhaled albuterol or placebo in a double-blind randomized
manner. Subsequently, dyspnea was measured while patients breathed through
inspiratory resistors, and diaphragmatic contractility was quantified during
maximal inspiratory efforts and after twitch stimulation of the phrenic nerves.
Albuterol produced a decrease in dyspnea (5 +/- 2 to 4 +/- 2 [SD] Borg units, p <
0.01), and increases in maximal transdiaphragmatic pressure (92.4 +/- 37.2 to
102.8 +/- 37.2 cm H(2)O, p < 0.03) and potentiated twitch transdiaphragmatic
pressures (21.6 +/- 7.1 to 25.2 +/- 7.6 cm H(2)O, p < 0.02). The decrease in
dyspnea correlated with the increases in maximal and twitch transdiaphragmatic
pressures: r = -0.64 (p = 0. 04) and r = -0.65 (p = 0.04), respectively. Compared
with placebo, albuterol produced an increase in inspiratory capacity (1.87 +/- 0.
71 to 2.26 +/- 0.74 L, p = 0.002), which accounted for the increases in maximal
and twitch transdiaphragmatic pressures. The decrease in dyspnea correlated with 
the increase in inspiratory capacity (r = -0. 62, p = 0.04), but not with the
increase in FEV(1) (r = -0.13, p = 0. 72). In conclusion, albuterol relieves
dyspnea and enhances respiratory muscle output in patients with COPD primarily by
improving the length-tension relationship of the diaphragm rather than by
improving its contractility.

DOI: 10.1164/ajrccm.160.6.9903122 
PMID: 10588606  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Respiration. 1999 Nov-Dec;66(6):501-5.

In long-term smokers and former smokers the bronchodilator response is not
related to the fall in FEV.

Stănescu D(1), Veriter C, Sanna A.

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary Laboratory and Division, Cliniques Universitaires Saint-Luc,
Brussels, Belgium. Stanescu@pneu.ucl.ac.be

Comment in
    Respiration. 1999 Nov-Dec;66(6):493-4.

BACKGROUND: Cigarette smoking is the cardinal cause of chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD), but only a relatively small percentage of smokers are
developing clinically overt disease, suggesting, therefore, that other risk
factors than smoking are involved. Several studies have shown that the
bronchodilator response (BR) is related to the progress of COPD, as assessed by
the fall in forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV(1)). However, the relationship
between BR and fall in FEV(1), is a disputed one.
OBJECTIVE: To assess the relationship between BR and fall in FEV(1) in a group of
long-term smokers and ex-smokers who were 60 years old on the average.
METHODS: Questionnaire, spirographic tests and BR were assessed in 56 smokers and
ex-smokers of mean age 62.5 +/- (SD) 2.7 years at the end of a 13-year follow-up 
period. BR was expressed as a percentage change of the prebronchodilator value
('% initial') and as a percentage change of predicted value ('% predicted').
RESULTS: The FEV(1)/VC vital capacity was 68.9 +/- 7.6% at the start and 64.5 +/-
11.3% at the end of the study. The average fall in FEV(1) over 13 years was 26
+/- 25 ml/year. The FEV(1) increased after albuterol on the average with 5.9 +/- 
6.6%, 4.5 +/- 3.9% of predicted, and the vital capacity with 2.5 +/- 6.5%, 2.3
+/- 6.4% of predicted. BR and fall in FEV(1) were correlated: the greater the BR,
the more rapid the fall in FEV(1) (r = 0.4 and p < 0.01 for FEV(1)% and r = 0.3
and p < 0.05 for FEV(1) predicted). However, when adjusting for prebronchodilator
FEV(1), the BR was no more related to the fall in FEV(1) (r = 0.15, p > 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: In long-term smokers and ex-smokers, the BR measured at the end of
the follow-up period was correlated with the fall in FEV(1). However, after
adjusting for prebronchodilator FEV(1) values, BR was no more related to the
decline in FEV(1). The BR appears not to be associated with the development of
COPD.

Copyright 1999 S. Karger AG, Basel

DOI: 29448 
PMID: 10575334  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Med Arh. 1999;53(3 Suppl 1):19-22.

[Treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease].

[Article in Croatian]

Bakran I(1).

Author information: 
(1)Zavod za klinicku farmakologiju, Medicinski fakultet Sveucilista u Zagrebu.

American, British and European guidelines on the management and treatment of
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) were issued in last years. In
October 1998 Croatian guidelines were presented. They are very similar to British
guidelines. The treatment of COPD depends on the severity of the disease and
reversibility of bronchoconstriction. The drug of first choice is ipratropium
bromide, but useful are also beta2-agonists of short (albuterol) and long action 
(salmeterol) and theophylline. Inhalation of corticosteroids is also indicated.
The prerequisite of successful treatment is to stop smoking.


PMID: 10546463  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 1999 Sep;160(3):1028-30.

Effects of salmeterol on arterial blood gases in patients with stable chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease. Comparison with albuterol and ipratropium.

Khoukaz G(1), Gross NJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary Medicine, Hines Veterans Affairs Hospital, Hines, IL
60141, USA.

Administration of beta-adrenergic agonist bronchodilators to patients with
airways obstruction commonly results in transient decreases in Pa(O(2)) levels
despite bronchodilation, an effect that has been attributed to these drugs'
pulmonary vasodilator action. We compared the acute effects on gas exchange of
salmeterol with those of albuterol and the anticholinergic agent ipratropium in
20 patients with stable chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Each agent 
was given in recommended dosage on separate days in a double-blind, crossover
format, and the patients' arterial blood gases (ABGs) were measured at baseline
and at intervals to 120 min. Small but statistically significant declines in
Pa(O(2)), the primary outcome variable, were found after administration of both
salmeterol and albuterol. The decline in PaO2 after salmeterol was of lesser
magnitude but was more prolonged than that after albuterol, the greatest mean
change being -2.74 +/- 0.89 mm Hg (mean +/- SEM) at 30 min after salmeterol, and 
-3.45 +/- 0.92 mm Hg at 20 min after albuterol. Following ipratropium, the
corresponding change was -1.32 +/- 0.85 mm Hg at 20 min. These declines, which
were almost entirely attributable to increases in the alveolar-arterial
difference in oxygen tension Delta(A-a)DO2 tended to be more marked in subjects
with higher baseline PaO2 values. No subject experienced a decline in PaO2 to
levels below 59 mm Hg. There were no significant differences among the three
drugs studied. We conclude that despite small decreases in PaO2 after each of the
three drugs, the declines were small transient, and of doubtful clinical
significance.

DOI: 10.1164/ajrccm.160.3.9812117 
PMID: 10471636  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 1999 Aug;104(2 Pt 2):S61-8.

Prospects for improved therapy in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease by the
use of levalbuterol.

Costello J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Sackler Institute of Pulmonary Pharmacology, Division of Pharmacology and
Therapeutics, Guy's, King's and St Thomas' School of Biomedical Sciences, London,
UK.

Like asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a chronic disease,
the most prominent symptom of which is airway obstruction. Airway inflammation
may be pathogenomic in both diseases, but only in COPD does inflammation
predominate as a determinant of symptoms to make obstruction largely refractory
to treatment. Despite a more limited degree of reversibility than in asthma,
beta(2 )-agonists are used extensively to reduce airway obstruction and to
achieve symptomatic improvement, with racemic albuterol being widely favored. In 
asthma, bronchodilation and bronchoprotection largely account for symptomatic
benefit. In COPD, the capacity of racemic albuterol to ameliorate these symptoms 
is more limited and suppression of edema and of infiltration and activation of
leukocytes acquire greater significance. During regular use of racemic albuterol 
in asthma, bronchoprotection diminishes progressively as hyperresponsiveness
becomes increasingly pronounced, a process that is associated with an
infiltration and activation of eosinophils. These paradoxic effects of racemic
albuterol may be attributed to pharmacologic actions of the distomer,
(S)-albuterol. As would be expected, homochiral (R)-albuterol (levalbuterol) is
more potent and effective in asthma and may have significant advantages if used
in COPD. A substantial (4-8-fold) reduction in the dose of levalbuterol
anticipates lesser side effects and diminished risk in patients with
cardiovascular disease. Additionally, the increased potency and duration of
bronchodilation observed in asthma may extend to COPD. Finally, removal of the
proinflammatory actions of (S)-albuterol may eliminate the persisting obstruction
and decrease elastance that are associated with enhanced inflammation and may
allow levalbuterol to suppress edema and diminish leukocyte activation more
effectively.


PMID: 10452790  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. J Pediatr. 1999 Aug;135(2 Pt 2):33-7.

Effect of pneumonia in childhood on adult lung function.

Johnston ID(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, University Hospital, Queen's Medical
Centre, Nottingham, United Kingdom.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease is a major health burden. Evidence that
childhood lower respiratory tract infection (LRTI) is associated with reduced
adult lung function and thereby with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease comes 
from 3 sources. First, studies of children hospitalized with specific LRTIs, for 
example, as a result of respiratory syncytial virus, show reduced lung function 7
to 10 years later, but many have diagnostic and referral biases. Second,
population studies show that adults reporting childhood LRTI have reduced lung
function, but retrospective ascertainment of LRTI is unreliable. Finally, in the 
largest study of adults with independent ascertainment of childhood LRTI, those
with pneumonia before age 7 years had a 6% to 7% lower unadjusted mean forced
expiratory volume in 1 second and forced vital capacity. The deficits in adjusted
lung function persisted after albuterol was administered and were neither due to 
wheezing illness nor diminished after results were controlled for confounders.
Loss of lung function was no greater in those with pneumonia at age <2 years than
in those with pneumonia at age 2 to 7 years. This and similar studies strongly
support an association between childhood pneumonia and a reduction in adult lung 
volume, whereas follow-up studies of children with specific LRTIs show an
obstructive defect. Ongoing studies that have ascertained premorbid lung function
should help determine whether pneumonia causes this deficit or is commoner in
those with poorer premorbid lung function.


PMID: 10431137  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Arch Intern Med. 1999 Jul 12;159(13):1501-2.

Use of the combination product ipratropium and albuterol in chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease.

Crouch MA, Raney CR, Davis K.

Comment on
    Arch Intern Med. 1999 Jan 25;159(2):156-60.


PMID: 10399906  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Mayo Clin Proc. 1999 Apr;74(4):339-46.

Pulmonary function monitoring during adenosine myocardial perfusion scintigraphy 
in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Johnston DL(1), Scanlon PD, Hodge DO, Glynn RB, Hung JC, Gibbons RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiovascular Diseases and Internal Medicine, Mayo Clinic
Rochester, Minnesota 55905, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To determine whether adenosine could be safely administered to
patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) for coronary
vasodilatation during perfusion scintigraphy without causing bronchospasm.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: The study was divided into two phases. In the monitoring
phase, patients with COPD were pretreated with an inhaled bronchodilator
(albuterol) and had pulmonary function monitored during the infusion of a
graduated dose of adenosine. Eligibility for entry into this phase of the study
was determined on the basis of results of pulmonary function testing (PFT) during
resting. Once we had shown that adenosine could be safely administered to
patients with COPD, an implementation phase was begun. Entry did not require
resting PFT, and patients were administered adenosine without monitoring of
pulmonary function. Differences between patients with normal pulmonary function
or mild COPD and those with more severe COPD were analyzed statistically.
RESULTS: Of 94 patients entered into the monitoring phase, none had obvious
bronchospasm. The dosage of adenosine was reduced in four patients because of a
decrease in forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1) of 20% in comparison with
baseline (FEV1 before administration of albuterol). The mean FEV1 decreased
slightly from 1.83 L after administration of albuterol to 1.78 L during the
maximal adenosine dose. Patients with a remote history of asthma, positive result
of a methacholine challenge test, or mild COPD (FEV1 60 to 80% of the maximal
predicted value for age) did not differ significantly in their response to
infusion of adenosine from those with moderate or severe COPD (FEV1 30 to 59% of 
the maximum predicted for age). Of 117 patients in the implementation phase, 2
had bronchospasm during infusion of adenosine that was quickly terminated by
stopping the administration in one patient and reducing the dose of adenosine in 
the other.
CONCLUSION: This study shows that adenosine can be safely administered
intravenously to selected patients with known or suspected COPD to produce
coronary vasodilatation for myocardial perfusion imaging. Patients who are within
the guidelines established for this study should be considered for adenosine
coronary vasodilatation with use of bronchodilator pretreatment, a graduated dose
of adenosine, and regular chest auscultation during the infusion.

DOI: 10.4065/74.4.339 
PMID: 10221461  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Arch Intern Med. 1999 Jan 25;159(2):156-60.

For COPD a combination of ipratropium bromide and albuterol sulfate is more
effective than albuterol base.

Campbell S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Respiratory Sciences Center, University of Arizona 
and Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Tucson 85723, USA.

Comment in
    Arch Intern Med. 1999 Jul 12;159(13):1501-2.

BACKGROUND: A combination metered-dose inhaler aerosol containing ipratropium
bromide and albuterol sulfate has been reported to be more effective than either 
of its components in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. The
dose of albuterol sulfate is equal in moles per liter to the dose of albuterol
base used in the commercially available metered-dose inhalers.
OBJECTIVE: To compare the safety and efficacy of the combination of ipratropium
bromide and albuterol sulfate with a commonly prescribed albuterol metered-dose
inhaler containing albuterol base alone.
METHODS: Investigators at different sites performed a double-blind, 29-day trial 
involving 357 patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Efficacy
measurements were taken at 15, 30, and 60 minutes after treatment with study
medication and then hourly up to 6 hours on days 1 and 29 of the trial. The
primary end point was improvement in forced expiratory volume in 1 second.
Clinical status was followed up and safety monitoring was also performed.
RESULTS: The combination produced a significantly greater peak and mean
improvement in forced expiratory volume in 1 second over albuterol base alone on 
both test days. Similar changes were seen with forced vital capacity. Evaluations
of clinical status were better for patients receiving combination therapy, and
some improvements were statistically significant. The overall incidence of
adverse effects was similar in the 2 treatment groups.
CONCLUSION: We conclude that a combination of ipratropium bromide and albuterol
sulfate is more effective at improving pulmonary function than albuterol base
alone, with no potentiation of adverse effects.


PMID: 9927098  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. J La State Med Soc. 1998 Dec;150(12):596-600.

Pharmacotherapy of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Borron W(1), deBoisblanc BP.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Pulmonary/Critical Care Medicine, LSU Medical School-New Orleans,
USA.

Despite a significant reduction in cigarette consumption, chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease continues to be an important cause of mortality in the United
States. COPD is characterized by progressive airflow obstruction which is
punctuated by acute exacerbations. Nicotine substitution and use of bupropion
have been shown to double long-term smoking cessation success. The combination of
albuterol and ipratropium bromide produces a synergistic beneficial effect on
pulmonary function and symptoms. Long-acting inhaled beta 2-agonists improve
symptoms better than as needed albuterol. Oral corticosteroids appear to be
helpful during acute exacerbations; however, the chronic use of steroids benefits
only a minority of patients. Broad- spectrum antibiotics are indicated during
acute exacerbations if there is increased sputum volume and purulence.
System-oriented administration of pneumococcal and influenza vaccinations is more
successful than provider or client-oriented approaches.


PMID: 9926698  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Respiration. 1998;65(5):354-62.

Inhalation by nebulization of albuterol-ipratropium combination (Dey combination)
is superior to either agent alone in the treatment of chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease. Dey Combination Solution Study Group.

Gross N(1), Tashkin D, Miller R, Oren J, Coleman W, Linberg S.

Author information: 
(1)Hines V.A., Hines, Ill., USA.

Combination bronchodilator therapy for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD) potentially can provide increased benefit over single-agent therapy. The
objective of this double-blind, randomized, positive-control trial was to
determine the effectiveness of an albuterol-ipratropium solution aerosol
combination (Dey combination solution, Dey LP, Napa, Calif., USA) compared with
solution aerosols of both component medications administered alone in patients
with COPD. The trial consisted of a 6-week, 3-period crossover phase followed by 
a 6-week parallel phase during which patients self-administered study medications
by inhalation from a nebulizer. A total of 863 patients were initially randomized
to each of the six possible treatment sequences of the three study medications in
the crossover phase and received each study medication in turn for a 2-week
period. Patients continued to receive the same treatment administered during the 
last 2-week period of the crossover phase for an additional 6 weeks in the
parallel phase. Assessment of 1-second forced expiratory volume (FEV1) curves
before and after dosing on the last day of each 2-week period indicated that the 
combination was superior to either single agent in peak effect and area under the
curve up to 8 h after dosing (FEV1-AUC0-8), in both phases of the trial. The use 
of Dey combination during the crossover phase resulted in 24% more improvement in
peak FEV1 than was seen with albuterol alone (p < 0.001), and 37% more than was
seen with ipratropium alone (p < 0.001). Similarly, when examining FEV1-AUC0-8,
Dey combination resulted in 30% more improvement than was seen with albuterol
alone (p < 0.001), and 32% more than was seen with ipratropium alone (p < 0.001).
The combination affords a convenient dosing regimen and incorporates enhanced
benefit without compromising the safety profile of either component agent.


PMID: 9782217  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Am Heart J. 1998 Aug;136(2):307-13.

Patients with stable chronic obstructive pulmonary disease can safely undergo
intravenous dipyridamole thallium-201 imaging.

Shaffer J(1), Simbartl L, Render ML, Snow E, Chaney C, Nishiyama H, Rauf GC,
Wexler LF.

Author information: 
(1)Veterans Affairs Medical Center and University of Cincinnati, College of
Medicine, Ohio 45220, USA.

BACKGROUND: Patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease are usually
excluded from intravenous dipyridamole thallium-201 testing. We developed a
nurse-administered protocol to screen and pretreat patients so they could be
safely tested.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We prospectively screened patients referred for intravenous 
dipyridamole thallium testing and retrospectively reviewed a comparison group of 
patients who had undergone intravenous dipyridamole testing before our
bronchospasm protocol. We studied 492 consecutive patients referred for
intravenous dipyridamole thallium testing, separating those with complete data (n
= 451) into two groups: group A (n = 72), patients assessed to be at risk for
intravenous dipyridamole-induced bronchospasm who received our bronchospasm
treatment protocol; and group B (n = 379), patients assessed to be free of risk, 
who did not receive our bronchospasm protocol. Group C (n = 89) was a
retrospective comparison group of patients who had undergone intravenous
dipyridamole testing before initiation of the protocol. Patients were considered 
at risk for an adverse event if any of the following were present: peak flow < or
=400 ml at the time of the test (spirometry by nurse) that increased to >400 ml
after bronchodilator treatment, wheezing audible with stethoscope, history of
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease or asthma or dyspnea on exertion at less
than four blocks, or resting respiratory rate >18 breaths/min. The test was
considered contraindicated if resting oxygen saturation was <85%, respiratory
rate < or =36 breaths/min, or peak flow measured by peak flowmeter <400 ml after 
bronchodilator inhalant (albuterol or metaproterenol sulfate by spacer) at a dose
of up to six puffs. One minute after injections of thallium-201, patients at risk
were given 50 mg aminophylline by slow intravenous injection. We looked for major
and minor adverse effects and divided them into three categories: (1) minor
events (transient headache, abdominal discomfort, or nausea), wheezing (audible
by stethoscope but without marked respiratory distress), (2) marked events
(severe bronchospasm or severe ischemia defined as wheezing audible with or
without stethoscope, respiratory rate >20 breaths/min or increased by 10 from
pretest evaluation, oxygen desaturation to <90%, hypoventilation [reduced
respiratory rate with decreased mental status], respiratory arrest, chest pain,
horizontal ST-segment depression > or =1 mm on the electrocardiogram in any lead,
symptomatic hypotension), or (3) other intravenous dipyridamole-induced side
effects (persistent headache, dizziness, flushing, nausea, dyspnea, and ischemic 
chest pain) or anginal equivalent. The protocol properly identified patients with
impaired pulmonary function. There was no difference in the frequency of adverse 
marked events among groups A, B, or C (1 % vs 4% vs 2%, p = 0.25). Patients in
group A had more minor side effects than those in group B (53% vs 35%, p =
0.004). Specifically, patients in group A were more likely to wheeze (39% vs 1 %,
p = <0.001), but wheezing in group A was self-limited or responded to treatment
as described in the protocol. The prevalence of positive thallium-201 scans in
group A (44%) compared with group C (49%) was not different (p = 0.15).
CONCLUSIONS: A nurse-administered risk assessment and pretreatment protocol (1)
properly identified patients with impaired pulmonary function, (2) permitted
completion of intravenous dipyridamole testing in patients at risk for
bronchospasm without an increased incidence of marked adverse events, and (3) did
not appear to influence the interpretation of the thallium test.

DOI: 10.1053/hj.1998.v136.89587 
PMID: 9704695  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. J Emerg Med. 1998 Jan-Feb;16(1):15-9.

A pilot study of steroid therapy after emergency department treatment of acute
asthma: is a taper needed?

Cydulka RK(1), Emerman CL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Emergency Medicine, MetroHealth Medical Center, Cleveland, Ohio 
44109-1998, USA.

The purpose of this study was to determine if there is a difference in early
relapse rates between patients receiving an 8-day course of 40 mg/day prednisone 
and those receiving an 8-day tapering course of prednisone. Furthermore, we
wished to determine if one regimen is superior to the other for minimizing
adrenal suppression. This was a prospective, randomized, double blind clinical
trial conducted in an urban, university-affiliated Level 1 trauma center. All
asthmatic patients with exacerbation who were judged well enough for discharge
home from the emergency department (ED) were eligible for participation. Patients
with a history of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, congestive heart
failure, pneumonia, pneumothorax, or other pulmonary process, and asthmatics
already using inhaled or oral steroids within 2 weeks of admission to the ED were
excluded. Before treatment, a cosyntropin stimulation test was administered to
all asthmatics admitted to the ED. All patients treated in the ED then received
three doses of aerosolized albuterol, 60 mg of i.v. methylprednisolone, and
oxygen. FEV1 was measured before treatment, after each treatment, and 1 h after
the third aerosol administration. Patients were then sent home with either an
8-day course of 40 mg/day prednisone or an 8-day tapering course of prednisone
(tapering from 40 mg to 0 mg). Patients were asked to return on day 12 for
another cosyntropin stimulation test and pulmonary function testing and on day 21
for pulmonary function testing only. Fifteen patients participated: seven
received a nontapering dose of prednisone and eight received a tapering dose of
prednisone. There were no differences in the FEV1 percent predicted, the
incidence of relapse, or the incidence of adrenal suppression between the two
groups. In our small study, we found no difference in relapse rate between
asthmatics receiving an 8-day tapering dose of prednisone and those receiving 40 
mg/day prednisone upon discharge from the ED. Furthermore, no patients had
evidence of adrenal suppression from either dosing regimen.


PMID: 9472754  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Pharmacotherapy. 1998 Jan-Feb;18(1):130-9.

Preservatives in nebulizer solutions: risks without benefit.

Beasley R(1), Fishwick D, Miles JF, Hendeles L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Wellington School of Medicine, New Zealand.

Comment in
    Pharmacotherapy. 1999 Apr;19(4):473-4.

Edetate disodium (EDTA) and benzalkonium chloride (BAC) are often present as
preservative or stabilizing agents in nebulizer solutions used to treat asthma
and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Benzalkonium chloride is a potent
bronchoconstrictor when inhaled in concentrations similar to those in which it is
present in these solutions. Inclusion of BAC (together with EDTA) in the
ipratropium bromide (Atrovent) nebulizer solution resulted in paradoxic
bronchoconstriction in some asthmatic patients and an overall reduction in
bronchodilator efficacy. The presence of BAC in albuterol nebulizer solutions
does not affect the short-term bronchodilator response to a single dose, although
case reports suggest that its repeated use in patients with severe asthma may
result in paradoxic bronchoconstriction. When inhaled by asthmatic subjects, EDTA
also causes dose-dependent bronchoconstriction, although it is less potent than
BAC. The use of preservative-free bronchodilator nebulizer solutions does not
result in clinically significant bacterial contamination if they are dispensed in
sterile unit-dose vials, in volumes and concentrations that do not require
modification by the user. Despite this evidence, in the United States a number of
solutions, including some preparations of albuterol, contain either BAC or EDTA. 
Current regulations do not require that the concentration of preservatives be
documented on the product; however, considerably different doses of BAC are
delivered with different products. For example, a standard 2.5-mg dose of
albuterol nebulizer solution contains 50 microg of BAC when administered from the
multidose dropper bottle and 300 microg from the unit-dose screw-cap product.
Furthermore, it is legal for pharmacists to substitute or compound solutions
containing high concentrations of BAC when the physician has prescribed a
preservative-free product. We recommend that the United States follow the
practice of most Western countries and withdraw bronchodilator nebulizer
solutions that contain preservatives such as BAC. We further recommend that the
solutions should be prepared under sterile conditions, formulated preservative
free, and made available in unit-dose vials.


PMID: 9469687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Ann Emerg Med. 1997 Apr;29(4):474-8.

Effect of different albuterol dosing regimens in the treatment of acute
exacerbation of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Emerman CL(1), Cydulka RK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Emergency Medicine, MetroHealth Medical Center, Case Western
Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio, USA.

STUDY OBJECTIVE: To compare hourly administration of albuterol with more frequent
administration of a higher cumulative dose in patients with an acute exacerbation
of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
METHODS: Participants in this pilot study were patients older than 50 years who
presented to the emergency department with an acute exacerbation of COPD. After
initial assessment and spirometry, all patients received nebulized aerosols every
20 minutes. Patients were randomly assigned to receive either albuterol (2.5 mg) 
every 60 minutes for two doses, interspersed with saline aerosols every 20
minutes; or albuterol (2.5 mg) every 20 minutes for 2 hours. Patients were
assessed with spirometry after 60 and 120 minutes. No other medications were
administered during the course of this study.
RESULTS: Eighty-six patients were enrolled in the study. No statistically
significant difference was found between groups in mean 1-second forced
expiratory volume (FEV1) at study initiation, 1 hour, or 2 hours or in the
interval changes in mean FEV1. There was, however, almost twice as much
improvement in FEV1 in the higher-dose group. Group hospitalization rates were
similar. There were more side effects in the higher-dose group (45% versus 24%, P
< .05). Among 32 patients with a pretreatment FEV1 less than 20% of predicted,
there was a significantly greater interval improvement in FEV1 at both 1 hour and
2 hours.
CONCLUSION: This study failed to demonstrate a statistically significant
advantage to use of a higher cumulative dose of albuterol in patients with acute 
exacerbation of COPD, possibly because of type II statistical error. There may be
an advantage to more frequent dosing, particularly in patients with initially
severe bronchospasm, although at the expense of more frequent side effects.


PMID: 9095007  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. J Med Assoc Thai. 1996 Dec;79(12):779-84.

Effects of nebulized beta 2-adrenergic agonists on pulmonary mechanics in
anesthetized patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Vichitvejpaisal P(1), Joshi GP, Kumar S, White PF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology and Pain Management, University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, USA.

We evaluated the effects of nebulized beta 2-adrenergic agonists on pulmonary
mechanics in patients with COPD undergoing peripheral surgery with a standardized
general anesthetic technique. Thirty males with COPD were randomized into one of 
three groups. Group I (control group; n = 10) received nebulized saline 3 ml,
Group II (n = 10) received nebulized albuterol (2.5 mg in 3 ml), and Group III (n
= 10) received nebulized metaproterenol (15 mg in 3 ml). At 20 min after tracheal
intubation, the study drugs were nebulized over 20 min. Datex Capnomac Ultima
monitor was used to measure pulmonary mechanics on a breath-by-breath basis.
There was no difference between the three groups with respect to demographic data
and preoperative respiratory parameters. A similar degree of DPH occurred with
the initiation of mechanical ventilation in all three groups. Patients receiving 
nebulized bronchodilators (Groups II and III) displayed a significant decrease in
DPH and an increase in total dynamic compliance. However, there were no
differences in DPH and total dynamic compliance between Groups II and III. We
conclude that nebulization of either albuterol or metaproterenol can alleviate
DPH resulting from mechanical ventilation in anesthetized patients with COPD.


PMID: 9071082  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 1996 Aug;154(2 Pt 1):388-93.

Dose-response to bronchodilator delivered by metered-dose inhaler in
ventilator-supported patients.

Dhand R(1), Duarte AG, Jubran A, Jenne JW, Fink JB, Fahey PJ, Tobin MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Edward Hines Jr. Veterans
Affairs Hospital, Loyola University of Chicago Stritch School of Medicine, Hines,
IL 60141, USA.

In nonintubated patients, metered-dose inhalers (MDIs) are accepted as the most
convenient, efficient, and cost effective method of administering inhaled
bronchodilators. Recent studies have demonstrated the efficacy of MDIs in
ventilator-supported patients; however, the optimal dose of a bronchodilator from
a MDI is unknown. We determined the response to increasing doses of albuterol
administered by a MDI and cylindrical spacer to 12 mechanically ventilated
patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Four, eight, and 16
puffs of albuterol were given at 15-min intervals. Rapid airway occlusion were
performed before and at 5-min intervals after albuterol for 80 min. Respiratory
mechanics were also measured for 60 min in another group of seven patients with
COPD who received four puffs of albuterol. Significant decrease in airways
resistance occurred after administration of albuterol (p < 0.001). The decrease
in airway resistance with four puffs of albuterol was comparable to that observed
with cumulative doses of 12 puffs (p = 0.12) and 28 puffs (p = 0.25). Heart rate 
increased significantly (p < 0.01) after a cumulative dose of 28 puffs. The
decrease in airway resistance was sustained for 60 min in the group that received
only four puffs of albuterol (p < 0.003). In conclusion, four puffs of albuterol 
given by a MDI and spacer provided the best combination of bronchodilator effect 
and safety in stable mechanically ventilated patients with COPD.

DOI: 10.1164/ajrccm.154.2.8756811 
PMID: 8756811  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol. 1996 Apr;76(4):335-40.

Effects of theophylline and ipratropium on cognition in elderly patients with
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Ramsdell JW(1), Henderson S, Renvall MJ, Salmon DP, Ferguson P.

Author information: 
(1)Division of General Internal Medicine, Department of Medicine, University of
California, San Diego, USA.

OBJECTIVES: To determine whether chronic therapy with theophylline or ipratropium
has an adverse effect on cognition and psychomotor skills in geriatric patients
with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
DESIGN: The study design was a randomized, repeated measures, double-blind,
double-dummy, placebo-controlled comparison of theophylline and ipratropium
treatments.
SETTING: Ambulatory patients were tested at the Clinical Trials Center of the
University of California, San Diego, Medical Center.
PATIENTS: Ambulatory patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease aged 65 
years or more with FEV1 less than 60% predicted, FEV1/FVC less than 70%, and post
bronchodilator FEV1 less than 70%.
INTERVENTIONS: Patients received either theophylline or ipratropium for 2 weeks, 
followed by a 1-week placebo control period, then a 2-week treatment period of
the alternative drug therapy. A standard therapy of albuterol MDI, 2 puffs (180
microg) qid was given throughout the study.
MEASUREMENTS: The main response level was an 11-part battery of psychometric
tests. Tests were administered at the end of each treatment period and at the end
of the washout period. Covariates were sequence of treatment, pulmonary function 
tests, age, and baseline psychometric test scores.
RESULTS: There was no difference in performance scores on the cognitive tests
among the three treatment periods.
CONCLUSIONS: We were unable to detect a harmful effect of treatment with either
theophylline or ipratropium on the performance of elderly patients with chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease on a battery of psychometric tests, suggesting that
significant cognitive impairment in the elderly is not commonly associated with
treatment with either theophylline or ipratropium.

DOI: 10.1016/S1081-1206(10)60034-8 
PMID: 8612115  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 1996 Mar;153(3):967-75.

Inhaled bronchodilators reduce dynamic hyperinflation during exercise in patients
with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Belman MJ(1), Botnick WC, Shin JW.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary Medicine, Cedars Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles,
California 90048, USA.

Dynamic hyperinflation (DH) is a major pathophysiologic consequence of airflow
limitation during exercise in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD) and an important contributing factor to breathlessness. In this study we
aimed to examine the effect of inhaled beta agonist therapy on DH during exercise
in these patients and the relationship between changes in DH and breathlessness. 
In 13 COPD patients (mean age 65.1 +/- 2.0, FEV1 1.20 +/- 0.17, FEV1/FVC 40 +/-
3) we measured pulmonary function tests, exercise breathlessness by Borg score,
and exercise flow volume and pressure volume loops on two separate days. Prior to
testing, patients randomly received inhaled placebo or albuterol on the first
test day and the alternative medication on the second test day. From measurements
of exercise inspiratory capacity (IC), we calculated the end-expiratory and
end-inspiratory lung volumes (EELV, EILV). We used esophageal pressure recordings
to measure peak inspiratory esophageal pressure (Pesins) during exercise and this
was related to the maximal capacity for pressure generation taking into account
lung volume and airflow changes (Pcapi). Bronchodilator caused significant
increase in both FEV1 and FVC (+0.23 and +0.51, p<0.01). Comparisons of
breathlessness, exercise volumes, and pressures were made at the highest
equivalent work load. There was a significant reduction in the peak exercise
EELV/TLC (80 +/- 0.02% to 76 +/- 0.02%, p<0.05) while the peak EILV/TLC decreased
by 2% (97 +/- 1% to 95 +/- 1%, p<0.05). The peak Pesins/Pcapi decreased (0.79 +/-
0.10 to 0.57 +/- 0.05, p<0.05), and the Pcapi - Pesins increased (7.4 +/- 3 to
13.0 +/- 3 cm H2O, p<0.05). There was significant improvement in neuroventilatory
coupling for volume change (Pesins/Pcapi/VT/TLC 5.45 +/- 0.5 to 3.25 +/- 1.0,
p<0.05). There was a significant reduction in breathlessness as measured by Borg 
score (4.5 +/- 0.7 to 3.1 +/- 0.5, p<0.05) and there was a significant
correlation between delta Borg and delta EILV/TLC (r=0.771, p<0.01) with a trend 
for Pesins/Pcapi/VT/TLC (r=0.544, p=0.067). There was also a significant
correlation between delta EELV/TLC and delta Pesins/Pcapi/VT/TLC (r=0.772,
p<0.01). The relationships between delta Borg, delta resting volumes, and flow
rates were not significant. We conclude that in patients with COPD, inhaled
bronchodilator reduces exercise DH and improves inspiratory pressure reserve and 
neuroventilatory coupling. Changes in DH and neuroventilatory coupling were the
main determinants of reduced breathlessness.

DOI: 10.1164/ajrccm.153.3.8630581 
PMID: 8630581  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Am J Med. 1996 Jan 29;100(1A):40S-48S.

Addition of anticholinergic solution prolongs bronchodilator effect of beta 2
agonists in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Levin DC(1), Little KS, Laughlin KR, Galbraith JM, Gustman PM, Murphy D, Kram JA,
Hardie G, Reuter C, Ostransky D, McFarland K, Petty TL, Silvers W, Rennard SI,
Mueller M, Repsher LH, Zuwallack RL, Vale R.

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary Disease and Critical Care Section, Oklahoma University Health
Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, USA.

A randomized, double-blind placebo-controlled clinical trial was designed to
assess the safety, efficacy, and duration of the bronchodilation resulting from
the addition of 500 micrograms of ipratropium bromide (Atrovent; Boehringer
Ingelheim, CT) inhalation solution to standard small volume nebulizer treatments 
with 2.5 mg albuterol inhalation solution. A total of 195 patients (63% men,
average age 64 years) with > 10 pack-year smoking histories and stable,
moderate-to- severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD; forced
expiratory volume in 1 second [FEV1] 1.02 liter, 38.8% predicted) from eight
university-affiliated chest clinics in seven U.S. cities were enrolled into the
study. Asthma, rhinitis, and eosinophilia were exclusions, as was daily use of > 
10 mg of prednisone (or 20 mg on alternate days). There was a 2-week
stabilization period during which the patients were instructed in the use of the 
small volume nebulizers, which they used three times daily with albuterol alone. 
They were asked to keep daily logs of peak flow rates, pulmonary symptoms, and
additional medication usage. On their test day 1 the subjects came to the
pulmonary function laboratory having been off theophylline for 24 hours and beta 
2-agonists for 12 hours and performed a baseline spirometry. They then received
their morning small volume nebulizer treatment of albuterol to which was added
either 500 micrograms if ipratropium bromide or a saline placebo. Spirometry was 
repeated at 15, 30, and 60 minutes, and then hourly for 8 hours. Subjects then
took home a 2-week supply of albuterol and test drug for thrice daily use in
their small volume nebulizer. They were evaluated for pulmonary symptoms and
adverse effects every 14 days. The 8-hour spirometry was repeated on test day 43 
and finally on test day 85. Primary data evaluated were the peak increase in FEV1
and the area between the FEV1 baseline value and the 8-hour FEV1 curve. Similar
calculations were made for forced vital capacity (FVC) and 25-75% forced
expiratory flow (FEF25-75%). On test day 1 the peak increase in FEV1 for the
ipratropium bromide + albuterol subjects was 26% greater than those on placebo + 
albuterol (p < 0.003). The area under the 8-hour FEV1 curve was 64% greater in
those given ipratropium bromide on test day 1 (p < 0.0002). Similar increases
were seen in FVC and FEF25-75%. The peak improvements in FEV1 and FVC with the
addition of ipratropium bromide to albuterol were maintained on test days 43 and 
85. Considering the safety and efficacy profiles of this combination, the data
would suggest that ipratropium bromide inhalation solution should be considered
first-line therapy for those patients with COPD requiring small volume nebulizer 
treatments.


PMID: 8610716  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Am J Med. 1996 Jan 29;100(1A):11S-18S.

Nebulized bronchodilators for outpatient management of stable chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease.

Colice GL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Veterans Affairs Medical Center, White River Junction, Vermont 05009, USA.

The bronchodilator efficacy, safety, and persistence of effect of the
anticholinergic agent ipratropium bromide and the beta-adrenergic agonist
albuterol, both given by nebulization, were compared in 223 patients with stable,
severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). The study was a randomized, 
double-blind, parallel group trial conducted over 85 days. Patients took the
study drugs (either 500 micrograms of ipratropium bromide or 2.5 mg of albuterol)
three times daily on an outpatient basis throughout the study. The acute
bronchodilator responses to nebulized ipratropium bromide and albuterol were
studied on days 1, 43, and 85. The forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1)
response was similar for both drugs on day 1 (33% peak increase after ipratropium
bromide and 36% peak increase after albuterol). However, albuterol's effect on
FEV1 decreased over time. Clinical improvement was noted in both study groups,
but the ipratropium bromide group had a greater symptomatic benefit. Patients
receiving ipratropium bromide scored higher on a quality-of-life questionnaire
evaluating dyspnea, fatigue, emotional function, and mastery. Side effects were
relatively infrequent and generally mild for both study drugs. These results show
that ipratropium bromide, given by nebulization, is safe and effective in the
outpatient treatment of COPD.


PMID: 8610712  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. J Fam Pract. 1996 Jan;42(1):49-53.

A randomized controlled trial of oral albuterol in acute cough.

Littenberg B(1), Wheeler M, Smith DS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical Center, Lebanon, New
Hampshire, USA.

BACKGROUND: Beta-agonist agents have been used for bronchospasm and cough in a
variety of settings. We sought to evaluate the efficacy of oral albuterol for
acute cough in ambulatory adults.
METHODS: We performed a prospective, randomized, controlled, double-blind
clinical trial comparing albuterol 4 mg by mouth three times daily for 7 days
with placebo in 104 adults. Subjects had cough of less than 4 weeks' duration and
no evidence of pneumonia, asthma, or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. All
subjects were enrolled at the walk-in clinic of a rural academic medical center.
RESULTS: There was no significant difference between treated and control subjects
in any measure of efficacy including cough severity score, reduction in sleepless
nights, utilization of health care, or return to full activity. There were
significantly more reports of "shakiness" and "nervousness" among
albuterol-treated subjects than among controls.
CONCLUSIONS: Oral albuterol should not be used in unselected patients with acute,
nonspecific cough.


PMID: 8537805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Acad Emerg Med. 1995 Aug;2(8):686-91.

Terbutaline vs albuterol for out-of-hospital respiratory distress: randomized,
double-blind trial.

Zehner WJ Jr(1), Scott JM, Iannolo PM, Ungaro A, Terndrup TE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Emergency Medicine, SUNY Health Science Center, Syracuse 13210, 
USA.

OBJECTIVE: To determine the efficacy and safety of single doses of subcutaneous
terbutaline (TERB) or nebulized albuterol (ALB) during out-of-hospital treatment 
for respiratory distress from asthma or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
METHODS: Patients aged > 18 years who had respiratory distress were enrolled in a
double-placebo, double-blind, randomized trial. Paramedics measured respiratory
severity using an empiric score [respiratory rate, wheezing, speech, and peak
expiratory flow rate (PEFR)], and the patients rated their own respiratory
distress using a visual analog scale (VAS). The patients received O2 plus ALB
(2.5 mg) and saline injection (n = 40) or TERB (0.25 mg) and saline aerosol (n = 
43).
RESULTS: The groups were similar with respect to age, gender, initial empiric
scores (median score 9 for both groups), PEFRs (89 +/- 84 L/min, mean +/- SD, for
ALB vs 97 +/- 84 L/min for TERB), and respiratory distress VAS scores. Both
groups showed significant improvement in their respiratory distress VAS scores by
the time of ED arrival. The ALB group had a greater improvement in respiratory
distress VAS score than did the TERB group (p < 0.05). Empiric scores, PEFR
scores, and hospital admission frequencies were not significantly different. No
complication was observed.
CONCLUSION: The out-of-hospital administration of either aerosolized ALB or
subcutaneous TERB reduced respiratory severity. Albuterol provided greater
subjective improvement in respiratory distress.


PMID: 7584746  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 1995 Jun;151(6):1827-33.

Bronchodilator delivery by metered-dose inhaler in ventilator-supported patients.

Dhand R(1), Jubran A, Tobin MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Hines VA Hospital, IL 60141,
USA.

The optimal dose and technique for administration of bronchodilators with a
metered-dose inhaler (MDI) in mechanically ventilated patients have not been
established. We studied the efficacy and safety of 10 puffs (90 micrograms/puff) 
of albuterol administered by an MDI in seven mechanically ventilated patients
with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Rapid airway occlusions at
constant flow inflation were performed before and at 5-min intervals after
administration of albuterol for 60 min. Significant decreases in maximum (Rrsmax;
p < 0.01) and minimum inspiratory resistance (Rrsmin; p < 0.01) were present at 5
min and persisted for 60 min after administration of albuterol (p < 0.01 for both
parameters). Rrsmax indicates maximal inspiratory resistance while Rrsmin
represents the ohmic flow resistance. Intrinsic positive end-expiratory pressure 
decreased significantly (p < 0.05) 15 min after albuterol administration. Heart
rate, blood pressure, and arterial oxygenation did not show significant change
after albuterol. In summary, 10 puffs of albuterol given by an MDI and spacer
produced significant bronchodilation in ventilator-supported patients with COPD, 
without producing side effects. In conclusion, higher doses of albuterol given by
an MDI and spacer could be used routinely in mechanically ventilated patients
with COPD.

DOI: 10.1164/ajrccm.151.6.7767526 
PMID: 7767526  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Ann Emerg Med. 1995 Apr;25(4):470-3.

Effects of combined treatment with glycopyrrolate and albuterol in acute
exacerbation of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Cydulka RK(1), Emerman CL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Emergency Medicine, MetroHealth Medical Center, Cleveland, Ohio.

STUDY OBJECTIVE: To investigate whether the addition of a single aerosolized dose
of glycopyrrolate leads to a greater improvement in pulmonary function than
treatment with albuterol alone for patients with acute exacerbation of chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
DESIGN: Prospective, randomized, blinded, controlled study. Fifty-seven patients 
with acute exacerbation of COPD were entered into the study. All patients
received three aerosol treatments. Patients were randomized to receive 2 mg
aerosolized glycopyrrolate (combination therapy group) or aerosolized placebo in 
addition to their first 2.5-mg albuterol aerosol treatment. All patients received
2.5 mg of aerosolized albuterol alone for the next two treatments.
SETTING: Urban teaching hospital emergency department.
RESULTS: We found no difference in pretreatment 1-second fractional expired
volume (FEV1) between the control and glycopyrrolate groups. There was no
significant difference in the absolute value of the FEV1 at 1 hour or at 3 hours 
between the two groups; however, patients who received combination therapy had a 
greater percent increase from the pretreatment value of FEV1 (56%) as measured in
milliliters than did control patients (19%; P = .008).
CONCLUSION: The combination of glycopyrrolate and albuterol produces a greater
improvement in FEV1 than does albuterol alone in the treatment of patients with
acute exacerbation of COPD.


PMID: 7710150  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Arch Intern Med. 1995 Mar 13;155(5):496-500.

Magnesium sulfate in exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Skorodin MS(1), Tenholder MF, Yetter B, Owen KA, Waller RF, Khandelwahl S, Maki
K, Rohail T, D'Alfonso N.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Service, Veterans Affairs Hospital, Hines, Ill.

BACKGROUND: Acute exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease are
commonly seen and difficult to treat. We sought to determine the bronchodilator
efficacy of magnesium sulfate in this situation, as this compound is helpful in
acute asthma.
METHODS: Subjects who came to either of two Veterans Affairs emergency
departments were randomized in a double-blind fashion to receive either 1.2 g of 
magnesium sulfate or placebo over 20 minutes after they first received albuterol,
2.5 mg by nebulization. Peak expiratory flow, dyspnea scores, arterial hemoglobin
oxygen saturation by pulse oximetry, maximal inspiratory and expiratory
pressures, and vital signs were monitored for 45 minutes after the start of
magnesium sulfate or placebo treatment.
RESULTS: Seventy-two individuals were studied. The peak expiratory flow increased
16.6% +/- 27.7% (mean +/- SD) in both groups after the initial albuterol
treatment, from 121.2 +/- 55.7 L/min to 136.9 +/- 63.9 L/min. The peak expiratory
flow increased from 136.7 +/- 69.7 L/min at the start of the infusion to 162.3
+/- 76.6 L/min at 30 minutes and 161.3 +/- 78.7 L/min at 45 minutes with
magnesium sulfate treatment. The peak expiratory flow was 137.0 +/- 58.6 L/min on
initiation of the intravenous infusion, 143.0 +/- 72.7 L/min at 30 minutes, and
143.3 +/- 70.5 L/min at 45 minutes in the placebo group. The difference in peak
expiratory flow from initiation of the infusion to 30 and 45 minutes later
(calculated as means of the 30- and 45-minute values) was significantly different
for the two groups (25.1 +/- 35.7 L/min vs 7.4 +/- 33.3 L/min; P = 0.3); the
difference was also significant when expressed as percentage increase (22.4% +/- 
28.5% vs 6.1% +/- 24.4%; P = .01). There was a statistically nonsignificantly
trend toward a reduced need for hospitalization in the magnesium sulfate group as
compared with the placebo group (28.1% vs 41.9%; P = .25). There were no
significant changes in the other parameters with either treatment.
CONCLUSION: Magnesium sulfate, 1.2 g over 20 minutes after beta-agonist
administration, is safe and modestly efficacious in the treatment of acute
exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, and its bronchodilator
effect is greater than that of a beta-agonist given alone and lasts beyond the
period of magnesium sulfate administration.


PMID: 7864705  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Ann Pharmacother. 1994 Dec;28(12):1379-88.

Beta-agonists in the treatment of acute exacerbation of chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease.

Kuhl DA(1), Agiri OA, Mauro LS.

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmacy, University of Tennessee, Memphis.

OBJECTIVE: To critically evaluate the following issues regarding the use of
beta-agonists in the treatment of acute exacerbations of chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD): (1) optimal dose, (2) use of nebulizer (NEB) versus
metered-dose inhaler-spacer devices (MDISs), (3) comparison with anticholinergic 
agents, and (4) use in mechanically ventilated patients. The patient populations 
addressed are limited primarily to emergency department (ED) and intensive
care/acute care settings.
DATA SOURCES: English-language journal articles published between 1977 and 1993.
STUDY SELECTION: Nine studies were evaluated that included beta-agonists alone or
in combination with other bronchodilators in the treatment of acute exacerbation 
of COPD. Many of the studies contained design flaws or were limited in size,
making interpretation difficult. In studies containing both asthma and COPD
patients, focus was restricted to analysis of COPD patients when possible.
DATA EXTRACTION: Performed subjectively by the authors. Studies were evaluated
for methodologic strengths and weaknesses.
DATA SYNTHESIS: Dosing studies in patients with stable disease show a
relationship between dose and the various pulmonary function tests (PFTs). Dose
also correlates with duration of action and incidence of adverse effects. Four
studies compared NEBs versus MDISs. Studies revealed significant improvement in
PFTs for both treatments, with no significant difference between groups noted.
Five studies compared various combinations of beta-agonists and ipratropium. Both
ipratropium and beta-agonists caused statistically significant increases in PFTs 
from baseline. Combination therapy provided no further increase in spirometry
compared with that of single-agent therapy. One study did report an early
discharge from the ED with the addition of ipratropium. Most studies did not use 
large doses of beta-agonists or evaluate the effect of repeated doses. Many
studies allowed concomitant therapy. Most did not include outcome measurements,
such as ED length of stay, admission rates, hospital stay, or incidence of
relapse.
CONCLUSIONS: Dose-response studies in patients with stable disease suggest that
doses of albuterol powder up to 1 mg may be tolerated safely, although use of
repeated larger doses has not been well studied. Beta-agonists given by MDIS or
NEB are equally effective in this setting. There is no apparent advantage to
combined use of beta-agonist and ipratropium in the acute setting. Future
research in this area should evaluate the use of larger or repeated doses of
beta-agonists in the acute setting. Optimizing concurrent therapy and evaluating 
various patient outcomes should receive special attention in further
investigations.


PMID: 7696730  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Braz J Med Biol Res. 1994 Dec;27(12):2869-77.

Arrhythmogenic effects of combined orally administered theophylline and albuterol
in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Cukier A(1), Vargas FS, Teixeira LR, Grupi CJ, Terra-Filho M, Carvalho-Pinto RM, 
Light RW.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto do Coração, Hospital das Clínicas, Faculdade de Medicina,
Universidade de São Paulo, Brasil.

1. Studies in asthmatic subjects have reported conflicting results about the
arrhythmogenic effects of beta agonist and theophylline. The purpose of the
present study was to evaluate the effects of the combination of these drugs in
patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). 2. Twelve COPD
patients (FEV1 = 1.2 +/- 0.3 L; PaO2 = 65.7 +/- 9.0 mmHg) were evaluated by 24-h 
Holter monitoring on three different days. The first evaluation was done after
the patient had been without any treatment for at least 24 h, the second after
sustained-release theophylline for one week and the third after oral beta agonist
(albuterol) and theophylline for one week. 3. Mean serum level of theophylline
was 1.9, 15.6 and 11.7 micrograms/ml, and mean heart rate was 78.3, 82.0 and 84.5
beats/min for the first, second and third period, respectively. Four patients
showed more than 10 premature atrial contractions/h in the baseline Holter, and
this rate did not increase after either treatment. Three patients had more than
10 premature ventricular contractions/h (PVC) at baseline, with no increase while
receiving theophylline or the combination of theophylline and albuterol. However,
one patient did have worsening of the arrhythmia while taking both drugs. There
were 5 single PVCs/h at baseline and 150 single and 9 coupled PVCs/h plus 1
episode of non-sustained ventricular tachycardia during combined therapy. 4. We
conclude that the combination of theophylline and a beta agonist (albuterol) may 
increase the premature ventricular contraction rate and the complexity of ectopic
activity in COPD patients.


PMID: 7550007  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Pharmacotherapy. 1994 Nov-Dec;14(6):729-33.

Effect of nebulized albuterol on serum potassium and cardiac rhythm in patients
with asthma or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Dickens GR(1), McCoy RA, West R, Stapczynski JS, Clifton GD.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pharmacy Practice and Science, College of Pharmacy, University of 
Kentucky, Lexington.

STUDY OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the metabolic and cardiopulmonary effects of
nebulized albuterol in patients suffering moderate to severe exacerbations of
asthma or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
DESIGN: Open-label, prospective study.
SETTING: The emergency department of a university medical center.
PATIENTS: Ten patients with moderate to severe exacerbation of asthma.
INTERVENTIONS: Each patient received nebulized albuterol 2.5 mg for approximately
10 minutes.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: Serum potassium, heart rate and rhythm, blood
pressure, and pulmonary function were measured before treatment and every 15
minutes for 2 hours after treatment. Serum potassium concentrations decreased
significantly (p < 0.05) within 75 minutes after initiation of treatment, from a 
baseline value of 4.5 +/- 0.6 mEq/L (range 3.5-5.5 mEq/L) to 3.7 +/- 0.5 mEq/L
(range 2.8-4.4 mEq/L) at the end of the collection period (120 minutes). Forced
expiratory volume in 1 second significantly increased over time in patients with 
asthma (p < 0.05). No statistically significant changes in blood pressure, heart 
rate, or corrected QT intervals occurred. Pre-emergency department use of a beta 
2-agonist by metered-dose inhaler was not associated with a decreased serum
potassium on admission.
CONCLUSIONS: Nebulized beta 2-agonists are generally efficacious and safe in
patients with acute bronchospasms. However, close monitoring of serum
electrolytes, heart rate, and rhythm in patients at risk (elderly, those with
pre-existing cardiac disease) is advised before these individuals receive repeat 
doses by continuous aerosol administration.


PMID: 7885977  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Chest. 1994 May;105(5):1411-9.

In chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, a combination of ipratropium and
albuterol is more effective than either agent alone. An 85-day multicenter trial.
COMBIVENT Inhalation Aerosol Study Group.

[No authors listed]

Combination bronchodilator therapy for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD) is available widely throughout the world except in North America. Previous
studies have yielded conflicting results regarding the advantages of combining
anticholinergic therapy with sympathomimetic therapy in COPD. We report the
results of a 12-week prospective, double-blind, parallel-group evaluation of the 
use of the following: albuterol, a beta-adrenergic agent; ipratropium, an
anticholinergic agent; or a combination of the two, administered by metered-dose 
inhaler to patients with moderately severe stable COPD. Following baseline
studies, 534 patients were given one of the three test bronchodilator
preparations to be used at home four times daily in addition to oral theophylline
and corticosteroids as required. The doses of the latter two drugs were kept
stable. Subjects were tested on days 1, 29, 57, and 85. Analysis of 1-s forced
expiratory volume (FEV1) curves on those test days indicated that the combination
was superior to either single agent alone in peak effect, in the effect during
the first 4 h after dosing, and in the total area under the curve of the FEV1
response. The mean peak percent increases in FEV1 over baseline on the four test 
days were 31 to 33 percent for the combination, 24 to 25 percent for ipratropium,
and 24 to 27 percent for albuterol. The differences between the combination and
its components were statistically significant on all test days. The AUC0-4 means 
for the combination were 21 to 44 percent greater than the ipratropium means and 
30 to 46 percent greater than the albuterol means. Similar changes were noted in 
the forced vital capacity curves. Symptom scores did not change over time and did
not differ among the treatment groups. We conclude that the combination of
ipratropium and albuterol, when given by metered-dose inhaler to patients with
COPD, is more effective than either of the two agents alone. The advantage of the
combination is apparent primarily during the first 4 h after administration. The 
availability of combination therapy by metered-dose inhaler should help to
improve patient compliance.


PMID: 8181328  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Am J Emerg Med. 1994 May;12(3):323-5.

Effect of albuterol nebulization on peripheral WBC counts.

Vetto TA(1), Moore GP.

Author information: 
(1)Thunderbird Samaritan Hospital, Phoenix, AZ.

The white blood cell (WBC) count and neutrophil count are commonly used in
clinical decision making. It has been established that parenterally administered 
beta-adrenergic agents will increase the values of both of these measurements as 
a result of demargination. The purpose of this study was to evaluate whether the 
same phenomenon occurs when the beta-adrenergic agent albuterol is administered
by inhalation. This 3-month study was performed in a prospective, nonblinded
manner with each patient serving as their own control, in an urban medical center
emergency department (ED). All patients 18 to 55 years of age with an established
diagnosis of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease or asthma who were
experiencing an exacerbation of their disease that did not appear life
threatening were entered onto the study. Patients were excluded if they were
immunocompromised, on steroids, or had been seen in the last 2 weeks in the ED. A
total of 28 patients were entered in a consecutive volunteer pattern. On
presentation to the ED, patients had a baseline complete blood cell (CBC) count
with differential obtained. They then were given a small volume nebulization
treatment with 0.5 mL of albuterol (2.5 mg) in 3 mL of normal saline during a
15-minute period. A repeat CBC with differential was performed 30 minutes after
completion of the treatment. Three patients did not get neutrophil counts
recorded. All results are noted as the mean +/- one standard deviation. The WBC
count (in 1,000) before (mean, 10.33 +/- 3.48) and after (mean, 10.66 +/- 4.02)
albuterol were compared using the two-tailed paired t test.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT
250 WORDS)


PMID: 8179740  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Clin Ther. 1994 May-Jun;16(3):595-601; discussion 594.

Ipratropium bromide in the management of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease:
effect on health service expenditures.

Sclar DA(1), Legg RF, Skaer TL, Robison LM, Nemic NL.

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmacy, Washington State University, Pullman.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), which is estimated to affect 32
million Americans, is the fifth leading cause of death in the United States. This
retrospective study was designed to discern the economic utility of initial
pharmacotherapy with various individual drugs in the management of COPD, as well 
as subsequent costs incurred as disease progression necessitated combination
therapy. Data for this analysis were derived from the computer archive of a
network-model health maintenance organization. During the first 6 months
post-diagnosis for COPD, results indicated a significant (P < or = 0.05) increase
in expenditures for physicians, hospital care, and total health service
utilization for patients prescribed theophylline, a corticosteroid (triamcinolone
or beclomethasone) delivered via a metered-dose inhaler, or albuterol delivered
via a metered-dose inhaler as initial monotherapy compared with patients
prescribed ipratropium bromide (IB) delivered via a metered-dose inhaler.
Patients receiving initial pharmacotherapy with ipratropium bromide and
subsequently adding albuterol used significantly less health care services (P <
or = 0.05) during the first 15 months post-diagnosis for COPD than did patients
prescribed all other combination therapies we evaluated.


PMID: 7923323  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Ann Emerg Med. 1993 Dec;22(12):1836-41.

Changes in serum catecholamine levels during acute bronchospasm.

Emerman CL(1), Cydulka RK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Emergency Medicine, MetroHealth Medical Center, Cleveland, Ohio.

STUDY OBJECTIVES: Previous studies reported that norepinephrine levels increased 
during acute asthma, while epinephrine levels have remained at normal levels. The
purpose of this study was to determine whether the lack of rise in epinephrine
levels is due to an inherent defect in catecholamine secretion in asthmatics or
is a result of an insufficient stimulus for epinephrine release.
DESIGN: County-owned, university-affiliated emergency department.
SETTING: Prospective study.
TYPE OF PARTICIPANTS: Patients more than 18 years old presenting to the ED with
an acute exacerbation of asthma or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
INTERVENTIONS: Initial phlebotomy and spirometry were followed by treatment with 
either albuterol or albuterol and glycopyrrolate. Asthmatic patients received
steroids. Phlebotomy and spirometry were performed again after treatment.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: There was no difference in epinephrine levels
between patients with asthma and those with COPD either before or after
treatment. Norepinephrine levels were higher in patients with COPD, both before
and after treatment. There was only a weak correlation between epinephrine levels
and pretreatment FEV1 for asthma but not for COPD.
CONCLUSION: Moderate bronchospasm is not a major stimulus for epinephrine release
in either acute asthma or COPD.


PMID: 8239104  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Ann Pharmacother. 1993 Jul-Aug;27(7-8):922-7.

Assessment of patient acceptance and inhalation technique of a pressurized
aerosol inhaler and two breath-actuated devices.

Nimmo CJ(1), Chen DN, Martinusen SM, Ustad TL, Ostrow DN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy, Vancouver General Hospital, BC, Canada.

OBJECTIVE: To assess inhalation technique in patients after written instruction
alone, written and verbal instruction, and clinical use of two new inhalation
devices.
DESIGN: Randomized, crossover evaluation of the albuterol Diskhaler and the
terbutaline Turbuhaler.
SETTING: Canadian tertiary-care hospital.
PATIENTS: Twenty hospitalized adults with asthma or chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease currently using an albuterol metered-dose inhaler (MDI). Nineteen
patients received Diskhaler, 16 received Turbuhaler, 15 received both inhalers,
and 10 patients used both inhalers for three days each.
INTERVENTIONS: Patients were randomized to receive either Diskhaler or Turbuhaler
for three days. Inhaler technique was assessed after written instruction, written
plus verbal instruction, at the first scheduled dose after instruction, and after
three days of clinical use. Patients remaining in the hospital after three days
crossed over to the other study inhaler and the same protocol was followed.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Patient inhalation technique was assessed and compared for
the MDI, Diskhaler, and Turbuhaler.
RESULTS: Assessment of MDI technique revealed that 35 percent of patients used
their MDI correctly on the first puff, and 42 percent used it correctly on the
second puff. Following written instruction alone, correct technique was
demonstrated by 32 percent of patients with Diskhaler and 6 percent with
Turbuhaler. Technique significantly improved following verbal instruction,
although 40 percent of the patients required up to three attempts to demonstrate 
correct technique on at least one of the study inhalers. After three days of
clinical use, correct technique was demonstrated in only 54 percent of the
Diskhaler and 64 percent of the Turbuhaler assessments. Performance at this
assessment was, however, significantly better on the Turbuhaler than on the MDI
(p = 0.01). Performance on the Diskhaler was not significantly different from the
performance on the other inhalers.
CONCLUSIONS: Written instruction alone is inadequate in teaching correct
inhalation technique. Verbal instruction and technique assessment are essential
for patients to achieve proper technique. Patients may perform better on the
Turbuhaler than on other inhalation devices.


PMID: 8364279  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Ann Emerg Med. 1992 Nov;21(11):1337-42.

Frequently nebulized beta-agonists for asthma: effects on serum electrolytes.

Bodenhamer J(1), Bergstrom R, Brown D, Gabow P, Marx JA, Lowenstein SR.

Author information: 
(1)Emergency Medical Services, Denver General Hospital.

STUDY OBJECTIVE: To determine the magnitude of the changes in serum potassium,
magnesium, and phosphate during the treatment of acute bronchospasm with repeated
doses of beta-adrenergic agonists.
DESIGN: Prospective study of a convenience sample of asthmatic patients.
SETTING: University teaching hospital emergency department.
TYPE OF PARTICIPANTS: Twenty-three patients met the inclusion criteria of age of 
more than 16 years; a history of asthma or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease;
and an acute exacerbation.
INTERVENTIONS: Baseline peak expiratory flow rate and serum potassium, magnesium,
and phosphate levels were measured. Nebulized albuterol (2.5 mg) was administered
every 30 minutes until the patient was discharged from the ED. Before each
albuterol treatment, repeat serum levels of potassium, magnesium, and phosphate
were determined.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: Baseline peak expiratory flow rate averaged 188
+/- 119 L/min. Serum potassium levels decreased significantly (P = .0001 by
repeated-measures analysis of variance) from 4.10 +/- 0.468 (baseline) to 3.55
+/- 0.580 mmol/L (90 minutes) and 3.45 +/- 0.683 mmol/L (180 minutes). Potassium 
decreased to less than 3.0 mmol/L in 22% of patients at some point during the
study. Magnesium decreased from 1.64 +/- 0.133 mmol/L (baseline) to 1.48 +/-
0.184 mmol/L (90 minutes) and 1.40 +/- 0.219 mmol/L (180 minutes) (P = .0001).
Phosphate levels also decreased, from 3.74 +/- 1.029 (baseline) to 2.84 +/- 0.957
mmol/L (90 minutes) and 2.55 +/- 0.715 mmol/L (180 minutes) (P = .0001).
CONCLUSION: Aggressive administration of nebulized albuterol during the emergency
treatment of acute bronchospasm is associated with statistically significant
decreases in serum potassium, magnesium, and phosphate. The mechanism and
clinical significance of these findings are unknown and warrant further study.


PMID: 1416329  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Am J Med. 1991 Oct 21;91(4A):28S-32S.

Comparison of ipratropium bromide and albuterol in chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease: a three-center study.

Braun SR(1), Levy SF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Missouri, Columbia.

Seventy-two subjects who had severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and a
history of heavy smoking completed a study to compare the effect of single doses 
of ipratropium bromide (0.036 mg), albuterol (0.18 mg), and placebo on the forced
expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1), forced vital capacity (FVC), heart rate,
and blood pressure during a period of 6 hours. During initial testing for
reversibility, 40 subjects did not demonstrate a 15% increase in FEV1 from
baseline after metaproterenol. Ipratropium produced a significantly greater
response than albuterol in FEV1 at 3, 4, and 5 hours and in FVC at 1, 2, 3, 4,
and 5 hours. For the entire 6-hour period, ipratropium produced a 25% greater
response than albuterol in FEV1 and a 50% greater response in FVC. The difference
between the two drugs was even greater between 3 and 6 hours. There were no
significant differences between the three treatments as regards adverse
reactions, heart rate, and blood pressure measurements. In patients who have
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, ipratropium bromide has apparent benefits 
over beta 2 agonist therapy, including a longer duration of action. Ipratropium
may also be effective when beta 2 agonists are not effective.


PMID: 1835292  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Ann Emerg Med. 1991 Oct;20(10):1090-3.

A randomized, controlled comparison of isoetharine and albuterol in the treatment
of acute asthma.

Emerman CL(1), Cydulka RK, Effron D, Lukens TW, Gershman H, Boehm SP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Emergency Medicine, MetroHealth Medical Center, Cleveland, Ohio 
44109.

STUDY OBJECTIVE: To determine whether treatment of acute asthma with repeated
doses of nebulized albuterol leads to greater bronchodilation and lower hospital 
admission rate than treatment with nebulized isoetharine.
DESIGN: Randomized, double-blinded, controlled trial of albuterol and
isoetharine.
TYPE OF PARTICIPANTS: Patients between 18 and 50 years old presenting with acute 
asthma. Patients were excluded if they had a history of sensitivity to the study 
drugs, had congestive heart failure or chronic-obstructive pulmonary disease, or 
were unable to perform spirometry. One hundred three patients were entered into
the study.
INTERVENTIONS: All patients received oxygen and methylprednisolone in addition to
administration of either isoetharine or albuterol. The nebulized aerosol was
given at hourly intervals for a total of three doses.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: Spirometry was performed before treatment and
again at 90 and 180 minutes. Initial forced expiratory volume at one minute
(FEV1) was 38.1% of predicted normal for the albuterol group and 36.0% of
predicted normal for the isoetharine group. At 180 minutes, FEV1 was 55.6% of
predicted normal for the albuterol group and 57.1% of predicted for the
isoetharine group (NS). Twenty-eight percent of the albuterol group required
admission compared with 26% of the isoetharine group (NS). There was no
difference in occurrence of side effects between the two groups.
CONCLUSION: Repeated doses of albuterol do not lead to a greater improvement in
pulmonary function or a lower hospital admission rate than treatment with
isoetharine.


PMID: 1928879  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Am Rev Respir Dis. 1991 May;143(5 Pt 1):1038-43.

A controlled trial of colchicine to reduce the elastase load in the lungs of
ex-cigarette smokers with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Cohen AB(1), Girard W, Mclarty J, Starcher B, Davis D, Stevens M, Rosenbloom J,
Kucich U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Texas Health Science Center, Tyler
75710.

A great deal of experimental evidence suggests that emphysema in smokers is
caused by the action of neutrophil elastase on lung elastin. In order to test
this hypothesis, it is necessary to find a drug that reduces the load of
neutrophil elastase in the lungs of patients with emphysema. In a previous study 
we treated smokers with emphysema with colchicine, a drug that prevents
neutrophil elastase secretion, to determine if it would reduce the elastase
burden in the lungs. Colchicine was unable to reduce the elastase load while the 
stimulus of smoking continued. In this study we treated ex-smokers with emphysema
to determine if colchicine could reduce the elastase burden in the lungs. The
objective of the study was to determine if colchicine can reduce the elastase
load and putative indicators of elastase load in the lungs of patients with
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. The study was a prospective, double-blind,
randomized, and placebo-controlled clinical trial. The subjects were outpatients 
seeking treatment at the University of Texas Health Center at Tyler. We studied
16 ex-cigarette smokers between 45 and 75 yr of age with lung disease defined by 
FEV1 less than 70% of predicted but greater than 1.2 L whose airflow obstruction 
was less than 20% reversible with bronchodilators. Colchicine or placebo was
taken by mouth in disguised capsules, 0.6 mg three times per day. Volunteers were
placed on a baseline bronchodilator regimen of theodur by mouth and albuterol by 
inhalation. Blood, urine, and bronchoalveolar lavage fluids were obtained after 1
wk of stabilization.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

DOI: 10.1164/ajrccm/143.5_Pt_1.1038 
PMID: 2024812  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Am Rev Respir Dis. 1991 Feb;143(2):245-50.

Effect of theophylline on sleep and sleep-disordered breathing in patients with
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Berry RB(1), Desa MM, Branum JP, Light RW.

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary Section, Long Beach VA Medical Center, CA 90822.

To investigate the effect of theophylline on sleep and sleep-disordered breathing
in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), we studied 12 male
nonhypercapnic subjects with a mean +/- SEM age of 62.8 +/- 2.5 yr and a FEV1 of 
1.36 +/- 0.11 L using a randomized double-blind crossover protocol.
Sustained-action theophylline (250 mg three times or four times a day) or placebo
was administered for 2 days, and the alternate drug was administered on the
following 2 days. Sleep studies were performed on Nights 2 and 4 with spirometry 
at 9:00P.M. and 7:00A.M. Two puffs of metaproterenol or albuterol were
administered at 10:00P.M. on both study nights. A theophylline level, drawn at
bedtime (10:00 to 11:00P.M.), was 14.2 +/- 0.78 micrograms/ml on the theophylline
nights and less than 2 on placebo nights. The morning FEV1 was significantly
better during theophylline administration (1.27 +/- 0.12 versus 1.00 +/- 0.11 L, 
p less than 0.001). The mean arterial oxygen saturation (SaO2) and transcutaneous
carbon dioxide pressure (PCO2) were also better during NREM sleep on theophylline
nights. Neither the mean SaO2 and transcutaneous PCO2 during REM sleep nor the
apnea plus hypopnea index (events per hour of sleep) differed between placebo and
theophylline nights. Theophylline administration did not impair the amount or
architecture of sleep as neither total sleep time nor the fraction of time spent 
in Stages 1, 2, and 3/4 and REM differed between the two regimens. The number of 
arousals per hour of sleep was slightly less on theophylline nights (19.9 +/- 1.7
versus 24.9 +/- 2.7, p less than 0.05).(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

DOI: 10.1164/ajrccm/143.2.245 
PMID: 1899325  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Clin Pharmacokinet. 1990 Dec;19(6):462-90.

The effect of respiratory disorders on clinical pharmacokinetic variables.

Taburet AM(1), Tollier C, Richard C.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Pharmacy, Hôpital de Bicêtre, Paris, France.

Respiratory disorders induce several pathophysiological changes involving gas
exchange and acid-base balance, regional haemodynamics, and alterations of the
alveolocapillary membrane. The consequences for the absorption, distribution and 
elimination of drugs are evaluated. Drug absorption after inhalation is not
significantly impaired in patients. With drugs administered by this route, an
average of 10% of the dose reaches the lungs. It is not completely clear whether 
changes in pulmonary endothelium in respiratory failure enhance lung absorption. 
The effects of changes in blood pH on plasma protein binding and volume of
distribution are discussed, but relevant data are not available to explain the
distribution changes observed in acutely ill patients. Lung diffusion of some
antimicrobial agents is enhanced in patients with pulmonary infections. Decreased
cardiac output and hepatic blood flow in patients under mechanical ventilation
cause an increase in the plasma concentration of drugs with a high hepatic
extraction ratio, such as lidocaine (lignocaine). On a theoretical basis, hypoxia
should lead to decreased biotransformation of drugs with a low hepatic extraction
ratio, but in vivo data with phenazone (antipyrine) or theophylline are
conflicting. The effects of disease on the lung clearance of drugs are discussed 
but clinically relevant data are lacking. The pharmacokinetics of drugs in
patients with asthma or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease are reviewed.
Stable asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease do not appear to affect
the disposition of theophylline or beta 2-agonists such as salbutamol (albuterol)
or terbutaline. Important variations in theophylline pharmacokinetics have been
reported in critically ill patients, the causes of which are more likely to be
linked to the poor condition of the patients than to a direct effect of hypoxia
or hypercapnia. Little is known regarding the pharmacokinetics of cromoglycate,
ipratropium, corticoids or antimicrobial agents in pulmonary disease. In patients
under mechanical ventilation, the half-life of midazolam, a new benzodiazepine
used as a sedative, has been found to be lengthened but the underlying mechanism 
is not well understood. Pulmonary absorption of pentamidine was found to be
increased in patients under mechanical ventilation. Pharmacokinetic impairment
does occur in patients with severe pulmonary disease but more work is needed to
understand the exact mechanisms and to propose proper dosage regimens.

DOI: 10.2165/00003088-199019060-00004 
PMID: 2292169  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. DICP. 1990 Dec;24(12):1169-72.

Severe hyponatremia: an association with lisinopril?

Hume AL(1), Jack BW, Levinson P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy Practice, College of Pharmacy, University of Rhode
Island, Kingston 02881.

Comment in
    DICP. 1991 Jul-Aug;25(7-8):873-4.

A 63-year-old white woman with a history of hypertension and chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease presented to the emergency room with worsening shortness of
breath, anorexia, coughing, increased thirst, and leg edema of two weeks'
duration. Medications included lisinopril 10 mg/d, which had been started six
weeks earlier, sustained-release theophylline 300 mg q12h, and an albuterol
inhaler. The lisinopril was discontinued on admission. Serum sodium concentration
was 109 mmol/L; the osmolality of the blood and of the urine were 253 mOsmol and 
438 mOsmol, respectively, with a specific gravity of 1.025 and a urine sodium of 
17 mmol/L. The hyponatremia initially was considered to be the syndrome of
inappropriate antidiuretic hormone secretion in response to the patient's
suspected pneumonia. Due to worsening blood pressure, lisinopril was restarted
and the serum sodium concentration dropped from 134 to 126 mmol/L. Evaluation of 
the patient's hyponatremia included assessment of thyroid, adrenal, hepatic, and 
cardiac function that were within normal limits. The patient was discharged on
the following medications: sustained-release theophylline 300 mg tid, prednisone 
10 mg/d, albuterol inhaler 2 puffs q6h, and sustained-release verapamil 240 mg/d 
for blood pressure control. Her serum sodium concentration has remained between
135 and 140 mmol/L during hospitalizations for exacerbations of chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease and for pneumonias 10 and 12 months after
discharge.


PMID: 1965241  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Am Rev Respir Dis. 1990 Jul;142(1):63-72.

A controlled trial of colchicine to reduce the elastase load in the lungs of
cigarette smokers with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Cohen AB(1), Girard W, Mclarty J, Starcher B, Stevens M, Fair DS, Davis D, James 
H, Rosenbloom J, Kucich U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Texas Health Center, Tyler 75710.

Current data suggest that emphysema in smokers is caused at least in part by the 
unrestrained action of neutrophil elastase on pulmonary tissues. Since colchicine
reduces the secretion of enzymes from stimulated neutrophils, we designed a
clinical trial to determine if colchicine could reduce the elastase load in the
lungs or several putative indicators of elastin destruction. We carried out a
prospective, double-blind, randomized, and placebo-controlled clinical trial.
Outpatients seeking treatment for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease at the
University of Texas Health Center at Tyler who met specific criteria were
recruited into the study. A group of 46 cigarette smokers between 45 and 75 yr of
age with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) were studied. Colchicine or
placebo was given orally in disguised capsules, 0.6 mg three times per day.
Volunteers were placed on a baseline bronchodilator regimen of Theodur orally and
albuterol by inhalation. Blood, urine, and bronchoalveolar lavage fluids were
obtained after 1 wk of stabilization. The patients were then randomized and
treated for 14 days with colchicine, and the measurements were repeated.
Modifications in plasma elastin peptides and neutrophil elastase-generated
fibrinopeptide A, urinary desmosines, and bronchoalveolar lavage fluid
neutrophils or neutrophil elastase were the indicators of success or failure of
the treatment. Pre- and posttreatment measurements in each patient and the
difference between colchicine-treated and placebo-treated groups were compared.
There were no statistically significant differences in either of the two types of
analyses in any of the variables. We conclude that variables related to elastase 
load in the lungs were not modified by colchicine treatment. If a drug can be
identified that is successful in modifying one of these variables, it would then 
have to be tested in a large-scale clinical trial in which the rate of decline in
the FEV1.0 or mortality would be measured. The data presented here may provide
useful information about the variability of key measurements of elastase load in 
the lungs and the breakdown of elastin and may aid investigators in designing
similar trials in the future.

DOI: 10.1164/ajrccm/142.1.63 
PMID: 2195934  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. N Engl J Med. 1986 Sep 18;315(12):735-9.

A comparison of the bronchodilating effects of a beta-2 adrenergic agent
(albuterol) and an anticholinergic agent (ipratropium bromide), given by aerosol 
alone or in sequence.

Easton PA, Jadue C, Dhingra S, Anthonisen NR.

We evaluated the effect of anticholinergic and beta-adrenergic inhaled
bronchodilators, alone or in sequence, in 11 patients with chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease. We compared the agents albuterol and ipratropium bromide when 
each was used as a single aerosol in the maximal dose. After giving a maximal
dose of one agent, we compared the effect of adding the other with that of adding
a placebo. When used alone, both bronchodilators significantly increased airflow 
and relieved hyperinflation, and there was no significant difference between the 
two. After the improvement with the initial bronchodilator, the subsequent effect
of a second inhaled bronchodilator was not greater than that of placebo. These
results suggest that in the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease,
these two aerosols are usually equipotent in maximal doses and the addition of a 
second agent is of no practical value. The data support the prescription of a
single inhaled agent in most cases but do not rule out the value of combinations 
of agents under special circumstances.

DOI: 10.1056/NEJM198609183151205 
PMID: 2943994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Pharmacotherapy. 1985 May-Jun;5(3):127-37.

Bitolterol mesylate: a beta-adrenergic agent. Chemistry, pharmacokinetics,
pharmacodynamics, adverse effects and clinical efficacy in asthma.

Walker SB, Kradjan WA, Bierman CW.

Bitolterol, (3-4 diester colterol) is a new beta 2-adrenergic agonist. Since it
in itself is biologically inactive, bitolterol is considered a pro-drug. When
administered it is activated within the lung by esterase hydrolysis to the active
compound colterol catecholamine N-t-butyl-arterenol). In preclinical and clinical
studies to date, bitolterol has proved to be an effective bronchodilator for
adult and pediatric patients with chronic stable asthma and for some with chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease. Bitolterol has been compared with other beta 2
agents, including isoproterenol, metaproterenol and albuterol. There is no
evidence for cardiotoxicity when bitolterol is used in combination with
theophylline in human studies. It is effective for control of exercise-induced
asthma.


PMID: 3895171  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Pharmacotherapy. 1984 Jan-Feb;4(1):1-10.

Pirbuterol hydrochloride: evaluation of beta adrenergic agonist activity in
reversible obstructive pulmonary disease and congestive heart failure.

Weber RW, Nelson HS.

Pirbuterol hydrochloride is a beta 2 adrenergic agonist with a structure similar 
to that of albuterol, except for the substitution of a pyridine ring for the
benzene ring. It is comparable in duration of action to albuterol when given by
inhalation, but it is threefold less potent by weight. In man, pirbuterol and
albuterol have similar beta 2 selectivity. In the acute therapy of chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease, pirbuterol is most effective in oral doses of
15-20 mg, and by aerosol in doses of 400 micrograms or greater. Long-term studies
of oral pirbuterol in doses between 30-60 mg/day are promising, but further
research is warranted. The combination of pirbuterol's beta 2 and lesser beta1
activity has proven helpful in the therapy of refractory congestive heart
failure. Improvement of function of both right and left ventricles and systemic
and pulmonic circulations has been demonstrated acutely. Drug effect wanes, as
with other beta adrenergic agonists, due to the development of tolerance;
however, long-term benefit appears to persist in both pulmonary and cardiac
patients. Pirbuterol will be marketed in the United States as 10 and 15 mg
tablets and as a 200 micrograms per actuation metered dose aerosol for use in
pulmonary patients only; it will not be approved for use in congestive heart
failure. In terms of beta 2 selectivity, duration of action, potency and
frequency of side effects, pirbuterol is comparable to the two beta 2 agonists
already available in the United States, albuterol and terbutaline.


PMID: 6142449  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Am J Med. 1983 Oct;75(4):697-701.

Bronchodilator response to oral aminophylline and terbutaline versus aerosol
albuterol in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Shim CS, Williams MH Jr.

Bronchodilator efficacy of oral administration of aminophylline (400 mg) and
terbutaline sulfate (5 mg) was compared with inhalation of three puffs of
albuterol sulfate in 17 patients with stable chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease in a double-blind crossover study. Two hours after either form of
therapy, the patients were treated again with three puffs of albuterol. Forced
expiratory volume in one second (FEV1) increased significantly more from the
baseline value after albuterol aerosol than after oral medication at 30, 60, and 
120 minutes (paired t test, p less than 0.01). After three puffs of albuterol at 
120 minutes, FEV1 increased to similar values an hour later on both days in 14 of
17 patients. Thirteen patients complained of side effects during oral therapy and
none during aerosol therapy. Maximum bronchodilatation was achieved by albuterol 
aerosol in 14 of 17 patients, and addition of oral therapy produced no further
increase of flow rate in these patients. Bronchodilator aerosol is the logical
choice for treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease because it is more 
effective than oral therapy and because it is free from side effects.


PMID: 6624778  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Clinics (Sao Paulo). 2012;67(6):615-22.

The effect of acute magnesium loading on the maximal exercise performance of
stable chronic obstructive pulmonary disease patients.

Amaral AF(1), Gallo L Jr, Vannucchi H, Crescêncio JC, Vianna EO, Martinez JA.

Author information: 
(1)Internal Medicine Department, Medical School of Ribeirão Preto, Universidade
de São Paulo, Ribeirão Preto, SP, Brazil.

OBJECTIVE: The potential influence of magnesium on exercise performance is a
subject of increasing interest. Magnesium has been shown to have
bronchodilatatory properties in asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
patients. The aim of this study was to investigate the effects of acute magnesium
IV loading on the aerobic exercise performance of stable chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease patients.
METHODS: Twenty male chronic obstructive pulmonary disease patients (66.2 + 8.3
years old, FEV1: 49.3+19.8%) received an IV infusion of 2 g of either magnesium
sulfate or saline on two randomly assigned occasions approximately two days
apart. Spirometry was performed both before and 45 minutes after the infusions. A
symptom-limited incremental maximal cardiopulmonary test was performed on a cycle
ergometer at approximately 100 minutes after the end of the infusion.
RESULTS: Magnesium infusion was associated with significant reductions in the
functional residual capacity (-0.41 l) and residual volume (-0.47 l), the mean
arterial blood pressure (-5.6 mmHg) and the cardiac double product (734.8
mmHg.bpm) at rest. Magnesium treatment led to significant increases in the
maximal load reached (+8 w) and the respiratory exchange ratio (0.06) at peak
exercise. The subgroup of patients who showed increases in the work load equal to
or greater than 5 w also exhibited significantly greater improvements in
inspiratory capacity (0.29 l).
CONCLUSIONS: The acute IV loading of magnesium promotes a reduction in static
lung hyperinflation and improves the exercise performance in stable chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease patients. Improvements in respiratory mechanics
appear to be responsible for the latter finding.


PMCID: PMC3370314
PMID: 22760901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Am J Ther. 2014 May-Jun;21(3):152-8. doi: 10.1097/MJT.0b013e3182459a8e.

Magnesium sulfate versus ipratropium bromide in chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease exacerbation: a randomized trial.

Nouira S(1), Bouida W, Grissa MH, Beltaief K, Trimech MN, Boubaker H, Marghli S, 
Letaief M, Boukef R.

Author information: 
(1)1Emergency Department and Research Unit, Fattouma Bourguiba University
Hospital, Monastir, Tunisia; 2Emergency Department, Tahar Sfar University
Hospital, Mahdia, Tunisia; and 3Department of Preventive Medicine, University of 
Medicine, Monastir, Tunisia.

Treatment with short-acting β2-agonists for exacerbations of chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD) results in clinical improvement. It has not been
established whether combining short-acting β2-agonists to other bronchodilators
is more effective than β2-agonists alone. We conducted a study in patients
presenting to the emergency department with exacerbation of COPD. They were
randomized to receive nebulized ipratropium bromide (IB group; n = 62) or
combined nebulized and intravenous bolus of magnesium sulfate (MgSO4 group; n =
62). All nebulized drugs were administered at 30-minute intervals for 2 hours.
Primary outcome included hospital admission, endotracheal intubation, and
hospital death rates. Secondary outcome measures were improvement in peak
expiratory flow, dyspnea score, and arterial blood gas changes within the first 3
hours. There were no significant differences in primary outcome between MgSO4 and
IB groups. Patients given IB average 32 L greater improvement in peak expiratory 
flow rate compared with magnesium sulfate (95% confidence interval, 19-43 L) at
180 minutes. Simultaneously, there was a significant reduction in PaCO2 compared 
with baseline values in IB group but not in MgSO4 group. There was a
statistically nonsignificant trend toward a decrease in dyspnea score in both
groups although adverse events were similar. Although the improvement in peak
expiratory flow rate and arterial blood gas favored nebulized IB over magnesium
sulfate, there was a nonsignificant difference between both drugs with regard to 
hospital admission, intubation, and hospital death rates in patients with COPD
treated in the emergency department for acute exacerbation.

DOI: 10.1097/MJT.0b013e3182459a8e 
PMID: 22407196  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Med Sci Monit. 2008 Oct;14(10):CR524-9.

Effects of acute magnesium loading on pulmonary function of stable COPD patients.

do Amaral AF(1), Rodrigues-Júnior AL, Terra Filho J, Vannucchi H, Martinez JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Medical School of Ribeirao Preto, University 
of Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil.

BACKGROUND: Magnesium (Mg) use has the potential to promote bronchodilatation and
to improve lung function in obstructive diseases. IV administration of Mg during 
exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) has led to improved
peak flow. This study aimed to investigate the effects of acute IV Mg loading on 
respiratory parameters of stable COPD patients.
MATERIAL/METHODS: This was a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled
crossover study. Twenty-two male COPD patients (64+/-6 years old, FEV1: 49+/-20%)
received an IV infusion of 2 g of magnesium sulfate or placebo on two distinct
occasions. Spirometry and mouth maximal respiratory pressures were obtained
before and 45 minutes after the infusions.
RESULTS: Mg use led to significant changes in functional respiratory capacity
(-0.48 l, 95%CI: -0.96, -0.01), inspiratory capacity (0.21 l, 95%CI: 0.04, 0.37),
maximal inspiratory pressure (10 cmH2O, 95%CI: 1.6, 18.4), and maximal expiratory
capacity (10.7 cmH2O, 95%CI: 0.20, 21.2). The treatment was also associated with 
a marginally significant decrease in residual volume (-0.47 L, 95%CI: -0.96,
0.02, p=0.06).
CONCLUSIONS: Acute IV Mg loading in stable COPD patients was associated with a
reduction in lung hyperinflation and improvement of respiratory muscle strength. 
The clinical potential for chronic magnesium supplementation in COPD deserves
further investigation.


PMID: 18830192  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Expert Rev Respir Med. 2008 Jun;2(3):305-13. doi: 10.1586/17476348.2.3.305.

Aminophylline for treating asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Nuhoglu Y(1), Nuhoglu C.

Author information: 
(1)Istanbul Bilim University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pediatrics,
Istanbul, Turkey. yonca@nuhoglu.com

Aminophylline is a complex of theophylline and ethylenediamine. Its main
pharmacological action is relaxation of bronchial smooth muscle. Two
meta-analyses examining the efficacy of aminophylline in acute asthma attacks in 
children and in adults have been reported by the Cochrane Collaboration. In the
meta-analysis reporting results from studies in children, it was concluded that
aminophylline does not add any benefit to standard care. Yet one study, which has
the largest patient population, reports that aminophylline improves lung
functions within 6-8 h and reduces the risk of intubation. The meta-analysis
examining adult studies revealed that there is no outstanding difference between 
aminophylline and standard therapy in the management of adult acute asthma. In
conclusion, aminophylline may be an alternative to intravenous infusion of
beta-agonists, heliox or magnesium sulfate administration in children in whom
respiratory fatigue begins to develop and intensive-care unit admission and
mechanical ventilation seems to be the next treatment in line. However, in
adults, it is not recommended for use in the treatment of acute asthma owing to
its possible adverse effects.

DOI: 10.1586/17476348.2.3.305 
PMID: 20477194  [PubMed]


5. Arch Bronconeumol. 2006 Aug;42(8):384-7.

[Effect of intravenous magnesium sulfate on chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
exacerbations requiring hospitalization: a randomized placebo-controlled trial].

[Article in Spanish]

Abreu González J(1), Hernández García C, Abreu González P, Martín García C,
Jiménez A.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Neumología, Hospital Universitario de Canarias, La Laguna, Santa
Cruz de Tenerife, España. juan_abre@hotmail.com

Erratum in
    Arch Bronconeumol. 2006 Oct;42(10):491.

OBJECTIVE: Magnesium sulfate has been shown to have a bronchodilating effect in
asthma, but this effect has not been clearly established in the context of
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). For this reason we investigated the
possible bronchodilating effect of magnesium sulfate in COPD exacerbations.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We studied 24 patients with exacerbated COPD who required
admission to our hospital's pneumology department. All patients underwent
baseline spirometry and were subsequently randomized to groups in a double-blind 
crossover design. Patients received 1.5 g of magnesium sulfate or placebo in an
intravenous solution for 20 minutes. Those who received magnesium sulfate the
first day were given placebo the second day, and vice versa. Spirometry was
performed 15, 30, and 45 minutes after administration of magnesium sulfate or
placebo. Finally, 400 microg of salbutamol were administered using a spacer and a
final spirometry was performed 15 minutes later. All patients also received
treatment with corticosteroids, intravenous antibiotics, oxygen, and
regularly-scheduled bronchodilator therapy (salbutamol and ipratropium bromide
every 6 hours).
RESULTS: When we compared absolute increase in milliliters and percentage
increase in forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1) obtained with magnesium
sulfate application to the increases obtained with placebo after 15, 30, and 45
minutes, no significant differences were found. When we compared absolute and
percentage increases in FEV1 after administering salbutamol, we found
significantly greater increases after magnesium sulfate administration. The mean 
(SD) absolute increase in FEV1 was 0.18 [corrected] (0.42) L after magnesium
sulfate administration and 0.081 [0.01] L after placebo (P=.004). The percentage 
increase in FEV1 was 17.11% (3.7%) after magnesium sulfate and 7.06% (1.8%) after
placebo (P=.008).
CONCLUSIONS: Intravenous administration of magnesium sulfate has no
bronchodilating effect in patients with COPD exacerbations. It does, however,
enhance the bronchodilating effect of inhaled ss2-agonists.


PMID: 16948990  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Am J Manag Care. 2004 Jul;10(5 Suppl):S139-52.

An assessment of therapeutic regimens in the treatment of acute exacerbations in 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and asthma.

Skrepnek GH(1), Skrepnek SV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, and Center for Health Outcomes and
Pharmacoeconomics Research, University of Arizonia, College of Pharmacy, Tucson, 
USA.

Acute exacerbations in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and asthma
are potentially life-threatening clinical events that may result in substantial
morbidity and mortality. Treatment of these episodes requires the rapid reversal 
of airway obstruction by decreasing bronchoconstriction and inflammation.
Consensus guidelines and recommendations build on stepwise approaches to care,
with the mainstay of therapeutic interventions involving brochodilators and often
including systemic corticosteroids, oxygen, and other treatments, depending on
severity and setting. Future therapies that target inflammatory processes may
offer improved efficacy and potential disease-modifying effects. The purpose of
this article is to assess the treatment options for acute exacerbations in COPD
and asthma within the scope of current consensus guidelines and recommendations
(eg, Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease, National Asthma
Education and Prevention Program, Global Initiative for Asthma). Although
bronchodilators and corticosteroids are the primary therapies discussed,
antibiotics, oxygen, magnesium sulfate, noninvasive positive pressure
ventilation, and helium/oxygen mixtures are also addressed. Preventive approaches
for future exacerbations are considered in the overall approach to achieve
optimal outcomes.


PMID: 15354679  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Arch Intern Med. 1995 Mar 13;155(5):496-500.

Magnesium sulfate in exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Skorodin MS(1), Tenholder MF, Yetter B, Owen KA, Waller RF, Khandelwahl S, Maki
K, Rohail T, D'Alfonso N.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Service, Veterans Affairs Hospital, Hines, Ill.

BACKGROUND: Acute exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease are
commonly seen and difficult to treat. We sought to determine the bronchodilator
efficacy of magnesium sulfate in this situation, as this compound is helpful in
acute asthma.
METHODS: Subjects who came to either of two Veterans Affairs emergency
departments were randomized in a double-blind fashion to receive either 1.2 g of 
magnesium sulfate or placebo over 20 minutes after they first received albuterol,
2.5 mg by nebulization. Peak expiratory flow, dyspnea scores, arterial hemoglobin
oxygen saturation by pulse oximetry, maximal inspiratory and expiratory
pressures, and vital signs were monitored for 45 minutes after the start of
magnesium sulfate or placebo treatment.
RESULTS: Seventy-two individuals were studied. The peak expiratory flow increased
16.6% +/- 27.7% (mean +/- SD) in both groups after the initial albuterol
treatment, from 121.2 +/- 55.7 L/min to 136.9 +/- 63.9 L/min. The peak expiratory
flow increased from 136.7 +/- 69.7 L/min at the start of the infusion to 162.3
+/- 76.6 L/min at 30 minutes and 161.3 +/- 78.7 L/min at 45 minutes with
magnesium sulfate treatment. The peak expiratory flow was 137.0 +/- 58.6 L/min on
initiation of the intravenous infusion, 143.0 +/- 72.7 L/min at 30 minutes, and
143.3 +/- 70.5 L/min at 45 minutes in the placebo group. The difference in peak
expiratory flow from initiation of the infusion to 30 and 45 minutes later
(calculated as means of the 30- and 45-minute values) was significantly different
for the two groups (25.1 +/- 35.7 L/min vs 7.4 +/- 33.3 L/min; P = 0.3); the
difference was also significant when expressed as percentage increase (22.4% +/- 
28.5% vs 6.1% +/- 24.4%; P = .01). There was a statistically nonsignificantly
trend toward a reduced need for hospitalization in the magnesium sulfate group as
compared with the placebo group (28.1% vs 41.9%; P = .25). There were no
significant changes in the other parameters with either treatment.
CONCLUSION: Magnesium sulfate, 1.2 g over 20 minutes after beta-agonist
administration, is safe and modestly efficacious in the treatment of acute
exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, and its bronchodilator
effect is greater than that of a beta-agonist given alone and lasts beyond the
period of magnesium sulfate administration.


PMID: 7864705  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]

1. Am J Health Syst Pharm. 2015 Jun 15;72(12):1026-35. doi: 10.2146/ajhp140551.

Clinical outcomes and treatment cost comparison of levalbuterol versus albuterol 
in hospitalized adults with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease or asthma.

Brunetti L(1), Poiani G(1), Dhanaliwala F(1), Poppiti K(1), Kang H(1), Suh DC(2).

Author information: 
(1)Luigi Brunetti, Pharm.D., M.P.H., is Clinical Associate Professor, Ernest
Mario School of Pharmacy, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey,
Piscataway, and Clinical Pharmacy Specialist, Internal Medicine, Robert Wood
Johnson University Hospital-Somerset, Somerville, NJ. George Poiani, M.D., FACP, 
FCCP, is Attending Physician, Department of Medicine, Robert Wood Johnson
University Hospital-Somerset, and Clinical Associate Professor, Division of
Pulmonary/Critical Care Medicine, Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, New
Brunswick, NJ. Fatema Dhanaliwala, B.S.Pharm., is Pharmacy Supervisor, Department
of Pharmacy, Robert Wood Johnson University Hospital-Somerset. Kristen Poppiti,
Pharm.D., is Postgraduate Year 1 Pharmacy Resident, Inova Fairfax Hospital, Falls
Church, VA; at the time of writing, she was a Pharm.D. student in the Honors
Research Program at Ernest Mario School of Pharmacy, Rutgers, The State
University of New Jersey. Haenam Kang, B.S., is Graduate Student, College of
Pharmacy; and Dong-Churl Suh, M.B.A., Ph.D., is Professor, College of Pharmacy,
Chung-Ang University, Seoul, South Korea. (2)Luigi Brunetti, Pharm.D., M.P.H., is
Clinical Associate Professor, Ernest Mario School of Pharmacy, Rutgers, The State
University of New Jersey, Piscataway, and Clinical Pharmacy Specialist, Internal 
Medicine, Robert Wood Johnson University Hospital-Somerset, Somerville, NJ.
George Poiani, M.D., FACP, FCCP, is Attending Physician, Department of Medicine, 
Robert Wood Johnson University Hospital-Somerset, and Clinical Associate
Professor, Division of Pulmonary/Critical Care Medicine, Robert Wood Johnson
Medical School, New Brunswick, NJ. Fatema Dhanaliwala, B.S.Pharm., is Pharmacy
Supervisor, Department of Pharmacy, Robert Wood Johnson University
Hospital-Somerset. Kristen Poppiti, Pharm.D., is Postgraduate Year 1 Pharmacy
Resident, Inova Fairfax Hospital, Falls Church, VA; at the time of writing, she
was a Pharm.D. student in the Honors Research Program at Ernest Mario School of
Pharmacy, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey. Haenam Kang, B.S., is
Graduate Student, College of Pharmacy; and Dong-Churl Suh, M.B.A., Ph.D., is
Professor, College of Pharmacy, Chung-Ang University, Seoul, South Korea.
dongsuh75@gmail.com.

PURPOSE: Results of a prospective study comparing clinical outcomes and costs of 
levalbuterol versus albuterol therapy for exacerbations of asthma or chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) are presented.
METHODS: In a single-center open-label study, selected adults hospitalized for
asthma or COPD exacerbations over a 21-month period were randomly assigned to
receive levalbuterol 1.25 mg three times daily (n = 55) or albuterol 2.5 mg four 
times daily (n = 57); dosage reductions and other respiratory therapies were
permitted. Study outcomes included scheduled and rescue nebulizations, total
treatment costs, hospital length of stay, and change in heart rate from baseline.
RESULTS: The numbers of scheduled nebulizations were similar in the levalbuterol 
and albuterol groups (mean ± S.D., 19.6 ± 13.4 versus 20.7 ± 14.4; p = 0.692), as
were the numbers of rescue nebulizations (mean ± S.D., 0.7 ± 1.4 versus 0.8 ±
2.0; p = 0.849). The mean change from baseline in heart rate did not differ
significantly between groups. Mean total treatment costs per patient were
significantly greater with the use of levalbuterol ($8003, bootstrap 95%
confidence interval [CI], $6628-$9379) versus albuterol ($5772, bootstrap 95% CI,
$5051-$6494; p = 0.006). Hospital length of stay was significantly greater in the
levalbuterol group (mean ± S.D., 8.5 ± 5.2 days versus 6.8 ± 3.6 days with
albuterol use; p = 0.040).
CONCLUSION: Clinical outcomes were similar with the use of levalbuterol versus
albuterol for exacerbations of COPD or asthma. On average, patients receiving
levalbuterol had longer and more costly hospital stays.

Copyright © 2015 by the American Society of Health-System Pharmacists, Inc. All
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.2146/ajhp140551 
PMID: 26025994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2013;8:631-9. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S52557. Epub
2013 Dec 5.

Hospital readmissions following initiation of nebulized arformoterol tartrate or 
nebulized short-acting beta-agonists among inpatients treated for COPD.

Bollu V(1), Ernst FR(2), Karafilidis J(1), Rajagopalan K(1), Robinson SB(2),
Braman SS(3).

Author information: 
(1)Sunovion Pharmaceuticals, Inc., Marlborough, MA. (2)Premier healthcare
alliance, Charlotte, NC. (3)The Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New
York, NY, USA.

BACKGROUND: Inpatient admissions for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)
represent a significant economic burden, accounting for over half of direct
medical costs. Reducing 30-day readmissions could save health care resources
while improving patient care. Recently, the Patient Protection and Affordable
Care Act authorized reduced Medicare payments to hospitals with excess
readmissions for acute myocardial infarction, heart failure, and pneumonia.
Starting in October 2014, hospitals will also be penalized for excess COPD
readmissions. This retrospective database study investigated whether use of
arformoterol, a nebulized long-acting beta agonist, during an inpatient
admission, had different 30-day all-cause readmission rates compared with
treatment using nebulized short-acting beta agonists (SABAs, albuterol, or
levalbuterol).
METHODS: A US nationally representative hospital database was used to study
adults aged ≥40 years, discharged between January, 2006 and March, 2010, and with
a diagnosis of COPD. Patients receiving arformoterol on ≥80% of days following
treatment initiation were compared with patients receiving a nebulized SABA
during hospitalization. Arformoterol and nebulized SABA patients were matched
(1:2) for age, sex, severity of inpatient admission, and primary/secondary COPD
diagnosis. Logistic regression compared the odds of readmission while adjusting
for age, sex, race, admission type, severity, primary/secondary diagnosis, other 
respiratory medication use, respiratory therapy use, oxygen use, hospital size,
and teaching status.
RESULTS: This retrospective study compared 812 arformoterol patients and 1,651
nebulized SABA patients who were discharged from their initial COPD hospital
admission. An intensive care unit stay was more common among arformoterol
patients (32.1% versus 18.4%, P<0.001), suggesting more severe symptoms during
the initial admission. The observed readmission rate was significantly lower for 
arformoterol patients than for nebulized SABA patients (8.7% versus 11.9%,
P=0.017), as were the adjusted odds of readmission (odds ratio 0.69, 95%
confidence interval 0.51-0.92).
CONCLUSION: All-cause 30-day readmission rates were significantly lower for
arformoterol patients than nebulized SABA patients, both before and after
adjusting for patient and hospital characteristics.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S52557 
PMCID: PMC3858026
PMID: 24353413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Pediatr Pulmonol. 2011 Aug;46(8):761-9. doi: 10.1002/ppul.21446. Epub 2011 May
16.

A cumulative dose, safety and tolerability study of arformoterol in pediatric
subjects with stable asthma.

Hinkle J(1), Hinson J, Kerwin E, Goodwin E, Sciarappa K, Curry L, Hanrahan JP.

Author information: 
(1)Sunovion Pharmaceuticals Inc., 84 Waterford Drive, Marlborough, MA 01752, USA.
joseph.hinkle@sunovion.com

PURPOSE: Short-acting β(2) -agonists (SABAs) are recommended for treating acute
pediatric asthma. The long-acting β(2) -agonist (LABA) arformoterol is approved
for the maintenance treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
Arformoterol acts rapidly, is delivered via nebulization, and, as such, raises
concerns from the FDA over possible off-label use in acute asthma in children. As
a step to investigate this issue, this study evaluated the safety and
tolerability of three consecutive doses of arformoterol administered over 1 hr in
children with stable asthma.
METHODS: This study consisted of a double-blind, crossover period in which
subjects (ages 2-11 years) with stable asthma were randomized to three
consecutive nebulized doses of arformoterol (7.5 µg/dose) or levalbuterol (0.63
mg/dose) administered over 1-hr (0, 30, and 60 min) followed by an open-label
period with three consecutive doses of arformoterol (15 µg/dose) administered
over 1 hr. Endpoints were change in heart rate, blood pressure, and serum
potassium and glucose levels. Other endpoints included adverse events and
pulmonary function.
RESULTS: There were no clinically important mean changes from pre-dose in heart
rate, blood pressure, or serum glucose levels, across treatment groups.
Substantial declines in serum potassium levels were observed both 2 and 6 hr
post-dosing. Two subjects had declines to 2.8 mEq/L and 2.9 mEq/L 2-hr
post-dosing. Adverse events were infrequent and differences in forced expiratory 
volume in 1 sec and peak expiratory flow across treatment groups were not
clinically meaningful.
CONCLUSION: In this study, in children with stable asthma, three consecutive
doses of arformoterol (7.5 and 15 µg) and levalbuterol were overall well
tolerated. Nonetheless, serum potassium levels demonstrated substantial mean
declines after dosing. These findings do not address or support the safety and
tolerability of arformoterol use in acute exacerbations of asthma in children.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ppul.21446 
PMID: 21584948  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Am J Geriatr Pharmacother. 2010 Dec;8(6):571-82. doi:
10.1016/S1543-5946(10)80006-6.

Albuterol and levalbuterol use and spending in Medicare beneficiaries with
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Puig A(1), McElligott S, Bergquist H, Doshi JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health Care Management and Economics, Wharton School, University
of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, 19104–6021, USA.

Comment in
    Am J Geriatr Pharmacother. 2010 Dec;8(6):483-4.

BACKGROUND: The evidence for the benefits of branded levalbuterol over generic
albuterol in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is
inconclusive. However, there are significant cost differences between these
products.
OBJECTIVES: This study examined use and spending on albuterol and levalbuterol in
a nationally representative sample of Medicare beneficiaries with COPD enrolled
in Part D in 2006. It also examined differences in patient characteristics and
use of other COPD drugs among recipients of these 2 short-acting β-agonists.
METHODS: Data were obtained from the 5% Medicare files for 2005-2006 linked to
the 2006 Medicare Part D files. The sample consisted of all fee-for-service
beneficiaries with COPD enrolled in stand-alone Part D plans in 2006. Patient
characteristics and other COPD medication use were compared across albuterol-only
users, levalbuterol-only users, and users of both albuterol and levalbuterol.
Multinomial logistic regressions were used to identify factors independently
associated with levalbuterol use.
RESULTS: There were 5.5 times more albuterol users than levalbuterol users in
2006; however, mean annual spending on levalbuterol was 18.6 times higher per
user in 2006 than spending on albuterol ($1876 vs $101 per user, respectively).
Levalbuterol-only users were more likely to be older than albuterol-only users
(mean age: 71.5 vs 68.7 years; P < 0.05), as well as sicker (mean prescription
drug hierarchical condition category score: 1.72 vs 1.55; P < 0.05) and residing 
in the South (67.9% vs 41.6%; P < 0.05). Levalbuterol-only users were more likely
to use nebulizer forms covered under Part B than inhaler forms covered under Part
D (78.6% vs 26.8%, respectively; P < 0.05), whereas albuterol-only users were
more likely to use inhaler forms covered under Part D than nebulizer forms
covered under Part B (82.2% vs 33.0%, respectively; P < 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: In this sample of Medicare beneficiaries with COPD enrolled in Part 
D, mean annual spending in 2006 was significantly higher for levalbuterol than
for albuterol. The differences between levalbuterol and albuterol users in terms 
of patient characteristics, geographic region, and drug formulation/device type, 
coupled with the inconclusive evidence for efficacy differences in the
literature, highlight the need for further comparative clinical and
cost-effectiveness studies of these agents.

Copyright © 2010. Published by EM Inc USA.

DOI: 10.1016/S1543-5946(10)80006-6 
PMID: 21356506  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Clin Ther. 2008;30 Spec No:989-1002. doi: 10.1016/j.clinthera.2008.06.010.

Comparison of levalbuterol and racemic albuterol in hospitalized patients with
acute asthma or COPD: a 2-week, multicenter, randomized, open-label study.

Donohue JF(1), Hanania NA, Ciubotaru RL, Noe L, Pasta DJ, Schaefer K, Claus R,
Andrews WT, Roach J.

Author information: 
(1)School of Medicine, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North Carolina 
27599-7020, USA. jdonohue@med.unc.edu

BACKGROUND: The National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute guideline recommends
that dosing racemic albuterol be administered every 1 to 4 hours for treating
patients with asthma or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) in the
hospital. Previously published preliminary and retrospective studies suggested
that levalbuterol can be administered every 8 hours for the treatment of
bronchoconstriction in hospitalized patients. However, it is unclear how the
different dosing regimens affect the total number of nebulizations (scheduled
plus as-needed treatments) and the costs of treatment of bronchoconstriction in a
hospital setting. Moreover, it is not clear how the different dosing regimens
affect symptom outcomes and health status in hospitalized patients with asthma or
COPD.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to evaluate these issues in hospitalized
patients with acute asthma or COPD.
METHODS: In this prospective, multicenter, randomized, open-label study,
hospitalized patients aged > or = 18 years were randomly assigned to receive
14-day treatment with levalbuterol 1.25 mg q6-8h or racemic albuterol 2.5 mg
q1-4h, administered per routine hospital practice at each institution. The
primary efficacy end point was total number of nebulizations during
hospitalization. Pulmonary function, symptom evaluation (subject general
well-being score [SGWB], disease symptom assessment [DSA], and beta-mediated
adverse effect scores), hospital costs (excluding medication costs) and hospital 
length of stay (LOS) were also evaluated.
RESULTS: In the intent-to-treat population (n = 479; levalbuterol, 241;racemic
albuterol, 238), the mean (SE) age was 55.3 (16.9) years, the majority of
patients were white (57.8%), and the mean (SE) weight was 80.9 (24.5) kg.
Demographic characteristics were similar between the 2 treatment groups, except
that there were more females with COPD in the levalbuterol treatment group
(63.88%) compared with the racemic albuterol treatment group (45.5%) (P = 0.005).
Patients treated with levalbuterol required significantly fewer median total
nebulizations (10 vs 12; P = 0.031) and scheduled nebulizations (9 vs 11; P =
0.009) compared with those in the racemic albuterol group. The 2 treatment groups
required 0 rescue nebulizations. Mean (SD) forced expiratory volume in 1 second
improved from baseline with both levalbuterol and racemic albuterol (0.06 [0.43] 
and 0.10 [0.37] L, respectively); these improvements were maintained throughout
the hospital stay (0.11 [0.48] and 0.16 [0.52] L). DSA and SGWB scores improved
significantly from baseline in both treatment groups, and beta-mediated adverse
effects mean scores were significantly greater with levalbuterol versus racemic
albuterol (P < 0.001). In the levalbuterol and racemic albuterol treatment
groups, hospital LOS (70.6 and 65.7 hours, respectively), time to discharge (66.0
and 62.8 hours), and total hospital costs (least squares mean [SE], US $4869.30
[$343.58] and $4899.41 [$343.20]) were similar.
CONCLUSIONS: In these hospitalized patients with acute asthma or COPD treated
with levalbuterol every 6 to 8 hours or racemic albuterol every 1 to 4 hours,
significantly fewer total nebulizations were required with levalbuterol, without 
an increased need for rescue nebulizations during 14 days of hospitalization.
Both treatments were associated with improvements from baseline in symptoms and
health status. The costs of treating bronchoconstriction in hospitalized patients
were similar between the levalbuterol and racemic albuterol groups.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clinthera.2008.06.010 
PMID: 18640474  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. COPD. 2006 Aug;3(3):125-32.

Evaluation of the efficacy and safety of levalbuterol in subjects with COPD.

Donohue JF(1), Parsey MV, Andrews C, D'Urzo T, Sharma S, Schaefer K, Claus R,
Baumgartner RA; Levalbuterol COPD Study Group.

Author information: 
(1)University of North Carolina School of Medicine at Chapel Hill, USA.
jdonohue@med.unc.edu

The efficacy and safety of nebulized levalbuterol in adults with chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) was evaluated in this multicenter,
randomized, double-blind, parallel design study. Randomized subjects (n = 209)
received levalbuterol (LEV) 0.63 mg or 1.25 mg, racemic albuterol (RAC) 2.5 mg,
or placebo (PBO) TID for 6 weeks. Serial spirometry was completed in-clinic after
study drug alone (weeks 0, 2, and 6) or in combination with ipratropium bromide
0.5 mg (week 4). The primary endpoint was the averaged FEV1 AUC(0-8 hrs) over
weeks 0, 2 and 6 compared with placebo. Other endpoints included rescue
medication use, safety parameters, COPD exacerbations, and global evaluations.
All active treatments demonstrated improvements in the percent change in FEV1
AUC(0-8 hrs) over the double-blind period and at each visit vs PBO (p < 0.05).
Rescue medication use vs. baseline (doses/day) changed over time: PBO +0.38 +/-
3.3; LEV 0.63 mg +0.07 +/- 3.3; LEV 1.25 mg -0.84 +/- 3.8 (p = 0.02 vs. RAC); RAC
+0.97 +/- 2.5. The overall rate of adverse events was PBO 56.4%, LEV 0.63 mg
56.6%, LEV 1.25 mg 67.3%, and RAC 65.4%. Protocol-defined COPD exacerbations
occurred in all groups (PBO 12.7%, LEV 0.63 mg 11.3%; LEV 1.25 mg 18.4%; RAC
21.2%). Withdrawals due to COPD exacerbations were significantly higher in the
RAC group compared with PBO (PBO 0%; LEV 0.63 mg 1.9%; LEV 1.25 mg 4.1%; RAC 9.6%
p = 0.01 vs. PBO). In this study, levalbuterol treatment in subjects with COPD
was generally well tolerated, produced significant bronchodilation compared with 
PBO, and improved clinical control of COPD as evidenced by reductions in rescue
medication use compared with PBO and/or RAC.


PMID: 17240614  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Pharmacotherapy. 2006 Sep;26(9 Pt 2):175S-80S.

Outcomes and humanistic issues related to treatment of acute bronchospasm.

Okamoto LJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Health Economics and Policy, United BioSource Corporation,
Bethesda, Maryland 20814, USA. lynn.okamoto@unitedbiosource.com

Because of emergency department visits and hospitalizations, the economic costs
associated with asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), and
bronchospasm are a significant portion of total overall treatment costs. A small 
proportion of patients account for most of the costs, due to disease severity and
acute exacerbations. Disease management programs, sponsored by insurance groups
and employers, are lowering health and disability costs and reducing days missed 
from work and school because of exacerbations. Quality-of-life patient
assessments are available to assist practitioners in evaluating disease status.
Evidenced-based medicine analysis can show that less expensive therapies are not 
necessarily cost-effective. A study of the rate of hospital admissions from the
emergency department showed that although levalbuterol therapy in the emergency
department was more costly than racemic albuterol therapy, total overall
treatment costs were reduced because of decreased hospitalizations in the
levalbuterol-treated patients. Thus, providers, payers, and patients should
examine all the scientific evidence (safety, efficacy or effectiveness,
economics, and humanistic benefits) to make the most informed health care
decision.

DOI: 10.1592/phco.26.9part2.175S 
PMID: 16945064  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Pharmacotherapy. 2006 Sep;26(9 Pt 2):164S-74S.

Risk versus benefit considerations for the beta(2)-agonists.

Kelly HW(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, New Mexico
87131, USA. hwkelly@unm.edu

Short-acting beta(2)-agonists are the mainstay of therapy for acute bronchospasm 
associated with asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, whereas
long-acting beta(2)-agonists are used in maintaining disease control in these
respiratory disorders. This review describes and compares the pharmacology of the
beta(2)-agonists and explains how these differences translate into differences in
efficacy and beta(2)-adrenergic-mediated adverse effects. Questions commonly
asked by clinicians regarding the efficacy and safety of short- and long-acting
beta(2)-agonists include issues about cardiovascular effects, tolerance to their 
bronchodilator and bronchoprotective effects, blunting of albuterol response by
long-acting beta(2)-agonists, potential masking of worsening asthma control, and 
the role of long-acting beta(2)-agonists as adjunctive therapy with inhaled
corticosteroids in maintaining asthma control. Pharmacogenetics may play a role
in determining which patients may be at risk for a reduced response to a
beta(2)-agonist. The continued use of racemic albuterol, which contains a mixture
of R-albuterol and S-albuterol, has been questioned because of data from
preclinical and clinical studies suggesting that S-albuterol causes
proinflammatory effects and may increase bronchial hyperreactivity. The
preclinical and clinical effects of these two stereoisomers are reviewed. Data
describing the efficacy and safety of levalbuterol (R-albuterol) and racemic
albuterol are presented.

DOI: 10.1592/phco.26.9part2.164S 
PMID: 16945063  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Postgrad Med. 2005 Dec;118(6 Suppl Acute):34-7; discussion 38. doi:
10.3810/pgm.12.2005.suppl44.236.

Treatment of acute bronchospasm in elderly patients.

Berger WE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of pediatrics, division of allergy and immunology, College of
Medicine, University of California, Irvine, USA. weberger@uci.edu

Both asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) are often
underdiagnosed and undertreated among the elderly. Patient compliance with
treatments plans and medication schedules are often less than ideal. This paper
presents results from clinical studies examining levalbuterol and racemic
albuterol use among elderly patients who have asthma or COPD.

DOI: 10.3810/pgm.12.2005.suppl44.236 
PMID: 19667714  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. J Asthma. 2005 Feb;42(1):29-34.

A respiratory therapist-directed protocol for managing inpatients with asthma and
COPD incorporating a long-acting bronchodilator.

Colice GL(1), Carnathan B, Sung J, Paramore LC.

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary Service, Washington Hospital Center, Washington, District of
Columbia, 20010, USA. Gene.Colice@Medstar.net

This prospective study was designed to determine whether incorporating formoterol
into a standardized respiratory therapist-directed protocol for administering
bronchodilators to hospitalized patients with obstructive airway disease would
reduce health care resource use and provide a safety advantage. All patients
admitted to Washington Hospital Center with asthma and chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (CODP) are administered bronchodilators under a standardized
respiratory therapist-directed protocol. Formoterol was the primary
bronchodilator for the intervention period from January through March 2002, with 
levalbuterol, albuterol, and ipratropium available as needed. Results for the
intervention period were compared against two historical control periods. From
January through March 2000, the bronchodilators in the protocol were albuterol
and ipratropium, and from January through March 2001 levalbuterol, albuterol, and
ipratropium were available. Health care resource use was determined by the number
of bronchodilator treatments administered per admission. Costs (adjusted to 2002 
dollars) for supplies, therapist time, and drugs were calculated for the three
time periods. Adverse events related to bronchodilator administration were
recorded in a standardized manner for all three time periods. Bronchodilator
treatments per admission, respiratory therapist visits per admission, and time
spent per admission, and cost per bronchodilator treatment significantly
decreased in 2002. Significantly fewer adverse events related to bronchodilator
treatments were reported in 2002 than 2000. The addition of formoterol to a
respiratory therapist-directed protocol for administering bronchodilators reduced
health care resource use and adverse events for patients with asthma and COPD.


PMID: 15801325  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. J Am Osteopath Assoc. 2004 Jul;104(7):288-93.

Levalbuterol in the treatment of patients with asthma and chronic obstructive
lung disease.

Dalonzo GE Jr(1).

Author information: 
(1)Temple University Hospital, Pulmonary and Critical Care, Philadelphia, PA
19140, USA. dalong@temple.edu

Effective asthma control requires long-term (anti-inflammatory) controller
medications for patients with mild-persistent to severe-persistent disease, and
quick-relief bronchodilator medication for all patients with asthma to control
intermittent symptoms of cough, wheeze, and bronchoconstriction, as well as acute
exacerbations. For patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease,
quick-relief and long-acting bronchodilators are primarily used in the
maintenance and treatment of associated symptoms, including shortness of breath. 
For many years, the most widely used bronchodilator has been racemic (R,
S)-albuterol, a short-acting beta2-adrenergic agonist, commonly dispensed as an
inhaled aerosol or solution. Until the introduction of levalbuterol inhalation
solution (Xopenex) in 1999, all marketed forms of albuterol (including Ventolin
and Proventil brands) were racemic mixtures composed of a 1:1 ratio of (R)- and
(S)-stereoisomers. Administered as a proportionally equivalent nebulized dose,
levalbuterol [(R)-albuterol] provides greater bronchodilation than racemic
albuterol and, in the appropriate clinical setting, offers the possibility for
improving clinical outcomes in patients with asthma and other obstructive airway 
diseases. Additionally, levalbuterol can be given at lower doses than racemic
albuterol to provide comparable bronchodilation, with the potential for reduced
beta-mediated adverse effects in adults and children. Only since the past decade 
has the technology to separate stereoisomers become available, and thus the
biologic activities of the albuterol stereoisomers had not been established.
Binding studies have demonstrated that (R)-albuterol binds to the
beta2-adrenergic receptor with a high affinity, whereas (S)-albuterol binds with 
100-fold less affinity than (R)-albuterol. Other evaluations have suggested that 
(R)-albuterol possesses the bronchodilatory, bronchoprotective, and
ciliary-stimulatory properties of racemic albuterol, while (S)-albuterol does not
contribute beneficially to the therapeutic effects of the racemate and was
originally assumed to be inert. However, preclinical evaluations have shown that 
(S)-albuterol has effects that work in opposition to (R)-albuterol and may
diminish the therapeutic effects of (R)-albuterol.


PMID: 15293593  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 1999 Aug;104(2 Pt 2):S61-8.

Prospects for improved therapy in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease by the
use of levalbuterol.

Costello J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Sackler Institute of Pulmonary Pharmacology, Division of Pharmacology and
Therapeutics, Guy's, King's and St Thomas' School of Biomedical Sciences, London,
UK.

Like asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a chronic disease,
the most prominent symptom of which is airway obstruction. Airway inflammation
may be pathogenomic in both diseases, but only in COPD does inflammation
predominate as a determinant of symptoms to make obstruction largely refractory
to treatment. Despite a more limited degree of reversibility than in asthma,
beta(2 )-agonists are used extensively to reduce airway obstruction and to
achieve symptomatic improvement, with racemic albuterol being widely favored. In 
asthma, bronchodilation and bronchoprotection largely account for symptomatic
benefit. In COPD, the capacity of racemic albuterol to ameliorate these symptoms 
is more limited and suppression of edema and of infiltration and activation of
leukocytes acquire greater significance. During regular use of racemic albuterol 
in asthma, bronchoprotection diminishes progressively as hyperresponsiveness
becomes increasingly pronounced, a process that is associated with an
infiltration and activation of eosinophils. These paradoxic effects of racemic
albuterol may be attributed to pharmacologic actions of the distomer,
(S)-albuterol. As would be expected, homochiral (R)-albuterol (levalbuterol) is
more potent and effective in asthma and may have significant advantages if used
in COPD. A substantial (4-8-fold) reduction in the dose of levalbuterol
anticipates lesser side effects and diminished risk in patients with
cardiovascular disease. Additionally, the increased potency and duration of
bronchodilation observed in asthma may extend to COPD. Finally, removal of the
proinflammatory actions of (S)-albuterol may eliminate the persisting obstruction
and decrease elastance that are associated with enhanced inflammation and may
allow levalbuterol to suppress edema and diminish leukocyte activation more
effectively.


PMID: 10452790  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]
