
1. Oral Maxillofac Surg Clin North Am. 2015 Nov;27(4):497-508. doi:
10.1016/j.coms.2015.06.002. Epub 2015 Aug 13.

Medication-Related Osteonecrosis of the Jaw: Basic and Translational Science
Updates.

Allen MR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Indiana University School of Medicine,
635 Barnhill Drive, MS-5035, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA. Electronic address:
matallen@iupui.edu.

In the late 1990s and the early 2000s, bisphosphonates had become the clinical
pillar of excellence for treating metabolic bone disease, and thus their
connection with osteonecrosis of the jaw (ONJ) caused significant concern. Over
the past decade, progress has been made in understanding what is now referred to 
as medication-related ONJ (MRONJ), because of its connections to agents other
than bisphosphonates, although in many respects the progress has been slow. This 
review highlights the key basic science and translational (animal) studies in the
area of MRONJ and suggests areas of focus as the field moves into the next
decade.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.coms.2015.06.002 
PMID: 26277349  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Semin Arthritis Rheum. 2012 Apr;41(5):619-41. doi:
10.1016/j.semarthrit.2011.07.005. Epub 2011 Sep 29.

Paget's disease of bone: evidence for complex pathogenetic interactions.

Chung PY(1), Van Hul W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium.

OBJECTIVES: Paget's disease of bone (PDB), with a prevalence of 2 to 5% in
Caucasians >55 years, is the second most frequent metabolic bone disease, after
osteoporosis. PDB characteristics are bone lesions with an imbalanced bone
remodeling, resulting in disorganized and nonfully fledged new bone. PDB etiology
is not completely understood. In this review, current views on the etiology,
clinical aspects, and PDB treatment are summarized and discussed.
METHODS: The PubMed database was searched using the keywords PDB, sequestosome1
(SQSTM1), valosin-containing protein (VCP), receptor activator of nuclear
factor-κB (RANK), osteoprotegerin (OPG), RANK ligand (RANKL), mutation, genetic
variants, virus, osteosarcoma, bisphosphonates, and denosumab.
RESULTS: Environmental evidence (e.g. viruses) and also genetic risk factors have
been found for PDB. Until now, SQSTM1 was the only PDB-causing gene identified.
However, PDB patients without SQSTM1 mutations seem to have susceptibility
genetic polymorphisms in regions containing the CaSR, ESR1, TNFRSF11B (OPG),
TNFRSF11A (RANK), CSF1 (M-CSF), OPTN, TM7SF4 (DC-STAMP), VCP, NUP205, RIN3, PML, 
and GOLGA6A genes, resulting in an increased risk of developing PDB. The nature
of these genes indicates that the regulation of osteoclastogenesis is a key
process in PDB pathogenesis. Furthermore, with the involvement of SQSTM1 and VCP 
in autophagy and in forming protein aggregates, this might also indicate that a
disturbance of these processes might be a risk factor.
CONCLUSIONS: Unraveling the PDB genetic background is instrumental to
understanding the PDB pathogenesis and the role of slow viruses. Furthermore, it 
might make early detection and subsequently treatment of risk individuals
possible.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.semarthrit.2011.07.005 
PMID: 21959292  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Drug Des Devel Ther. 2011;5:225-39. doi: 10.2147/DDDT.S11306. Epub 2011 Apr 26.

Emerging strategies and therapies for treatment of Paget's disease of bone.

Michou L(1), Brown JP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, CHUQ (CHUL), Research Centre and Division of
Rheumatology, Laval University, Quebec City, QC, Canada.
laetitia.michou@crchul.ulaval.ca

Paget's disease of bone (PDB) is a progressive monostotic or polyostotic
metabolic bone disease characterized by focal abnormal bone remodeling, with
increased bone resorption and excessive, disorganized, new bone formation. PDB
rarely occurs before middle age, and it is the second most frequent metabolic
bone disorder after osteoporosis, affecting up to 3% of adults over 55 years of
age. One of the most striking and intriguing clinical features is the focal
nature of the disorder, in that once the disease is established within a bone,
there is only local spread within that bone and no systemic dissemination.
Despite many years of intense research, the etiology of PDB has still to be
conclusively determined. Based on a detailed review of genetic and viral factors 
incriminated in PDB, we propose a unifying hypothesis from which we can suggest
emerging strategies and therapies. PDB results in weakened bone strength and
abnormal bone architecture, leading to pain, deformity or, depending on the bone 
involved, fracture in the affected bone. The diagnostic assessment includes serum
total alkaline phosphatase, total body bone scintigraphy, skull and enlarged view
pelvis x-rays, and if needed, additional x-rays. The ideal therapeutic option
would eliminate bone pain, normalize serum total alkaline phosphatase with
prolonged remission, heal radiographic osteolytic lesions, restore normal
lamellar bone, and prevent recurrence and complications. With the development of 
increasingly potent bisphosphonates, culminating in the introduction of a single 
intravenous infusion of zoledronic acid 5 mg, these goals of treatment are close 
to being achieved, together with long-term remission in almost all patients.
Based on the recent pathophysiological findings, emerging strategies and
therapies are reviewed: ie, pulse treatment with zoledronic acid; denosumab, a
fully human monoclonal antibody directed against RANK ligand; tocilizumab, an
interleukin-6 receptor inhibitor; odanacatib, a cathepsin K inhibitor; and
proteasome and Dickkopf-1 inhibitors.

DOI: 10.2147/DDDT.S11306 
PMCID: PMC3096538
PMID: 21607019  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Arthritis Res Ther. 2007;9 Suppl 1:S7.

Clinical development of anti-RANKL therapy.

Schwarz EM(1), Ritchlin CT.

Author information: 
(1)The Center for Musculoskeletal Research, University of Rochester Medical
Center, Rochester, New York 14642, USA. edward_schwarz@urmc.rochester.edu

The receptor activator of nuclear factor-kappaB ligand (RANKL), its cognate
receptor RANK, and its natural decoy receptor osteoprotegerin have been
identified as the final effector molecules of osteoclastic bone resorption. This 
has provided an ideal target for therapeutic interventions in metabolic bone
disease. As described in previous reviews in this supplement, RANKL signaling is 
required for osteoclast differentiation, activation, and survival. Furthermore,
in vivo inhibition of RANKL leads to immediate osteoclast apoptosis, and there
are no in vivo models of bone resorption that are refractory to RANKL inhibition.
Thus, the only step remaining in the development of a clinical intervention is
the generation of a safe, effective, and specific drug that can inhibit RANKL in 
humans. Here we review the clinical development of denosumab (formerly known as
AMG 162), which is a fully human mAb directed against RANKL. This discussion
includes the breadth of 21 human studies that have led to the current phase 3
clinical trials seeking approval for use of this agent to treat postmenopausal
women with low bone mineral density (osteoporosis) and patients with metastatic
lytic bone lesions (multiple myeloma, and prostate and breast cancer).

DOI: 10.1186/ar2171 
PMCID: PMC1924522
PMID: 17634146  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]

