
1. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2017 Jan 19;12:367-381. doi:
10.2147/COPD.S119908. eCollection 2017.

Comparative efficacy of long-acting β2-agonists as monotherapy for chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease: a network meta-analysis.

Donohue JF(1), Betts KA(2), Du EX(2), Altman P(3), Goyal P(4), Keininger DL(4),
Gruenberger JB(4), Signorovitch JE(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonary Diseases and Critical Care Medicine, The University of
North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC. (2)Analysis Group, Inc., Los Angeles, CA.
(3)Novartis Pharmaceutical Corporation, East Hanover, NJ, USA. (4)Novartis Pharma
AG, Basel, Switzerland. (5)Analysis Group, Inc., Boston, MA, USA.

PURPOSE: Long-acting β2-agonists (LABAs) have demonstrated efficacy in patients
with COPD in clinical trials. The purpose of this study was to assess the
comparative efficacy of all available dosages of all LABA monotherapies using a
network meta-analysis.
METHODS: A systematic literature review identified 33 randomized controlled
trials of LABA monotherapies (salmeterol 50 μg twice daily [BID]; formoterol 12
μg BID; indacaterol 75, 150, and 300 μg once daily [OD]; olodaterol 5 and 10 μg
OD, and vilanterol 25 μg OD). Clinical efficacy was evaluated at 12 and 24 weeks 
in terms of trough forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1), transition
dyspnea index focal score, St George's Respiratory Questionnaire total score, and
rate of COPD exacerbations. The relative effectiveness of all LABA monotherapies 
was estimated by Bayesian network meta-analysis.
RESULTS: At 12 and 24 weeks, indacaterol 300 and 150 μg OD were associated with
statistically significant improvement in trough FEV1 compared to all other LABA
monotherapies; vilanterol 25 μg OD was superior to formoterol 12 μg BID. At 12
weeks, indacaterol 75 μg OD was associated with significant improvement in trough
FEV1 compared to formoterol 12 μg BID and olodaterol (5 and 10 μg OD); salmeterol
50 μg BID was superior to formoterol 12 μg BID and olodaterol 5 μg OD.
Indacaterol 300 μg OD was also associated with significant improvement in
transition dyspnea index focal score compared to all other LABAs at 12 or 24
weeks. Indacaterol 150 μg OD had significantly better results in exacerbation
rates than olodaterol 5 μg and olodaterol 10 μg OD.
CONCLUSION: Indacaterol 300 μg, followed by 150 and 75 μg, were the most
effective LABA monotherapies for moderate to severe COPD.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S119908 
PMCID: PMC5261557
PMID: 28176892  [PubMed - in process]


2. Vnitr Lek. 2016 Winter;62(12):1011-1020.

[Current position of new fixed-dose combination of tiotropium and olodaterol -
its role in the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease in the Czech
Republic].

[Article in Czech]

Koblížek V, Svoboda M.

COPD is a serious pulmonary disease with rising global socioeconomic impact. From
the perspective of the Czech Republic COPD was responsible for 21 000 acute
hospitalizations and 3 500 deaths, mortality reaches 33/100 000 in 2015. Early
stages of disease may be associated with a significant reduction of exercise
capacity and the reduction of activities of daily living. Moreover early stages
of bronchial obstruction are associated with the fastest lung function decline.
Finally, early elimination of the risk of inhalation exposure is able to
influence the course of the disease and to reduce its mortality. Most current
treatment strategies and national recommendations attributed central role to
bronchodilator drugs. Long-acting bronchodilators (LAMA and LABA) creates an
essential component of the treatment of symptomatic individuals in the Czech COPD
guidelines as well. Actual version of this document constitutes as standard
therapy: long-lasting inhaled bronchodilators, targeted efforts to eliminate
inhalation risk, vaccination, regular exercise, repeated inhalation technique
training, identification, and treatment of relevant comorbidities. All other
drugs (inhaled-corticosteroids, mucoactive medication, roflumilast, antibiotics),
and non-pharmacological (lung volume reductions, nutrition support, long-term
oxygen, home non-invasive ventilation, lung transplantation, palliative care)
procedures are intended for a specific subgroups of patients only. The newest
type of bronchodilator therapy is represented by a fixed dual bronchodilation.
Currently we can use four original drug combinations: titropium + olodaterol,
glycopyrronium + indacaterol, umeklidinium + vilanterol and aclidinium +
formoterol in the Czech Republic. This area is an enterprising research. For
example comprehensive scientific program covering eight studies on 15 000 COPD
patients (TOviTO) assess the therapeutic benefits of tiotropium + olodaterolu in 
terms of lung function, quality of life, exercise tolerance, daily physical
activity and the incidence of acute exacerbations. Meanwhile the published
results of analyzed studies TONADO, OTEMTO, VIVACITO, and the first results of
the study DYNAGITO have showed that fixed dual bronchodilation should be a
mandatory treatment to all the symptomatic COPD patients. Unfortunately "face to 
face" comparison of different drug combinations is still missing. However, the
treatment with tiotropium + olodaterol combination has been demonstrated to
significantly (35 %) reduce the occurrence of clinically significant
deterioration, which may lead to the stabilization of this multicomponent
disease.Key words: COPD - hospitalizations - inhaled bronchodilators - mortality 
- treatment.


PMID: 28139131  [PubMed - in process]


3. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2016 Dec 30;12:141-168. doi:
10.2147/COPD.S116719. eCollection 2017.

Dual bronchodilation in COPD: lung function and patient-reported outcomes - a
review.

Price D(1), Østrem A(2), Thomas M(3), Welte T(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Primary Care Respiratory Medicine, Division of Applied Health
Sciences, University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen, UK; Observational and Pragmatic
Research Institute, Singapore. (2)Gransdalen Legesenter, Oslo, Norway.
(3)Department of Primary Care Research, University of Southampton, Southampton,
UK. (4)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Hannover Medical School, Hannover,
Germany.

Several fixed-dose combinations (FDCs) of long-acting bronchodilators (a
long-acting muscarinic antagonist [LAMA] plus a long-acting β2-agonist [LABA])
are available for the treatment of COPD. Studies of these FDCs have demonstrated 
substantial improvements in lung function (forced expiratory volume in 1 second) 
in comparison with their respective constituent monocomponents. Improvements in
patient-reported outcomes (PROs), such as symptoms and health status, as well as 
exacerbation rates, have been reported compared with a LABA or LAMA alone, but
results are less consistent. The inconsistencies may in part be owing to
differences in study design, methods used to assess study end points, and patient
populations. Nevertheless, these observations tend to support an association
between improvements in forced expiratory volume in 1 second and improvements in 
symptom-based outcomes. In order to assess the effects of FDCs on PROs and
evaluate relationships between PROs and changes in lung function, we performed a 
systematic literature search of publications reporting randomized controlled
trials of FDCs. Results of this literature search were independently assessed by 
two reviewers, with a third reviewer resolving any conflicting results. In total,
22 Phase III randomized controlled trials of FDC bronchodilators in COPD were
identified, with an additional study including a post-literature search (ten for 
indacaterol-glycopyrronium once daily, eight for umeclidinium-vilanterol once
daily, three for tiotropium-olodaterol once daily, and two for
aclidinium-formoterol twice daily). Results from these studies demonstrated that 
the LAMA-LABA FDCs significantly improved lung function compared with their
component monotherapies or other single-agent treatments. Furthermore, LABA-LAMA 
combinations also generally improved symptoms and health status versus
monotherapies, although some discrepancies between lung function and PROs were
observed. Overall, the safety profiles of the FDCs were similar to placebo.
Further research is required to examine more closely any relationship between
lung function and PROs in patients receiving LABA-LAMA combinations.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S116719 
PMCID: PMC5221557
PMID: 28115839  [PubMed - in process]


4. Respir Res. 2017 Jan 18;18(1):19. doi: 10.1186/s12931-017-0506-0.

Is aclidinium alone or combined with a LABA a rational choice for symptomatic
COPD patients?

Blasi F(1), Canonica GW(2), Miravitlles M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathophysiology and Transplantation, Università degli Studi di
Milano, Cardio-thoracic unit and Cystic Fibrosis Adult Center Fondazione IRCCS Cà
Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico Milano, Milan, Italy.
francesco.blasi@unimi.it. (2)Department of Biomedical Science, Personalized
Medicine Clinic: Asthma & Allergy - Humanitas Clinical and Research Center,
Humanitas University -Rozzano (Milano), Milan, Italy. (3)Pneumology Department,
Hospital Universitari Vall d'Hebron, Barcelona, Spain.

Erratum in
    Respir Res. 2017 Feb 10;18(1):35.

BACKGROUND: As emphasized by international recommendations and largely confirmed 
by clinical experience, long-acting bronchodilators play a central role in the
maintenance treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) due to
their proven efficacy in reducing airflow obstruction and improving symptoms.
MAIN BODY: There are some important aspects to define with regard to inhalation
therapy for COPD, particularly those concerning the selection criteria and the
optimal use of long-acting bronchodilators. First of all, it needs to be
determined in which patients and clinical situations monotherapy with one
bronchodilator, such as a long-acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA), should be
considered adequate, and in which cases the use of combination therapies, such as
the "double bronchodilation" with a LAMA and a long-acting β2-agonist (LABA),
should be preferred. Another critical issue concerns the effect of the frequency 
of daily administration of inhaled agents on the control of symptoms during the
24 h. COPD symptoms are known to exhibit considerable circadian variability with 
worsening in the early morning, and a significant proportion of patients have
disease-related sleep disorders which can adversely affect their quality of life.
The worsening of symptoms in the early morning may be due, at least in part, to a
reduction in airway caliber caused by an increased "cholinergic tone" at night.
As such, the coverage of nighttime and early morning symptoms is a reasonable
therapeutic goal, which can be achieved by many patients using LAMAs such as
aclidinium bromide twice daily (BID). Therapeutic adherence is known to be a
multifactorial phenomenon that is frequently affected by other aspects than
dosing frequency, including the technical features and ease of use of the
inhalers. To this end, it should be mentioned that certain new-generation
inhalers such as Genuair® have been associated in clinical trials with higher
patient preference.
CONCLUSION: In this work, in addition to presenting an overview of the main
evidence on the efficacy of COPD treatment with the LAMA aclidinium bromide BID, 
we suggest some selection criteria for the monotherapy with one long-acting
bronchodilator or the combination therapy with LAMA and LABA in COPD patients,
with particular reference to specific clinical scenarios.

DOI: 10.1186/s12931-017-0506-0 
PMCID: PMC5242048
PMID: 28100244  [PubMed - in process]


5. Pulm Pharmacol Ther. 2017 Feb;42:43-51. doi: 10.1016/j.pupt.2016.12.004. Epub
2017 Jan 5.

Acute cardiovascular safety of two formulations of beclometasone
dipropionate/formoterol fumarate in COPD patients: A single-dose, randomised,
placebo-controlled crossover study.

Singh D(1), Ciurlia G(2), Piccinno A(2), Muraro A(2), Bocchi M(2), Scuri M(2).

Author information: 
(1)University of Manchester, Medicines Evaluation Unit, The Langley Building,
University Hospital of South Manchester, Southmoor Rd, Wythenshawe M23 9QZ,
United Kingdom. Electronic address: DSingh@meu.org.uk. (2)Chiesi Farmaceutici
SpA, Via Palermo 26/A, 43122 Parma, Italy.

INTRODUCTION: An extrafine combination of beclometasone dipropionate (BDP) and
formoterol fumarate (FF) via a pressurised metered-dose inhaler (pMDI) has been
commercially available for some years for the management of asthma and chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). A dry powder inhaler (DPI) formulation of
extrafine BDP/FF is now also available. This study evaluated the cardiovascular
safety of BDP/FF DPI in comparison to BDP/FF pMDI and placebo.
METHODS: Single-dose, partially-blind, randomised, placebo-controlled, 5-period
crossover study. Main inclusion criteria: aged 40-75 years; moderate to severe
COPD (post-bronchodilator FEV1 40-80% predicted, FEV1/FVC <0.7). Patients
received BDP/FF 200/12, 800/48 μg and placebo via DPI, and BDP/FF 200/12 and
800/48 μg via pMDI. In both devices, 200/12 μg is the therapeutic dose; 800/48 μg
is supratherapeutic.
PRIMARY OBJECTIVE: to demonstrate non-inferiority between BDP/FF DPI and pMDI in 
average 4-h heart rate (HR0-4h) at each dose level. Secondary variables included:
HR0-12h, HR peak and individual timepoint; QTcF interval; SBP and DBP AUC0-12h;
and potassium and glucose AUC0-4h. Adverse events (AEs) were collected.
RESULTS: Forty-nine patients were randomised; 45 (92%) received all five
treatments. Non-inferiority was demonstrated between the DPI and pMDI
formulations at both doses (-0.2 bpm [95% CI -1.3, 0.9] for 200/12 μg and 0.6 bpm
[-0.5, 1.7] for 800/48 μg). Although there were statistically significant
treatment-placebo differences at both doses and with both devices (thus
confirming assay sensitivity), these differences were small and well below 5 bpm 
for the 200/12 μg dose. The results for the secondary parameters (QTcF, glucose
and potassium) further supported the therapeutic equivalence of the two
treatments. At the therapeutic dose, there were no clinically relevant
treatment-placebo differences in any parameter with either formulation. There was
no increase in the proportion of patients reporting AEs whilst receiving
therapeutic doses of BDF/FF (either formulation) compared with placebo.
CONCLUSIONS: Overall, this study provides reassurance over the cardiovascular
safety of extrafine BDP/FF, both in a DPI and a pMDI formulation.

Copyright © 2017 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pupt.2016.12.004 
PMID: 28065679  [PubMed - in process]


6. Respir Res. 2017 Jan 6;18(1):8. doi: 10.1186/s12931-016-0491-8.

A randomized, seven-day study to assess the efficacy and safety of a
glycopyrrolate/formoterol fumarate fixed-dose combination metered dose inhaler
using novel Co-Suspension™ Delivery Technology in patients with moderate-to-very 
severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Reisner C(1), Fabbri LM(2), Kerwin EM(3), Fogarty C(4), Spangenthal S(5), Rabe
KF(6,)(7), Ferguson GT(8), Martinez FJ(9), Donohue JF(10), Darken P(11), St Rose 
E(11), Orevillo C(11), Strom S(12), Fischer T(12), Golden M(12), Dwivedi S(13).

Author information: 
(1)Pearl Therapeutics Inc., 280 Headquarters Plaza, East Tower, 2nd Floor,
Morristown, NJ, 07960, USA. creisner@pearltherapeutics.com. (2)Department of
Medicine, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, NOCSAE, Modena, Italy.
(3)Clinical Research Institute of Southern Oregon, Medford, OR, USA.
(4)Spartanburg Medical Research, Spartanburg, NC, USA. (5)American Health
Research, Charlotte, NC, USA. (6)Lungen Clinic Grosshansdorf, Airway Research
Center North, Member of the German Center for Lung Research (DZL), Grosshansdorf,
Germany. (7)Department of Medicine, Christian-Albrechts University Kiel, Kiel,
MI, USA. (8)Pulmonary Research Institute of Southeast Michigan, Farmington Hills,
MI, USA. (9)Joan and Sanford I. Weill Department of Medicine, Weill Cornell
Medical College; New York-Presbyterian Hospital/Weill Cornell Medical Center, New
York, NY, USA. (10)Department of Medicine, University of North Carolina School of
Medicine, Chapel Hill, NC, USA. (11)Pearl Therapeutics Inc., 280 Headquarters
Plaza, East Tower, 2nd Floor, Morristown, NJ, 07960, USA. (12)Pearl Therapeutics 
Inc., Durham, NC, USA. (13)Pearl Therapeutics Inc., Redwood City, CA, USA.

BACKGROUND: Long-acting muscarinic antagonist/long-acting β2-agonist combinations
are recommended for patients whose chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)
is not managed with monotherapy. We assessed the efficacy and safety of
glycopyrrolate (GP)/formoterol fumarate (FF) fixed-dose combination delivered via
a Co-Suspension™ Delivery Technology-based metered dose inhaler (MDI) (GFF MDI).
METHODS: This was a Phase IIb randomized, multicenter, placebo-controlled,
double-blind, chronic-dosing (7 days), crossover study in patients with
moderate-to-very severe COPD ( NCT01085045 ). Treatments included GFF MDI twice
daily (BID) (GP/FF 72/9.6 μg or 36/9.6 μg), GP MDI 36 μg BID, FF MDI 7.2 and
9.6 μg BID, placebo MDI, and open-label formoterol dry powder inhaler (FF DPI)
12 μg BID or tiotropium DPI 18 μg once daily. The primary endpoint was forced
expiratory volume in 1 s area under the curve from 0 to 12 h (FEV1 AUC0-12) on
Day 7 relative to baseline FEV1. Secondary endpoints included pharmacokinetics
and safety.
RESULTS: GFF MDI 72/9.6 μg or 36/9.6 μg led to statistically significant
improvements in FEV1 AUC0-12 after 7 days' treatment versus monocomponent MDIs,
placebo MDI, tiotropium, or FF DPI (p ≤ 0.0002). GFF MDI 36/9.6 μg was
non-inferior to GFF MDI 72/9.6 μg and monocomponent MDIs were non-inferior to
open-label comparators. Pharmacokinetic results showed glycopyrrolate and
formoterol exposure were decreased following administration via fixed-dose
combination versus monocomponent MDIs; however, this was not clinically
meaningful. GFF MDI was well tolerated.
CONCLUSIONS: GFF MDI 72/9.6 μg and 36/9.6 μg BID improve lung function and are
well tolerated in patients with moderate-to-very severe COPD.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov NCT01085045 . Registered 9 March 2010.

DOI: 10.1186/s12931-016-0491-8 
PMCID: PMC5216561
PMID: 28061907  [PubMed - in process]


7. Exp Biol Med (Maywood). 2017 Jan 1:1535370216685006. doi:
10.1177/1535370216685006. [Epub ahead of print]

Co-inhalation of roflumilast, rather than formoterol, with fluticasone more
effectively improves asthma in asthmatic mice.

Murad HA(1,)(2), Habib HS(3), Rafeeq MM(1), Sulaiman MI(4), Abdulrahman AS(5),
Khabaz MN(5).

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Pharmacology, Faculty of Medicine, Rabigh, King Abdulaziz
University (KAU), Jeddah 21589, Saudi Arabia. (2)2 Department of Pharmacology,
Faculty of Medicine, Ain Shams University, Cairo 11562, Egypt. (3)3 Department of
Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, KAU, Jeddah 21589, Saudi Arabia. (4)4 Department
of Pharmacology, Faculty of Medicine, KAU, Jeddah 21589, Saudi Arabia. (5)5
Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, Rabigh, KAU, Jeddah 21589, Saudi
Arabia.

Roflumilast is approved as an add-on therapy for chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease. The inflammation in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease is mainly
neutrophilic, while in asthma it is mainly eosinophilic, studies addressing role 
of roflumilast in eosinophilic inflammation are recommended. Also in severe
asthma, the dominant inflammatory cells are neutrophils. Thus, roflumilast has a 
potential off-label use in the treatment of asthma. This study was designed to
evaluate the effects of co-inhalation of roflumilast and fluticasone compared to 
that of formoterol and fluticasone in ovalbumin-sensitized and-challenged BALB/c 
mice. Besides normal control group, the ovalbumin-asthmatic mice were randomly
divided into seven groups (n = 8): positive control, vehicle-treated, and five
drug-treated groups. Treatments (µg/kg) were given as 15 min-inhalation once/day 
for five days as follows: roflumilast (500), formoterol (50), fluticasone (1000),
roflumilast + fluticasone (500 + 1000), and formoterol + fluticasone (50 + 1000).
Penh values were measured in conscious unrestrained mice using the single-chamber
whole-body plethysmography. Airway hyperreactivity to inhaled methacholine was
evaluated. Bronchoalveolar lavage fluid was used for the measurements of levels
of IL-4, IL-5, TNF-α, OVA-specific IgE, and total and differential white cells.
Lung sections were stained with hematoxylin and eosin and periodic acid-Schiff.
The asthmatic mice showed significant increases in airway hyperreactivity which
were significantly reversed by the combination treatments. The asthmatic mice
showed significant increases in levels of IL-4, IL-5, TNF-α, ovalbumin-specific
IgE, and total and differential white cells in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid. All 
treatments (except formoterol) significantly reversed these changes mainly with
roflumilast + fluticasone. The asthmatic mice showed severe inflammatory
infiltration and goblet cell hyperplasia which were maximally reversed by
roflumilast + fluticasone, while minimally reversed by formoterol. In conclusion,
co-inhalation of roflumilast + fluticasone more significantly improved
inflammation and histopathological changes than co-inhalation of
formoterol + fluticasone in ovalumin-asthmatic mice. Further studies are needed
to help confirm the potential off-label add-on use of roflumilast in typical and 
atypical asthma and asthma-chronic obstructive pulmonary disease overlap
syndrome.

DOI: 10.1177/1535370216685006 
PMID: 28056550  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


8. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2016 Dec 19;12:13-25. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S114209.
eCollection 2017.

Early efficacy of budesonide/formoterol in patients with moderate-to-very-severe 
COPD.

Calverley PM(1), Eriksson G(2), Jenkins CR(3), Anzueto AR(4), Make BJ(5), Persson
A(6), Fagerås M(6), Postma DS(7).

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary and Rehabilitation Research Group, University Hospital Aintree,
Liverpool, UK. (2)Department of Respiratory Medicine and Allergology, University 
Hospital, Lund, Sweden. (3)George Institute for Global Health, The University of 
Sydney and Concord Clinical School, Sydney, Australia. (4)Department of Pulmonary
Medicine and Allergology, University of Texas Health Sciences Center and South
Texas Veterans' Health Care System, San Antonio, Texas. (5)Division of Pulmonary 
Sciences and Critical Care Medicine, National Jewish Health, University of
Colorado, Denver, Colorado, USA. (6)AstraZeneca R&D, Gothenburg, Sweden.
(7)Department of Pulmonary Medicine and Tuberculosis, GRIAC Research Institute,
University Medical Center Groningen, University of Groningen, Groningen, the
Netherlands.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Large clinical trials have confirmed the long-term
efficacy of inhaled corticosteroid/long-acting β2-agonist combinations in
patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). It was hypothesized
that significant treatment effects would already be present within 3 months after
the initiation of treatment across a range of clinical outcomes, irrespective of 
COPD severity.
METHODS: Post hoc analysis of 3-month post-randomization outcomes, including
exacerbation rates, dropouts, symptoms, reliever use, and lung function, from
three studies with similar inclusion criteria of moderate-to-very-severe COPD.
Patients (n=1,571) were treated with budesonide/formoterol (B/F) 320/9 μg or
placebo, twice daily; in one study, tiotropium 18 μg once daily was also given.
RESULTS: Over the first 3 months of treatment, fewer patients randomized to B/F
experienced exacerbations versus the placebo group (111 and 196 patients with ≥1 
exacerbation, respectively). This was true in each COPD severity group. Compared 
with placebo, B/F treatment led to significantly lower 3-month exacerbation rates
in the moderate and severe COPD severity groups (46% and 57% reduction,
respectively), with a nonsignificant reduction (29%) in very severe COPD. Fewer
dropouts occurred among patients treated with B/F versus placebo, this effect
being greater with increasing COPD severity. B/F was associated with improved
forced expiratory volume in 1 s, morning peak expiratory flow rate, total
reliever use, and total symptom score versus placebo.
CONCLUSION: Treatment with B/F decreased exacerbations in patients with
moderate-to-very-severe COPD within 3 months of commencing treatment. This effect
was paralleled by improved lung function, less reliever medication use, and fewer
symptoms, irrespective of disease severity.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S114209 
PMCID: PMC5182036
PMID: 28031707  [PubMed - in process]


9. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2016 Dec 20. doi: 10.1165/rcmb.2016-0191OC. [Epub
ahead of print]

Roflumilast N-oxide in Combination with Formoterol Enhances the Anti-inflammatory
Effect of Dexamethasone in ASM Cells.

Patel BS(1), Rahman MM(2), Baehring G(3), Xenaki D(4), Tang FS(5), Oliver
BG(6,)(7,)(8), Ammit AJ(6,)(9).

Author information: 
(1)University of Sydney, Faculty of Pharmacy, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia 
; bpat5142@uni.sydney.edu.au. (2)University of Sydney, Faculty of Pharmacy,
Sydney, New South Wales, Australia ; mrah7373@uni.sydney.edu.au. (3)University of
Sydney, Woolcock Emphysema Centre, Woolcock Institute of Medical Research,
Sydney, New South Wales, Australia ; g.baehring@gmail.com. (4)University of
Sydney, Respiratory Cellular and Molecular Biology, Sydney, New South Wales,
Australia ; dia.xenaki@sydney.edu.au. (5)University of Sydney, Woolcock Emphysema
Centre, Woolcock Institute of Medical Research, Sydney, New South Wales,
Australia ; francesca.tang@sydney.edu.au. (6)University of Sydney, Woolcock
Emphysema Centre, Woolcock Institute of Medical Research, Sydney, New South
Wales, Australia. (7)University of Sydney, Respiratory Cellular and Molecular
Biology, Woolcock Institute of Medical Research, Sydney, New South Wales,
Australia. (8)University of Technology Sydney, 1994, Centre for Health
Technologies and Molecular Biosciences, School of Life Sciences, Faculty of
Science, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia ; brian.oliver@uts.edu.au.
(9)University of Technology Sydney, 1994, School of Life Sciences, Faculty of
Science, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia ; Alaina.Ammit@uts.edu.au.

Roflumilast is an orally active phosphodiesterase 4 (PDE4) inhibitor approved for
use in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Roflumilast N-oxide (RNO) is the
active metabolite of roflumilast and has demonstrated anti-inflammatory impact in
vivo and in vitro. To date, the effect of RNO on the synthetic function of airway
smooth muscle (ASM) cells is unknown. We address this herein and investigate the 
effect of RNO on β2-adrenoceptor-mediated, cAMP-dependent responses in ASM cells 
in vitro, and whether RNO enhances steroid-induced repression of inflammation.
RNO (0.001-1000 nM) alone had no effect on AMP production from ASM cells, and
significant potentiation of the long-acting β2-agonist formoterol-induced cAMP
could only be achieved at the highest concentration of RNO tested (1000 nM). At
this concentration, RNO exerted a small, but not significantly different,
potentiation of formoterol-induced expression of anti-inflammatory
mitogen-activated protein kinase phosphatase 1 (MKP-1). Consequently, tumor
necrosis factor (TNF)-induced IL-8 secretion was unaffected by RNO in combination
with formoterol. However, as there was the potential for PDE4 inhibitors and
LABAs to interact with corticosteroids to achieve superior anti-inflammatory
efficacy, we examined whether RNO, alone or in combination with formoterol,
enhanced the anti-inflammatory effect of dexamethasone by measuring the impact on
IL-8 secretion. While RNO alone did not significantly enhance cytokine repression
achieved with steroids; RNO in combination with formoterol significantly enhanced
the anti-inflammatory effect of dexamethasone in ASM cells. This was linked to
increased MKP-1 expression in ASM cells, suggesting a molecular mechanism
responsible for augmented anti-inflammatory actions of combination therapeutic
approaches that include RNO.

DOI: 10.1165/rcmb.2016-0191OC 
PMID: 27997807  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


10. Adv Ther. 2016 Dec 15. doi: 10.1007/s12325-016-0459-6. [Epub ahead of print]

Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease Individualized Therapy: Tailored Approach
to Symptom Management.

Singh D(1), Miravitlles M(2), Vogelmeier C(3).

Author information: 
(1)University of Manchester, Manchester, UK. dsingh@meu.org.uk. (2)Pneumology
Department, Hospital Universitari Vall d'Hebron, CIBER de Enfermedades
Respiratorias (CIBERES), Barcelona, Spain. (3)Department of Medicine, Pulmonary
and Critical Care Medicine, Member of the German Center for Lung Research (DZL), 
University Medical Center Giessen and Marburg, Philipps-University Marburg,
Marburg, Germany.

Erratum in
    Adv Ther. 2017 Jan 31;:.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is associated with high morbidity
and mortality. COPD is typified by persistent, progressive airflow limitation and
a range of respiratory and systemic symptoms such as breathlessness, coughing,
wheezing, depression, anxiety, general fatigue, and sleeping difficulties.
Despite receiving treatment for COPD, many patients suffer from regular symptoms 
that affect their daily lives and lead to increased morbidity. These symptoms
vary in severity, frequency, and type, and can occur at any time throughout the
24-h day, with over half of patients with COPD experiencing symptoms in the
morning, during the day, and at nighttime. Despite the prevalence of symptoms,
patient and physician perception of the impact of COPD symptoms on patients'
lives is not always in concordance. Dual bronchodilator therapy with a
long-acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA) and long-acting beta agonist (LABA) has 
the potential to treat the symptoms of COPD in addition to improving lung
function. This review therefore examines the burden of symptoms experienced
throughout the day by patients with COPD and the evidence for combined LAMA/LABA 
treatment in terms of symptom management. As patients with COPD experience
varying symptoms throughout the course of their disease, the role of tailoring
treatment to the individual needs of the patient is also examined. We conclude
that the symptoms of COPD are troublesome, variable, can occur during all parts
of the 24-h day, and have a substantial impact on patients' health status and
quality of life. In order to provide effective, patient-orientated care, patients
with COPD should be evaluated on the basis of lung function, the frequency of
symptoms, and patient-perceived impact of symptoms on their lives. Therapy should
be chosen carefully based on individualized assessment, ensuring personalization 
to the individual needs of the patient.

DOI: 10.1007/s12325-016-0459-6 
PMID: 27981495  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


11. Aclidinium Bromide / Formoterol -- Benefit Assessment According to §35a Social
Code Book V [Internet].

Institute for Quality and Efficiency in Health Care.
Cologne, Germany: Institute for Quality and Efficiency in Health Care (IQWiG);
2015 Apr. Extract of Dossier Assessment No. A15-06.
IQWiG Dossier Assessment Extracts.

The aim of the present report is to assess the added benefit of aclidinium
bromide / formoterol (hereinafter referred to as “aclidinium / formoterol”) as a 
maintenance bronchodilator treatment for relief of symptoms in adult patients
with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) in comparison with the
appropriate comparator therapy (ACT). From the Federal Joint Committee (G-BA)’s
specification of the ACT, the following 2 research questions result for the
benefit assessment (Table 2). From the options named by the G-BA, the company
chose formoterol for research question 1, and formoterol and additional inhaled
corticosteroids (ICS) for research question 2 as ACT. The assessment was
conducted with the ACTs chosen by the company for the populations described in
Table 2. The assessment was conducted based on patient-relevant outcomes and on
the data provided by the company in the dossier. Randomized controlled trials
(RCTs) with a minimum duration of 24 weeks were used for the derivation of the
added benefit.

PMID: 27905788  [PubMed]


12. Indacaterol / Glycopyrronium -- Benefit Assessment According to §35a Social Code 
Book V [Internet].

Institute for Quality and Efficiency in Health Care.
Cologne, Germany: Institute for Quality and Efficiency in Health Care (IQWiG);
2014 Feb. Extract of Dossier Assessment No. A13-40.
IQWiG Dossier Assessment Extracts.

The aim of this report is to assess the added benefit of indacaterol /
glycopyrronium in comparison with the appropriate comparator therapy (ACT) in
adult patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) for maintenance 
bronchodilator treatment to relieve symptoms. The Federal Joint Committee (G-BA) 
specified the following ACT:The treatment of stable COPD of the severity stages
“moderate” (stage II), “severe” (stage III) and “very severe” (stage IV) was
conducted according to the recommendations of the most recently effective version
of the German National Care Guideline COPD 4. Long-acting beta-2 agonists
(formoterol, salmeterol) and / or tiotropium are recommended for long-term drug
treatment from stage II. In COPD stage III/IV with more than 2 exacerbations per 
year, inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) should be used in addition. The company
followed the specification of the G-BA and, from the options mentioned, chose
formoterol in combination with tiotropium as the ACT. However, it did not
consider the conditions for ICS use named above in the study inclusion. Deviating
from this, the criteria for ICS treatment specified by the G-BA were used in the 
present benefit assessment. The assessment for patients with COPD stages II to IV
was conducted based on patient-relevant outcomes. Only direct comparative
randomized controlled trials (RCTs) with a minimum duration of 6 months were
included in the assessment.

PMID: 27905766  [PubMed]


13. Aclidinium Bromide -- Benefit Assessment According to §35a Social Code Book V
[Internet].

Institute for Quality and Efficiency in Health Care.
Cologne, Germany: Institute for Quality and Efficiency in Health Care (IQWiG);
2012 Dec. Extract of Dossier Assessment No. A12-13.
IQWiG Dossier Assessment Extracts.

The aim of this report is to assess the added benefit of aclidinium bromide
(hereinafter abbreviated to “aclidinium”) according to the approval status for
the following therapeutic indication: maintenance bronchodilator treatment to
relieve symptoms in adult patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD). The Federal Joint Committe (G-BA) specified the following appropriate
comparator therapy (ACT): The graded scheme of the current German National Care
Guideline COPD is to be taken into account:From Stage II, long-acting beta-2
sympathomimetics (formoterol, salmeterol) and/or long-acting anticholinergics
(tiotropium bromide), From Stage III / IV with more than 2 exacerbations per
year, inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) should be used in addition. From the
above-named drugs, the company chose tiotropium bromide (hereinafter abbreviated 
to “tiotropium”) as ACT and specified that account would be taken of the
aforementioned graded scheme insofar as tiotropium plus ICS was the ACT for
patients with Stage III or IV COPD with more than 2 exacerbations per year. The
company’s approach with regard to the choice of ACT is appropriate. Accordingly, 
the dossier does not contain a comparison of aclidinium with long-acting beta-2
sympathomimetics. Only studies with a minimum duration of 6 months were
considered in this benefit assessment, because only such studies are capable of
contributing reliable knowledge about the benefit or added benefit of aclidinium 
in the approved maintenance therapy. This deviates from the company’s approach,
which also included studies of shorter duration. The benefit assessment was
undertaken with respect to patient-relevant outcomes.

PMID: 27905744  [PubMed]


14. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2016 Nov 8;11:2775-2783. eCollection 2016.

The association between inhaled corticosteroid and pneumonia in COPD patients:
the improvement of patients' life quality with COPD in Taiwan (IMPACT) study.

Wang CY(1), Lai CC(2), Yang WC(3), Lin CC(1), Chen L(3), Wang HC(4), Yu CJ(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine; Medical Research Center, Cardinal Tien
Hospital, Fu Jen Catholic University College of Medicine, New Taipei City.
(2)Department of Intensive Care Medicine, Chi Mei Medical Center, Liouying.
(3)Institute of Population Health Sciences, National Health Research Institutes, 
Zhunan. (4)Department of Internal Medicine, National Taiwan University Hospital
and National Taiwan University, College of Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan.

To investigate the association between inhaled corticosteroid (ICS) exposure
patterns and the risk of pneumonia in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD) patients, we performed a nested case-control study. Between 1998 and 2010,
51,739 patients, including 19,838 cases of pneumonia, were matched to 74,849
control subjects selected from a cohort of COPD patients using ICSs via risk-set 
sampling of the database constructed by the National Health Research Institutes
of Taiwan. After adjusting for covariates, the current use of ICSs was associated
with a 25% increase in the risk of pneumonia (odds ratio [OR] =1.25, 95%
confidence interval [CI] =1.20-1.30), and there was an increase in the OR with
increase in the average daily dosage. Additionally, users of
fluticasone/salmeterol, fluticasone, and either fluticasone/salmeterol or
fluticasone were more likely to be at a higher risk of pneumonia (OR =1.35, 95%
CI =1.28-1.41; OR =1.22, 95% CI =1.10-1.35; and OR =1.33, 95% CI =1.27-1.39,
respectively). In contrast, there were no statistically significant associations 
between the risk of pneumonia and the use of budesonide/formoterol, budesonide,
or either budesonide/formoterol or budesonide. In conclusion, ICSs are
significantly associated with an increased risk of pneumonia in COPD patients.
The effect is prominent for fluticasone-containing ICSs but not for
budesonide-containing ICSs.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S116750 
PMID: 27877031  [PubMed - in process]


15. Clinicoecon Outcomes Res. 2016 Nov 7;8:667-674. eCollection 2016.

UK-specific cost-effectiveness of tiotropium + olodaterol fixed-dose combination 
versus other LAMA + LABA combinations in patients with COPD.

Tebboth A(1), Ternouth A(1), Gonzalez-Rojas N(2).

Author information: 
(1)Boehringer Ingelheim Ltd., Bracknell, UK. (2)Boehringer Ingelheim GmBH,
Ingelheim, Germany.

OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study is to assess the cost-effectiveness of other
long-acting muscarinic antagonist + long-acting β2 agonist combinations in
comparison with Spiolto(®) Respimat(®) (tiotropium + olodaterol fixed-dose
combination [FDC]) for maintenance treatment to relieve symptoms in adult
patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
METHODS: A previously published individual-level Markov model was adapted for the
perspective of the UK health care system, in line with recommendations from the
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Individuals progressed through
the model based on their forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1) value at
baseline and the post-improvement FEV1 value. Changes in FEV1 were taken from a
mixed treatment comparison. Costs were obtained from a published cost-utility
analysis of tiotropium in the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
in the UK. Uncertainty was assessed by deterministic and probabilistic
sensitivity analysis.
RESULTS: Duaklir(®) Genuair(®) (aclidinium bromide + formoterol fumarate FDC) and
the free-dose combination of tiotropium + salmeterol were dominated by tiotropium
+ olodaterol FDC. The quality-adjusted life years and costs were identical for
Ultibro(®) Breezhaler(®) (indacaterol + glycopyrronium FDC) and Anoro(™)
Ellipta(®) (umeclidinium + vilanterol FDC) compared with tiotropium + olodaterol 
FDC, resulting in identical incremental cost-effectiveness ratios.
CONCLUSION: This analysis shows tiotropium + olodaterol FDC to be a
cost-effective option for the maintenance treatment of adults with chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease in the UK.

DOI: 10.2147/CEOR.S116546 
PMCID: PMC5106216
PMID: 27853383  [PubMed - in process]


16. Respir Med. 2016 Nov;120:54-63. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2016.09.015. Epub 2016 Sep
22.

Incidence of oral thrush in patients with COPD prescribed inhaled
corticosteroids: Effect of drug, dose, and device.

Dekhuijzen PN(1), Batsiou M(2), Bjermer L(3), Bosnic-Anticevich S(4), Chrystyn
H(5), Papi A(6), Rodríguez-Roisin R(7), Fletcher M(8), Wood L(9), Cifra A(2),
Soriano JB(10), Price DB(11).

Author information: 
(1)Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands. (2)Cambridge
Research Support Ltd, Cambridge, UK; Observational and Pragmatic Research
Institute Pte Ltd, Singapore. (3)Lung Medicine and Allergology, Department of
Clinical Sciences, Lund University, Lund, Sweden. (4)Woolcock Institute of
Medical Research, University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia. (5)Observational and
Pragmatic Research Institute Pte Ltd, Singapore; Faculty of Health and Human
Sciences, Plymouth University, Plymouth, UK. (6)Respiratory Diseases Unit,
Department of Medical Sciences, University of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy.
(7)Universitat de Barcelona, Hospital Clínic-IDIBAPS, Barcelona, Spain.
(8)Education for Health, Warwick, UK. (9)Observational and Pragmatic Research
Institute Pte Ltd, Singapore. (10)Instituto de Investigación Hospital
Universitario de la Princesa (IISP), Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Madrid,
Spain. (11)Observational and Pragmatic Research Institute Pte Ltd, Singapore;
Academic Primary Care, Division of Applied Health Sciences, University of
Aberdeen, Aberdeen, UK. Electronic address: dprice@opri.sg.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Little information is available on real-life occurrence of
oral thrush in COPD patients treated with ICS. We investigated oral thrush
incidence in COPD patients prescribed FDC ICS/LABA therapies and assessed whether
it is modulated by the ICS type, dose, and delivery device.
METHODS: We conducted a historical, observational, matched cohort study (one
baseline year before and one outcome year after initiation of therapy) using data
from the UK Optimum Patient Care Research Database. We assessed oral thrush
incidence in patients initiating long-acting bronchodilators or FDC ICS/LABA
therapy. We then compared different combination therapies (budesonide/formoterol 
fumarate dihydrate [BUD/FOR] and fluticasone propionate/salmeterol xinafoate
[FP/SAL]) and devices (DPI and pMDI).
RESULTS: Patients prescribed FDC ICS/LABA had significantly greater odds of
experiencing oral thrush than those prescribed long-acting bronchodilators alone 
(adjusted OR 2.18 [95% CI 1.84-2.59]). Significantly fewer patients prescribed
BUD/FOR DPI developed oral thrush compared with FP/SAL DPI (OR 0.77 [0.63-0.94]) 
when allowing for differences in prescribed doses between the drugs. A
significantly smaller proportion of patients developed oral thrush in the FP/SAL 
pMDI arm than in the FP/SAL DPI arm (OR 0.67 [0.55-0.82]). Additionally, in the
FP/SAL cohort (both DPI and pMDI), increased risk of oral thrush was
significantly associated with high ICS daily dose (OR 1.97 [1.22-3.17] vs low
daily dose).
CONCLUSIONS: ICS use increases oral thrush incidence in COPD and this effect is
dose-dependent for FP/SAL therapies. Of the therapies assessed, FP/SAL pMDI and
BUD/FOR DPI may be more protective against oral thrush.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2016.09.015 
PMID: 27817816  [PubMed - in process]


17. Drug Discov Today. 2016 Nov;21(11):1820-1827. doi: 10.1016/j.drudis.2016.07.009. 
Epub 2016 Jul 21.

Triple inhaled therapy for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Montuschi P(1), Malerba M(2), Macis G(3), Mores N(4), Santini G(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Faculty of Medicine, University Hospital Agostino 
Gemelli, Catholic University of the Sacred Heart, Rome, Italy. Electronic
address: pmontuschi@rm.unicatt.it. (2)Department of Internal Medicine, University
of Brescia, Brescia, Italy. (3)Department of Radiological Sciences, Faculty of
Medicine, University Hospital Agostino Gemelli, Catholic University of the Sacred
Heart, Rome, Italy. (4)Department of Pharmacology, Faculty of Medicine,
University Hospital Agostino Gemelli, Catholic University of the Sacred Heart,
Rome, Italy.

Combining individual drugs in a single inhaler is the most convenient way to
deliver triple therapy. A long-acting muscarinic receptor antagonist (LAMA) added
to an inhaled corticosteroid (ICS)/long-acting β2-adrenoceptor agonist (LABA)
fixed-dose combination (FDC) can improve efficacy of pharmacological treatment of
patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). New inhaled
ICS/LABA/LAMA FDCs, including fluticasone furoate/vilanterol/umeclidinium,
budesonide/formoterol/glycopyrronium and beclometasone/formoterol/glycopyrronium,
are in Phase III of clinical development for COPD. Triple inhaled therapy might
be particularly useful in patients with severe to very severe COPD, above all in 
those with peripheral blood or sputum eosinophilia, asthma-COPD overlap syndrome 
(ACOS) or frequent exacerbators. Future prospective studies should assess
efficacy and safety of triple ICS/LABA/LAMA therapy in selected COPD phenotypes.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.drudis.2016.07.009 
PMID: 27452453  [PubMed - in process]


18. J Aerosol Med Pulm Drug Deliv. 2017 Feb;30(1):71-79. doi: 10.1089/jamp.2015.1284.
Epub 2016 Sep 16.

Variability in Delivered Dose from Pressurized Metered-Dose Inhaler Formulations 
Due to a Delay Between Shake and Fire.

Hatley RH(1), Parker J(1), Pritchard JN(1), von Hollen D(2).

Author information: 
(1)1 Philips Respironics Respiratory Drug Delivery (UK) Ltd, a business of
Philips Electronics UK Limited, Chichester, United Kingdom . (2)2 Respironics,
Inc., A Philips Healthcare Company , Murrysville, Pennsylvania.

BACKGROUND: Pressurized metered-dose inhalers (pMDIs) should be shaken before use
to prevent creaming or sedimentation of the drugs in solution; however, data
published on this topic are limited, and it is rarely specified how soon after
shaking the device should be actuated. Delays between shaking and firing the pMDI
have previously been shown to cause significant inhomogeneity in delivered dose. 
We studied the effect of various shake-fire delays on the drug delivered from
five commercially available pMDIs commonly prescribed for asthma and chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease to assess the potential variability in delivered
dose.
METHODS: The pMDI formulations tested were the Flovent HFA, Ventolin Evohaler,
Airomir Inhaler, and Symbicort (suspension pMDIs), and the QVAR 100 Inhaler
(solution pMDI). Each pMDI was shaken for 5 seconds before attachment to a dosage
unit sampling apparatus collection tube and filter, and it was actuated once with
shake-fire delays of 0, 5, 10, 20, 30, 40, 50, and 60 seconds. Analysis of the
eluates from the collection tubes and filters was performed by using
high-performance liquid chromatography. Three of each pMDI were tested twice with
each time delay.
RESULTS: All of the suspension pMDIs produced variable amounts of drug over the
shake-fire delays tested. A comparison of the delivered doses after the 0- and
60-second delays showed that the drug delivered increased for the Flovent HFA
(320%), Ventolin Evohaler (346%), and Airomir Inhaler (230%) pMDIs; decreased for
the Symbicort budesonide (75%) and formoterol fumarate (76%) pMDI; and remained
consistent for the QVAR 100 Inhaler pMDI.
CONCLUSIONS: The amount of drug delivered can vary widely over different
shake-fire delays with suspension pMDIs. Therefore, guidance should be given to
users/caregivers on the timing of firing after shaking their device, particularly
with pediatrics, who may take time to become receptive to accepting their
medication after pMDI shaking and before dose administration.

DOI: 10.1089/jamp.2015.1284 
PMID: 27635793  [PubMed - in process]


19. P T. 2016 Sep;41(9):554-61.

Pharmaceutical Approval Update.

Choy M.

Cabozantinib (Cabometyx) for advanced renal cell carcinoma;
glycopyrrolate/formoterol fumarate (Bevespi Aerosphere) for chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease; and ephedrine sulfate (Akovaz) for hypotension during
anesthesia.


PMCID: PMC5010263
PMID: 27630521  [PubMed]


20. Respirology. 2017 Feb;22(2):322-328. doi: 10.1111/resp.12902. Epub 2016 Sep 13.

Can computed tomography and carbon monoxide transfer coefficient diagnose an
asthma-like phenotype in COPD?

Al-Kassimi FA(1), Alhamad EH(1), Al-Hajjaj MS(1), Raddaoui E(2,)(3), Alzeer
AH(4), Alboukai AA(5), Somily AM(3), Cal JG(1), Ibrahim AF(1), Shaik SA(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(2)Department of Pathology, Alfaisal University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(3)Department of Pathology, King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(4)Critical Care Department, King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(5)Department of Radiology, King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(6)Department of Family and Community Medicine, King Saud University, Riyadh,
Saudi Arabia.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Post-mortem and computed tomography (CT) studies
indicated that emphysema is a feature of COPD even in the 'blue bloater/chronic
bronchitis' type. We aim to test the hypothesis that the non-emphysematous
patients are distinct from the main body of COPD and are more akin to asthmatic
patients.
METHODS: We studied 54 patients with COPD. Emphysema was measured by Goddard's
visual scoring of CT scan and the carbon monoxide transfer coefficient (KCO).
Bronchial biopsy was offered for thickness of basement membrane (BM) (≥7 µm) as a
marker of remodelling in irreversible asthma. Spirometry was repeated after
therapy with Budesonide/Formoterol for 1 year.
RESULTS: The non-emphysematous phenotype were 24 of 54 patients (44%) by CT scan 
and 23 of 54 patients (43%) by KCO, showing agreement in 53 out of 54 patients.
The non-emphysematous patients were younger, had higher forced expiratory volume 
in 1 s (FEV1 ) (median 61% vs 49.7%), greater prevalence of hypertrophy of nasal 
turbinates and higher serum IgE. The emphysematous phenotype had lower BMI and
greater dyspnoea score. The BM was thickened in 11 of 14 and 0 of 10 patients in 
the non-emphysematous and emphysematous groups, respectively. Three patients
without emphysema and a normal BM normalized their FEV1 upon receiving inhaled
corticosteroid (ICS)/long-acting β2 agonist (LABA). All the non-emphysematous
improved their FEV1 after ICS/LABA (median = 215 mL). The median decline in the
emphysematous was -65 mL.
CONCLUSION: The non-emphysematous phenotype of COPD displays important features
of asthma: clinical picture, histology and response to ICS. CT and KCO can
predict spirometric response to ICS/LABA.

© 2016 Asian Pacific Society of Respirology.

DOI: 10.1111/resp.12902 
PMID: 27623733  [PubMed - in process]


21. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2016 Aug 29;11:2041-53. doi:
10.2147/COPD.S114566. eCollection 2016.

The efficacy of aclidinium/formoterol on lung function and symptoms in patients
with COPD categorized by symptom status: a pooled analysis.

Miravitlles M(1), Chapman KR(2), Chuecos F(3), Ribera A(4), Gil EG(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pneumology, Vall d'Hebron University Hospital, CIBER de
Enfermedades Respiratorias (CIBERES), Barcelona, Spain. (2)Asthma & Airway
Centre, University Health Network, Toronto Western Hospital and University of
Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada. (3)Global Medicines Development, AstraZeneca PLC,
Barcelona, Spain. (4)Global Medical Affairs, AstraZeneca PLC, Barcelona, Spain.

BACKGROUND: Patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) experience
respiratory symptoms, which impair quality of life. This pooled analysis of two
Phase III studies assessed the impact of aclidinium/formoterol on patients with
COPD categorized by symptom status.
METHODS: Data were pooled from two 24-week, randomized, placebo-controlled
studies of twice-daily aclidinium/formoterol 400/12 µg in moderate-to-severe COPD
(ACLIFORM [NCT01462942] and AUGMENT [NCT01437397]). These post hoc analyses
evaluated the efficacy of aclidinium/formoterol versus placebo or monotherapies
in patients defined as less/more symptomatic by a) Evaluating Respiratory
Symptoms (E-RS™) score ≥10/<10 and b) Baseline Dyspnea Index score <7/≥7.
Endpoints included trough and 1-hour morning postdose forced expiratory volume in
1 second (FEV1), Transition Dyspnea Index, E-RS total score, early-morning and
nighttime symptom severity, early-morning limitation of activities, and
exacerbation rate.
RESULTS: Data for 3,394 patients were analyzed (mean age: 63.5 years; 60.5%
male). In both definitions of less and more symptomatic patients,
aclidinium/formoterol improved 1-hour morning postdose FEV1 from baseline at week
24 versus placebo (P<0.001) and both monotherapies (P<0.05).
Aclidinium/formoterol improved trough FEV1 from baseline in both groups versus
placebo (P<0.05) and formoterol (P<0.05); improvements were greater in more
symptomatic patients. Improvements versus aclidinium were also observed in more
symptomatic patients (P<0.05). Aclidinium/formoterol improved dyspnea,
early-morning symptom severity, and limitation of activities versus placebo in
both less and more symptomatic patients (P<0.001). In more symptomatic patients, 
aclidinium/formoterol also improved E-RS total score and severity of nighttime
symptoms from baseline versus placebo and one or both monotherapies (P<0.05). The
rate of moderate/severe exacerbations was reduced with aclidinium/formoterol
versus placebo in more symptomatic patients.
CONCLUSION: Aclidinium/formoterol 400/12 µg provided consistent improvements in
bronchodilation and symptoms versus monotherapies and reduced exacerbations
versus placebo in more symptomatic patients with moderate-to-severe COPD,
regardless of the definition used. Furthermore, patients with a low symptom
burden achieved benefits with aclidinium/formoterol versus monotherapies in
postdose FEV1, dyspnea, and early-morning symptoms.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S114566 
PMCID: PMC5012634
PMID: 27621610  [PubMed - in process]


22. Lancet. 2016 Sep 3;388(10048):963-73. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(16)31354-X. Epub
2016 Sep 1.

Single inhaler triple therapy versus inhaled corticosteroid plus long-acting
β2-agonist therapy for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (TRILOGY): a
double-blind, parallel group, randomised controlled trial.

Singh D(1), Papi A(2), Corradi M(3), Pavlišová I(4), Montagna I(5), Francisco
C(6), Cohuet G(6), Vezzoli S(5), Scuri M(5), Vestbo J(7).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Respiratory Medicine and Allergy, University of Manchester,
Manchester, UK. Electronic address: dsingh@meu.org.uk. (2)Research Centre on
Asthma and COPD, University of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy. (3)Department of Clinical
and Experimental Medicine, University of Parma, Italy. (4)Odborny Plicni Lekar,
Poliklinika Moravsky Krumlov, Moravsky Krumlov, Czech Republic. (5)Global
Clinical Development, Chiesi Farmaceutici SpA, Parma, Italy. (6)Global Clinical
Development, Chiesi SAS, Courbevoie, France. (7)Centre for Respiratory Medicine
and Allergy, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK.

Comment in
    Lancet. 2016 Sep 3;388(10048):937-8.
    Lancet. 2016 Sep 3;388(10048):936.

BACKGROUND: Few data are available for the efficacy of "triple therapy" with two 
long-acting bronchodilators and an inhaled corticosteroid in chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD). We designed this study to assess efficacy of
single-inhaler combination of an extra fine formulation of beclometasone
dipropionate, formoterol fumarate, and glycopyrronium bromide (BDP/FF/GB) in COPD
compared with beclometasone dipropionate and formoterol fumarate (BDP/FF)
treatment.
METHODS: TRILOGY was a randomised, parallel group, double-blind,
active-controlled study done in 159 sites across 14 countries. The sites were a
mixture of primary, secondary, and tertiary care providers, and specialist
investigation units. Eligible patients with COPD had post-bronchodilator forced
expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1) of lower than 50%, one or more moderate-to-severe
COPD exacerbation in the previous 12 months, COPD Assessment Test total score of 
10 or more, and a Baseline Dyspnea Index focal score of 10 or less. Patients who 
met the inclusion and exclusion criteria at screening entered a 2-week open-label
run-in period where they received beclometasone dipropionate (100 μg) and
formoterol fumarate (6 μg) in two actuations twice daily. Patients were then
randomly assigned (1:1) with an interactive response technology system to either 
continue BDP (100 μg) and FF (6 μg) or step-up to BDP (100 μg), FF (6 μg), and GB
(12·5 μg) in two actuations twice daily for 52 weeks via pressurised metered-dose
inhaler. The three co-primary endpoints were pre-dose FEV1, 2-h post-dose FEV1,
and Transition Dyspnea Index (TDI) focal score, all measured at week 26 in the
intention-to-treat population (all patients who were randomly assigned and
received at least one dose of study drug and had at least one post-baseline
efficacy assessment). Safety outcomes were measured in the safety population (all
patients who were randomly assigned and received at least one dose of study
drug). Secondary endpoints included moderate-to-severe COPD exacerbation rate
over 52 weeks. This study is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov number
NCT01917331.
FINDINGS: Between March 21, 2014, and Jan 14, 2016, 1368 patients received either
BDP/FF/GB (n=687) or BDP/FF (n=681). At week 26, BDP/FF/GB improved pre-dose FEV1
by 0·081 L (95% CI 0·052-0·109; p<0·001) and 2-h post-dose FEV1 by 0·117 L
(0·086-0·147; p<0·001) compared with BDP/FF. Mean TDI focal scores at week 26
were 1·71 for BDP/FF/GB and 1·50 for BDP/FF, with a difference of 0·21 (95% CI
-0·08 to 0·51; p=0·160). Adjusted annual moderate-to-severe exacerbation
frequencies were 0·41 for BDP/FF/GB and 0·53 for BDP/FF (rate ratio 0·77 [95% CI 
0·65-0·92]; p=0·005), corresponding to a 23% reduction in exacerbations with
BDP/FF/GB compared with BDP/FF. Adverse events were reported by 368 (54%)
patients with BDP/FF/GB and 379 (56%) with BDP/FF. One serious treatment-related 
adverse event occurred (atrial fibrillation) in a patient in the BDP/FF/GB group.
INTERPRETATION: We provide evidence for the clinical benefits of stepping up
patients with COPD from an inhaled corticosteroid/long-acting β2-agonist
combination treatment to triple therapy using a single inhaler.
FUNDING: Chiesi Farmaceutici SpA.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(16)31354-X 
PMID: 27598678  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Eur J Pharm Sci. 2016 Oct 10;93:371-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ejps.2016.08.036. Epub 2016
Aug 21.

Numerical simulation of emitted particle characteristics and airway deposition
distribution of Symbicort(®) Turbuhaler(®) dry powder fixed combination aerosol
drug.

Farkas Á(1), Jókay Á(2), Balásházy I(2), Füri P(2), Müller V(3), Tomisa G(4),
Horváth A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Energy Research, Hungarian Academy of Sciences, Konkoly-Thege
Miklós út 29-33, 1121 Budapest, Hungary. Electronic address:
farkas.arpad@energia.mta.hu. (2)Centre for Energy Research, Hungarian Academy of 
Sciences, Konkoly-Thege Miklós út 29-33, 1121 Budapest, Hungary. (3)Department of
Pulmonology, Semmelweis University, Diós árok 1/C, 1125 Budapest, Hungary.
(4)Department of Pulmonology, Semmelweis University, Diós árok 1/C, 1125
Budapest, Hungary; Chiesi Hungary Kft., Dunavirág u. 2, 1138 Budapest, Hungary.

One of the most widespread dry powder fixed combinations used in asthma and
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) management is Symbicort(®)
Turbuhaler(®). The aim of this study was to simulate the deposition distribution 
of both components of this drug within the airways based on realistic airflow
measurements. Breathing parameters of 25 healthy adults (11 females and 14 males)
were acquired while inhaling through Turbuhaler(®). Individual specific emitted
doses and particle size distributions of Symbicort(®) Turbuhaler(®) were
determined. A self-developed particle deposition model was adapted and validated 
to simulate the deposition of budesonide (inhaled corticosteroid; ICS) and
formoterol (long acting β2 agonist; LABA) in the upper airways and lungs of the
healthy volunteers. Based on current simulations the emitted doses varied between
50.4% and 92.5% of the metered dose for the ICS, and between 38% and 96.1% in
case of LABA component depending on the individual inhalation flow rate. This
variability induced a notable inter-individual spread of the deposited lung doses
(mean: 33.6%, range: 20.4%-48.8% for budesonide and mean: 29.8%, range:
16.4%-42.9% for formoterol). Significant inter-gender differences were also
observed. Average lung dose of budesonide was 29.2% of the metered dose for
females and 37% for males, while formoterol deposited with 26.4% efficiency for
females and 32.5% for males. Present results also highlighted the importance of
breath-holding after inhalation of the drug. About a half of the total lung
deposition occurred during breath-hold at 9.6s average breath-hold time.
Calculated depositions confirmed appropriate lung deposition of Symbicort(®)
Turbuhaler(®) for both genders, however more effort for optimal inhalation
technique is advised for persons with low vital capacity. This study demonstrated
the possibility of personalized prediction of airway deposition of aerosol drugs 
by numerical simulations. The methodology developed in this study will be
applicable also to other marketed drugs in the future.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejps.2016.08.036 
PMID: 27552906  [PubMed - in process]


24. Expert Rev Respir Med. 2016 Oct;10(10):1045-55. doi:
10.1080/17476348.2016.1227247. Epub 2016 Sep 1.

Formoterol fumarate + glycopyrrolate for the treatment of chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease.

Radovanovic D(1), Mantero M(2), Sferrazza Papa GF(3), Valenti V(4), Aliberti
S(2), Di Marco F(3), Santus P(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Health Sciences Department, Pulmonary Rehabilitation Unit, Fondazione
Salvatore Maugeri, Scientific Institute of Milan-IRCCS , Università degli Studi
di Milano , Milan , Italy. (2)b Department of Pathophysiology and Transplantation
, Università degli Studi di Milano, Cardio-thoracic Unit and Cystic Fibrosis
Adult Center Fondazione IRCCS Cà Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico Milano ,
Milan , Italy. (3)c Health Sciences Department, Respiratory Unit, San Paolo and
Carlo Hospital , Università degli Studi di Milano , Milan , Italy. (4)d San
Donato Milanese , Università degli Studi di Milano , Milan , Italy.

INTRODUCTION: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is characterized by a 
high disability and increasing mortality. Bronchodilators are the cornerstone of 
pharmacological treatment in COPD, while therapeutic optimization with an
improvement in symptoms and compliance represent the actual goals. This has led
to the development of devices that combine different classes of inhalatory drugs.
Recently, a novel combination of the long acting antimuscarinic agent
glycopyrronium bromide and the beta2-agonist formoterol fumarate has been
developed in a metered dose inhaler delivery system.
AREAS COVERED: The present article will discuss the current unmet needs in
pharmacological therapy of COPD, will then briefly cover the pharmacokinetic and 
pharmacodynamic characteristics of the formoterol/glycopyrronium fixed dose
combination and present the novel delivery system based on engineered
microparticles and the co-suspension technology. Finally, efficacy and safety
results of phase I, II and III trials will be reviewed. Expert commentary: The
novel combination therapy of formoterol/glycopyrronium is the first available as 
a metered dose inhaler and proved to have a good efficacy and safety profile
compared to monocomponents and tiotropium. Although still limited, data from
phase III trials provide good evidence to consider it a valid option in the
pharmacological management of patients with COPD.

DOI: 10.1080/17476348.2016.1227247 
PMID: 27552524  [PubMed - in process]


25. Eur Respir J. 2016 Oct;48(4):1030-1039. doi: 10.1183/13993003.00216-2016. Epub
2016 Aug 4.

Efficacy and safety of aclidinium/formoterol versus salmeterol/fluticasone: a
phase 3 COPD study.

Vogelmeier C(1), Paggiaro PL(2), Dorca J(3), Sliwinski P(4), Mallet M(5), Kirsten
AM(6), Beier J(7), Seoane B(8), Segarra RM(8), Leselbaum A(9).

Author information: 
(1)Dept of Medicine, Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, University Medical
Center Giessen and Marburg, Member of the German Center for Lung Research (DZL), 
Philipps-University Marburg, Marburg, Germany
claus.vogelmeier@med.uni-marburg.de. (2)Respiratory Pathophysiology, University
Hospital of Pisa, Pisa, Italy. (3)Hospital Universitari de Bellvitge, University 
of Barcelona, and Institut d'Investigació Biomèdica de Bellvitge (IDIBELL),
Barcelona, Spain. (4)2nd Dept of Respiratory Medicine, Institute of Tuberculosis 
and Lung Diseases, Warsaw, Poland. (5)Moncton Respirology Clinic, Moncton, NB,
Canada. (6)Pulmonary Research Institute at Lung Clinic Grosshansdorf, Airway
Research Center North, Member of the Germany Center for Lung Research (DZL),
Grosshansdorf, Germany. (7)insaf Respiratory Research Institute, Wiesbaden,
Germany. (8)AstraZeneca, Barcelona, Spain. (9)Almirall SA, Barcelona, Spain.

The efficacy and safety of twice-daily aclidinium bromide/formoterol fumarate was
compared with that of salmeterol/fluticasone propionate in patients with stable, 
moderate-to-severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).AFFIRM COPD
(Aclidinium and Formoterol Findings in Respiratory Medicine COPD) was a 24-week, 
double-blind, double-dummy, active-controlled study. Patients were randomised
(1:1) to aclidinium/formoterol 400/12 µg twice-daily via Genuair/Pressair or
salmeterol/fluticasone 50/500 µg twice-daily via Accuhaler. The primary end-point
was peak forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1) at week 24. Other end-points
included Transition Dyspnoea Index (TDI) focal score at week 24, TDI and St
George's Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ) responders, COPD Assessment Test and
SGRQ scores, assessment of COPD symptoms and exacerbations, use of reliever
medication, and device preference. Adverse events were monitored throughout.In
total, 933 patients were eligible (mean age 63.4 years, 65.1% male).
Aclidinium/formoterol was superior to salmeterol/fluticasone in peak FEV1 and
noninferior in TDI. Health status and reduction in exacerbation risk were similar
in both groups. While both treatments were well tolerated, pneumonia occurred
less frequently with aclidinium/formoterol than salmeterol/fluticasone.In stable 
COPD, aclidinium/formoterol significantly improved bronchodilation versus
salmeterol/fluticasone, with equivalent benefits in symptom control and reduction
in exacerbation risk. Both treatments were well tolerated and treatment-related
adverse events were less common with aclidinium/formoterol.

Copyright ©ERS 2016.

DOI: 10.1183/13993003.00216-2016 
PMID: 27492833  [PubMed - in process]


26. Tuberc Respir Dis (Seoul). 2016 Jul;79(3):111-20. doi: 10.4046/trd.2016.79.3.111.
Epub 2016 Jul 1.

Korean Asthma Guideline 2014: Summary of Major Updates to the Korean Asthma
Guideline 2014.

Kim DK(1), Park YB(2), Oh YM(3), Jung KS(4), Yoo JH(5), Yoo KH(6), Kim KH(7);
Steering and Scientific Committee of Asthma Study Group and Guideline Control
Committee in The Korean Academy of Tuberculosis and Respiratory Diseases (KATRD).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, SMG-SNU Boramae Medical Center, Seoul
National University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea. (2)Department of
Pulmonary, Allergy and Critical Care Medicine, Hallym University Kangdong Sacred 
Heart Hospital, Seoul, Korea. (3)Department of Internal Medicine, Asan Medical
Center, University of Ulsan College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea. (4)Division of
Pulmonary, Allergy and Critical Care Medicine, Hallym University Sacred Heart
Hospital, Anyang, Korea. (5)Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine,
Kyung Hee University Hospital at Gangdong, Kyung Hee University School of
Medicine, Seoul, Korea. (6)Department of Internal Medicine, Konkuk University
School of Medicine, Seoul, Korea. (7)Department of Internal Medicine, Uijeongbu
St. Mary's Hospital, College of Medicine, The Catholic University of Korea,
Uijeongbu, Korea.

Asthma is a prevalent and serious health problem in Korea. Recently, the Korean
Asthma Guideline has been updated by The Korean Academy of Tuberculosis and
Respiratory Diseases (KATRD) in an effort to improve the clinical management of
asthma. This guideline focuses on adult patients with asthma and aims to deliver 
up to date scientific evidence and recommendations to general physicians for the 
management of asthma. For this purpose, this guideline was updated following
systematic review and meta-analysis of recent studies and adapting some points of
international guidelines (Global Initiative for Asthma [GINA] report 2014,
National Asthma Education and Prevention Program [NAEPP] 2007, British Thoracic
Society [BTS/SIGN] asthma guideline 2012, and Canadian asthma guideline 2012).
Updated issues include recommendations derived using the population,
intervention, comparison, and outcomes (PICO) model, which produced 20 clinical
questions on the management of asthma. It also covers a new definition of asthma,
the importance of confirming various airflow limitations with spirometry, the
epidemiology and the diagnostic flow of asthma in Korea, the importance and
evidence for inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) and ICS/formoterol as a single
maintenance and acute therapy in the stepwise management of asthma, assessment of
severity of asthma and management of exacerbation, and an action plan to cope
with exacerbation. This guideline includes clinical assessments, and treatment of
asthma-chronic obstructive pulmonary disease overlap syndrome, management of
asthma in specific conditions including severe asthma, elderly asthma, cough
variant asthma, exercise-induced bronchial contraction, etc. The revised Korean
Asthma Guideline is expected to be a useful resource in the management of asthma.

DOI: 10.4046/trd.2016.79.3.111 
PMCID: PMC4943894
PMID: 27433170  [PubMed]


27. BMC Health Serv Res. 2016 Jul 12;16:251. doi: 10.1186/s12913-016-1482-7.

The economic burden of asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and the
impact of poor inhalation technique with commonly prescribed dry powder inhalers 
in three European countries.

Lewis A(1), Torvinen S(2), Dekhuijzen PN(3), Chrystyn H(4), Watson AT(1),
Blackney M(5), Plich A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Covance Market Access, London, UK. (2)Teva Pharmaceuticals Europe B.V,
Haarlem, Netherlands. (3)Department of Pulmonary Diseases, Radboud University
Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands. (4)Talmedica Ltd., Rossendale,
and Faculty of Human and Health Sciences, University of Plymouth, Plymouth,
United Kingdom. (5)Covance Market Access, London, UK.
michael.blackney@covance.com.

BACKGROUND: Asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) are common
chronic inflammatory respiratory diseases, which impose a substantial burden on
healthcare systems and society. Fixed-dose combinations (FDCs) of inhaled
corticosteroids (ICS) and long-acting β2 agonists (LABA), often administered
using dry powder inhalers (DPIs), are frequently prescribed to control persistent
asthma and COPD. Use of DPIs has been associated with poor inhalation technique, 
which can lead to increased healthcare resource use and costs.
METHODS: A model was developed to estimate the healthcare resource use and costs 
associated with asthma and COPD management in people using commonly prescribed
DPIs (budesonide + formoterol Turbuhaler(®) or fluticasone + salmeterol
Accuhaler(®)) over 1 year in Spain, Sweden and the United Kingdom (UK). The model
considered direct costs (inhaler acquisition costs and scheduled and unscheduled 
healthcare costs), indirect costs (productive days lost), and estimated the
contribution of poor inhalation technique to the burden of illness.
RESULTS: The direct cost burden of managing asthma and COPD for people using
budesonide + formoterol Turbuhaler(®) or fluticasone + salmeterol Accuhaler(®) in
2015 was estimated at €813 million, €560 million, and €774 million for Spain,
Sweden and the UK, respectively. Poor inhalation technique comprised 2.2-7.7 % of
direct costs, totalling €105 million across the three countries. When lost
productivity costs were included, total expenditure increased to €1.4 billion,
€1.7 billion and €3.3 billion in Spain, Sweden and the UK, respectively, with
€782 million attributable to poor inhalation technique across the three
countries. Sensitivity analyses showed that the model results were most sensitive
to changes in the proportion of patients prescribed ICS and LABA FDCs, and least 
sensitive to differences in the number of antimicrobials and oral corticosteroids
prescribed.
CONCLUSIONS: The cost of managing asthma and COPD using commonly prescribed DPIs 
is considerable. A substantial, and avoidable, contributor to this burden is poor
inhalation technique. Measures that can improve inhalation technique with current
DPIs, such as easier-to-use inhalers or better patient training, could offer
benefits to patients and healthcare providers through improving disease outcomes 
and lowering costs.

DOI: 10.1186/s12913-016-1482-7 
PMCID: PMC4942909
PMID: 27406133  [PubMed - in process]


28. Clin Respir J. 2016 Jul 12. doi: 10.1111/crj.12526. [Epub ahead of print]

Tiotropium plus formoterol versus tiotropium alone for stable moderate-to-severe 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: A meta-analysis.

Zou Y(1), Xiao J(1), Lu XX(1), Xia ZA(2), Xie B(1), Li J(3), Chen Q(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gerontology and Respiratory Diseases, Xiangya Hospital, Central 
South University, 136 Xiangya Road, Changsha, Hunan, 410008, People's Republic of
China. (2)Institute of Integrated Traditional Chinese and Western Medicine,
Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, Changsha, Hunan, 410008, People's
Republic of China. (3)Thyroid Tumour Internal Medicine Department, Cancer
Hospital affiliated to Xiangya School of Medicine, Central South University,
Changsha, Hunan, 410013, People's Republic of China.

PURPOSE: This meta-analysis was performed to compare the risks and benefits of
combined treatment with tiotropium plus formoterol versus tiotropium alone for
stable moderate-to-severe COPD.
METHODS: A comprehensive search of MEDLINE, EMBASE, CINAHL, and the Cochrane
Library was performed to identify randomized controlled trials (RCTs) that
compared formoterol plus tiotropium to tiotropium alone in COPD patients with a
duration of at least 4 weeks. The cut-off date for the search was July 1, 2015.
The odds ratio (OR) or mean difference (MD) was used to pool the results with 95%
confidence intervals (CI).
RESULTS: Eight randomized controlled trials were eligible for this meta-analysis.
A significant improvement was observed among patients treated with tiotropium
plus formoterol compared with tiotropium alone in the following spirometric
indices: mean change in trough FEV1 (P = .02), trough FVC (P = .007), peak FEV1
(P < .00001), and peak FVC (P < .00001). A similar result was noted for the
transitional dyspnea index (TDI) (MD 1.46; 95% CI 1.07-1.85) and a clinically
significant change in TDI between the tiotropium plus formoterol and tiotropium
alone groups (P < .00001). Moreover, a trend toward fewer adverse events was seen
in the combination treatment group compared with the tiotropium group (OR .88;
95% CI .70-1.11), although this difference was not statistically significant.
CONCLUSIONS: Compared with tiotropium alone, tiotropium in combination with
formoterol improved lung function and the symptoms of dyspnea in stable
moderate-to-severe COPD patients. Moreover, the combined treatment group tended
to have fewer adverse events compared with the tiotropium treatment alone group.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/crj.12526 
PMID: 27402142  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


29. Am J Health Syst Pharm. 2016 Aug 1;73(15):1135-43. doi: 10.2146/ajhp150364. Epub 
2016 Jun 28.

Olodaterol for the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Ramadan WH(1), Kabbara WK(2), Abilmona RM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy Practice, School of Pharmacy, Lebanese American
University, Byblos, Lebanon. wramadan@lau.edu.lb. (2)Department of Pharmacy
Practice, School of Pharmacy, Lebanese American University, Byblos, Lebanon.
(3)Pharmalife Pharmacy, Beirut, Lebanon.

PURPOSE: Published data on the pharmacology, pharmacokinetics, efficacy, and
safety of the once-daily, long-acting β2-agonist (LABA) olodaterol are reviewed.
SUMMARY: Olodaterol (Striverdi Respimat, Boehringer Ingelheim), a LABA with high 
selectivity for β2-adrenergic receptors, is indicated for the treatment of
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD); the recommended dose is 5 μg, to be
delivered once daily via the Respimat inhaler. In 48- and 6-week Phase III
clinical trials of olodaterol evaluating various lung function and symptomatic
outcomes in patients with moderate to very severe COPD, olodaterol use was
associated with significant improvements in spirometry outcomes, such as
postbronchodilator forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV1), as well as
dyspnea severity and quality-of-life measures. Other clinical trials demonstrated
that olodaterol produced beneficial effects on FEV1 measures throughout the
24-hour dosing interval. A meta-analysis of data from 20 published research
reports indicated that olodaterol's efficacy was comparable to that of the
once-daily LABA indacaterol and that the combination of olodaterol and tiotropium
provided improvements in lung function greater than those provided by tiotropium 
alone. Analysis of pooled data from four long-term trials showed that
olodaterol's safety profile was comparable to that of formoterol; the most
frequently reported adverse effects associated with olodaterol use were
bronchitis, nasopharyngitis, and upper respiratory tract infection.
CONCLUSION: Once-daily olodaterol 5 μg is an effective therapy in improving lung 
function and symptomatic outcomes in patients with moderate to very severe COPD
receiving other maintenance therapy, with a satisfactory safety profile.

Copyright © 2016 by the American Society of Health-System Pharmacists, Inc. All
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.2146/ajhp150364 
PMID: 27354040  [PubMed - in process]


30. Pulm Pharmacol Ther. 2016 Aug;39:48-53. doi: 10.1016/j.pupt.2016.06.006. Epub
2016 Jun 22.

Onset of action of budesonide/formoterol Spiromax(®) compared with
budesonide/formoterol Turbuhaler(®) in patients with COPD.

Cazzola M(1), Ora J(2), Di Paolo A(2), Puxeddu E(2), Calzetta L(2), Rogliani
P(2).

Author information: 
(1)University of Rome Tor Vergata, Department of Systems Medicine, Chair of
Respiratory Medicine, Rome, Italy. Electronic address: mario.cazzola@uniroma2.it.
(2)University of Rome Tor Vergata, Department of Systems Medicine, Chair of
Respiratory Medicine, Rome, Italy.

Budesonide/formoterol (BF) is available in two delivery systems, the dry powder
inhaler (DPI) Turbuhaler and a pressurized metered dose inhaler (pMDI) for use in
patients with asthma or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Spiromax
DPI was recently developed as an alternative to Turbuhaler DPI. In the present
study, we examined whether there is a difference in the onset of
bronchodilatation between BF 320/9 μg delivered by Spiromax and BF 320/9 μg
delivered by Turbuhaler in 16 outpatients with stable moderate-to-severe COPD.
Our results confirm the rapid onset of action of formoterol when combined with
budesonide in patients with COPD and indicate that the onset of bronchodilation
induced by BF Spiromax is faster than that elicited by BF Turbuhaler.
Furthermore, they show that BF fixed-dose combination does not induce a decrease 
in SpO2 or an increase in heart rate in patients with COPD, irrespective of the
DPI used to deliver this combination. Given the evidence that both inhalers have 
an equal safety profile, BF Spiromax offers to prescribers and COPD patients an
effective alternative to BF Turbuhaler depending also on their preference,
availability and cost.

Copyright © 2016. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pupt.2016.06.006 
PMID: 27344046  [PubMed - in process]


31. NPJ Prim Care Respir Med. 2016 Jun 16;26:16030. doi: 10.1038/npjpcrm.2016.30.

Extrafine beclometasone diproprionate/formoterol fumarate: a review of its
effects in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Singh D(1), Corradi M(2), Spinola M(3), Petruzzelli S(3), Papi A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Medicines Evaluation Unit, Centre for Respiratory Medicine and Allergy, The
University of Manchester and University Hospital of South Manchester NHS
Foundation Trust, Manchester, UK. (2)Department of Clinical and Experimental
Medicine, University of Parma, Parma, Italy. (3)Chiesi Farmaceutici, Parma,
Italy. (4)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of
Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy.

A fixed-dose inhaled corticosteroid/long-acting β2-agonist (ICS/LABA) combination
of extrafine beclometasone dipropionate and formoterol fumarate (BDP/FF) has been
recently approved for use in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Small 
airway inflammation and remodelling are cardinal features of COPD; therefore, the
ability of this extrafine formulation to reach the small, as well as the large,
airways is likely to be therapeutically important by enabling treatment of
inflammatory processes in the whole bronchial tree. The clinical development of
extrafine BDP/FF has demonstrated significant benefits over extrafine FF in terms
of lung function improvement and reduction of the exacerbation rate, thus
supporting the beneficial effect of an ICS combined to a LABA in COPD patients.
Head-to-head comparison studies versus other ICS/LABA combinations have shown
that the extrafine formulation enables the clinical benefits to be achieved with 
a lower dose of ICS. Extrafine BDP/FF showed lung function and dyspnoea
improvements comparable to other ICS/LABAs, and a significantly faster onset of
action was observed when compared with a salmeterol-containing fixed-dose
combination. This review summarises the clinical evidence supporting the efficacy
of extrafine BDP/FF in COPD and confirming that extrafine BDP/FF achieves the
type of health benefit expected from such a targeted ICS/LABA combination in
COPD.

DOI: 10.1038/npjpcrm.2016.30 
PMCID: PMC4910970
PMID: 27309985  [PubMed - in process]


32. Respir Med. 2016 Jul;116:41-8. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2016.05.007. Epub 2016 May 7.

Long-term safety of aclidinium bromide/formoterol fumarate fixed-dose
combination: Results of a randomized 1-year trial in patients with COPD.

Donohue JF(1), Soong W(2), Wu X(3), Shrestha P(4), Lei A(5).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary Medicine, University of North Carolina, 130 Mason Farm
Rd Suite 4124, Chapel Hill NC27599, USA. Electronic address:
james_donohue@med.unc.edu. (2)Clinical Research Center of Alabama, 504 Brookwood 
Boulevard, Suite 250, Birmingham, AL 35209, USA. Electronic address:
WSoong@alabamaallergy.com. (3)Forest Laboratories LLC, a wholly owned subsidiary 
of Allergan plc, Harborside Financial Center, Plaza V, Jersey City, NJ 07311,
USA. Electronic address: Renee.Wu@actavis.com. (4)Forest Laboratories LLC, a
wholly owned subsidiary of Allergan plc, Harborside Financial Center, Plaza V,
Jersey City, NJ 07311, USA. Electronic address: Pomy.Shrestha@actavis.com.
(5)Global Medicines Development, AstraZeneca PLC, Pont Reixat, 5, 08960 Sant Just
Desvern, Barcelona, Spain. Electronic address: alejhandra.lei@astrazeneca.com.

TRIAL DESIGN: This was a one-year, Phase III randomized, double-blind,
parallel-group, active-control study investigating the long-term safety and
tolerability of twice-daily aclidinium 400 μg/formoterol 12 μg versus formoterol 
12 μg.
METHODS: Eligible patients were male or female, current or ex-smokers (history of
≥10 pack-years) aged ≥40 years with a diagnosis of moderate to severe chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD): post-bronchodilator forced expiratory
volume in 1 s (FEV1)/forced vital capacity (FVC) ratio <70%, and
post-bronchodilator FEV1≥30% and <80% predicted. Patients were randomized 2:1 to 
twice-daily aclidinium 400 μg/formoterol 12 μg or formoterol 12 μg, administered 
via a multidose dry powder inhaler (Genuair™/Pressair(®))(1). The objective was
to evaluate the one-year safety of aclidinium 400 μg/formoterol 12 μg versus
formoterol 12 μg.
RESULTS: All 590 patients were included in the safety population; 392 patients
received aclidinium 400 μg/formoterol 12 μg and 198 patients received formoterol 
12 μg. Of these, 581 patients were included in the intent-to-treat (ITT)
population (385 patients received aclidinium 400 μg/formoterol 12 μg; 196
patients received formoterol 12 μg). In the safety population, the percentage of 
patients with ≥1 treatment-emergent adverse event was similar between aclidinium 
400 μg/formoterol 12 μg (71.4%) and formoterol 12 μg (65.7%). Mean baseline
post-bronchodilator FEV1 was 51.3% of predicted (ITT population). Aclidinium
400 μg/formoterol 12 μg significantly improved morning pre-dose (trough) FEV1 and
trough FVC versus formoterol 12 μg at each assessment, with improvements at Week 
1 (least squares mean difference [LSMD]: 87.4 mL and 157.8 mL, respectively)
maintained at study end (LSMD: 81.5 mL and 185.4 mL, respectively).
CONCLUSIONS: Aclidinium 400 μg/formoterol 12 μg was well tolerated, with a safety
profile similar to formoterol 12 μg and consistent with that seen in two Phase
III studies. Additionally, aclidinium 400 μg/formoterol 12 μg improved lung
function versus formoterol 12 μg, with a sustained effect over one year.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2016.05.007 
PMID: 27296819  [PubMed - in process]


33. Eur J Drug Metab Pharmacokinet. 2016 May 21. [Epub ahead of print]

A Two-Period Open-Label, Single-Dose Crossover Study in Healthy Volunteers to
Evaluate the Drug-Drug Interaction Between Cimetidine and Inhaled Extrafine CHF
5993.

Mariotti F(1), Ciurlia G(2), Spaccapelo L(2), Muraro A(2), Acerbi D(2).

Author information: 
(1)Global Clinical Development, Chiesi Farmaceutici SpA, Largo Belloli 11/A,
43122, Parma, Italy. F.Mariotti@chiesi.com. (2)Global Clinical Development,
Chiesi Farmaceutici SpA, Largo Belloli 11/A, 43122, Parma, Italy.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: CHF 5993 is an extrafine 'triple therapy' combination 
of the long-acting muscarinic antagonist glycopyrronium bromide (GB), the
long-acting β2-agonist formoterol fumarate (FF), and the inhaled corticosteroid
beclometasone dipropionate (BDP). It is in development for chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease and asthma delivered via pressurised metered-dose inhaler.
METHODS: This two-period, open-label, crossover study examined the drug-drug
interaction of CHF 5993 and cimetidine. In one period, subjects received
cimetidine 800 mg twice daily for 6 days; on the fourth day they also received
CHF 5993 (BDP/FF/GB 400/24/100 µg). In the other, they received CHF 5993 alone.
Primary objective was to compare the area under the plasma concentration-time
curve from time 0 to last quantifiable concentration (AUC0-t) of GB, with and
without cimetidine. Secondary endpoints included GB AUC0-12h, maximum
concentration (C max), time to C max (t max), elimination half-life (t ½) and
urinary excretion. Pharmacokinetic parameters of BDP,
beclometasone-17-monopropionate (B17MP; active metabolite of BDP) and formoterol 
were also evaluated.
RESULTS: Twenty-six subjects were randomised; 25 completed. Co-administration of 
CHF 5993 and cimetidine resulted in small, statistically significant increases in
GB AUC0-t, AUC0-12h and C max vs CHF 5993 (ratios 1.16, 1.21 and 1.26,
respectively); t ½, t max and urinary excretion were unaffected. There were
small, statistically significant increases in formoterol AUC0-t, AUC0-24h and t ½
following co-administration of cimetidine and CHF 5993; urinary excretion was
unaffected. There were no significant differences for either BDP or B17MP. There 
were few adverse events (AEs), and no serious AEs.
CONCLUSIONS: Overall, this study indicates that there is no clinically relevant
drug-drug interaction between CHF 5993 and cimetidine.

DOI: 10.1007/s13318-016-0345-2 
PMID: 27209586  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


34. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2016 Apr 15;11:785-97. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S54513.
eCollection 2016.

Dual therapy strategies for COPD: the scientific rationale for LAMA + LABA.

Cohen JS(1), Miles MC(2), Donohue JF(3), Ohar JA(2).

Author information: 
(1)United Lung and Sleep Clinic, Saint Paul, MN, USA. (2)Department of Internal
Medicine, Wake Forest School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, NC, USA. (3)University
of North Carolina Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a leading cause of morbidity,
mortality, and health care expenditure worldwide. Relaxation of airway smooth
muscle with inhaled bronchodilators is the cornerstone of treatment for stable
COPD, with inhaled corticosteroids reserved for those with a history of
exacerbations. Tiotropium has occupied center stage in COPD treatment for over 10
years and improves lung function, quality of life, exercise endurance, and
reduces the risk of COPD exacerbation. Long-acting β2-agonists (LABAs) improve
lung function, reduce dynamic hyperinflation, increase exercise tolerance,
health-related quality of life, and reduce acute exacerbation of COPD. The
combination of long-acting muscarinic antagonists (LAMAs) and LABAs is thought to
leverage different pathways to induce bronchodilation using submaximal drug
doses, increasing the benefits and minimizing receptor-specific side effects.
Umeclidinium/vilanterol is the first combination of LAMA/LABA to be approved for 
use in stable COPD in USA and Europe. Additionally, indacaterol/glycopyrronium
and aclidinium/formoterol have been approved in Europe and in numerous locations 
outside USA. Several other agents are in the late stages of development, most of 
which offer once-daily dosing. The benefits of new LAMA/LABA combinations include
improved pulmonary function, dyspnea, and health-related quality of life, and in 
some cases, reduced exacerbations. These evolving treatments will provide new
opportunities and challenges in the management of COPD.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S54513 
PMCID: PMC4841398
PMID: 27143870  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Clin Pharmacol Drug Dev. 2016 Mar;5(2):109-17. doi: 10.1002/cpdd.209. Epub 2015
Aug 24.

Pharmacokinetics of aclidinium bromide/formoterol fumarate fixed-dose combination
compared with individual components: A phase 1, open-label, single-dose study.

Fuhr R(1), Leselbaum A(2), Aubets J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Early Phase Clinical Unit Berlin, PAREXEL International GmbH, Berlin, Germany.
(2)Formerly of Almirall S.A., Barcelona, Spain. (3)R&D Centre, Almirall S.A.,
Barcelona, Spain.

Inhaled, long-acting bronchodilators represent a cornerstone of maintenance
treatment for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Aclidinium
bromide/formoterol fumarate 400/12 μg fixed-dose combination (FDC) has recently
been licensed for use in adults with COPD in the European Union. This phase 1,
randomized, open-label, 3-way, complete crossover, single-dose study assessed the
pharmacokinetics, safety, and tolerability of an FDC, aclidinium bromide 400 μg, 
and formoterol fumarate 12 μg, all administered via Genuair™ to 30 healthy
subjects. The rate and extent of absorption were comparable for
aclidinium/formoterol FDC and individual monotherapies; aclidinium/formoterol FDC
and aclidinium alone: Cmax , 270 and 215 pg/mL, respectively; AUC0-t , 229 and
222 pg · h/mL, respectively; aclidinium/formoterol FDC and formoterol alone: Cmax
, 11 and 9.3 pg/mL, respectively; AUC, 36 and 32.4 pg · h/mL, respectively. There
were no major differences in relative bioavailability between the combination and
monotherapies: the aclidinium Cmax and AUC0-t were 26% and 3% higher,
respectively, with aclidinium/formoterol FDC compared with aclidinium alone, and 
18% and 11% higher, respectively, compared with formoterol alone.
Aclidinium/formoterol FDC was well tolerated; the incidence of adverse events was
low and similar to the monotherapies. Aclidinium/formoterol FDC was not
associated with any major differences in rate and extent of absorption or
relative bioavailability compared with monotherapies.

© 2015, The American College of Clinical Pharmacology.

DOI: 10.1002/cpdd.209 
PMID: 27138024  [PubMed - in process]


36. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2016 Mar 1;11:439-44. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S96070. 
eCollection 2016.

Striving for optimal bronchodilation: focus on olodaterol.

Incorvaia C(1), Montagni M(2), Makri E(1), Riario-Sforza GG(1), Ridolo E(2).

Author information: 
(1)Allergy/Pulmonary Rehabilitation, Istituti Clinici di Perfezionamento
Hospital, Milan, Italy. (2)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine,
University of Parma, Parma, Italy.

β2-agonists were introduced in the 1940s as bronchodilators to be used in
obstructive respiratory diseases. Long-acting β2-agonists have been a mainstay of
bronchodilating treatment for decades. Recently, agents extending their effect to
24 hours and thus allowing the once-daily administration were introduced, defined
as very-long-acting β2-agonists. Olodaterol is a new very-long-acting β2-agonist 
that has been shown, in controlled trials, to improve lung function as well as
clinical outcomes and quality of life. Most of these trials included patients
with moderate, severe, or very severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD). Olodaterol has a rapid onset of action (comparable to formoterol) and
provides bronchodilation over 24 hours. In controlled trials, olodaterol was
shown to be as effective as formoterol twice daily, but significantly superior in
terms of quality of life in patients with COPD. The safety profile of olodaterol 
was very good, with a rate of adverse events, including the cardiac events that
are particularly important for β2-agonists, comparable to placebo. Also, the
efficiency of the Respimat(®) device concurs to the effectiveness of treatment.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S96070 
PMCID: PMC4780202
PMID: 27042036  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. J Manag Care Spec Pharm. 2016 Apr;22(4):316-23. doi: 10.18553/jmcp.2016.22.4.316.

Evaluation of a Therapeutic Interchange from Fluticasone/Salmeterol to
Mometasone/Formoterol in Patients with Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease.

Yip E(1), Karimi S(2), Pien LT(3).

Author information: 
(1)1 Primary Care Clinical Pharmacy Specialist, Kaiser Permanente Mid-Atlantic
States, Upper Marlboro, Maryland. (2)2 Primary Care Clinical Pharmacy Specialist,
Kaiser Permanente Mid-Atlantic States, Manassas, Virginia. (3)3 Primary Care
Clinical Pharmacy Specialist, Kaiser Permanente Mid-Atlantic States, Springfield,
Virginia.

BACKGROUND: Combination treatment with an inhaled corticosteroid and long-acting 
beta2-agonist is among the many treatment options for chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD) that has been shown to improve clinical outcomes. While 
mometasone/formoterol does not currently have an FDA-approved indication for
COPD, evidence from 2 phase 3 trials demonstrated that mometasone/formoterol can 
improve lung function and was well tolerated in patients with moderate-to-very
severe COPD. Based on these data, a therapeutic interchange was implemented in
the Kaiser Permanente Mid-Atlantic States region to convert patients with a COPD 
diagnosis from fluticasone/salmeterol to mometasone/formoterol.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the impact of a therapeutic interchange from
fluticasone/salmeterol to mometasone/formoterol on health outcomes in patients
with COPD in a large ambulatory and managed care setting.
METHODS: The investigators retrospectively reviewed the electronic medical
records of patients with a COPD diagnosis who had a prescription for
fluticasone/salmeterol converted to mometasone/formoterol between March 6, 2011, 
to March 6, 2013. Kaiser Permanente's Pharmacy and Therapeutics Committee
provided recommended equivalent doses for conversion from fluticasone/salmeterol 
to mometasone/formoterol. Nonetheless, the final approval for the change in
medication and selection of the dose was left to each physician's clinical
judgment. Patients were excluded if they were (a) prescribed
fluticasone/salmeterol 100/50 mcg, which has no equivalent mometasone/formoterol 
dose; (b) less than aged 18 years; or (c) prescribed fluticasone/salmeterol for a
duration of less than 6 months preconversion to mometasone/formoterol. In
addition, patients who left the Kaiser Permanente network or became deceased
during the study period of interest were excluded. After the application of the
inclusion and exclusion criteria, 521 patients were included in the data
analysis. The primary endpoint was the determination of the difference in the
occurrence of COPD exacerbations 6 months pre- and postconversion from
fluticasone/salmeterol to mometasone/formoterol. COPD exacerbations were defined 
by the diagnosis or documentation of a COPD exacerbation during any
hospitalizations, urgent care (UC)/emergency department (ED) visits, or clinic
encounters. Secondary outcomes included the determination of the difference in
the occurrence of intensive care unit admissions, hospitalizations, UC/ED visits,
and clinic encounters for COPD exacerbations 6 months pre- and postconversion;
number of patients who required modification in therapy; and any reasons for
mometasone/for-moterol discontinuation postconversion. Patients served as their
own controls to compare any differences in outcomes while taking
mometasone/formoterol versus fluticasone/salmeterol.
RESULTS: Within our patient population, 34.2% (n = 178) of patients experienced
at least 1 COPD exacerbation while prescribed fluticasone/salmeterol compared
with 28.6% (n = 149) of patients while prescribed mometasone/formoterol (P =
0.030). Mometasone/formoterol therapy did not demonstrate any statistically
significant differences in the secondary outcomes (P < 0.050). A later subgroup
analysis of the primary outcome revealed that factors associated with a
statistically significant decrease in the occurrence of COPD exacerbations were
male sex (P = 0.023), comorbid asthma (P = 0.026), and conversion from
fluticasone/salmeterol to a more potent dose of mometasone/formoterol (P =
0.014).
CONCLUSIONS: There was a statistically significant decrease in the proportion of 
patients who experienced COPD exacerbations postconversion from
fluticasone/salmeterol to mometasone/formoterol. This study is an example of a
real-world therapeutic interchange that provides additional data to support the
use of mometasone/formoterol for its unlabeled COPD indication.
DISCLOSURES: No outside funding supported this study. The authors report no
financial or other conflicts of interest related to the subject of this article. 
All authors contributed to study design and manuscript revision. Yip collected
and analyzed data and prepared the manuscript.

DOI: 10.18553/jmcp.2016.22.4.316 
PMID: 27023685  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. J Manag Care Spec Pharm. 2016 Mar;22(3):293-304. doi:
10.18553/jmcp.2016.22.3.293.

Health Care Utilization and Costs After Initiating Budesonide/Formoterol
Combination or Fluticasone/Salmeterol Combination Among COPD Patients New to
ICS/LABA Treatment.

Davis JR(1), Kern DM(2), Williams SA(3), Tunceli O(4), Wu B(5), Hollis S(6),
Strange C(7), Trudo F(8).

Author information: 
(1)1 Director, Health Economics and Outcomes Research, AstraZeneca
Pharmaceuticals, Wilmington, Delaware. (2)2 Associate Research Director, Industry
Sponsored Research, HealthCore, Wilmington, Delaware. (3)3 Senior Director,
Medical Evidence Center, AstraZeneca Pharmaceuticals, Gaithersburg, Maryland.
(4)4 Director, Industry Sponsored Research, HealthCore, Wilmington, Delaware.
(5)5 Research Manager, Industry Sponsored Research, HealthCore, Wilmington,
Delaware. (6)6 Senior Director and Biometrics Team Leader, AstraZeneca
Pharmaceuticals, Alderley Park, Cheshire, United Kingdom. (7)7 Professor,
Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Medical University of South
Carolina, Charleston. (8)8 Medical Lead, Respiratory, AstraZeneca
Pharmaceuticals, Wilmington, Delaware.

BACKGROUND: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) affects approximately 15
million people in the United States and accounts for approximately $36 billion in
economic burden, primarily due to medical costs. To address the increasing
clinical and economic burden, the Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung 
Disease emphasizes the use of therapies that help prevent COPD exacerbations,
including inhaled corticosteroid/long-acting beta2-agonist (ICS/LABA).
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate health care costs and utilization among COPD patients
newly initiating ICS/LABA combination therapy with budesonide/formoterol (BFC) or
fluticasone/salmeterol (FSC) in a managed care system.
METHODS: COPD patients aged 40 years and older who initiated BFC (160/4.5 μg) or 
FSC (250/50 μg) treatment between March 1, 2009, and March 31, 2012, were
identified using claims data from major U.S. health plans. BFC and FSC patients
were propensity score matched (1:1) on age, sex, prior asthma diagnosis, prior
COPD-related health care utilization, and respiratory medication use.
COPD-related, pneumonia-related, and all-cause costs and utilization were
analyzed during the 12-month follow-up period. Post-index costs were assessed
with generalized linear models (GLMs) with gamma distribution. Health care
utilization data were analyzed via logistic regression (any event vs. none) and
GLMs with negative binomial distribution (number of visits) and were adjusted for
the analogous pre-index variable as well as pre-index characteristics that
remained imbalanced after matching.
RESULTS: After matching, each cohort had 3,697 patients balanced on age (mean 64 
years), sex (female 52% BFC and 54% FSC), asthma and other comorbid conditions,
prior COPD-related health care utilization, and respiratory medication use.
During the 12-month follow-up, COPD-related costs averaged $316 less for BFC
versus FSC patients ($4,326 vs. $4,846; P = 0.003), reflecting lower inpatient
($966 vs. $1,202; P < 0.001), pharmacy ($1,482 vs. $1,609; P = 0.002), and
outpatient/office ($1,378 vs. $1,436; P = 0.048) costs, but higher emergency
department ($257 vs. $252; P = 0.033) costs. Pneumonia-related health care costs 
were also lower on average for BFC patients ($2,855 vs. $3,605; P < 0.001).
Similarly, initiating BFC was associated with lower all-use health care costs
versus initiating FSC ($21,580 vs. $24,483; P < 0.001, respectively). No
differences in health care utilization were found between the 2 groups.
CONCLUSIONS: In this study, although no difference was observed in rates of
health care utilization, COPD patients initiating BFC treatment incurred lower
average COPD-related, pneumonia-related, and all-cause costs versus FSC
initiators, which was driven by cumulative differences in inpatient, outpatient, 
and pharmacy costs.

DOI: 10.18553/jmcp.2016.22.3.293 
PMID: 27003559  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. BMC Pulm Med. 2016 Mar 17;16:42. doi: 10.1186/s12890-016-0200-x.

A randomized, double-blinded, double-dummy efficacy and safety study of
budesonide-formoterol Spiromax® compared to budesonide-formoterol Turbuhaler® in 
adults and adolescents with persistent asthma.

Virchow JC(1), Rodriguez-Roisin R(2), Papi A(3), Shah TP(4), Gopalan G(4,)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pneumology/Intensive Care Medicine, University of Rostock,
Zentrum für Innere Medizin/Medizinische Klinik 1, Rostock, Germany.
j.c.virchow@med.uni-rostock.ch. (2)Servei de Pneumologia (Institut del Tòrax),
Hospital Clínic-IDIBAPS-CIBERES, Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(3)University of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy. (4)Teva Pharmaceuticals, Malvern, PA,
USA. (5), Present address: 41 Spruce Hollow Road, Green Brook, NJ, 08812, USA.

BACKGROUND: Budesonide and formoterol (BF) Spiromax® is a dry powder inhaler
designed to deliver BF with maximum ease of use for patients with asthma or
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
METHODS: A phase 3b, 12-week, multicenter, double-blind, double-dummy,
randomized, controlled trial in patients (≥12 years) with persistent asthma.
PRIMARY OBJECTIVE: to demonstrate non-inferiority of twice-daily BF Spiromax
160/4.5 mcg to BF Turbuhaler® 200/6 mcg in change from baseline in weekly average
of daily trough morning peak expiratory flow (PEF). Secondary endpoints included:
Patient Satisfaction and Preference Questionnaire scores, change from baseline in
evening PEF, trough forced expiratory volume in one second, percentage of
symptom-free and rescue-free 24-hour periods, and safety.
RESULTS: The analysis was based on the per-protocol population (BF Spiromax,
n = 290; BF Turbuhaler, n = 284). The least squares mean change from baseline to 
week 12 in morning PEF was: BF Spiromax, 18.8 L/min and BF Turbuhaler, 21.8
L/min. Non-inferiority of BF Spiromax vs BF Turbuhaler was demonstrated (the
lower limit of the 95% two-sided confidence interval was -9.02 L/min, which is
greater than -15 L/min [the criteria specified for non-inferiority]). The mean
difference in the total performance domains scores for BF Spiromax vs BF
Turbuhaler were 0.248 at baseline and 0.353 at week 12 (both, p <0.001),
indicating statistical superiority for BF Spiromax. No statistical or numerical
differences were recorded in the total convenience domain score between the two
devices. Scores for 'device preference' and 'willingness to continue' supported
BF Spiromax at baseline and at week 12 (p = 0.0005 vs BF Turbuhaler). No
significant between-group differences were observed in the other secondary
efficacy endpoints. Both treatments were well tolerated, with no significant
differences in adverse events or asthma exacerbations.
CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrates the non-inferiority of BF Spiromax vs BF
Turbuhaler in patients (≥12 years) with asthma. More patients preferred the
Spiromax device over Turbuhaler for its performance, and were willing to continue
therapy with BF Spiromax beyond the 12-week study period.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: NCT01803555; February 28, 2013.

DOI: 10.1186/s12890-016-0200-x 
PMCID: PMC4794916
PMID: 26987997  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2016 Feb 25;11:381-90. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S93303.
eCollection 2016.

Early response to inhaled bronchodilators and corticosteroids as a predictor of
12-month treatment responder status and COPD exacerbations.

Calverley PM(1), Postma DS(2), Anzueto AR(3), Make BJ(4), Eriksson G(5), Peterson
S(6), Jenkins CR(7).

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary and Rehabilitation Research Group, University Hospital Aintree,
Liverpool, UK. (2)Department of Pulmonary Medicine and Tuberculosis, Gronigen
Research Institute for Asthma and COPD, University Medical Center Groningen,
University of Groningen, Groningen, the Netherlands. (3)Division of Pulmonary
Diseases and Critical Care Medicine, University of Texas Health Sciences Center, 
School of Medicine, University of Texas, San Antonio, TX, USA; South Texas
Veterans Health Care System, San Antonio, TX, USA. (4)Division of Pulmonary
Sciences and Critical Care Medicine, National Jewish Health, University of
Colorado, Denver, CO, USA. (5)Department of Respiratory Medicine and Allergology,
University Hospital, Lund, Sweden. (6)StatMind AB, Lund, Sweden. (7)George
Institute for Global Health, Concord Clincal School, The University of Sydney,
Sydney, NSW, Australia.

BACKGROUND: Early treatment response markers, for example, improvement in forced 
expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1) and St George's Respiratory Questionnaire
(SGRQ) total score, may help clinicians to better manage patients with chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). We investigated the prevalence of
clinically important improvements in FEV1 and SGRQ scores after 2-month
budesonide/formoterol or formoterol treatment and whether such improvements
predict subsequent improvements and exacerbation rates.
METHODS: This post hoc analysis is based on data from three double-blind,
randomized studies in patients with moderate-to-very-severe COPD receiving
twice-daily budesonide/formoterol or formoterol alone for 6 or 12 months.
Prebronchodilator FEV1 and SGRQ total score were measured before treatment and at
2 and 12 months; COPD exacerbation rates were measured during months 2-12.
Responders were defined by ≥100 mL improvement in prebronchodilator FEV1 and
≥4-point decrease in SGRQ total score.
RESULTS: Overall, 2,331 and 1,799 patients were included in the 0-2- and
0-12-month responder analyses, respectively, and 2,360 patients in the 2-12-month
exacerbation rate analysis. At 2 months, 35.1% of patients were FEV1 responders
and 44.3% were SGRQ responders. The probability of response was significantly
greater with budesonide/formoterol than with formoterol or placebo for both
parameters. Two-month responders had a greater chance of 12-month response than
2-month nonresponders for both FEV1 (odds ratio, 5.57; 95% confidence interval,
4.14-7.50) and SGRQ (odds ratio, 3.87; 95% confidence interval, 2.83-5.31).
Two-month response in FEV1 (P<0.001), but not SGRQ (P=0.11), was associated with 
greater reductions in exacerbation risk.
CONCLUSION: Early FEV1 and SGRQ treatment responses relate to their changes at 12
months. FEV1 response, but not SGRQ response, at 2 months predicts the risk of a 
future COPD exacerbation in some, but not all patients. This is potentially
useful in clinical practice, although more sensitive and specific markers of
favorable treatment response are required.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S93303 
PMCID: PMC4772946
PMID: 26952309  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Ther Clin Risk Manag. 2016 Feb 15;12:209-15. doi: 10.2147/TCRM.S82034.
eCollection 2016.

New combinations in the treatment of COPD: rationale for aclidinium-formoterol.

Incorvaia C(1), Montagni M(2), Makri E(1), Ridolo E(2).

Author information: 
(1)Allergy/Pulmonary Rehabilitation, Istituti Clinici di Perfezionamento
Hospital, Milan, Italy. (2)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine,
University of Parma, Parma, Italy.

The current guidelines on chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) recommend 
the prominent use of bronchodilators, including long-acting β2-agonists (LABAs)
and long-acting muscarinic antagonists (LAMAs), while inhaled corticosteroids are
recommended only in patients with severe disease or frequent exacerbations.
LABA-LAMA combinations are indicated when single bronchodilators are insufficient
to control COPD. A number of LABA-LAMA combinations are available, based on
twice-daily or once-daily administration according to the 12- or 24-hour duration
of action, respectively. The aclidinium-formoterol combination is based on the
new LAMA aclidinium bromide, which has a high selectivity for M3 muscarinic
receptors and a fast onset of action, and the well-known LABA formoterol. Both
drugs require twice-daily administration. The fixed-dose combination of
aclidinium 400 μg/formoterol 12 μg has shown in randomized controlled trials fast
and sustained bronchodilation that was greater than either monotherapy and
provided clinically significant improvements in dyspnea and health status
compared with placebo, also reducing the use of rescue medications. The overall
incidence of adverse events was low and comparable to placebo. These data define 
the aclidinium-formoterol fixed-dose combination as a new treatment option for
patients with COPD. The need for twice-daily administration could be an apparent 
disadvantage compared to the available once-daily LABA-LAMA combinations, but the
immediately perceived benefit in reducing dyspnea due to the fast onset of
action, as well as reported correct patient use and satisfaction with the Genuair
inhaler might prove useful in favoring adherence.

DOI: 10.2147/TCRM.S82034 
PMCID: PMC4760652
PMID: 26929634  [PubMed]


42. Drug Saf. 2016 Jun;39(6):501-8. doi: 10.1007/s40264-016-0402-4.

Safety Considerations with Dual Bronchodilator Therapy in COPD: An Update.

Matera MG(1), Rogliani P(2), Calzetta L(2), Cazzola M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Medicine, Second University of Naples, Naples,
Italy. (2)Department of Systems Medicine, University of Rome Tor Vergata, Rome,
Italy. (3)Department of Systems Medicine, University of Rome Tor Vergata, Rome,
Italy. mario.cazzola@uniroma2.it.

Combining a long-acting β2-agonist (LABA) with a long-acting anti-muscarinic
agent (LAMA) provides synergistic benefit on airway smooth muscle relaxation,
which may have major implications for the use of LABA/LAMA combinations in the
treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). There are four
different approved LAMA/LABA fixed-dose combinations
(FDCs)-glycopyrronium/indacaterol, umeclidinium/vilanterol,
tiotropium/olodaterol, and aclidinium/formoterol-and another,
glycopyrronium/formoterol, that is still under clinical development. Many pivotal
trials have shown that all of these FDCs are more effective than monotherapies in
inducing bronchodilation and do not amplify the possible adverse events (AEs)
that are characteristic of LAMAs and LABAs when used as monotherapy.
Unfortunately, these clinical trials have included a very small and highly
selected fraction of the COPD patient population. Therefore, it is questionable
whether such data can be extrapolated to a larger, 'real-life' population of
patients with COPD, especially given that COPD patients with co-morbidities are
often excluded from clinical trials, COPD is a major risk factor for most
cardiovascular diseases, and both LAMAs and LABAs have a high potential to impact
cardiac activities. All clinical trials have been conducted under widely varying 
conditions and, consequently, AE rates of a drug observed in a clinical trial
cannot be directly compared with rates in the clinical trials of another drug and
may not reflect the rates observed in practice. Head-to-head studies comparing
the different LAMA/LABA FDCs that will include the true patients that we meet in 
our everyday practice are absolutely essential if we wish to make a therapeutic
choice that is not purely empirical.

DOI: 10.1007/s40264-016-0402-4 
PMID: 26924197  [PubMed - in process]


43. World Allergy Organ J. 2016 Feb 12;9:5. doi: 10.1186/s40413-016-0095-2.
eCollection 2016.

CD4(+)CD25(high)CD127(-) regulatory T-cells in COPD: smoke and drugs effect.

Chiappori A(1), Folli C(1), Balbi F(1), Caci E(2), Riccio AM(1), De Ferrari L(1),
Melioli G(1), Braido F(1), Canonica GW(1).

Author information: 
(1)Allergy and Respiratory Diseases, IRCCS San Martino-IST-University of Genoa,
Genoa, Italy. (2)Istituto Giannina Gaslini, Genoa, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a progressive lung
disorder characterized by poorly reversible airway obstruction and its
pathogenesis remains largely misunderstood. Local changes of regulatory T-cell
populations in the lungs of COPD patients have been demonstrated although data
concerning their pathologic role are contrasting. The aim of our study was to
evaluate the relative percentage of regulatory T-cells in the peripheral blood of
current and former smoker subjects, affected or not by COPD. Furthermore, the
effect of different concentrations of budesonide and formoterol, on regulatory
T-cells has been investigated.
METHODS: T regulatory lymphocytes were isolated and assessed as
CD4(+)CD25(high)CD127(-) cells by flow cytometry and cultured for 48 hours in the
absence or in the presence of budesonide and/or formoterol at different doses.
RESULTS: CD4(+)CD25(high)CD127(-) regulatory T-cells percentage was significantly
reduced in COPD patients, both current and former smokers, with respect to
volunteers. Furthermore, CD4(+)CD25(high)CD127(-) cells of COPD patients showed a
not statistically significant response to drugs compared to healthy subjects.
DISCUSSION: Our results evidenced a different behaviour of
CD4(+)CD25(high)CD127(-) Treg cells in COPD patients after in vitro treatments.
CONCLUSIONS: Based on our data, we suggested a possible role of CD4
CD25(high)CD127 T-cells in COPD pathogenesis.

DOI: 10.1186/s40413-016-0095-2 
PMCID: PMC4751712
PMID: 26904157  [PubMed]


44. Adv Ther. 2016 Mar;33(3):379-99. doi: 10.1007/s12325-016-0299-4. Epub 2016 Feb
16.

Efficacy and Safety of Aclidinium/Formoterol versus Tiotropium in COPD: Results
of an Indirect Treatment Comparison.

Medic G(1), Lindner L(2), van der Weijden M(3), Karabis A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Real World Strategy and Analytics, Mapi Group, Houten, The Netherlands.
(2)AstraZeneca, Barcelona, Spain. (3)Real World Strategy and Analytics, Mapi
Group, Houten, The Netherlands. mvanderweijden@mapigroup.com.

INTRODUCTION: The objective of this study was to estimate the relative efficacy
and safety of fixed-dose combination aclidinium/formoterol 400/12 μg twice daily 
compared to tiotropium 18 μg once daily in adult patients with moderate-to-severe
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
METHODS: A systematic literature review performed in March 2014, using a
predefined search strategy in MEDLINE, EMBASE and Cochrane Library, identified 17
randomized placebo-controlled trials, (tiotropium n = 15; aclidinium/formoterol
n = 2). Outcomes of interest were: bronchodilation (peak and trough forced
expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1)), COPD symptoms [Transition Dyspnea Index (TDI)
focal score and % of responders (>1 unit improvement)] and Health Related Quality
of Life (HRQoL) [St. George's Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ) total score and % 
responders (>4 unit improvement)], % of patients with ≥1 exacerbations, adverse
events (AE), serious adverse events (SAE), hospitalization and mortality, all at 
24 weeks. In the absence of head-to-head trials between aclidinium/formoterol and
tiotropium, a Bayesian indirect treatment comparison (ITC) was used with placebo 
as common control.
RESULTS: Regarding bronchodilation, aclidinium/formoterol was found to be more
efficacious than tiotropium at peak FEV1, with mean difference in change from
baseline (DCFB) 143 mL [95% credible interval (CrI): 112, 174] and at trough FEV1
[DCFB 26 mL (95% CrI -2, 55)]. Aclidinium/formoterol is expected to be more
efficacious than tiotropium in improving dyspnea symptoms measured by TDI [DCFB
0.54 points (95% CrI 0.09, 0.99); odds ratio (OR) of responders 1.51 (95% CrI
1.11, 2.06)]. SGRQ results are comparable for aclidinium/formoterol versus
tiotropium [DCFB -0.52 (95% CrI -2.21, 1.17); OR of responders 1.16 (95% CrI
0.47, 2.87)]. The ITC results suggest similar safety profiles regarding AEs, SAEs
and hospitalization.
CONCLUSION: Based on the ITC, aclidinium/formoterol is expected to be more
efficacious than tiotropium in terms of lung function and symptom control while
providing comparable HRQoL results and safety profile.
FUNDING: AstraZeneca.

DOI: 10.1007/s12325-016-0299-4 
PMCID: PMC4833795
PMID: 26883661  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Zhonghua Jie He He Hu Xi Za Zhi. 2015 Dec;38(12):901-6.

[Characteristics of subgroups classified by pulmonary function test in chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease patients].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang X(1), Li M(1), Kang X(1), Zhou L(1), Lyu J(1), Sun B(1).

Author information: 
(1)The First Department of Respiratory Medicine, Cangzhou Central Hospital,
Cangzhou 061000, China.

OBJECTIVE: To compare the clinical characteristics and the therapeutic responses 
in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) subgroups, classified by
diffusing capacity of the lung for carbon monoxide (D(L)CO) and inspiratary
capacity (IC).
METHODS: A total of 105 mild-severe patients (70 males, 35 females, 44 to 85
years of age), with stable COPD were recruited in Cangzhou Central Hospital from 
June 2012 to June 2014. According to baseline D(L)CO and IC, the patients were
divided into normal D(L)CO/IC group (group A, n=10), low D(L)CO/normal IC group
(group B, n=18), normal D(L)CO/low IC group (group C, n=22) and low D(L)CO/IC
group (group D, n=55). We compared the clinical characteristics, induced sputum
cells and the therapeutic responses to 3-month treatment of
budesonide/formoterol(320 µg/9 µg, inhale, bid)among the 4 groups.
RESULTS: Group D showed the highest CAT scores(27.6 ± 6.4). Group C showed a
higher prevalence of patients with wheezing(81.8)% and the highest percentage of 
sputum eosinophils (7.6 ± 3.2)%. Group C showed the greatest FEV(1)
increase(0.214 ± 0.053)L. Group D showed a greater FEV(1) increase than Group B
[(0.137 ± 0.063) vs (0.092 ± 0.048)L]. Group C showed a greater FVC[(0.342 ±
0.073), (0.190 ± 0.081), (0.223 ± 0.094)L] increase and CAT[(4.4 ± 2.0), (2.3 ±
1.3), (3.9 ± 1.9)] decrease than Group B and Group D(P<0.05).
CONCLUSION: These findings suggest that COPD subgroups classified by D(L)CO and
IC show several clinical characteristics and may be helpful to predict responses 
to treatment.


PMID: 26850891  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2016 Jan 5;11:73-9. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S78000.
eCollection 2016.

Specific role of combination aclidinium: formoterol in the treatment of chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease.

Matera MG(1), Sanduzzi A(2), Cazzola M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Medicine, Second University of Naples, Naples,
Italy. (2)Department of Respiratory Diseases, Monaldi Hospital, University
Federico II, Naples, Italy. (3)Department of Systems Medicine, University of Rome
Tor Vergata, Rome, Italy.

Co-administration of a long-acting β2-agonist and a long acting muscarinic
antagonist produces superior bronchodilation compared with their individual
effects. Our preclinical data indicated that combining aclidinium bromide (ACLI) 
and formoterol fumarate (FORM) provides synergistic benefit on smooth muscle
relaxation of both large and small human airways. Data from more than 2,000
patients in eleven clinical trials documented that ACLI/FORM, a twice-daily
fixed-dose combination, produces a greater degree of bronchodilation than ACLI or
FORM monotherapy alone and is safe and well tolerated. Two large key trials have 
shown that there is a benefit in using ACLI/FORM when the clinical target is the 
variability of symptoms and mainly nighttime and/or early morning symptoms.
ACLI/FORM is the only long acting muscarinic antagonist/long acting β2-agonist
fixed-dose combination that has been studied for this therapeutic indication.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S78000 
PMCID: PMC4708173
PMID: 26792987  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Ther Adv Respir Dis. 2016 Apr;10(2):89-104. doi: 10.1177/1753465815624612. Epub
2016 Jan 8.

Comparative efficacy of fixed-dose combinations of long-acting muscarinic
antagonists and long-acting β2-agonists: a systematic review and network
meta-analysis.

Schlueter M(1), Gonzalez-Rojas N(2), Baldwin M(2), Groenke L(2), Voss F(2),
Reason T(3).

Author information: 
(1)IMS Health, 210 Pentonville Road, London N1 9JY, UK
mschlueter@uk.imshealth.com. (2)Boehringer Ingelheim GmbH,  Ingelheim am Rhein,
Germany. (3)IMS Health, London, UK.

BACKGROUND: A number of long-acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA)/long-acting
β2-agonist (LABA) fixed-dose combinations (FDCs) for treatment of
moderate-to-very severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) have
recently become available, but none have been directly compared in head-to-head
randomized controlled trials (RCTs). The purpose of this study was to assess the 
relative clinical benefit of all currently available LAMA/LABA FDCs using a
Bayesian network meta-analysis (NMA).
METHODS: A systematic literature review identified RCTs investigating the
efficacy, safety and quality of life associated with licensed LAMA/LABA FDCs for 
the treatment of moderate-to-very severe COPD. RCTs were screened for inclusion
in the NMA using prespecified eligibility criteria. Data were extracted for
outcomes of interest, including change in trough forced expiratory volume in 1
second (tFEV1) from baseline, St. George Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ)
percentage of responders, Transition Dyspnea Index (TDI) percentage of
responders, change in SGRQ score from baseline, change in TDI focal score from
baseline, moderate-to-severe exacerbations, all-cause discontinuation, and
discontinuation due to adverse events.
RESULTS: Following screening, a total of 27 trials from 26 publications with
30,361 subjects were eligible for inclusion in the NMA. Nonsignificant results
were seen in most analyses comparing efficacy, exacerbations and discontinuation 
rates of included LAMA/LABA FDCs (i.e. aclidinium/formoterol 400/12 µg,
glycopyrronium/indacaterol 110/50 µg, tiotropium + olodaterol 5/5 µg,
umeclidinium/vilanterol 62.5/25 µg). Meta-regression controlling for
post-bronchodilator percentage of tFEV1 predicted at baseline as well as
meta-regression adjusting for concomitant use of inhaled corticosteroids at
baseline was performed to assess the magnitude of effect modification and
produced similar results as observed in the base case analysis.
CONCLUSION: All LAMA/LABA FDCs were found to have similar efficacy and safety.
Definitive assessment of the relative efficacy of different treatments can only
be performed through direct comparison in head-to-head RCTs. In the absence of
such data, this indirect comparison may be of value in clinical and health
economic decision-making.

© The Author(s), 2016.

DOI: 10.1177/1753465815624612 
PMID: 26746383  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Ther Clin Risk Manag. 2015 Dec 4;11:1805-11. doi: 10.2147/TCRM.S73581.
eCollection 2015.

Differential pharmacology and clinical utility of long-acting bronchodilators in 
COPD - focus on olodaterol.

Matera MG(1), Ora J(2), Cazzola M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Medicine, Unit of Pharmacology, Second University
of Naples, Naples. (2)Division of Respiratory Medicine, University Hospital Tor
Vergata, Rome, Italy. (3)Division of Respiratory Medicine, University Hospital
Tor Vergata, Rome, Italy ; Department of Systems Medicine, Respiratory
Pharmacology Research Unit, University of Rome Tor Vergata, Rome, Italy.

Olodaterol (BI 1744 CL) is a novel, once-daily long-acting β2-agonist (LABA)
designed with the aim of improving β2-adrenoreceptor selectivity and intrinsic
activity. Phase III pivotal trials have documented that olodaterol Respimat Soft 
Mist inhaler 5 μg induces fast onset of bronchodilation, comparable with
formoterol at day 1. Moreover, significant lung function improvements have been
documented up to 48 weeks in patients with moderate to very severe chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Olodaterol was generally well tolerated and
had an acceptable cardiovascular and respiratory adverse event profile.
Regrettably, the clinical development of olodaterol is however still too partial 
to draw any firm conclusions on the positioning of this ultra-LABA as monotherapy
in the management of COPD. Waiting for further data on the impact of olodaterol
on different patient-reported outcomes, which however are widely available for
indacaterol, and mainly for a head-to-head comparison between these two
ultra-LABAs and between olodaterol long-acting antimuscarinic antagonists other
than tiotropium, we believe it is correct to follow the clinical indications of
indacaterol also for olodaterol. In any case, the parallel bronchodilating modes 
of action of olodaterol and tiotropium make them an attractive combination in
COPD. The results from the ongoing large TOviTO Phase III trial program have
documented the efficacy and safety of olodaterol/tiotropium fixed-dose
combination as maintenance therapy in patients with moderate to very severe COPD.
In particular, olodaterol/tiotropium fixed-dose combination provides a convincing
alternative for patients remaining symptomatic with olodaterol monotherapy.

DOI: 10.2147/TCRM.S73581 
PMCID: PMC4675639
PMID: 26676161  [PubMed]


49. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2015 Nov 9;10:2431-8. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S93375. 
eCollection 2015.

The EFFECT trial: evaluating exacerbations, biomarkers, and safety outcomes with 
two dose levels of fluticasone propionate/formoterol in COPD.

Papi A(1), Jones PW(2), Dalvi PS(3), McAulay K(4), McIver T(5), Dissanayake S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal and CardioRespiratory Medicine, Research Centre on
Asthma and COPD, University of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy. (2)Institute for
Infection and Immunity, St George's, University of London, London, UK. (3)Medical
Science - Respiratory, Mundipharma Research Ltd, Cambridge, UK. (4)Medical
Operations, Mundipharma Research Ltd, Cambridge, UK. (5)Data Management and
Statistics, Mundipharma Research Ltd, Cambridge, UK.

Inhaled corticosteroid/long-acting β2-agonist combination therapy is recommended 
in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) patients at high risk of
exacerbations. The EFFECT (Efficacy of Fluticasone propionate/FormotErol in COPD 
Treatment) trial is a Phase III, 52-week, randomized, double-blind study to
evaluate the efficacy and safety of two doses of fluticasone
propionate/formoterol compared to formoterol monotherapy in COPD patients with
FEV1 ≥50% predicted and a history of exacerbations. The primary endpoint is the
annualized rate of moderate and severe exacerbations. Secondary endpoints include
pre-dose FEV1, EXACT-PRO (EXAcerbations of Chronic pulmonary disease Tool -
Patient-Reported Outcome)-defined exacerbations, St George's Respiratory
Questionnaire for COPD, COPD Assessment Test, and EXACT-Respiratory Symptoms
total score. Lung-specific biomarkers (surfactant protein D and CC chemokine
ligand-18) will be measured in a subset of patients to explore their relationship
to other clinical indices in COPD and their predictive utility. Pneumonia will be
diagnosed per criteria defined by the British Thoracic Society community acquired
pneumonia guideline, primarily by radiological confirmation and, additionally,
using clinical criteria when a chest radiograph cannot be obtained. Serial
measurements of serum potassium, vital signs and electrocardiograms, 24-hour
Holter monitoring, and 24-hour urinary cortisol measurement will be performed in 
a subset of patients in addition to conventional safety assessments.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S93375 
PMCID: PMC4648608
PMID: 26648706  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2016 Jun;54(6):792-801. doi: 10.1165/rcmb.2015-0308OC.

Theophylline Represses IL-8 Secretion from Airway Smooth Muscle Cells
Independently of Phosphodiesterase Inhibition. Novel Role as a Protein
Phosphatase 2A Activator.

Patel BS(1), Rahman MM(1), Rumzhum NN(1), Oliver BG(2,)(3), Verrills NM(4), Ammit
AJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)1 Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Sydney, New South Wales, Australia. (2)2 
Woolcock Institute of Medical Research, University of Sydney, New South Wales,
Australia. (3)3 School of Life Sciences, University of Technology, Sydney, New
South Wales, Australia; and. (4)4 School of Biomedical Sciences and Pharmacy,
Faculty of Health and Medicine, University of Newcastle, New South Wales.

Theophylline is an old drug experiencing a renaissance owing to its beneficial
antiinflammatory effects in chronic respiratory diseases, such as asthma and
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Multiple modes of antiinflammatory action 
have been reported, including inhibition of the enzymes that degrade
cAMP-phosphodiesterase (PDE). Using primary cultures of airway smooth muscle
(ASM) cells, we recently revealed that PDE4 inhibitors can potentiate the
antiinflammatory action of β2-agonists by augmenting cAMP-dependent expression of
the phosphatase that deactivates mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK)-MAPK
phosphatase (MKP)-1. Therefore, the aim of this study was to address whether
theophylline repressed cytokine production in a similar, PDE-dependent,
MKP-1-mediated manner. Notably, theophylline did not potentiate cAMP release from
ASM cells treated with the long-acting β2-agonist formoterol. Moreover,
theophylline (0.1-10 μM) did not increase formoterol-induced MKP-1 messenger RNA 
expression nor protein up-regulation, consistent with the lack of cAMP
generation. However, theophylline (at 10 μM) was antiinflammatory and repressed
secretion of the neutrophil chemoattractant cytokine IL-8, which is produced in
response to TNF-α. Because theophylline's effects were independent of PDE4
inhibition or antiinflammatory MKP-1, we then wished to elucidate the novel
mechanisms responsible. We investigated the impact of theophylline on protein
phosphatase (PP) 2A, a master controller of multiple inflammatory signaling
pathways, and show that theophylline increases TNF-α-induced PP2A activity in ASM
cells. Confirmatory results were obtained in A549 lung epithelial cells. PP2A
activators have beneficial effects in ex vivo and in vivo models of respiratory
disease. Thus, our study is the first to link theophylline with PP2A activation
as a novel mechanism to control respiratory inflammation.

DOI: 10.1165/rcmb.2015-0308OC 
PMID: 26574643  [PubMed - in process]


51. Pharmacol Res. 2015 Dec;102:310-8. doi: 10.1016/j.phrs.2015.09.010. Epub 2015 Nov
4.

Aclidinium bromide combined with formoterol inhibits remodeling parameters in
lung epithelial cells through cAMP.

Lambers C(1), Costa L(2), Ying Q(2), Zhong J(2), Lardinois D(3), Dekan G(4),
Schuller E(5), Roth M(6).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Thoracic Surgery, Department of Surgery, Medical University of
Vienna, Waehringer Guertel 18-20, 1090 Vienna, Austria. (2)Pneumology and
Pulmonary Cell Research, Dept. Biomedicine and Internal Medicine, University &
University Hospital Basel, CH-4031 Basel, Switzerland. (3)Thoracic Surgery,
University Hospital Basel, CH-4031 Basel, Switzerland. (4)Pathology, Medical
University of Vienna, Waehringer Guertel 18-20, A-1090 Vienna, Austria.
(5)Almirall GmbH, Breitenfurter Straße 113, A-1120 Vienna, Austria. (6)Pneumology
and Pulmonary Cell Research, Dept. Biomedicine and Internal Medicine, University 
& University Hospital Basel, CH-4031 Basel, Switzerland. Electronic address:
Michael.roth@usb.ch.

Combined muscarinic receptor antagonists and long acting β2-agonists improve
symptom control in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) significantly. In
clinical studies aclidinium bromide achieved better beneficial effects than other
bronchodilators; however, the underlying molecular mechanisms are unknown. This
study assessed the effect of aclidinium bromide combined with formoterol on COPD 
lung (n=20) and non-COPD lung (n=10) derived epithelial cells stimulated with
TGF-β1+carbachol on: (i) the generation of mesenchymal cells in relation to
epithelial cells, (II) extracellular matrix (ECM) deposition, and (iii) the
interaction of ECM on the generation of epithelial and mesenchymal cells.
TGF-β1+carbachol enhanced the generation of mesenchymal cells, which was
significantly reduced by aclidinium bromide or formoterol. The effect of combined
drugs was additive. Inhibition of p38 MAP kinase and Smad by specific inhibitors 
or aclidinium bromide reduced the generation of mesenchymal cells. In mesenchymal
cells, TGF-β1+carbachol induced the deposition of collagen-I and fibronectin
which was prevented by both drugs dose-dependently. Formoterol alone reduced
collagen-I deposition via cAMP, this however, was overruled by TGF-β1+carbachol
and rescued by aclidinium bromide. Inhibition of fibronectin was cAMP
independent, but involved p38 MAP kinase and Smad. Seeding epithelial cells on
ECM collagen-I and fibronectin induced mesenchymal cell generation, which was
reduced by aclidinium bromide and formoterol. Our results suggest that the
beneficial effect of aclidinium bromide and formoterol involves cAMP affecting
both, the accumulation of mesenchymal cells and ECM remodeling, which may explain
the beneficial effect of the drugs on lung function in COPD.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.phrs.2015.09.010 
PMID: 26546746  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Value Health. 2015 Nov;18(7):A350-1. doi: 10.1016/j.jval.2015.09.638. Epub 2015
Oct 20.

The Potential For Improved Inhalation Technique With Duoresp® Spiromax®
(Budesonide + Formoterol Fumarate Dihydrate) Compared With Commonly Prescribed
Dry Powder Inhalers For The Management Of Asthma And Chronic Obstructive
Pulmonary Disease In Spain: Estimated Impact On Number And Cost Of Unscheduled
Healthcare Events.

Lewis A(1), Blackney M(1), Garcia Bujalance L(2), Sánchez-de la Rosa R(2),
Torvinen S(3), Plich A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Covance Market Access, London, UK. (2)Teva Pharmaceuticals, Madrid, Spain.
(3)Teva Pharmaceuticals Europe B.V., Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jval.2015.09.638 
PMID: 26531978  [PubMed]


53. Value Health. 2015 Nov;18(7):A340. doi: 10.1016/j.jval.2015.09.139. Epub 2015 Oct
20.

Assessing the Cost-Effectiveness of using Aclidinium Bromide 400 µG /Formoterol
Fumarate Dihydrate 12 µG Compared to Aclidinium Bromide 400 µG in the Management 
of Moderate to Severe Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease.

Ramos M(1), Haughney J(2), Henry N(3), Lindner L(4), Lamotte M(1).

Author information: 
(1)IMS Health, Vilvoorde, Belgium. (2)University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen, UK.
(3)IMS Health, London, UK. (4)AstraZeneca, Barcelona, Spain.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jval.2015.09.139 
PMID: 26531927  [PubMed]


54. BMJ Open. 2015 Oct 26;5(10):e009183. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2015-009183.

Comparative safety and effectiveness of long-acting inhaled agents for treating
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: a systematic review and network
meta-analysis.

Tricco AC(1), Strifler L(2), Veroniki AA(2), Yazdi F(3), Khan PA(2), Scott A(2), 
Ng C(2), Antony J(2), Mrklas K(4), D'Souza J(2), Cardoso R(2), Straus SE(5).

Author information: 
(1)Knowledge Translation Program, Li Ka Shing Knowledge Institute, St. Michael's 
Hospital, Toronto, Ontario, Canada Epidemiology Division, Dalla Lana School of
Public Health, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. (2)Knowledge
Translation Program, Li Ka Shing Knowledge Institute, St. Michael's Hospital,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada. (3)Ottawa Hospital Research Institute, Center for
Practice Changing Research Building, The Ottawa Hospital-General Campus, Ottawa, 
Ontario, Canada. (4)Knowledge Translation Program, Li Ka Shing Knowledge
Institute, St. Michael's Hospital, Toronto, Ontario, Canada Alberta Health
Services, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada. (5)Knowledge Translation Program, Li Ka
Shing Knowledge Institute, St. Michael's Hospital, Toronto, Ontario, Canada
Department of Geriatric Medicine, University of Toronto, 27 Kings College Circle,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

OBJECTIVE: To compare the safety and effectiveness of long-acting β-antagonists
(LABA), long-acting antimuscarinic agents (LAMA) and inhaled corticosteroids
(ICS) for managing chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
SETTING: Systematic review and network meta-analysis (NMA).
PARTICIPANTS: 208 randomised clinical trials (RCTs) including 134,692 adults with
COPD.
INTERVENTIONS: LABA, LAMA and/or ICS, alone or in combination, versus each other 
or placebo.
PRIMARY AND SECONDARY OUTCOMES: The proportion of patients with
moderate-to-severe exacerbations. The number of patients experiencing mortality, 
pneumonia, serious arrhythmia and cardiovascular-related mortality (CVM) were
secondary outcomes.
RESULTS: NMA was conducted including 20 RCTs for moderate-to-severe exacerbations
for 26,141 patients with an exacerbation in the past year. 32 treatments were
effective versus placebo including: tiotropium, budesonide/formoterol,
salmeterol, indacaterol, fluticasone/salmeterol, indacaterol/glycopyrronium,
tiotropium/fluticasone/salmeterol and tiotropium/budesonide/formoterol.
Tiotropium/budesonide/formoterol was most effective (99.2% probability of being
the most effective according to the Surface Under the Cumulative RAnking (SUCRA) 
curve). NMA was conducted on mortality (88 RCTs, 97 526 patients);
fluticasone/salmeterol was more effective in reducing mortality than placebo,
formoterol and fluticasone alone, and was the most effective (SUCRA=71%). NMA was
conducted on CVM (37 RCTs, 55,156 patients) and the following were safest:
salmeterol versus each OF placebo, tiotropium and tiotropium (Soft Mist Inhaler
(SMR)); fluticasone versus tiotropium (SMR); and salmeterol/fluticasone versus
tiotropium and tiotropium (SMR). Triamcinolone acetonide was the most harmful
(SUCRA=81%). NMA was conducted on pneumonia occurrence (54 RCTs, 61 551
patients). 24 treatments were more harmful, including 2 that increased risk of
pneumonia versus placebo; fluticasone and fluticasone/salmeterol. The most
harmful agent was fluticasone/salmeterol (SUCRA=89%). NMA was conducted for
arrhythmia; no statistically significant differences between agents were
identified.
CONCLUSIONS: Many inhaled agents are available for COPD, some are safer and more 
effective than others. Our results can be used by patients and physicians to
tailor administration of these agents.
PROTOCOL REGISTRATION NUMBER: PROSPERO # CRD42013006725.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://www.bmj.com/company/products-services/rights-and-licensing/

DOI: 10.1136/bmjopen-2015-009183 
PMCID: PMC4636655
PMID: 26503392  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2015 Oct 22;(10):CD008989. doi:
10.1002/14651858.CD008989.pub3.

Long-acting beta2-agonist in addition to tiotropium versus either tiotropium or
long-acting beta2-agonist alone for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Farne HA(1), Cates CJ.

Author information: 
(1)National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College London, London, UK.

Update of
    Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2012;(4):CD008989.

BACKGROUND: Long-acting bronchodilators, comprising long-acting beta2-agonists
(LABA) and long-acting anti-muscarinic agents (LAMA, principally tiotropium), are
commonly used for managing persistent symptoms of chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD). Combining these treatments, which have different mechanisms of
action, may be more effective than the individual components. However, the
benefits and risks of combining tiotropium and LABAs for the treatment of COPD
are unclear.
OBJECTIVES: To compare the relative effects on markers of quality of life,
exacerbations, symptoms, lung function and serious adverse events in people with 
COPD randomised to LABA plus tiotropium versus tiotropium alone; or LABA plus
tiotropium versus LABA alone.
SEARCH METHODS: We searched the Cochrane Airways Group Specialised Register of
trials and ClinicalTrials.gov up to July 2015.
SELECTION CRITERIA: We included parallel-group, randomised controlled trials of
three months or longer comparing treatment with tiotropium in addition to LABA
against tiotropium or LABA alone for people with COPD.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Two review authors independently assessed trials
for inclusion and then extracted data on trial quality and the outcome results.
We contacted study authors for additional information. We collected information
on adverse effects from the trials.
MAIN RESULTS: This review included 10 trials on 10,894 participants, mostly
recruiting participants with moderate or severe COPD. All of the trials compared 
tiotropium in addition to LABA to tiotropium alone, and four trials additionally 
compared LAMA plus LABA with LABA alone. Four studies used the LABA olodaterol,
three used indacaterol, two used formoterol, and one used salmeterol.Compared to 
tiotropium alone, treatment with tiotropium plus LABA resulted in a slightly
larger improvement in mean health-related quality of life (St George's
Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ) (mean difference (MD) -1.34, 95% confidence
interval (CI) -1.87 to -0.80; 6709 participants; 5 studies). The MD was smaller
than the four units that is considered clinically important, but a responder
analysis indicated that 7% more participants receiving tiotropium plus LABA had a
noticeable benefit (greater than four units) from treatment in comparison to
tiotropium alone. In the control arm in one study, which was tiotropium alone,
the SGRQ improved by falling 4.5 units from baseline and with tiotropium plus
LABA the improvement was a fall of a further 1.3 units (on average). Most of the 
data came from studies using olodaterol. High withdrawal rates in the trials
increased the uncertainty in this result, and the GRADE assessment for this
outcome was therefore moderate. There were no significant differences in the
other primary outcomes (hospital admission or mortality).The secondary outcome of
pre-bronchodilator forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV1) showed a small
mean increase with the addition of LABA over the control arm (MD 0.06, 95% CI
0.05 to 0.07; 9573 participants; 10 studies), which showed a change from baseline
ranging from 0.03 L to 0.13 L with tiotropium alone. None of the other secondary 
outcomes (exacerbations, symptom scores, serious adverse events, and withdrawals)
showed any statistically significant differences between the groups. There was
moderate heterogeneity for both exacerbations and withdrawals.This review
included data on four LABAs: two administered twice daily (salmeterol,
formoterol) and two once daily (indacaterol, olodaterol). The results were
largely from studies of olodaterol and there was insufficient information to
assess whether the other LABAs were equivalent to olodaterol or each
other.Comparing LABA plus tiotropium treatment with LABA alone, there was a small
but significant improvement in SGRQ (MD -1.25, 95% CI -2.14 to -0.37; 3378
participants; 4 studies). The data came mostly from studies using olodaterol and,
although the difference was smaller than four units, this still represented an
increase of 10 people with a clinically important improvement for 100 treated.
There was also an improvement in FEV1 (MD 0.07, 95% CI 0.06 to 0.09; 3513
participants; 4 studies), and in addition an improvement in exacerbation rates
(odds ratio (OR) 0.80, 95% CI 0.69 to 0.93; 3514 participants; 3 studies).
AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: The results from this review indicated a small mean
improvement in health-related quality of life and FEV1 for participants on a
combination of tiotropium and LABA compared to either agent alone, and this
translated into a small increase in the number of responders on combination
treatment. In addition, adding tiotropium to LABA reduced exacerbations, although
adding LABA to tiotropium did not. Hospital admission and mortality were not
altered by adding LABA to tiotropium, although there may not be enough data.
While it is possible that this is affected by higher attrition in the tiotropium 
group, one would expect that participants withdrawn from the study would have had
less favourable outcomes; this means that the expected direction of attrition
bias would be to reduce the estimated benefit of the combination treatment. The
results were largely from studies of olodaterol and there was insufficient
information to assess whether the other LABAs were equivalent to olodaterol or
each other.

DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD008989.pub3 
PMID: 26490945  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. J Thromb Haemost. 2016 Jan;14(1):191-204. doi: 10.1111/jth.13173. Epub 2015 Dec
8.

Roflumilast inhibits leukocyte-platelet interactions and prevents the
prothrombotic functions of polymorphonuclear leukocytes and monocytes.

Totani L(1), Amore C(1), Di Santo A(1), Dell'Elba G(1), Piccoli A(1), Martelli
N(1), Tenor H(2), Beume R(2), Evangelista V(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Vascular Biology and Pharmacology, Fondazione Mario Negri Sud,
Santa Maria Imbaro, Italy. (2)Takeda Pharmaceuticals International GmbH,
Glattpark-Opfikon, Switzerland.

ESSENTIALS: Thrombosis is a major comorbidity in patients with chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Roflumilast is a selective
phosphodiesterase type-4 (PDE4) inhibitor approved for treatment of severe COPD. 
PDE4 blockade by roflumilast inhibits prothrombotic functions of neutrophils and 
monocytes. PDE4 inhibitors may reduce thrombotic risk in COPD as well as in other
vascular diseases.BACKGROUND: Roflumilast, an oral selective phosphodiesterase
type 4 inhibitor, is approved for the treatment of severe chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD). A recent meta-analysis of trials on COPD revealed that 
treatment with roflumilast was associated with a significant reduction in the
rate of major cardiovascular events. The mechanisms of this effect remain
unknown.
OBJECTIVES: We tested the hypothesis that roflumilast N-oxide (RNO), the active
metabolite of roflumilast, curbs the molecular mechanisms required for
leukocyte-platelet (PLT) interactions and prevents the prothrombotic functions of
polymorphonuclear leukocytes (PMNs) and monocytes (MNs).
METHODS: Using well-characterized in vitro models, we analysed the effects of RNO
on: (i) PMN adhesiveness; (ii) the release of neutrophil extracellular traps
(NETs); and (iii) tissue factor expression in MNs. Key biochemical events
underlying the inhibitory effects of RNO were defined.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS: In PMNs, RNO prevented phosphoinositide 3-kinase
(PI3K)-dependent phosphorylation of Akt on Ser473, and Src family kinase
(SFK)-mediated Pyk2 phosphorylation on Tyr579-580, while inducing protein kinase 
A-mediated phosphorylation of C-terminal Src kinase, the major negative regulator
of SFKs. Modulation of these signaling pathways by RNO resulted in a significant 
impairment of PMN adhesion to activated PLTs or human umbilical vein endothelial 
cells, mainly mediated by inhibition of the adhesive function of Mac-1. Moreover 
RNO curbed SFK/PI3K-mediated NET release by PMNs adherent on fibrinogen-coated
surfaces. In MNs interacting with activated PLTs, RNO curbed PI3K-mediated
expression of tissue factor. The efficacy of RNO was significantly potentiated by
formoterol, a long acting β-adrenergic receptor agonist. This study reveals novel
antithrombotic activities by which roflumilast may exert protective effects
against cardiovascular comorbodities in COPD.

© 2015 International Society on Thrombosis and Haemostasis.

DOI: 10.1111/jth.13173 
PMID: 26484898  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2015 Sep 28;10:2055-66. doi:
10.2147/COPD.S90658. eCollection 2015.

Comparative effectiveness of budesonide/formoterol combination and tiotropium
bromide among COPD patients new to these controller treatments.

Trudo F(1), Kern DM(2), Davis JR(1), Tunceli O(2), Zhou S(2), Graham EL(3),
Strange C(4), Williams SA(1).

Author information: 
(1)AstraZeneca Pharmaceuticals LP, Wilmington, DE, USA. (2)HealthCore, Inc.,
Wilmington, DE, USA. (3)AstraZeneca Pharmaceuticals LP, Alderley Park, Cheshire, 
UK. (4)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Medicine, 
Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, SC, USA.

BACKGROUND: Inhaled corticosteroid/long-acting β2-agonist combinations and/or
long-acting muscarinic antagonists are recommended first-line therapies for
preventing chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) exacerbation. Comparative
effectiveness of budesonide/formoterol combination (BFC, an inhaled
corticosteroid/long-acting β2-agonist combination) vs tiotropium (long-acting
muscarinic antagonist) in the US has not yet been studied.
METHODS: Using US claims data from the HealthCore Integrated Research
Environment, COPD patients (with or without comorbid asthma) ≥40 years old
initiating BFC or tiotropium between March 1, 2009 and February 28, 2012 and at
risk for exacerbation were identified and followed for 12 months. Patients were
propensity score matched on demographics and COPD disease severity indicators.
The primary outcome was time to first COPD exacerbation. Secondary outcomes
included COPD exacerbation rate, health care resource utilization, and costs.
RESULTS: The Cox proportional hazards model for time to first exacerbation
yielded a hazard ratio (HR) of 0.78 (95% CI =[0.70, 0.87], P<0.001), indicating a
22% reduction in risk of COPD exacerbation associated with initiation of BFC
versus tiotropium. A post hoc sensitivity analysis found similar effects in those
who had a prior asthma diagnosis (HR =0.72 [0.61, 0.86]) and those who did not
(HR =0.83 [0.72, 0.96]). BFC initiation was associated with lower COPD-related
health care resource utilization and costs ($4,084 per patient-year compared with
$5,656 for tiotropium patients, P<0.001).
CONCLUSION: In COPD patients new to controller therapies, initiating treatment
with BFC was associated with improvements in health and economic outcomes
compared with tiotropium.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S90658 
PMCID: PMC4592033
PMID: 26451101  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Drug Des Devel Ther. 2015 Sep 21;9:5287-90. doi: 10.2147/DDDT.S90504. eCollection
2015.

The rapid effects of budesonide plus formoterol in patients with obstructive
airway diseases.

Bayiz H(1), Ozkaya S(1), Dirican A(2), Ece F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Bahcesehir University, 
Istanbul, Turkey. (2)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Samsun Medical Park
Hospital, Samsun, Turkey.

INTRODUCTION: The use of a combination inhaler containing budesonide and
formoterol (BUD/FOR) to both maintenance and quick relief therapy has been
recommended as an improved method of using inhaled corticosteroid/long-acting β
agonist therapy. The aim of this study was to investigate the acute effects of
BUD/FOR and testing the availability of BUD/FOR for early reversibility test in
patients with airway obstruction.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: The study was conducted on patients who were admitted to
the Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Samsun Medical Park Hospital, Samsun,
Turkey.
RESULTS: A total of 44 patients were included in the study. The mean age of
patients was 48.5 ± 17.3 (range 10-75) years and the male-to-female ratio was
36:8. The pre-bronchodilator pulmonary function test results are as follows: the 
mean forced vital capacity, 3,025 ± 1,162 mL (76.3% ± 23.2%); mean forced
expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1), 1,898 ± 725 mL (59.2% ± 19.1%); mean
FEV1/forced vital capacity, 62.8 ± 6.3% (range 42%-70%); mean peak expiratory
flow, 3,859 ± 1,779 mL (48.0% ± 19.7%); and forced expiratory flow 25%-75%, 1,295
± 486 mL (35.8% ± 12.3%). The reversibility was positive in 26 (59.1%) patients. 
The absolute change and percentage of change in FEV1 were 318 ± 228 mL and 17.7% 
± 11.9%, respectively. The patients were divided into two groups according to
reversibility (reversible and irreversible) and both groups were compared with
changes according to spirometric results. FEV1 values were statistically
different between the two groups.
CONCLUSION: The fixed combination of BUD/FOR has rapid bronchodilator effect, and
they can be used for early reversibility test.

DOI: 10.2147/DDDT.S90504 
PMCID: PMC4590314
PMID: 26451084  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Respirology. 2016 Jan;21(1):119-27. doi: 10.1111/resp.12646. Epub 2015 Sep 23.

Efficacy and tolerability of budesonide/formoterol added to tiotropium compared
with tiotropium alone in patients with severe or very severe COPD: A randomized, 
multicentre study in East Asia.

Lee SD(1), Xie CM(2), Yunus F(3), Itoh Y(4), Ling X(5), Yu WC(6), Kiatboonsri
S(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine and Clinical Research
Center for Chronic Obstructive Airway Diseases, Asan Medical Center, University
of Ulsan College of Medicine, Seoul, South Korea. (2)Department of Pulmonary and 
Critical Care Medicine, 1st Hospital of Sun Yat-sen University, Institute of
Respiratory Disease of Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China.
(3)Department of Pulmonology and Respiratory Medicine, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Indonesia, Persahabatan Hospital, Jakarta, Indonesia.
(4)AstraZeneca, Osaka, Japan. (5)AstraZeneca, Shanghai, China. (6)Department of
Medicine and Geriatrics, Princess Margaret Hospital, Kowloon, Hong Kong, China.
(7)Pulmonary and Critical Care Unit, Department of Medicine, Ramathibodi
Hospital, Bangkok, Thailand.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Triple combination therapy with tiotropium plus
budesonide/formoterol has improved lung function and reduced exacerbation risk in
patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) in Western countries, 
but no such data exist for East Asian patients. This study aimed to evaluate the 
efficacy and tolerability of adding budesonide/formoterol to tiotropium compared 
with tiotropium alone in East Asian patients with severe/very severe COPD.
METHODS: This 12-week, randomized, parallel-group, multicentre, open-label study 
was conducted in East Asia. After a 14-day run-in period during which patients
received tiotropium 18 μg once daily, patients were randomized to tiotropium
(18 μg once daily) + budesonide/formoterol (160/4.5 μg 2 inhalations twice daily)
or tiotropium alone (18 μg once daily). The primary endpoint was change from
baseline in pre-dose forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1 ) to the mean of
values measured at Weeks 1, 6 and 12.
RESULTS: Pre-dose FEV1 significantly increased from baseline with tiotropium plus
budesonide/formoterol (n = 287) versus tiotropium alone (n = 291) (5.0% vs 0.6%; 
treatment difference: 4.4% (95% CI: 1.9-6.9), P = 0.0004). Triple therapy also
reduced the COPD exacerbation rate by 40.7% (P = 0.0032) and prolonged time to
first exacerbation (38.6% risk reduction, P = 0.0167) versus tiotropium alone and
markedly improved health-related quality of life (HRQoL), measured using the St
George's Respiratory Questionnaire. Incidence of adverse events was 26% for both 
groups.
CONCLUSIONS: In East Asian patients with severe/very severe COPD, adding
budesonide/formoterol to tiotropium was associated with significant improvements 
in FEV1 and HRQoL and lower COPD exacerbation rates. Treatment was generally well
tolerated.
CLINICAL TRIAL REGISTRATION: NCT01397890 at Clinicaltrials.gov.

© 2015 Asian Pacific Society of Respirology.

DOI: 10.1111/resp.12646 
PMID: 26394882  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2015 Sep 9;10:1863-81. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S87082.
eCollection 2015.

Comparative efficacy of combination bronchodilator therapies in COPD: a network
meta-analysis.

Huisman EL(1), Cockle SM(2), Ismaila AS(3), Karabis A(1), Punekar YS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Mapi Group, Real World Strategy and Analytics and Strategic Market Access,
Houten, the Netherlands. (2)Value Evidence and Outcomes, GlaxoSmithKline,
Uxbridge, UK. (3)Value Evidence and Outcomes, GlaxoSmithKline R&D, Research
Triangle Park, NC, USA ; Clinical Epidemiology and Biostatistics, McMaster
University, Hamilton, ON, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Several new fixed-dose combination bronchodilators have been recently
launched, and assessing their efficacy relative to each other, and with open dual
combinations is desirable. This network meta-analysis (NMA) assessed the efficacy
of umeclidinium and vilanterol (UMEC/VI) with that of available dual
bronchodilators in single/separate inhalers.
METHODS: A systematic literature review identified randomized controlled trials
of ≥10 weeks among chronic obstructive pulmonary disease patients (≥40 years),
assessing the efficacy of combination bronchodilators in single or separate
inhalers. Comparative assessment was conducted on change from baseline in trough 
forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1), St George's Respiratory
Questionnaire (SGRQ) total scores, transitional dyspnea index (TDI) focal scores,
and rescue medication use at 12 weeks and 24 weeks using an NMA within a Bayesian
framework.
RESULTS: A systematic literature review identified 77 articles of 26 trials
comparing UMEC/VI, indacaterol/glycopyrronium (QVA149), formoterol plus
tiotropium (TIO) 18 μg, salmeterol plus TIO, or indacaterol plus TIO, with TIO
and placebo as common comparators at 12 weeks and approximately 24 weeks. The NMA
showed that at 24 weeks, efficacy of UMEC/VI was not significantly different
compared with QVA149 on trough FEV1 (14.1 mL [95% credible interval: -14.2,
42.3]), SGRQ total score (0.18 [-1.28, 1.63]), TDI focal score (-0.30 [-0.73,
0.13]), and rescue medication use (0.02 [-0.27, 0.32]); compared with salmeterol 
plus TIO on trough FEV1 (67.4 mL [-25.3, 159.4]), SGRQ total score (-0.11 [-1.84,
1.61]), and TDI focal score (0.58 [-0.33, 1.50]); and compared with formoterol
plus TIO 18 μg on SGRQ total score (-0.68 [-1.77, 0.39]). Results at week 12 were
consistent with week 24 outcomes. Due to lack of availability of evidence, no
comparison was made with formoterol plus TIO on FEV1 or TDI at 24 weeks.
CONCLUSION: UMEC/VI has comparable efficacy to other dual-bronchodilator
combinations on available efficacy endpoints.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S87082 
PMCID: PMC4573199
PMID: 26392761  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. World J Clin Cases. 2015 Sep 16;3(9):843-7. doi: 10.12998/wjcc.v3.i9.843.

Do inhaled corticosteroids increase the risk of Pneumocystis pneumonia in people 
with lung cancer?

Msaad S(1), Yangui I(1), Bahloul N(1), Abid N(1), Koubaa M(1), Hentati Y(1), Ben 
Jemaa M(1), Kammoun S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Sameh Msaad, Ilhem Yangui, Najla Bahloul, Narjes Abid, Samy Kammoun,
Department of Respiratory Medicine, Hedi Chaker University Hospital, 3029 Sfax,
Tunisia.

Pneumocystis pneumonia (PCP) is a life-threatening infection in immunocompromised
patients. It is relatively uncommon in patients with lung cancer. We report a
case of PCP in a 59-year-old man with a past medical history of chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease treated with formoterol and a moderate daily dose
of inhaled budesonide. He had also advanced stage non-small lung cancer treated
with concurrent chemo-radiation with a cisplatin-etoposide containing regimen.
The diagnosis of PCP was suspected based on the context of rapidly increasing
dyspnea, lymphopenia and the imaging findings. Polymerase chain reaction testing 
on an induced sputum specimen was positive for Pneumocystis jirovecii. The
patient was treated with oral trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole and systemic
corticotherapy and had showed clinical and radiological improvement. Six months
after the PCP diagnosis, he developed a malignant pleural effusion and expired on
hospice care. Through this case, we remind the importance of screening for PCP in
lung cancer patients under chemotherapeutic regimens and with increasing dyspnea.
In addition, we alert to the fact that long-term inhaled corticosteroids may be a
risk factor for PCP in patients with lung cancer. Despite intensive treatment,
the mortality of PCP remains high, hence the importance of chemoprophylaxis
should be considered.

DOI: 10.12998/wjcc.v3.i9.843 
PMCID: PMC4568535
PMID: 26380833  [PubMed]


62. Expert Rev Respir Med. 2015 Oct;9(5):519-32. doi: 10.1586/17476348.2015.1081065. 
Epub 2015 Aug 26.

Dual bronchodilator therapy with aclidinium bromide/formoterol fumarate for
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

D'Urzo T(1), Donohue JF(2), Price D(3), Miravitlles M(4), Kerwin E(5).

Author information: 
(1)a 1 Department of Family and Community Medicine, University of Toronto,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada. (2)b 2 University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC,
USA. (3)c 3 University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen, UK. (4)d 4 Department of
Pneumology, Vall d'Hebron University Hospital, CIBER de Enfermedades
Respiratorias (CIBERES), Barcelona, Spain. (5)e 5 Clinical Research Institute,
Medford, OR, USA.

Inhaled bronchodilator therapy is a mainstay of treatment for chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD). Despite the number and types of treatments available,
the control of symptoms and exacerbations remains suboptimal, and adherence to,
and persistence with, inhaled therapy is generally poor. Results from clinical
studies suggest that dual bronchodilator therapy with long-acting muscarinic
receptor antagonists (LAMAs) and long-acting β2 adrenergic receptor agonists
(LABAs) may provide additional benefit over LAMA or LABA monotherapy without
additive effects on safety and tolerability. Several combinations of a LAMA plus 
a LABA have recently become available in a single inhaler for maintenance therapy
for adults with moderate-to-severe COPD, including aclidinium bromide/formoterol 
fumarate, glycopyrronium/indacaterol and umeclidinium/vilanterol. Here, we review
clinical data demonstrating significant improvements in bronchodilation, 24-h
symptoms, and health status with aclidinium/formoterol twice daily, and discuss
how this treatment can be implemented in clinical practice as part of a
patient-focused approach to disease control.

DOI: 10.1586/17476348.2015.1081065 
PMID: 26366803  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. J Med Econ. 2016;19(1):11-20. doi: 10.3111/13696998.2015.1079530. Epub 2015 Sep
11.

Exacerbations, health services utilization, and costs in commercially-insured
COPD patients treated with nebulized long-acting β2-agonists.

Chen YJ(1), Makin C(2), Bollu VK(3), Navaie M(4), Celli BR(5).

Author information: 
(1)a Onyx Pharmaceuticals, Inc. , South San Francisco , CA , USA. (2)b HEOR &
Strategic Market Access, Mapi Group , Boston , MA , USA. (3)c HEOR, Sunovion
Pharmaceuticals, Inc. , Marlborough , MA , USA. (4)d Advance Health Solutions,
LLC , San Diego , CA , USA. (5)e Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA, and
Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease Center, Brigham and Women's Hospital ,
Boston , MA , USA.

OBJECTIVE: This retrospective cohort study compared exacerbations, health
services utilization, and costs among chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD) patients who received nebulized arformoterol or nebulized formoterol
therapy.
METHODS: Using PharMetrics Plus health plan claims, 417 nebulized long-acting
β2-agonist (LABA) users meeting the study inclusion criteria were identified: had
≥2 fills of nebulized arformoterol or nebulized formoterol from January 1, 2009, 
to December 31, 2011, adhered to using their index drug ≥60% of the days during 1
year post-index, were ≥35 years old and continuously enrolled 180 days pre- and 1
year post-index, and did not use a nebulized LABA or have an asthma diagnosis
during the pre-index period. Descriptive and multivariate analyses were
performed.
RESULTS: A total of 274 nebulized arformoterol users and 143 nebulized formoterol
users were identified with comparable demographic characteristics. However,
significant differences were observed between the two groups in some clinical
characteristics at index including comorbidities and use of antibiotics. At 1
year post-index, a lower proportion of nebulized arformoterol users had ≥1
exacerbation compared to nebulized formoterol users (70.4% vs 80.4%; p = 0.028). 
Among patients with ≥1 hospital admission, COPD-related costs per inpatient stay 
were significantly lower for nebulized arformoterol users than nebulized
formoterol users (median = $9542 vs $14,025; p = 0.009). After controlling for
confounders, nebulized arformoterol users had 19% marginally lower risk of
exacerbations than nebulized formoterol users (hazard ratio = 0.81, 95%
confidence interval = 0.64-1.03; p < 0.084) and 14.4% marginally lower
COPD-related total costs at 1 year post-index (p = 0.062), primarily related to
fewer hospital readmissions (7.6% vs 12.2%) and lower average costs per
readmission stay (median = $7392 vs $18 081; p = 0.006).
CONCLUSIONS: This study suggests that the choice of nebulized LABA may influence 
COPD-related exacerbation occurrence and costs. Future studies with larger and
more closely matched nebulized arformoterol and nebulized formoterol users are
needed to confirm these findings.

DOI: 10.3111/13696998.2015.1079530 
PMID: 26357881  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. J Aerosol Med Pulm Drug Deliv. 2015 Oct;28(5):309-19. doi:
10.1089/jamp.2015.1216. Epub 2015 Sep 9.

Spiromax, a New Dry Powder Inhaler: Dose Consistency under Simulated Real-World
Conditions.

Canonica GW(1), Arp J(2), Keegstra JR(3), Chrystyn H(4).

Author information: 
(1)1 University of Genoa , Genoa, Italy . (2)2 Teva Pharmachemie , Haarlem, The
Netherlands . (3)3 Formerly Teva Pharmachemie , Haarlem, The Netherlands . (4)4
Inhalation Consultancy Ltd , Leeds, United Kingdom .

BACKGROUND: Spiromax(®) is a novel dry powder inhaler for patients with asthma or
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). The studies presented here provide 
further data on attributes (in vitro dosing consistency with
budesonide-formoterol (DuoResp) Spiromax; flow rates through empty versions of
the Spiromax and Turbuhaler inhaler) of importance to patients with asthma or
COPD.
METHODS: Dose-delivery studies were performed using low-, middle-, and
high-strength DuoResp Spiromax. Dose consistency was assessed over inhaler life. 
Total emitted doses (TEDs) were measured at various flow rates, after exposure to
high and low temperature or humidity, at different inhaler orientations, and
after dropping the inhaler. The criterion for evaluating dose uniformity was
whether mean TEDs were within the product specification limits. In separate
studies, flow rates were measured after training, using the patient information
leaflets, and again after enhanced training as part of a randomized, open-label, 
cross-over study.
RESULTS: Mean values for both budesonide and formoterol were within 85%-115% of
the label claim for each strength of DuoResp Spiromax for initial dose uniformity
and for the other investigated conditions (temperature, humidity, orientation,
dropping, knocking), with the exception of approximately an 80% increase in first
dose after dropping the inhaler (subsequent doses not affected). In the flow rate
patient study, two patients' inhalations with Spiromax and six with Turbuhaler
were <30 L/min. The majority of asthma patients [91% (Spiromax) versus 82%
(Turbuhaler)] achieved the preferred flow rate of >60 L/min.
CONCLUSIONS: DuoResp Spiromax consistently meets dose uniformity criteria, under 
controlled laboratory conditions and with variations intended to mimic real-world
use. Following enhanced training, all patients in the flow study were able to
achieve the minimal inspiratory flow rate of >30 L/min, which is required for
effective treatment.

DOI: 10.1089/jamp.2015.1216 
PMCID: PMC4601554
PMID: 26352860  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. BMC Pulm Med. 2015 Aug 21;15:97. doi: 10.1186/s12890-015-0077-0.

Reliever salbutamol use as a measure of exacerbation risk in chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease.

Jenkins CR(1), Postma DS(2), Anzueto AR(3), Make BJ(4), Peterson S(5), Eriksson
G(6), Calverley PM(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Medicine, Concord Hospital, University of Sydney and
The George Institute for Global Health, Hospital Rd, Concord, Sydney, NSW, 2139, 
Australia. christine.jenkins@sydney.edu.au. (2)Department of Pulmonary Medicine
and Tuberculosis, University of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen,
Groningen, PO Box 30001, 9700 RB, Groningen, The Netherlands. d.s.postma@umcg.nl.
(3)Pulmonary Section, Department of Medicine, University of Texas Health Science 
Center, and South Texas Veterans Health Care System, San Antonio, TX, USA.
anzueto@uthscsa.edu. (4)Division of Pulmonary Sciences and Critical Care
Medicine, National Jewish Health, University of Colorado Denver School of
Medicine, 1400 Jackson Street, K729, Denver, CO, 80206, USA. makeb@njhealth.org. 
(5)StatMind, Medicon Village AB, Scheelevägen 2, 22363, Lund, Sweden.
stefan.peterson@statmind.se. (6)Department of Respiratory Medicine and
Allergology, University Hospital, Lund, 221 87, Sweden. goran.eriksson@med.lu.se.
(7)Clinical Sciences Department, Institute of Ageing and Chronic Disease,
University Hospital Aintree, Lower Lane, Liverpool, L9 7AL, UK.
pmacal@liverpool.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: Debate exists regarding which endpoints most sensitively reflect
day-to-day variation in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) symptoms and
are most useful in clinical practice to predict COPD exacerbations. We
hypothesized that short-acting β2-agonist (SABA) reliever use would predict
short- and long-term exacerbation risk in COPD patients.
METHODS: We performed a retrospective analysis of data from a study
(ClinicalTrials.gov registration: NCT00419744) comparing budesonide/formoterol
320/9 μg with formoterol 9 μg (both twice daily) in patients with
moderate-to-very-severe COPD; reliever salbutamol 90 μg was provided. First
occurrence of reliever use >4 (low), >10 (medium), and >20 (high) inhalations/day
was assessed as a predictor of short-term (3-week) exacerbation risk. Mean daily 
reliever use in the week preceding the 2-month visit was investigated as a
predictor of the long-term (10-month) exacerbation risk, using intervals of 2-5, 
6-9, and ≥10 inhalations/day.
RESULTS: Overall, 810 patients were included (61 % male; mean age 63.2 years;
post-bronchodilator forced expiratory volume in 1 s 37.7 % of predicted). First
occurrence of low, medium, or high reliever use was predictive of an exacerbation
within the following 3 weeks; exacerbation risk increased significantly with
increasing reliever use. Mean reliever use over 1 week was predictive of
long-term exacerbation risk. Patients with mean use of 2-5, 6-9, and ≥10
inhalations/day exhibited 21 %, 67 %, and 135 % higher exacerbation rates,
respectively, in the following 10 months, compared with <2 inhalations/day.
Budesonide/formoterol was associated with lower short- and long-term exacerbation
risk than formoterol in all reliever-use groups.
CONCLUSIONS: SABA reliever use is a predictor of short- and long-term
exacerbation risk in moderate-to-very-severe COPD patients with a history of
exacerbations receiving budesonide/formoterol or formoterol.

DOI: 10.1186/s12890-015-0077-0 
PMCID: PMC4546184
PMID: 26293575  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Respir Res. 2015 Aug 18;16:97. doi: 10.1186/s12931-015-0249-8.

Dose-finding evaluation of once-daily treatment with olodaterol, a novel
long-acting β2-agonist, in patients with asthma: results of a parallel-group
study and a crossover study.

O'Byrne PM(1), D'Urzo T(2), Beck E(3), Fležar M(4), Gahlemann M(5), Hart L(6),
Blahova Z(7), Toorawa R(8), Beeh KM(9).

Author information: 
(1)Firestone Institute for Respiratory Health, and Department of Medicine,
McMaster University Medical Centre, 1280 Main Street West, Room 3 W10, Hamilton, 
ON, L8S 4 K1, Canada. obyrnep@mcmaster.ca. (2)Department of Family and Community 
Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada. tonydurzo@sympatico.ca.
(3)Institut für Gesundheitsförderung GmbH, Rüdersdorf, Germany.
beck@ifg-forschung.de. (4)Hospital Golnik, Clinical Department of Pulmonology and
Allergy, Golnik, Slovenia. matjaz.flezar@klinika-golnik.si. (5)Boehringer
Ingelheim (Schweiz) GmbH, Basel, Switzerland.
martina.gahlemann@boehringer-ingelheim.com. (6)Boehringer Ingelheim Canada Ltd,
Burlington, ON, Canada. lorna.hart@boehringer-ingelheim.com. (7)Boehringer
Ingelheim RCV GmbH & Co. KG, Vienna, Austria.
zuzana.blahova@boehringer-ingelheim.com. (8)Boehringer Ingelheim Ltd, Bracknell, 
UK. robert.toorawa.ext@boehringer-ingelheim.com. (9)insaf Respiratory Research
Institute, Wiesbaden, Germany. k.beeh@insaf-wi.de.

BACKGROUND: Olodaterol is a novel, inhaled long-acting β2-agonist (LABA) with
>24-hour duration of action investigated in asthma and chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease.
METHODS: Two multicentre studies examined the efficacy and safety of 4 weeks'
once-daily (QD) olodaterol (2, 5, 10 and 20 μg, with background inhaled
corticosteroids) in patients with asthma. One randomised, double-blind,
parallel-group study (1222.6; 296 patients) administered treatment in the
morning. Pulmonary function tests (PFTs) were performed pre-dose (trough) and ≤3 
hours post-dose (weeks 1 and 2), and ≤6 hours post-dose after 4 weeks; primary
end point was trough forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1) response (change
from baseline mean FEV1) after 4 weeks. A second randomised, double-blind,
placebo- and active-controlled (formoterol 12 μg twice-daily) incomplete-block
crossover study (1222.27; 198 patients) administered QD treatments in the
evening. PFTs were performed over a 24-hour dosing interval after 4 weeks;
primary end point was FEV1 area under the curve from 0-24 hours (AUC0-24)
response (change from study baseline [mean FEV1] after 4 weeks).
RESULTS: Study 1222.6 showed a statistically significant increase in trough FEV1 
response with olodaterol 20 μg (0.147 L; 95 % confidence interval [CI]: 0.059,
0.234; p = 0.001) versus placebo, with more limited efficacy and no evidence of
dose response compared to placebo across the other olodaterol doses (2, 5 and 10 
μg). Study 1222.27 demonstrated increases in FEV1 AUC0-24 responses at 4 weeks
with all active treatments (p < 0.0001); adjusted mean (95 % CI) differences from
placebo were 0.140 (0.097, 0.182), 0.182 (0.140, 0.224), 0.205 (0.163, 0.248) and
0.229 (0.186, 0.272) L for olodaterol 2, 5, 10 and 20 μg, respectively, and 0.169
(0.126, 0.211) for formoterol, providing evidence of increased efficacy with
higher olodaterol dose. Olodaterol was generally well tolerated, with a few
events associated with known sympathomimetic effects, mainly with 20 μg.
CONCLUSIONS: The LABA olodaterol has >24-hour duration of action. In patients
with asthma, evidence of bronchodilator efficacy was demonstrated with
statistically and clinically significant improvements in the primary end point of
trough FEV1 response measured in clinics over placebo for the highest
administered dose of 20 μg in Study 1222.6, and statistically and clinically
significant improvements versus placebo in FEV1 AUC0-24 responses at 4 weeks for 
all doses tested in Study 1222.27, which also exhibited a dose response.
Bronchodilator efficacy was seen over placebo for all olodaterol doses for
morning and evening peak expiratory flow in both studies. All doses were well
tolerated.
TRIAL REGISTRATIONS: NCT00467740 (1222.6) and NCT01013753 (1222.27).

DOI: 10.1186/s12931-015-0249-8 
PMCID: PMC4539885
PMID: 26283085  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Respir Res. 2015 Aug 2;16:92. doi: 10.1186/s12931-015-0250-2.

Aclidinium bromide and formoterol fumarate as a fixed-dose combination in COPD:
pooled analysis of symptoms and exacerbations from two six-month, multicentre,
randomised studies (ACLIFORM and AUGMENT).

Bateman ED(1), Chapman KR(2), Singh D(3), D'Urzo AD(4), Molins E(5), Leselbaum
A(6), Gil EG(7).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonology, Department of Medicine, University of Cape Town,
George Street, Mowbray, 7700, Cape Town, South Africa. eric.bateman@uct.ac.za.
(2)Asthma & Airway Centre, University Health Network, Toronto Western Hospital,
Toronto, ON, Canada. kchapman@ca.inter.net. (3)University of Manchester,
Medicines Evaluation Unit, University Hospital of South Manchester, Manchester,
UK. dsingh@meu.org.uk. (4)Department of Family and Community Medicine, University
of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada. tonydurzo@sympatico.ca. (5)R&D Centre,
AstraZeneca PLC (former employee of Almirall S.A.), Barcelona, Spain.
eduard.molins@astrazeneca.com. (6)Former employee of Almirall S.A., Barcelona,
Spain. aleselbaum1@gmail.com. (7)R&D Centre, AstraZeneca PLC (former employee of 
Almirall S.A.), Barcelona, Spain. esthergarciagil@astrazeneca.com.

BACKGROUND: The combination of aclidinium bromide, a long-acting anticholinergic,
and formoterol fumarate, a long-acting beta2-agonist (400/12 μg twice daily)
achieves improvements in lung function greater than either monotherapy in
patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), and is approved in
the European Union as a maintenance treatment. The effect of this combination on 
symptoms of COPD and exacerbations is less well established. We examined these
outcomes in a pre-specified analysis of pooled data from two 24-week,
double-blind, parallel-group, active- and placebo-controlled, multicentre,
randomised Phase III studies (ACLIFORM and AUGMENT).
METHODS: Patients ≥40 years with moderate to severe COPD (post-bronchodilator
forced expiratory volume in 1 s [FEV1]/forced vital capacity <70 % and FEV1 ≥30 %
but <80 % predicted normal) were randomised (ACLIFORM: 2:2:2:2:1; AUGMENT:
1:1:1:1:1) to twice-daily aclidinium/formoterol 400/12 μg or 400/6 μg, aclidinium
400 μg, formoterol 12 μg or placebo via Genuair™/Pressair®. Dyspnoea (Transition 
Dyspnoea Index; TDI), daily symptoms (EXAcerbations of Chronic pulmonary disease 
Tool [EXACT]-Respiratory Symptoms [E-RS] questionnaire), night-time and
early-morning symptoms, exacerbations (Healthcare Resource Utilisation [HCRU] and
EXACT definitions) and relief-medication use were assessed.
RESULTS: The pooled intent-to-treat population included 3394 patients.
Aclidinium/formoterol 400/12 μg significantly improved TDI focal score versus
placebo and both monotherapies at Week 24 (all p < 0.05). Over 24 weeks,
significant improvements in E-RS total score, overall night-time and
early-morning symptom severity and limitation of early-morning activities were
observed with aclidinium/formoterol 400/12 μg versus placebo and both
monotherapies (all p < 0.05). The rate of moderate or severe HCRU exacerbations
was significantly reduced with aclidinium/formoterol 400/12 μg compared with
placebo (p < 0.05) but not monotherapies; the rate of EXACT-defined exacerbations
was significantly reduced with aclidinium/formoterol 400/12 μg versus placebo
(p < 0.01) and aclidinium (p < 0.05). Time to first HCRU or EXACT exacerbation
was longer with aclidinium/formoterol 400/12 μg compared with placebo (all
p < 0.05) but not the monotherapies. Relief-medication use was reduced with
aclidinium/formoterol 400/12 μg versus placebo and aclidinium (p < 0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: Aclidinium/formoterol 400/12 μg significantly improves 24-hour
symptom control compared with placebo, aclidinium and formoterol in patients with
moderate to severe COPD. Furthermore, aclidinium/formoterol 400/12 μg reduces the
frequency of exacerbations compared with placebo.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: NCT01462942 and NCT01437397 (ClinicalTrials.gov).

DOI: 10.1186/s12931-015-0250-2 
PMCID: PMC4531806
PMID: 26233481  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Perspect Clin Res. 2015 Jul-Sep;6(3):150-8. doi: 10.4103/2229-3485.159940.

Cost-effectiveness analysis of three different combinations of inhalers for
severe and very severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease patients at a
tertiary care teaching hospital of South India.

Altaf M(1), Zubedi AM(1), Nazneen F(1), Kareemulla S(1), Ali SA(1), Aleemuddin
NM(2), Hannan Hazari MA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy Practice and PharmD, Deccan School of Pharmacy,
Jawaharlal Nehru Technological University, Hyderabad, Telangana, India.
(2)Department of Pulmonology, Deccan College of Medical Sciences, Hyderabad,
Telangana, India. (3)Department of Physiology, Deccan College of Medical
Sciences, Hyderabad, Telangana, India.

BACKGROUND: This study aims at simplifying the practical patient management and
offers some general indications for pharmacotherapeutic choice by the
implementation of (Global Initiative for Chronic Lung Disease) guidelines. This
study was designed to evaluate the clinical and economic consequences of
salmeterol/fluticasone (SF), formoterol/budesonide (FB), and
formoterol/fluticasone (FF) in severe and very severe chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD) patients.
OBJECTIVES: The aim was to find out the most cost-effective drug combination
between the three combinations (SF/FB/FF) in COPD patients.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A prospective observational comparative study
(cost-effectiveness analysis), in which 90 severe (30 ≤ forced expiratory volume 
in 1 s [FEV1] <50% predicted) and very severe (FEV1 < 30% predicted) COPD
patients (outpatients/inpatients) who are prescribed with any one of the
following combinations (SF/FB/FF) were selected. In our study, we have divided 90
COPD patients into three groups (Group I, Group II, and Group III) each group
consisting of 30 patients. Group I was prescribed with medication SF, Group II
with medication FB, and Group III with medication FF. We used five different
parameters such as spirometry test (mean FEV1 initial and final visit), number of
symptom-free days (SFDs), number of moderate and severe exacerbations, Number of 
days of hospitalization and direct, indirect, and total cost to assess the
cost-effectiveness of SF/FB/FF. Comparison of cost and effects was done during
the period of 6 months of using SF/FB/FF.
RESULTS: The average FEV1 for Group I, Group II, and Group III subjects at
initial visit was 33.47%, 33.73%, and 33.20% and was increased to 36.60%, 35.8%, 
and 33.4%, respectively. A 3% increment in FEV1 was reported for Group I subjects
(SF) and was highly significant statistically (t = -8.833, P = 0.000) at 95% CI. 
For Group II subjects (FB), a 2% increment in FEV1 was reported and was highly
significant statistically (t = -9.001, P = 0.000) at 95% CI. For Group III (FF)
subjects 0.2% increment in FEV1. The overall mean total cost for Group I, Group
II, and Group III subjects during the 6 months period was found to be Rs.
29,725/-, Rs. 32,602/- and Rs. 37,155/-. Incremental cost-effectiveness of FB
versus SF was Rs. 37,781/- per avoided exacerbation and Rs. 661/-per SFD.
CONCLUSION: This study highlights the favorable therapeutic performance of
combined inhaled bronchodilators and corticosteroids (SF/FB/FF), thus suggesting 
that healthcare costs would be also affected positively. Results from our study
showed that SF and FB were the most effective strategies in the treatment of
COPD, with a slight clinical superiority of SF. The FF strategy was not much
effective (i.e. associated with fewer outcomes and higher costs).

DOI: 10.4103/2229-3485.159940 
PMCID: PMC4504057
PMID: 26229751  [PubMed]


69. Expert Opin Pharmacother. 2015;16(13):2009-21. doi:
10.1517/14656566.2015.1070826. Epub 2015 Jul 20.

Pharmacological basis and scientific rationale underlying the targeted use of
inhaled corticosteroid/long-acting β2-adrenergic agonist combinations in chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease treatment.

Pelaia G(1), Muzzio CC, Vatrella A, Maselli R, Magnoni MS, Rizzi A.

Author information: 
(1)University 'Magna Græcia' of Catanzaro, Department of Medical and Surgical
Sciences, Section of Respiratory Diseases , Catanzaro , Italy.

INTRODUCTION: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a complex
respiratory disorder, whose medical and socioeconomic burden as one of the main
causes of morbidity and mortality is increasing worldwide. COPD pathophysiology
includes chronic airway/lung inflammation and progressive airflow limitation.
Therefore, anti-inflammatory and bronchodilator agents are key players in COPD
treatment.
AREAS COVERED: This review article discusses the complementary molecular
interactions connecting the respective mechanisms of action of inhaled
corticosteroids (ICS) and long-acting β2-adrenergic agonists (LABAs). Moreover,
attention is also focused on clinical trials, which have shown that ICS/LABA
combinations are very effective in improving COPD symptoms and lung function,
being also able to significantly reduce disease exacerbations.
EXPERT OPINION: In selected subgroups of COPD patients, ICS/LABA combinations
represent a very useful therapeutic approach for this widespread chronic
respiratory disease. In addition to the well-known fixed-dose drug associations
such as fluticasone propionate/salmeterol xinafoate and budesonide/formoterol
fumarate, other newly developed ICS/LABA combinations are currently emerging as
very interesting pharmacological options for COPD treatment.

DOI: 10.1517/14656566.2015.1070826 
PMID: 26194120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. J Hypertens. 2015 Jun;33 Suppl 1:e92-3. doi: 10.1097/01.hjh.0000467600.09175.5a.

7B.03: SAFETY OF BETA-AGONISTS WITH DIFFERENT DURATION OF ACTION IN PATIENTS WITH
ARTERIAL HYPERTENSION AND BRONCHO-OBSTRUCTIVE DISEASES.

Dolgusheva I(1), Agapova O, Zykov K, Sivacova O, Golitsyn P, Chazova I.

Author information: 
(1)1Russian Cardiology Complex, Department of Hypertension, Moscow, RUSSIA
2Moscow State University of Medicine and Dentistry named after A.I. Evdokimov,
Laboratory of Pulmonology, Moscow, RUSSIA.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the safety of beta-agonists (BA) with different duration
of action (short-acting (SABA), long-acting (LABA), ultra-long-acting (ULABA) in 
patients with arterial hypertension (AH) and chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD) or bronchial asthma.
DESIGN AND METHOD: 40 patients with AH and COPD (gr.1) and AH and asthma (gr.2)
were enrolled and examined initially. At the next three month patients were
treated with 3 types of BA: at the 1st month - with salbutamol (SABA), at 2nd
month -with formoterol (LABA), at 3rd month -with indacaterol (ULABA). Initially,
after one week and at the end of each month blood pressure (BP) and heart rate
(HR) on the visit, serum potassium in blood, electrocardiogram, were evaluate.
After one week and at the end of three month of treatment with BA all patients
underwent Holter monitoring and ambulatory blood pressure 24-monitoring (ABPM).
Results are presented as Mean ± sd.
RESULTS: Patients were 64 ± 7,7years (22-male,18-female), with BMI
29,8 ± 5,3 kg/m2; BP in gr.1 was 128,4 ± 14,3/81,1 ± 19,7 and 135 ± 13/83 ± 9,9
mmHg in gr.2, p = NS, initially. Baseline, 1-month, 2-month, 3-month BP and HR
levels on the visit were similar among all patients (p = NS). At the end of the
third month of treatment with BA different duration of action in gr.1 daily
average Systolic BP (SBP) was lowered than initially (129 ± 10,2 vs 124 ± 10,5,
p < 0,05). On the contrary in gr.2 daily average SBP became increased than
initially (122 ± 14,1 vs 127 ± 16, p < 0,05). Treatment with BA caused
significant serum potassium change in blood in both group: in gr.1 initially was 
4,5 ± 0,5 mmol/l, after SABA use - 4,2 ± 0,4(p < 0,05), LABA- 4,1 ± 0,4(p = NS), 
ULABA-4,2 ± 0,4(p < 0,05); in gr.2 initially was 4,4 ± 0,4 mmol/l, after use
SABA- 4,1 ± 0,3(p < 0,05), LABA- 4,3 ± 0,3(p = NS), ULABA-4,15 ± 0,6(p < 0,05).
In gr.2. three patients had hypokalemia.
CONCLUSIONS: Treatment with BA in patients with AH and bronchoobstructive
diseases significantly decreased levels of serum potassium in the blood in both
group and led to reduction of daily average SBP and in contrast treatment of
patients with AH and asthma resulted in increasing of daily average SBP. Our
results suggested the need for a different treatment of patients with AH and COPD
or asthma.

DOI: 10.1097/01.hjh.0000467600.09175.5a 
PMID: 26102971  [PubMed]


71. Ther Clin Risk Manag. 2015 Jun 2;11:889-99. doi: 10.2147/TCRM.S55116. eCollection
2015.

Fluticasone-formoterol: a systematic review of its potential role in the
treatment of asthma.

Prosser TR(1), Bollmeier SG(1).

Author information: 
(1)St Louis College of Pharmacy, St Louis, MO, USA.

BACKGROUND: The purpose of this systematic review is to summarize and evaluate
the available published data regarding the efficacy and safety of a combination
product containing fluticasone propionate/formoterol (FP-F) in order to establish
its potential role compared with other inhaled combination
corticosteroid/long-acting beta2 receptor agonists for the maintenance treatment 
of asthma.
METHODS: A PubMed and EMBASE search was conducted using the terms "fluticasone
propionate", "formoterol fumarate", "Flutiform(®)", and "asthma" in July 2014 to 
identify trials using this combination specifically for the treatment of asthma. 
Additional information was gathered from references cited in the identified
publications, the package insert, and the ClinicalTrials. gov registry. All
randomized controlled clinical trials for humans in asthma were evaluated for
inclusion. Data from animal trials, clinical trials for chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease, and non-English sources were excluded.
RESULTS: Seven short-term safety and efficacy trials of FP-F compared with its
individual components and two comparison trials of FP-F versus other combination 
products were identified. Generally, the incidence of drug-related adverse events
was low and consistent with previously reported drug class-related adverse events
(ie, pharyngitis, dysphonia, and headache). The combination of FP-F was shown to 
be noninferior to fluticasone propionate/salmeterol for improving predose forced 
expiratory volume at one second (FEV1) and 2 hours post dose FEV1. FP-F was also 
noninferior to budesonide/formoterol in improving predose FEV1. Other clinical
endpoints, including various symptom scores, asthma control, quality of life, and
subjects' assessment of the medications were not significantly different.
CONCLUSION: Poor asthma control is common. The data from short-term studies
indicate that this inhaled corticosteroid and long-acting beta2 receptor agonist 
combination product is non-inferior to similar combination products available. As
FP-F is available in different strengths, the corticosteroid dose can be titrated
without changing devices. A potential advantage is that those with good
technique, the same type of device could be used for both their controller and
rapid relief inhaler medicines. The choice of this combination versus other
similar products may be based primarily on cost.

DOI: 10.2147/TCRM.S55116 
PMCID: PMC4459636
PMID: 26082638  [PubMed]


72. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2015 Aug 15;192(4):523-5. doi:
10.1164/rccm.201502-0235LE.

Blood Eosinophils: A Biomarker of Response to Extrafine Beclomethasone/Formoterol
in Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease.

Siddiqui SH(1), Guasconi A(2), Vestbo J(3), Jones P(4), Agusti A(5,)(6), Paggiaro
P(7), Wedzicha JA(8), Singh D(9).

Author information: 
(1)1 University of Leicester/National Institute for Health Research Respiratory
 Biomedical Research Unit Leicester, United Kingdom. (2)2 Chiesi Farmaceutici
S.p.A, Parma, Italy. (3)3 University Hospital of South Manchester NHS Foundation 
Trust Manchester, United Kingdom. (4)4 University of London London, United
Kingdom. (5)5 University of Barcelona Barcelona, Spain and. (6)6 CIBERES Spain.
(7)7 University of Pisa Pisa, Italy. (8)8 Imperial College London London, United 
Kingdom. (9)9 University Hospital of South Manchester Foundations Trust
Manchester, United Kingdom.

DOI: 10.1164/rccm.201502-0235LE 
PMCID: PMC4595668
PMID: 26051430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Eur J Intern Med. 2015 Jul;26(6):379-84. doi: 10.1016/j.ejim.2015.05.001. Epub
2015 Jun 3.

Why use long acting bronchodilators in chronic obstructive lung diseases? An
extensive review on formoterol and salmeterol.

Santus P(1), Radovanovic D(1), Paggiaro P(2), Papi A(3), Sanduzzi A(4),
Scichilone N(5), Braido F(6).

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Scienze della Salute. Pneumologia Riabilitativa Fondazione
Salvatore Maugeri, Istituto Scientifico di Milano-IRCCS. Università degli Studi
di Milano, Italy. (2)Cardio-Thoracic and Vascular Department, University Hospital
of Pisa, Italy. (3)Respiratory Medicine, Department of Medical Sciences,
University of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy. (4)Section of Respiratory Diseases,
Department of Surgery and Clinical Medicine, University of Naples, Italy.
(5)Department of Internal Medicine, Section of Pulmonology (DIBIMIS), University 
of Palermo, Italy. (6)Allergy and Respiratory Diseases Clinic, DIMI, University
of Genoa, IRCS AOU San Martino-IST, Genoa, Italy. Electronic address:
fulvio.braido@unige.it.

Long-acting β2-adrenoceptor agonists, formoterol and salmeterol, represent a
milestone in the treatments of chronic obstructive lung diseases. Although no
specific indications concerning the choice of one molecule rather than another
are provided by asthma and COPD guidelines, they present different
pharmacological properties resulting in distinct clinical employment
possibilities. In particular, salmeterol has a low intrinsic efficacy working as 
a partial receptor agonist, while formoterol is a full agonist with high
intrinsic efficacy. From a clinical perspective, in the presence of low
β2-adrenoceptors availability, like in inflamed airways, a full agonist can
maintain its bronchodilatory and non-smooth muscle activities while a partial
agonist may be less effective. Furthermore, formoterol presents a faster onset of
action than salmeterol. This phenomenon, combined with the molecule safety
profile, leads to a prompt amelioration of the symptoms, and allows using this
drug in asthma as an "as needed" treatment in patients already on regular
treatment. The fast onset of action and the full agonism of formoterol need to be
considered in order to select the best pharmacological treatment of asthma and
COPD.

Copyright © 2015 European Federation of Internal Medicine. Published by Elsevier 
B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejim.2015.05.001 
PMID: 26049917  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Int J Pharm. 2015 Aug 1;491(1-2):268-76. doi: 10.1016/j.ijpharm.2015.05.076. Epub
2015 Jun 1.

Effect of inhalation profile and throat geometry on predicted lung deposition of 
budesonide and formoterol (BF) in COPD: An in-vitro comparison of Spiromax with
Turbuhaler.

Chrystyn H(1), Safioti G(2), Keegstra JR(3), Gopalan G(4).

Author information: 
(1)RiRL, 5a Coles Lane, Oakington, Cambridge, UK. Electronic address:
h.chrystyn@gmail.com. (2)Medical Affairs, Teva Pharmaceuticals, Helsingborg,
Sweden. Electronic address: guilherme.safioti@teva.se. (3)Global Respiratory R&D,
Teva Pharmachemie, Haarlem, The Netherlands. Electronic address:
hans.keegstra@tevapharmachemie.com. (4)Global Medical Affairs, Teva
Pharmaceuticals, Malvern, PA, USA. Electronic address:
gokul.gopalan@tevapharm.com.

Successful delivery of inhalation medication to the lungs can be affected by the 
inhalation manoeuvre used. Conventional in-vitro testing of the emitted dose from
a dry powder inhaler (DPI) uses a vacuum pump to simulate an inhalation. We have 
adapted this method by replacing the pump with patient inhalation profiles and an
anatomical throat. Three anatomical throat sizes and three inhalation profiles
were used. The profiles represented the 10th, 50th and 90th percentiles of peak
inhalation flow and acceleration of flow from a population of 50 COPD patients
inhaling through empty Spiromax and Turbuhaler devices. Combining the dose
emission results for the three throat sizes, the mean (SD) budesonide
fine-particle dose (FPD) from budesonide-formoterol Spiromax 320/9 μg was 78.91
(20.18), 79.91 (15.36) and 75.10 (19.91)μg and the total emitted dose (TED) of
budesonide was 263.69 (40.74), 261.20 (21.65) and 261.61 (45.65)μg. Similarly,
the FPD from 320/9 μg Turbuhaler was 22.45 (3.24), 52.20 (12.57) and 69.11
(75.10)μg with a TED of 143.80 (14.90), 149.50 (26.61) and 158.61 (43.04)μg.
Spiromax showed greater consistency than Turbuhaler over a range of inspiratory
flow profiles. The results demonstrate the value of this new method to assess the
doses that patients receive during real-life use of their DPI.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijpharm.2015.05.076 
PMID: 26043823  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2015 May 15;10:947-54. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S80022.
eCollection 2015.

Clinical, physiological, and radiological features of asthma-chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease overlap syndrome.

Suzuki T(1), Tada Y(1), Kawata N(1), Matsuura Y(1), Ikari J(1), Kasahara Y(1),
Tatsumi K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respirology, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba University,
Chiba, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Asthma-chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) overlap syndrome 
(ACOS) is associated with rapid decline in lung function, poorer health-related
quality-of-life outcomes, and frequent exacerbations, compared to COPD alone.
Although the numbers of patients with ACOS have increased, there is little
established evidence regarding diagnostic criteria and treatment options. Thus,
the aim of our study was to clarify the clinical, physiological, and radiological
features of patients with ACOS.
METHODS: We examined a total of 100 patients with COPD and 40 patients with ACOS,
who were selected based on clinical criteria. All patients underwent baseline
testing, including a COPD assessment test, pulmonary function tests, and
multidetector row computed tomography imaging. Percentage of low attenuation
volume, percentage of wall area, and percentage of total cross-sectional area of 
pulmonary vessels less than 5 mm(2) (%CSA <5) were determined using multidetector
row computed tomography. ACOS patients were administered a fixed dose of
budesonide/formoterol (160/4.5 μg, two inhalations; twice daily) for 12 weeks,
after which the ACOS patients underwent multidetector row computed tomography to 
measure the same parameters.
RESULTS: At baseline, the ACOS patients and COPD patients had a similar degree of
airflow limitation, vital capacity, and residual volume. ACOS patients had higher
COPD assessment test scores, percentage of wall area, and %CSA <5 than COPD
patients. Compared to baseline, budesonide/formoterol treatment significantly
increased the forced expiratory volume in 1 second and decreased the degree of
airway wall thickness (percentage of wall area) as well as pulmonary
microvascular density (%CSA <5) in ACOS patients.
CONCLUSION: Our results suggest that ACOS is characterized by an airway
lesion-dominant phenotype, in contrast to COPD. Higher %CSA <5 might be a
characteristic feature of ACOS.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S80022 
PMCID: PMC4440433
PMID: 26028967  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. BMC Pulm Med. 2015 May 1;15:47. doi: 10.1186/s12890-015-0043-x.

Inhalation characteristics of asthma patients, COPD patients and healthy
volunteers with the Spiromax® and Turbuhaler® devices: a randomised, cross-over
study.

Azouz W(1), Chetcuti P(2), Hosker H(3), Saralaya D(4), Chrystyn H(5).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pharmacy, School of Applied Sciences, University of Huddersfield, 
Huddersfield, UK. wahidaazzouz@yahoo.com. (2)Paediatrics, Leeds General
Infirmary, Leeds, UK. Philip.Chetcuti@leedsth.nhs.uk. (3)Department of
Respiratory, Airedale General Hospital, Steeton, Bradford, UK.
Harold.Hosker@anhst.nhs.uk. (4)Department of Respiratory, Bradford Royal
Infirmary, Bradford, UK. Dinesh.Saralaya@bthft.nhs.uk. (5)Inhalation Consultancy 
Ltd Tarn House (Formerly Division of Pharmacy, School of Applied Sciences,
University of Huddersfield), 55 High Street, Yeadon, Leeds, UK.
h.chrystyn@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Spiromax® is a novel dry-powder inhaler containing formulations of
budesonide plus formoterol (BF). The device is intended to provide dose
equivalence with enhanced user-friendliness compared to BF Turbuhaler® in asthma 
and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). The present study was performed
to compare inhalation parameters with empty versions of the two devices, and to
investigate the effects of enhanced training designed to encourage faster
inhalation.
METHODS: This randomised, open-label, cross-over study included children with
asthma (n = 23), adolescents with asthma (n = 27), adults with asthma (n = 50),
adults with COPD (n = 50) and healthy adult volunteers (n = 50). Inhalation
manoeuvres were recorded with each device after training with the patient
information leaflet (PIL) and after enhanced training using an In-Check Dial
device.
RESULTS: After PIL training, peak inspiratory flow (PIF), maximum change in
pressure (∆P) and the inhalation volume (IV) were significantly higher with
Spiromax than with the Turbuhaler device (p values were at least <0.05 in all
patient groups). After enhanced training, numerically or significantly higher
values for PIF, ∆P, IV and acceleration remained with Spiromax versus Turbuhaler,
except for ∆P in COPD patients. After PIL training, one adult asthma patient and 
one COPD patient inhaled <30 L/min through the Spiromax compared to one adult
asthma patient and five COPD patients with the Turbuhaler. All patients achieved 
PIF values of at least 30 L/min after enhanced training.
CONCLUSIONS: The two inhalers have similar resistance so inhalation flows and
pressure changes would be expected to be similar. The higher flow-related values 
noted for Spiromax versus Turbuhaler after PIL training suggest that Spiromax
might have human factor advantages in real-world use. After enhanced training,
the flow-related differences between devices persisted; increased flow rates were
achieved with both devices, and all patients achieved the minimal flow required
for adequate drug delivery. Enhanced training could be useful, especially in COPD
patients.

DOI: 10.1186/s12890-015-0043-x 
PMCID: PMC4450517
PMID: 25927483  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Respir Res. 2015 Apr 23;16:52. doi: 10.1186/s12931-015-0210-x.

Comparative effectiveness of budesonide/formoterol combination and
fluticasone/salmeterol combination among chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
patients new to controller treatment: a US administrative claims database study.

Kern DM(1), Davis J(2), Williams SA(3), Tunceli O(4), Wu B(5), Hollis S(6),
Strange C(7), Trudo F(8).

Author information: 
(1)HealthCore, Inc., 123 Justison St, Suite 200, Wilmington, DE, 19801-5134, USA.
dkern@healthcore.com. (2)AstraZeneca Pharmaceuticals, 1800 Concord Pike,
Wilmington, DE, 19850, USA. Jill.Davis@astrazeneca.com. (3)AstraZeneca
Pharmaceuticals, One MedImmune Way, Gaithersburg, MD, 20878, USA.
Setareh.Williams@astrazeneca.com. (4)HealthCore, Inc., 123 Justison St, Suite
200, Wilmington, DE, 19801-5134, USA. otunceli@healthcore.com. (5)HealthCore,
Inc., 123 Justison St, Suite 200, Wilmington, DE, 19801-5134, USA.
bwu@healthcore.com. (6)AstraZeneca Pharmaceuticals, Alderley Park, Cheshire, UK. 
Sally.Hollis@astrazeneca.com. (7)Department of Medicine, Division of Pulmonary
and Critical Care Medicine, Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, SC,
29425, USA. strangec@musc.edu. (8)AstraZeneca Pharmaceuticals, 1800 Concord Pike,
Wilmington, DE, 19850, USA. Frank.Trudo@astrazeneca.com.

BACKGROUND: Inhaled corticosteroid/long-acting β2-agonist combinations (ICS/LABA)
have emerged as first line therapies for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD) patients with exacerbation history. No randomized clinical trial has
compared exacerbation rates among COPD patients receiving budesonide/formoterol
combination (BFC) and fluticasone/salmeterol combination (FSC) to date, and only 
limited comparative data are available. This study compared the real-world
effectiveness of approved BFC and FSC treatments among matched cohorts of COPD
patients in a large US managed care setting.
METHODS: COPD patients (≥40 years) naive to ICS/LABA who initiated BFC or FSC
treatments between 03/01/2009-03/31/2012 were identified in a geographically
diverse US managed care database and followed for 12 months; index date was
defined as first prescription fill date. Patients with a cancer diagnosis or
chronic (≥180 days) oral corticosteroid (OCS) use within 12 months prior to index
were excluded. Patients were matched 1-to-1 on demographic and pre-initiation
clinical characteristics using propensity scores from a random forest model. The 
primary efficacy outcome was COPD exacerbation rate, and secondary efficacy
outcomes included exacerbation rates by event type and healthcare resource
utilization. Pneumonia objectives included rates of any diagnosis of pneumonia
and pneumonia-related healthcare resource utilization.
RESULTS: Matching of the identified 3,788 BFC and 6,439 FSC patients resulted in 
3,697 patients in each group. Matched patients were well balanced on age (mean=64
years), gender (BFC: 52% female; FSC: 54%), prior COPD-related medication use,
healthcare utilization, and comorbid conditions. During follow-up, no significant
difference was seen between BFC and FSC patients for number of COPD-related
exacerbations overall (rate ratio [RR]=1.02, 95% CI=[0.96,1.09], p=0.56) or by
event type: COPD-related hospitalizations (RR=0.96), COPD-related ED visits
(RR=1.11), and COPD-related office/outpatient visits with OCS and/or antibiotic
use (RR=1.01). The proportion of patients diagnosed with pneumonia during the
post-index period was similar for patients in each group (BFC =17.3%, FSC =19.0%,
odds ratio=0.92 [0.81,1.04], p=0.19), and no difference was detected for
pneumonia-related healthcare utilization by place of service.
CONCLUSION: This study demonstrated no difference in COPD-related exacerbations
or pneumonia events between BFC and FSC treatment groups for patients new to
ICS/LABA treatment in a real-world setting.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov identifier NCT01921127 .

DOI: 10.1186/s12931-015-0210-x 
PMCID: PMC4409772
PMID: 25899176  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Drug Des Devel Ther. 2015 Apr 7;9:1989-99. doi: 10.2147/DDDT.S53150. eCollection 
2015.

Aclidinium bromide/formoterol fixed-dose combination therapy for COPD: the
evidence to date.

Moitra S(1), Bhome AB(2), Brashier BB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Chest Research Foundation, Pune, Maharashtra, India. (2)Indian Coalition of
Obstructive Lung Diseases (ICOLD) Network, Pune, Maharashtra, India.

The quest for the right combination of bronchodilators with different mechanisms 
of action such as long-acting muscarinic antagonists and long-acting β-agonists
in the management of stable moderate-to-severe chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD) is a topic of intense research activity currently, given the
rising morbidity and mortality due to this disease. The fixed-dose combination of
aclidinium bromide and formoterol fumarate in a single inhaler seems to offer
superior advantages over either drugs given alone or as separate inhalers
concurrently. Since the fixed-dose combination needs to be given twice daily, it 
is likely to achieve control of symptoms most crucial to the quality of life in
COPD, namely, the morning hours. This is reflected in significant trough FEV1
(forced expiratory volume in 1 second) improvements after the dose. This paper
reviews the various studies related to this combination put in the perspective of
its safety and efficacy and potential benefits over other therapeutic options.
However, there is a dearth of data on the long-term safety and efficacy in terms 
of improvement in lung function. This combination could emerge as an excellent
option in the management of stable COPD if data on exacerbation rates and
patient-reported outcomes become available from longer-term studies. Moreover, we
need some more studies to define the ideal phenotype of COPD best suited for the 
use of this combination.

DOI: 10.2147/DDDT.S53150 
PMCID: PMC4396584
PMID: 25897208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. J Clin Diagn Res. 2015 Feb;9(2):OC10-3. doi: 10.7860/JCDR/2015/10803.5527. Epub
2015 Feb 1.

The Study of Efficacy, Tolerability and Safety of Theophylline Given Along with
Formoterol Plus Budesonide in COPD.

Subramanian(1), Ragulan(1), Jindal A(2), Viswambhar V(3), V AB(2).

Author information: 
(1)Associate Professor, Department of Respiratory Medicine, Chettinad Hospital & 
Research Institute , Chennai, India . (2)Post Graduate Student, Department of
Respiratory Medicine, Chettinad Hospital & Research Institute , Chennai, India . 
(3)Assistant Professor, Department of Respiratory Medicine, Chettinad Hospital & 
Research Institute , Chennai, India .

BACKGROUND: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a common disease
causing significant socioeconomic burden. COPD patients, commonly smokers develop
resistance to inhaled steroids attributed to deficiency of histone deacetylase 2 
(HDAC2). The study of relationship between systemic inflammation and functional
performance demonstrated that increased CRP level is inversely related to six
minute walk distance (SMWD) and Forced Expired Volume in one second (FEV1).
Theophylline restores HDAC2 activity thereby unlocking steroid resistance and
potentiating inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) action culminating in reduced airway
inflammation and mortality.
AIM: To study the effects of addition of Theophylline to the combination of
Formoterol plus Budesonide on various objective and subjective parameters in
moderate to severe COPD patients and to assess the safety profile of the
combination. Setting and Study design: A single blinded, prospective, randomized,
placebo controlled study at a tertiary care hospital in Jaipur, India.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Fifty eight patients diagnosed with moderate to severe
COPD were randomized into two groups. Group A patients received Formoterol 24μg
plus budesonide 800μg daily in divided doses along with Theophylline while group 
B patients received Formoterol 24μg plus budesonide 800μg daily in divided doses 
along with placebo tablets. Both groups were followed up on 15th, 30th &60th day.
During every visit all patients were assessed subjectively (symptom scoring) and 
objectively (spirometry, CRP, SMWT) and adverse effects if any were recorded. The
obtained data subject to statistical analysis using"Graph pad Instat3" software.
RESULTS: Statistically significant improvement with a decline in total symptom
score (p < 0.0001) was found with respect to "Night symptoms"&"SOB on rising" in 
group A. Theophylline group showed significant improvement in SMWD and FEV1.Mean 
fall in CRP was greater in Group A (not statistically significant). No side
effects requiring withdrawal of drug were noted with Theophylline.
CONCLUSION: Addition of Theophylline to Formoterol plus Budesonide reduces
dyspnea, improves exercise performance and pulmonary functions in moderate to
severe COPD. Further studies are required to explore if reduced dosage would have
equal efficacy with better safety and tolerability profile.

DOI: 10.7860/JCDR/2015/10803.5527 
PMCID: PMC4378761
PMID: 25859479  [PubMed]


80. PLoS One. 2015 Mar 23;10(3):e0120095. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0120095.
eCollection 2015.

ASM-024, a piperazinium compound, promotes the in vitro relaxation of
β2-adrenoreceptor desensitized tracheas.

Israël-Assayag E(1), Beaulieu MJ(2), Cormier Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institut universitaire de cardiologie et de pneumologie de Québec (IUCPQ),
Québec, Québec, Canada; Asmacure Ltée, Québec, Québec, Canada. (2)Institut
universitaire de cardiologie et de pneumologie de Québec (IUCPQ), Québec, Québec,
Canada.

Inhaled β2-adrenoreceptor agonists are widely used in asthma and chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) for bronchoconstriction relief.
β2-Adrenoreceptor agonists relax airway smooth muscle cells via cyclic adenosine 
monophosphate (cAMP) mediated pathways. However, prolonged stimulation induces
functional desensitization of the β2-adrenoreceptors (β2-AR), potentially leading
to reduced clinical efficacy with chronic or prolonged administration. ASM-024, a
small synthetic molecule in clinical stage development, has shown activity at the
level of nicotinic receptors and possibly at the muscarinic level and presents
anti-inflammatory and bronchodilator properties. Aerosolized ASM-024 reduces
airway resistance in mice and promotes in-vitro relaxation of tracheal and
bronchial preparations from animal and human tissues. ASM-024 increased in vitro 
relaxation response to maximally effective concentration of short-acting beta-2
agonists in dog and human bronchi. Although the precise mechanisms by which
ASM-024 promotes airway smooth muscle (ASM) relaxation remain unclear, we
hypothesized that ASM-024 will attenuate and/or abrogate agonist-induced
contraction and remain effective despite β2-AR tachyphylaxis. β2-AR tachyphylaxis
was induced with salbutamol, salmeterol and formoterol on guinea pig tracheas.
The addition of ASM-024 relaxed concentration-dependently intact or β2-AR
desensitized tracheal rings precontracted with methacholine. ASM-024 did not
induce any elevation of intracellular cAMP in isolated smooth muscle cells;
moreover, blockade of the cAMP pathway with an adenylate cyclase inhibitor had no
significant effect on ASM-024-induced guinea pig trachea relaxation.
Collectively, these findings show that ASM-024 elicits relaxation of β2-AR
desensitized tracheal preparations and suggest that ASM-024 mediates smooth
muscle relaxation through a different target and signaling pathway than
β2-adrenergic receptor agonists. These findings suggest ASM-024 could potentially
provide clinical benefit when used adjunctively with inhaled β2-adrenoreceptor
agonists in those patients exhibiting a reduced response to their chronic use.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0120095 
PMCID: PMC4370676
PMID: 25799096  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Expert Opin Pharmacother. 2015 Apr;16(6):939. doi: 10.1517/14656566.2015.1027861.
Epub 2015 Mar 16.

Erratum: correction to: aclidinium bromide plus formoterol for the treatment of
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

[No authors listed]

Erratum for
    Expert Opin Pharmacother. 2015 Feb;16(3):427-34.

DOI: 10.1517/14656566.2015.1027861 
PMID: 25778847  [PubMed]


82. Drugs. 2015 Apr;75(6):665-73. doi: 10.1007/s40265-015-0371-4.

Olodaterol: a review of its use in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Deeks ED(1).

Author information: 
(1)Springer, Private Bag 65901, Mairangi Bay, 0754, Auckland, New Zealand,
demail@springer.com.

Olodaterol (Striverdi(®) Respimat(®)) is an inhaled long-acting β2-adrenoceptor
agonist (LABA) indicated as a once-daily maintenance bronchodilator therapy in
adults with COPD. Several well-designed phase III trials have assessed use of the
drug over 6 or 48 weeks in this patient population. In these studies, once-daily 
olodaterol improved lung function relative to placebo over 48 weeks of treatment,
with such improvements being achieved and maintained within the 24-h dosage
interval, supporting its once-daily administration. In addition, combined
analyses of 48-week trials indicated that olodaterol reduces rescue medication
use and may also improve dyspnoea and health-related quality of life, and
crossover studies showed improvements in exercise endurance after 6 weeks of
treatment with the drug. Pooled analyses of crossover studies assessing 24-h
bronchodilation after 6 weeks of therapy indicated that once-daily olodaterol has
a 24-h bronchodilatory profile generally similar to that of once-daily tiotropium
bromide and twice-daily formoterol. Olodaterol was generally well tolerated and
had an acceptable cardiovascular and respiratory adverse event profile. However, 
further longer-term and active comparator-controlled studies would be beneficial,
including trials powered to assess COPD exacerbations.

DOI: 10.1007/s40265-015-0371-4 
PMID: 25773742  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. J Aerosol Med Pulm Drug Deliv. 2015 Dec;28(6):462-73. doi:
10.1089/jamp.2014.1195. Epub 2015 Mar 10.

Equivalent Lung Dose and Systemic Exposure of Budesonide/Formoterol Combination
via Easyhaler and Turbuhaler.

Lähelmä S(1), Sairanen U(1), Haikarainen J(1), Korhonen J(1), Vahteristo M(1),
Fuhr R(2), Kirjavainen M(1).

Author information: 
(1)1 Orion Corporation Orion Pharma , Espoo, Finland . (2)2 PAREXEL Early Phase
Clinical Unit , Berlin, Germany .

BACKGROUND: Easyhaler(®) device-metered dry powder inhaler containing budesonide 
and formoterol fumarate dihydrate (hereafter formoterol) for the treatment of
asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease has been developed. The current 
approvals of the product in Europe were based on several pharmacokinetic (PK)
bioequivalence (BE) studies, and in vitro-in vivo correlation (IVIVC) modeling.
METHODS: Four PK studies were performed to compare the lung deposition and total 
systemic exposure of budesonide and formoterol after administration of
budesonide/formoterol Easyhaler and the reference product, Symbicort Turbuhaler. 
The products were administered concomitantly with oral charcoal (lung deposition)
and in two of the studies also without charcoal (total systemic exposure).
Demonstration of BE for lung deposition (surrogate marker for efficacy) and
non-inferiority for systemic exposure (surrogate marker for safety) were
considered a proof of therapeutic equivalence. In addition, IVIVC models were
constructed to predict study outcomes with different reference product fine
particle doses (FPDs).
RESULTS: In the first pivotal study, the exposure and lung dose via Easyhaler
were higher compared to the reference product (mean comparison estimates between 
1.07 and 1.28) as the FPDs of the reference product batch were low. In the
following studies, reference product batches with higher FPDs were utilized. In
the second pivotal study, non-inferiority of Easyhaler compared to Turbuhaler was
shown in safety and BE in efficacy for all other parameters except the formoterol
AUCt. In the fourth study where two reference batches were compared to each other
and Easyhaler, budesonide/formoterol Easyhaler was bioequivalent with one
reference batch but not with the other having the highest FPDs amongst the 28
reference batches studied. In the IVIVC based study outcome predictions, the test
product was bioequivalent with great proportion of the reference batches. For the
test product and the median FPD reference product BE was predicted.
CONCLUSIONS: Equivalence regarding both safety and efficacy between
budesonide/formoterol Easyhaler and Symbicort Turbuhaler was shown based on
totality of evidence from the PK studies and IVIVC analyses, and therefore,
therapeutic equivalence between the products can be concluded. The results of the
PK studies are likely dependent on the variability of FPDs of the reference
product batches.

DOI: 10.1089/jamp.2014.1195 
PMCID: PMC4688463
PMID: 25757188  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Respir Res. 2014 Oct 14;15:123. doi: 10.1186/s12931-014-0123-0.

Efficacy and safety of fixed-dose combinations of aclidinium bromide/formoterol
fumarate: the 24-week, randomized, placebo-controlled AUGMENT COPD study.

D'Urzo AD, Rennard SI, Kerwin EM, Mergel V, Leselbaum AR, Caracta CF; AUGMENT
COPD study investigators.

BACKGROUND: Combining two long-acting bronchodilators with complementary
mechanisms of action may provide treatment benefits to patients with chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) that are greater than those derived from
either treatment alone. The efficacy and safety of a fixed-dose combination (FDC)
of aclidinium bromide, a long-acting muscarinic antagonist, and formoterol
fumarate, a long-acting β2-agonist, in patients with moderate to severe COPD are 
presented.
METHODS: In this 24-week double-blind study, 1692 patients with stable COPD were 
equally randomized to twice-daily treatment with FDC aclidinium 400 μg/formoterol
12 μg (ACL400/FOR12 FDC), FDC aclidinium 400 μg/formoterol 6 μg (ACL400/FOR6
FDC), aclidinium 400 μg, formoterol 12 μg, or placebo administered by a multidose
dry powder inhaler (Genuair®/Pressair®)*. Coprimary endpoints were change from
baseline to week 24 in 1-hour morning postdose FEV1 (FDCs versus aclidinium) and 
change from baseline to week 24 in morning predose (trough) FEV1 (FDCs versus
formoterol). Secondary endpoints were change from baseline in St. George's
Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ) total score and improvement in Transition
Dyspnea Index (TDI) focal score at week 24. Safety and tolerability were also
assessed.
RESULTS: At study end, improvements from baseline in 1-hour postdose FEV1 were
significantly greater in patients treated with ACL400/FOR12 FDC or ACL400/FOR6
FDC compared with aclidinium (108 mL and 87 mL, respectively; p < 0.0001).
Improvements in trough FEV1 were significantly greater in patients treated with
ACL400/FOR12 FDC versus formoterol (45 mL; p = 0.0102), a numerical improvement
of 26 mL in trough FEV1 over formoterol was observed with ACL400/FOR6 FDC.
Significant improvements in both SGRQ total and TDI focal scores were observed in
the ACL400/FOR12 FDC group at study end (p < 0.0001), with differences over
placebo exceeding the minimal clinically important difference of ≥4 points and ≥1
unit, respectively. All treatments were well tolerated, with safety profiles of
the FDCs similar to those of the monotherapies.
CONCLUSIONS: Treatment with twice-daily aclidinium 400 μg/formoterol 12 μg FDC
provided rapid and sustained bronchodilation that was greater than either
monotherapy; clinically significant improvements in dyspnea and health status
were evident compared with placebo. Aclidinium/formoterol FDC may be an effective
and well tolerated new treatment option for patients with COPD.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: Clinicaltrials.gov NCT01437397.

DOI: 10.1186/s12931-014-0123-0 
PMCID: PMC4213545
PMID: 25756831  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Drugs Today (Barc). 2015 Feb;51(2):97-105. doi: 10.1358/dot.2015.51.2.2273382.

Aclidinium/formoterol fixed-dose combination for the treatment of chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease.

Cazzola M(1), Calzetta L(2), Matera MG(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Respiratory Medicine, University Hospital Tor Vergata; Unit of
Respiratory Clinical Pharmacology, Department of Systems Medicine, University of 
Rome Tor Vergata, Rome, Italy. mario.cazzola@uniroma2.it. (2)Unit of Respiratory 
Clinical Pharmacology, Department of Systems Medicine, University of Rome Tor
Vergata, Rome, Italy. (3)Centre of Excellence for Cardiovascular Diseases,
Department of Experimental Medicine, Section of Pharmacology "L. Donatelli",
Second University of Naples, Naples, Italy.

This review will be focused on the development of aclidinium bromide/formoterol
fumarate (ACLI/FORM) fixed-dose combinations (FDC) that have been granted
marketing authorization by the European Commission to be used as a maintenance
bronchodilator treatment to relieve symptoms in adult patients with chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). ACLI/FORM FDC has been studied in 2 pivotal
trials involving over 3,400 patients with COPD, in which it was compared with
ACLI alone, FORM alone and placebo. The addition of FORM to ACLI resulted in
greater bronchodilation than FORM or ACLI alone. ACLI/FORM FDC was also shown to 
increase the percentage of patients who had an improvement in symptoms and
health-related quality of life compared with monotherapies. The frequency of side
effects reported with ACLI/FORM FDC was low and their nature did not raise any
major safety concern.

Copyright 2015 Prous Science, S.A.U. or its licensors. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1358/dot.2015.51.2.2273382 
PMID: 25756065  [PubMed]


86. Ther Adv Respir Dis. 2015 Apr;9(2):56-68. doi: 10.1177/1753465815575254. Epub
2015 Mar 9.

Clinicopharmacological profile of the fixed-dose combination of aclidinium
bromide and formoterol fumarate in the management of chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease.

Babu KS(1), Morjaria JB(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Queen Alexandra Hospital, Portsmouth, UK. 
(2)Department of Academic Respiratory Medicine, Hull York Medical School,
University of Hull, Castle Hill Hospital, Castle Road,Cottingham HU16 5JQ, UK
jaymin.morjaria@hey.nhs.uk.

The recent Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease (GOLD) chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) guidelines consider symptoms and
exacerbation history in addition to the degree of airflow obstruction for
classifying patients. The improvement of symptoms is principally provided by
bronchodilators, using β2 agonists and antimuscarinic agents. Aclidinium bromide 
is a novel long-acting antimuscarinic agent licensed for use in patients with
COPD. Novel fixed-dose combinations that are either licensed or in their late
phase of development include vilanterol/umeclidinium, indacaterol/glycopyrronium,
olodaterol/tiotropium and formoterol/aclidinium. Fixed-dose combinations of
aclidinium/formoterol have been evaluated in COPD patients and evidence suggests 
that this is efficacious, safe, has a quick onset of action and is well
tolerated. This review provides a clinico-pharmacological profile of this
compound.

© The Author(s), 2015.

DOI: 10.1177/1753465815575254 
PMID: 25754881  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Mol Pharm. 2015 Aug 3;12(8):2633-41. doi: 10.1021/mp500854e. Epub 2015 Mar 18.

Beta-2 Adrenergic Agonists Are Substrates and Inhibitors of Human Organic Cation 
Transporter 1.

Salomon JJ(1), Hagos Y(2,)(3), Petzke S(2), Kühne A(3), Gausterer JC(1), Hosoya
K(4), Ehrhardt C(1).

Author information: 
(1)†School of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences and Trinity Biomedical
Sciences Institute, Trinity College Dublin, Dublin 2, Ireland. (2)‡Zentrum für
Physiologie und Pathophysiologie, Georg-August-Universität, 37073 Göttingen,
Germany. (3)§PortaCellTec Biosciences GmbH, 37073 Göttingen, Germany.
(4)∥Graduate School of Medicine and Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of
Toyama, 930-0887 Toyama, Japan.

Beta-2-adrenergic agonists are first line therapeutics in the treatment of asthma
and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Upon inhalation,
bronchodilation is achieved after binding to β2-receptors, which are primarily
localized on airway smooth muscle cells. Given that β2-adrenergic agonists
chemically are bases, they carry net positive charge at physiologic pH value in
the lungs (i.e., pH 7.4). Here, we studied whether β2-agonists interact with
organic cation transporters (OCT) and whether this interaction exerted an
influence on their passage across the respiratory epithelium to their target
receptors. [14C]-TEA uptake into proximal (i.e., Calu-3) and distal (i.e., A549
and NCI-H441) lung epithelial cells was significantly reduced in the presence of 
salbutamol sulfate, formoterol fumarate, and salmeterol xinafoate in vitro.
Expression of all five members of the OCT/N family has been confirmed in human
pulmonary epithelial cells in situ and in vitro, which makes the identification
of the transporter(s) responsible for the β2-agonist interaction challenging.
Thus, additional experiments were carried out in HEK-293 cells transfected with
hOCT1-3. The most pronounced inhibition of organic cation uptake by β2-agonists
was observed in hOCT1 overexpressing HEK-293 cells. hOCT3 transfected HEK-293
cells were affected to a lesser extent, and in hOCT2 transfectants only marginal 
inhibition of organic cation uptake by β2-agonists was observed. Bidirectional
transport studies across confluent NCI-H441 cell monolayers revealed a net
absorptive transport of [3H]-salbutamol, which was sensitive to inhibition by the
OCT1 modulator, verapamil. Accordingly, salbutamol uptake into hOCT1
overexpressing HEK-293 cells was time- and concentration-dependent and could be
completely blocked by decynium-22. Taken together, our data suggest that
β2-agonists are specific substrates and inhibitors of OCT1 in human respiratory
epithelial cells and that this transporter might play a role in the pulmonary
disposition of drugs of this class.

DOI: 10.1021/mp500854e 
PMID: 25751092  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Pulm Pharmacol Ther. 2015 Jun;32:101-8. doi: 10.1016/j.pupt.2015.02.008. Epub
2015 Mar 3.

The impact of treatment with indacaterol in patients with COPD: A post-hoc
analysis according to GOLD 2011 categories A to D.

Kerstjens HA(1), Deslée G(2), Dahl R(3), Donohue JF(4), Young D(5), Lawrence
D(6), Kornmann O(7).

Author information: 
(1)University of Groningen, University Medical Center, and Groningen Research
Institute for Asthma and COPD GRIAC, Groningen, the Netherlands. Electronic
address: h.a.m.kerstjens@umcg.nl. (2)Service de Pneumologie, Hôpital Maison
Blanche, INSERM U903, CHU de Reims, France. Electronic address:
gdeslee@chu-reims.fr. (3)Allergy Centre, Odense University Hospital, Odense,
Denmark. Electronic address: Ronald.Dahl2@rsyd.dk. (4)Department of Medicine,
University of North Carolina, NC, USA. Electronic address:
james_donohue@med.unc.edu. (5)Novartis Horsham Research Centre, Horsham, West
Sussex, UK. Electronic address: david.young@young-communications.com. (6)Novartis
Pharmaceuticals Corporation, East Hanover, NJ, USA. Electronic address:
david-1.lawrence@novartis.com. (7)IKF Pneumologie Frankfurt, Clinical Research
Centre Respiratory Diseases, Frankfurt, Germany. Electronic address:
kornmann@ikf-pneumologie.de.

BACKGROUND: Indacaterol is an inhaled, once-daily, ultra-long-acting β2-agonist
for the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). We report on
the effectiveness of indacaterol and other bronchodilators compared with placebo 
in patients across the Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease
(GOLD) 2011 categories A to D.
METHODS: A post-hoc, subgroup pooled analysis of 6-month efficacy data from three
randomized, placebo-controlled, parallel-group studies involving 3862 patients
was performed across GOLD 2011 categories A to D, according to baseline forced
expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1) % predicted, modified Medical Research Council
(mMRC) dyspnea scale, and exacerbation history in the 12 months prior to entry.
Efficacy of once-daily indacaterol 150 and 300 μg, open-label tiotropium 18 μg,
twice-daily salmeterol 50 μg, and formoterol 12 μg was compared with placebo. End
points analysed were trough FEV1, transition dyspnea index (TDI), and St George's
Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ) total score, all at Week 26, and mean rescue
medication use over 26 weeks.
RESULTS: Indacaterol 150 and 300 μg significantly improved FEV1, compared with
placebo across all GOLD groups. Indacaterol 150 and 300 μg also significantly
improved TDI, SGRQ total score, and mean rescue medication use compared with
placebo across most GOLD subgroups.
CONCLUSIONS: Treatment selection according to patient's symptoms as well as lung 
function is an important consideration in maintenance treatment of COPD.
Indacaterol 150 and 300 μg effectively improved lung function and symptoms in
patients across all GOLD 2011 categories.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pupt.2015.02.008 
PMID: 25743376  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. COPD. 2015;12(5):484-93. doi: 10.3109/15412555.2014.991864. Epub 2015 Feb 18.

One-Year Safety of Olodaterol Once Daily via Respimat® in Patients with GOLD 2-4 
Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease: Results of a Pre-Specified Pooled
Analysis.

McGarvey L(1), Niewoehner D(2), Magder S(3), Sachs P(4), Tetzlaff K(5,)(6),
Hamilton A(7), Korducki L(8), Bothner U(5), Vogelmeier C(9), Koch A(10), Ferguson
GT(11).

Author information: 
(1)a Centre for Infection and Immunity , School of Medicine, Dentistry and
Biomedical Sciences, Queen's University Belfast , Belfast , United Kingdom. (2)b 
Minneapolis VA Health Care System , Minneapolis , Minnesota , USA. (3)c McGill
University Health Centre , Montreal , Canada. (4)d Pulmonary Associates of
Stamford, Stamford , Connecticut , USA. (5)e Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma GmbH &
Co. KG , Ingelheim , Germany. (6)f Department of Sports Medicine, Medical Clinic 
V , University of Tübingen , Tübingen , Germany. (7)g Boehringer Ingelheim ,
Burlington , Ontario , Canada. (8)h Boehringer Ingelheim Pharmaceuticals Inc.,
Ridgefield , Connecticut , USA. (9)i Department of Medicine, Pulmonary and
Critical Care Medicine , University Medical Center Giessen and Marburg,
Philipps-Universität Marburg , Germany. (10)j Medical Clinic III for Pneumology, 
Allergology, Sleep and Respiratory Medicine, University Hospital
Bochum-Bergmannsheil , Bochum , Germany. (11)k Pulmonary Research Institute of
Southeast Michigan , Livonia , Michigan , USA.

The novel long-acting β2-agonist olodaterol demonstrated an acceptable safety
profile in short-term phase II clinical studies. This analysis of four
randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, parallel-group, phase III studies
(1222.11, NCT00782210; 1222.12, NCT00782509; 1222.13, NCT00793624; 1222.14,
NCT00796653) evaluated the long-term safety of olodaterol once daily (QD) in a
large cohort of patients with moderate to very severe (Global initiative for
chronic Obstructive Lung Disease 2-4) chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD). The studies compared olodaterol (5 or 10 μg) QD via Respimat®, formoterol
12 μg twice daily (BID) via Aerolizer® (1222.13 and 1222.14), and placebo for 48 
weeks. Patients continued receiving background maintenance therapy, with ∼60%
receiving concomitant cardiovascular therapy and 25% having a history of
concomitant cardiac disease. Pre-specified analyses of pooled data assessed the
adverse events (AEs) and serious AEs in the whole population, and in subgroups
with cardiac disease, along with in-depth electrocardiogram and Holter
monitoring. In total, 3104 patients were included in the safety analysis: 876
received olodaterol 5 μg, 883 received olodaterol 10 μg, 885 received placebos,
and 460 received formoterol 12 μg BID. Overall incidence of on-treatment AEs
(71.2%), serious AEs (16.1%), and deaths (1.7%) were balanced across treatment
groups. Respiratory and cardiovascular AEs, including major adverse cardiac
events, were reported at similar frequencies in placebo and active treatment
groups. The safety profiles of both olodaterol 5 μg (marketed and registered
dose) and 10 μg QD delivered via Respimat® are comparable to placebo and
formoterol BID in this population, with no safety signals identified.

DOI: 10.3109/15412555.2014.991864 
PMCID: PMC4778540
PMID: 25692310  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Ther Adv Respir Dis. 2015 Apr;9(2):49-55. doi: 10.1177/1753465815572065. Epub
2015 Feb 17.

Combination therapy with indacaterol and glycopyrronium bromide in the management
of COPD: an update on the evidence for efficacy and safety.

Ridolo E(1), Montagni M(1), Riario-Sforza GG(2), Baroni M(2), Incorvaia C(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of Parma, Parma, 
Italy. (2)Pulmonary Rehabilitation, ICP Hospital, Milan, Italy. (3)Pulmonary
Rehabilitation, ICP Hospital, Milan, Italy cristoforo.incorvaia@gmail.com.

The international guidelines on chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)
recommend inhaled bronchodilators for maintenance treatment of the disease. These
drugs include β2-agonists and muscarinic antagonists, which are both available as
short-acting agents (to be used as needed for dyspnea) and long-acting agents. To
the latter belong salmeterol and formoterol (long-acting β2-agonists) and
indacaterol, vilanterol and olodaterol (very long-acting β2-agonist) as
β2-agonists, and tiotropium, aclidinium and glycopyrronium bromide as long-acting
muscarinic antagonists. The efficacy and safety of indacaterol and glycopyrronium
as monotherapies has been demonstrated in several controlled trials. However, in 
some patients with moderate-to-severe COPD, symptoms are poorly controlled by
bronchodilator monotherapy; in these cases the addition of a second
bronchodilator from a different pharmacological class may be beneficial. Here we 
review the evidence from published randomized trials concerning the efficacy and 
safety of the once-daily fixed-dose dual bronchodilator combining indacaterol and
glycopyrronium.

© The Author(s), 2015.

DOI: 10.1177/1753465815572065 
PMID: 25691493  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2015 Jan 27;10:201-9. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S69589. 
eCollection 2015.

A score to predict short-term risk of COPD exacerbations (SCOPEX).

Make BJ(1), Eriksson G(2), Calverley PM(3), Jenkins CR(4), Postma DS(5), Peterson
S(6), Östlund O(7), Anzueto A(8).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary Sciences and Critical Care Medicine, National Jewish
Health, University of Colorado Denver School of Medicine, Denver, CO, USA.
(2)Department of Respiratory Medicine and Allergology, University Hospital, Lund,
Sweden. (3)Pulmonary and Rehabilitation Research Group, University Hospital
Aintree, Liverpool, UK. (4)George Institute for Global Health, The University of 
Sydney and Concord Clinical School, Woolcock Institute of Medical Research,
Sydney, NSW, Australia. (5)Department of Pulmonology, University of Groningen and
GRIAC Research Institute, University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, The
Netherlands. (6)StatMind AB, Lund, Sweden. (7)Department of Medical Sciences and 
Uppsala Clinical Research Center, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.
(8)Department of Pulmonary/Critical Care, University of Texas Health Sciences
Center and South Texas Veterans Healthcare System, San Antonio, TX, USA.

BACKGROUND: There is no clinically useful score to predict chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD) exacerbations. We aimed to derive this by analyzing data
from three existing COPD clinical trials of budesonide/formoterol, formoterol, or
placebo in patients with moderate-to-very-severe COPD and a history of
exacerbations in the previous year.
METHODS: Predictive variables were selected using Cox regression for time to
first severe COPD exacerbation. We determined absolute risk estimates for an
exacerbation by identifying variables in a binomial model, adjusting for
observation time, study, and treatment. The model was further reduced to
clinically useful variables and the final regression coefficients scaled to
obtain risk scores of 0-100 to predict an exacerbation within 6 months. Receiver 
operating characteristic (ROC) curves and the corresponding C-index were used to 
investigate the discriminatory properties of predictive variables.
RESULTS: The best predictors of an exacerbation in the next 6 months were more
COPD maintenance medications prior to the trial, higher mean daily reliever use, 
more exacerbations during the previous year, lower forced expiratory volume in 1 
second/forced vital capacity ratio, and female sex. Using these risk variables,
we developed a score to predict short-term (6-month) risk of COPD exacerbations
(SCOPEX). Budesonide/formoterol reduced future exacerbation risk more than
formoterol or as-needed short-acting β2-agonist (salbutamol).
CONCLUSION: SCOPEX incorporates easily identifiable patient characteristics and
can be readily applied in clinical practice to target therapy to reduce COPD
exacerbations in patients at the highest risk.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S69589 
PMCID: PMC4315304
PMID: 25670896  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Expert Opin Pharmacother. 2015 Feb;16(3):427-34. doi:
10.1517/14656566.2015.1000861.

Aclidinium bromide plus formoterol for the treatment of chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease.

Lal C(1), Strange C.

Author information: 
(1)Medical University of South Carolina, Allergy and Sleep Medicine, Department
of Pulmonary, Critical Care , 96 Jonathan Lucas Street, CSB 812, Msc 630,
Charleston, SC 29425 , USA +1 843 792 7776 ; +1 843 876 2057 ; lalch@musc.edu.

Erratum in
    Expert Opin Pharmacother. 2015 Apr;16(6):939.

INTRODUCTION: Drugs that target dynamic hyperinflation such as long-acting β-2
agonists and long-acting antimuscarinic antagonists form a cornerstone of chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) management. The idea of combining these two 
medications in a single formulation, which may potentially improve patient
compliance, is novel and attractive.
AREAS COVERED: The pharmacologic profiles of aclidinium bromide and formoterol
fumarate are discussed. However, studies to define drug interactions and
alterations in the pharmacodynamics and pharmacokinetics of the fixed dose
combination (FDC) of aclidinium bromide/formoterol fumarate in large populations 
remain unpublished. Results of Phase II and two Phase III pivotal trials,
ACLIFORM/COPD and AUGMENT COPD, evaluating the FDC are discussed.
EXPERT OPINION: Initial data for the aclidinium/formoterol inhaler appears to be 
promising for impacting the lung function. To define if this benefit translates
into improved long-term outcomes of decreased exacerbation frequency, improved
quality of life and decreased disease-specific mortality are important. The
introduction of this combination will likely have a significant impact on the
prescribing habits of physicians across the world.

DOI: 10.1517/14656566.2015.1000861 
PMID: 25597386  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. J Med Chem. 2015 May 28;58(10):4131-64. doi: 10.1021/jm5013227. Epub 2015 Feb 9.

Bronchodilating drugs for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: current status
and future trends.

Montuschi P(1), Ciabattoni G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Faculty of Medicine, Catholic University of the
Sacred Heart, Largo Francesco Vito, 1, Rome, 00168, Italy.

Inhaled bronchodilators, including long-acting muscarinic receptor antagonists
(LAMA) and long-acting β2-adrenoreceptor agonists (LABA), are the mainstay of
pharmacological treatment of stable chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
Among approved LAMA, tiotropium bromide, glycopyrronium bromide, and umeclidinium
bromide are administered once daily, whereas aclidinium bromide is administered
every 12 h. New LAMA are under development for COPD. Among the approved LABA,
indacaterol has a 24 h duration of action, whereas salmeterol and formoterol
require twice-daily administration. New once-daily LABA, including vilanterol,
olodaterol, milveterol, carmoterol, and abediterol, are in development. LAMA/LABA
fixed dose combinations (FDCs) provide the convenience of two bronchodilators
with different mechanism of action in a single inhaler.
Indacaterol/glycopyrronium, umeclidinium/vilanterol, and olodaterol/tiotropium
FDCs have been approved or are under approval and are likely to become a standard
pharmacological strategy for COPD. Inhaled dual-pharmacology compounds, combining
muscarinic antagonism and β2-agonism (MABA) in a single molecule, potentially
provide additive or synergistic bronchodilation over either inhaled
antimuscarinic or β2-agonist monotherapy.

DOI: 10.1021/jm5013227 
PMID: 25587755  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2015 Jan 10;1:CD010139. doi:
10.1002/14651858.CD010139.pub2.

Indacaterol, a once-daily beta2-agonist, versus twice-daily beta₂-agonists or
placebo for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Geake JB(1), Dabscheck EJ, Wood-Baker R, Cates CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Medicine, The Prince Charles Hospital, Chermside,
Queensland, Australia, 4032.

BACKGROUND: Indacaterol is an inhaled long-acting beta2-agonist that is
administered once daily and has been investigated as a treatment for chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Four different doses have been investigated
(75 mcg, 150 mcg, 300 mcg and 600 mcg). The relative effects of different doses
of once-daily indacaterol in the management of patients with COPD are uncertain.
OBJECTIVES: To compare the efficacy and safety of indacaterol versus placebo and 
alternative twice-daily long-acting beta2-agonists for the treatment of patients 
with stable COPD.
SEARCH METHODS: We identified trials from the Cochrane Airways Group Specialised 
Register of trials (CAGR), handsearched respiratory journals and meeting
abstracts and searched the Novartis trials registry and ClinicalTrials.gov. The
date of the most recent search was 8 November 2014.
SELECTION CRITERIA: We included all randomised controlled trials comparing
indacaterol at any dose versus placebo or alternative long-acting beta2-agonists.
Trials were required to be of at least 12 weeks' duration and had to include
adults older than 18 years with a confirmed spirometric diagnosis of COPD.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Two review authors (JBG, EJD) independently
assessed for possible inclusion all citations identified as a result of the
search. Disagreements were resolved through discussion or, if required, through
resolution by a third review author (RWB). One review author (JBG) extracted data
from trials identified by the search and entered these data into Review Manager
5.1 for statistical analysis. Data entry was cross-checked by a second review
author (EJD, CJC).
MAIN RESULTS: A total of 13 trials with 9961 participants were included in the
review. Ten trials with a total of 8562 participants involved an indacaterol
versus placebo comparison. Five trials with a total of 4133 participants involved
an indacaterol versus twice-daily beta2-agonist comparison. The comparator
beta2-agonists were salmeterol, formoterol and eformoterol. One of these trials, 
with a total of 90 participants, provided no data that could be used in this
review. Two trials included both indacaterol versus placebo and indacaterol
versus twice-daily beta2-agonist comparisons. Trials were between 12 weeks and 52
weeks in duration. Overall the quality of the evidence was strong, and risk of
significant bias was minimal in most of the included studies. Enrolled
participants had stable COPD across a range of spirometric severities. Forced
expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1) was generally between 30% and 80% predicted,
and a mean FEV1 of approximately 50% was predicted in most studies. Patients with
concurrent respiratory disease, including asthma, were excluded. Concomitant use 
of inhaled corticosteroids was permitted.The primary objectives were to compare
trough FEV1 at the end of dosing, exacerbation rates and quality of life.
Significant adverse events, mortality and dyspnoea were included as secondary
outcomes. Compared with placebo, a significant and clinically relevant
improvement in trough FEV1 was noted with indacaterol (mean difference (MD)
149.11, 95% confidence interval (CI) 137.09 to 161.12). In addition, compared
with placebo, a significant improvement in mean St George Respiratory
Questionaire (SGRQ) score (MD -3.60, 95% CI -4.36 to -2.83) was reported, and the
proportion of participants experiencing clinically relevant improvement in SGRQ
score was significantly greater (odds ratio (OR) 1.63, 95% CI 1.46 to 1.84).
Compared with twice-daily beta2-agonists, a small but statistically significant
increase in trough FEV1 was seen with indacaterol (MD 61.71 mL, 95% CI 41.24 to
82.17). Differences between indacaterol and twice-daily beta2-agonists in mean
SGRQ scores (MD -0.81, 95% CI -2.28 to 0.66) and in the proportions of
participants achieving clinically relevant improvements in SGRQ scores (OR 1.07, 
95% CI 0.87 to 1.32) were not statistically significant, but the confidence
intervals are too wide to permit the conclusion that the treatments were
equivalent. Data were insufficient for analysis of differences in exacerbation
rates for both placebo and twice-daily beta2-agonist comparisons.
AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: For patients with stable COPD, use of indacaterol versus
placebo results in statistically significant and clinically meaningful
improvements in lung function and quality of life. The clinical benefit for lung 
function is at least as good as that seen with twice-daily long-acting
beta2-agonists. The comparative effect on quality of life remains uncertain, as
important differences cannot be excluded.

DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD010139.pub2 
PMID: 25575340  [PubMed - in process]


95. Expert Opin Drug Saf. 2015 Mar;14(3):463-72. doi: 10.1517/14740338.2015.998196.
Epub 2015 Jan 7.

Review of drug safety and efficacy of arformoterol in chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease.

Loh CH(1), Donohue JF, Ohar JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Wake Forest School of Medicine, Medical
Center Boulevard , Winston-Salem, NC 27157-1054 , USA.

INTRODUCTION: The global initiative for chronic obstructive lung disease
guidelines recommend maintenance therapy using long-acting bronchodilators for
patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) who have daily
symptoms. Arformoterol is the (R, R) - enantiomer of the racemic formoterol and
is more potent than (R, R/ S, S) - formoterol.
AREAS COVERED: Currently, arformoterol is one of two nebulized long-acting
β-agonists on the market. It has a low incidence of cardiovascular side effects
with incidence of arrhythmia and ischemia similar to placebo. β-adrenergic
adverse effects are infrequent, numerically lower than formoterol, but have a
quicker onset of action than salmeterol. There was no observed clinical tolerance
over 12 months. arformoterol is safe in combination therapy with inhaled
corticosteroids, tiotropium and rescue inhalers. A 12-month Phase IV trial found 
no increased risk of respiratory death or COPD exacerbation-related
hospitalizations. arformoterol can potentially benefit patients with
hyperinflation and low inspiratory flow rates.
EXPERT OPINION: The introduction of the centers for medicare and medicaid
services penalization for COPD readmissions may boost the appeal of long-acting
bronchodilators as new discharge medications. With the advent of ultra
long-acting bronchodilators, its potential as a once daily agent in isolation or 
combination with these new therapies needs further study.

DOI: 10.1517/14740338.2015.998196 
PMID: 25563342  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Basic Clin Pharmacol Toxicol. 2015 Apr;116(4):291-307. doi: 10.1111/bcpt.12366.
Epub 2015 Jan 22.

Diagnosis and pharmacotherapy of stable chronic obstructive pulmonary disease:
the finnish guidelines.

Kankaanranta H(1), Harju T, Kilpeläinen M, Mazur W, Lehto JT, Katajisto M, Peisa 
T, Meinander T, Lehtimäki L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Seinäjoki Central Hospital, Seinäjoki,
Finland; Department of Respiratory Medicine, University of Tampere, Tampere,
Finland.

The Finnish Medical Society Duodecim initiated and managed the update of the
Finnish national guideline for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). The 
Finnish COPD guideline was revised to acknowledge the progress in diagnosis and
management of COPD. This Finnish COPD guideline in English language is a part of 
the original guideline and focuses on the diagnosis, assessment and
pharmacotherapy of stable COPD. It is intended to be used mainly in primary
health care but not forgetting respiratory specialists and other healthcare
workers. The new recommendations and statements are based on the best evidence
available from the medical literature, other published national guidelines and
the GOLD (Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease) report. This
guideline introduces the diagnostic approach, differential diagnostics towards
asthma, assessment and treatment strategy to control symptoms and to prevent
exacerbations. The pharmacotherapy is based on the symptoms and a clinical
phenotype of the individual patient. The guideline defines three clinically
relevant phenotypes including the low and high exacerbation risk phenotypes and
the neglected asthma-COPD overlap syndrome (ACOS). These clinical phenotypes can 
help clinicians to identify patients that respond to specific pharmacological
interventions. For the low exacerbation risk phenotype, pharmacotherapy with
short-acting β2 -agonists (salbutamol, terbutaline) or anticholinergics
(ipratropium) or their combination (fenoterol-ipratropium) is recommended in
patients with less symptoms. If short-acting bronchodilators are not enough to
control symptoms, a long-acting β2 -agonist (formoterol, indacaterol, olodaterol 
or salmeterol) or a long-acting anticholinergic (muscarinic receptor antagonists;
aclidinium, glycopyrronium, tiotropium, umeclidinium) or their combination is
recommended. For the high exacerbation risk phenotype, pharmacotherapy with a
long-acting anticholinergic or a fixed combination of an inhaled glucocorticoid
and a long-acting β2 -agonist (budesonide-formoterol, beclomethasone
dipropionate-formoterol, fluticasone propionate-salmeterol or fluticasone
furoate-vilanterol) is recommended as a first choice. Other treatment options for
this phenotype include combination of long-acting bronchodilators given from
separate inhalers or as a fixed combination (glycopyrronium-indacaterol or
umeclidinium-vilanterol) or a triple combination of an inhaled glucocorticoid, a 
long-acting β2 -agonist and a long-acting anticholinergic. If the patient has
severe-to-very severe COPD (FEV1  < 50% predicted), chronic bronchitis and
frequent exacerbations despite long-acting bronchodilators, the pharmacotherapy
may include also roflumilast. ACOS is a phenotype of COPD in which there are
features that comply with both asthma and COPD. Patients belonging to this
phenotype have usually been excluded from studies evaluating the effects of drugs
both in asthma and in COPD. Thus, evidence-based recommendation of treatment
cannot be given. The treatment should cover both diseases. Generally, the therapy
should include at least inhaled glucocorticoids (beclomethasone dipropionate,
budesonide, ciclesonide, fluticasone furoate, fluticasone propionate or
mometasone) combined with a long-acting bronchodilator (β2 -agonist or
anticholinergic or both).

© 2014 The Authors. Basic & Clinical Pharmacology & Toxicology published by John 
Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of Nordic Association for the Publication of BCPT
(former Nordic Pharmacological Society).

DOI: 10.1111/bcpt.12366 
PMCID: PMC4409821
PMID: 25515181  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Patient Relat Outcome Meas. 2014 Nov 27;5:153-62. doi: 10.2147/PROM.S55276.
eCollection 2014.

Impact of extrafine formulations of inhaled corticosteroids/long-acting beta-2
agonist combinations on patient-related outcomes in asthma and COPD.

Scichilone N(1), Benfante A(1), Morandi L(2), Bellini F(2), Papi A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Department of Internal and Specialist Medicine, Section of
Pulmonology, University of Palermo, Italy. (2)Respiratory Medicine, Department of
Medical Sciences, University of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy.

Asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) are among the most common
chronic diseases worldwide, characterized by a condition of variable degree of
airway obstruction and chronic airway inflammation. A large body of evidence has 
demonstrated the importance of small airways as a pharmacological target in these
clinical conditions. Despite a deeper understanding of the pathophysiological
mechanisms, the epidemiological observations show that a significant proportion
of asthmatic and COPD patients have a suboptimal (or lack of) control of their
diseases. Different factors could influence the effectiveness of inhaled
treatment in chronic respiratory diseases: patient-related (eg, aging);
disease-related (eg, comorbid conditions); and drug-related/formulation-related
factors. The presence of multiple illnesses is common in the elderly patient as a
result of two processes: the association between age and incidence of
degenerative diseases; and the development over time of complications of the
existing diseases. In addition, specific comorbidities may contribute to impair
the ability to use inhalers, such as devices for efficient drug delivery in the
respiratory system. The inability to reach and treat the peripheral airways may
contribute to the lack of efficacy of inhaled treatments. The recent development 
of inhaled extrafine formulations allows a more uniform distribution of the
inhaled treatment throughout the respiratory tree to include the peripheral
airways. The beclomethasone/formoterol extrafine formulation is available for the
treatment of asthma and COPD. Different biomarkers of peripheral airways are
improved by beclomethasone/formoterol extrafine treatment in comparison with
equivalent nonextrafine inhaled corticosteroids/long-acting beta-2 agonist
(ICS/LABA) combinations. These improvements are associated with improved lung
function and clinical outcomes, along with reduced systemic exposure to inhaled
corticosteroids. The increased knowledge in the pathophysiology of the peripheral
airways may lead to identify specific phenotypes of obstructive lung diseases
that would mostly benefit from the treatments specifically targeting the
peripheral airways.

DOI: 10.2147/PROM.S55276 
PMCID: PMC4251568
PMID: 25473323  [PubMed]


98. Pulm Pharmacol Ther. 2015 Feb;30:44-50. doi: 10.1016/j.pupt.2014.10.006. Epub
2014 Nov 6.

Differences in the efficacy and safety among inhaled corticosteroids
(ICS)/long-acting beta2-agonists (LABA) combinations in the treatment of chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD): Role of ICS.

Latorre M(1), Novelli F(1), Vagaggini B(1), Braido F(2), Papi A(3), Sanduzzi
A(4), Santus P(5), Scichilone N(6), Paggiaro P(7).

Author information: 
(1)Cardio-Thoracic and Vascular Department, Pathophysiology Unit, University of
Pisa, Italy. (2)Allergy and Respiratory Diseases Clinic, DIMI, University of
Genoa, IRCS AOU San Martino-IST, Genoa, Italy. (3)Respiratory Medicine,
Department of Medical Sciences, University of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy. (4)Section
of Respiratory Diseases, Department of Surgery and Clinical Medicine, University 
of Naples, Italy. (5)Dipartimento di Scienze della Salute, Pneumologia
Riabilitativa Fondazione Salvatore Maugeri, Istituto Scientifico di Milano-IRCCS.
Università degli Studi di Milano, Italy. (6)Department of Internal Medicine,
Section of Pulmonology (DIBIMIS), University of Palermo, Palermo, Italy.
(7)Cardio-Thoracic and Vascular Department, Pathophysiology Unit, University of
Pisa, Italy. Electronic address: pierluigi.paggiaro@unipi.it.

Inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) are frequently recommended for the treatment of
asthma and COPD, often in combination with long-acting beta2-agonists (LABA),
depending on the severity of the disease and/or on the specific phenotype.
Several ICS/LABA combinations are currently available that differ in their
pharmacokinetic characteristics and dose of both components. Thus, this review
assesses differences in the efficacy and the safety profiles of the ICS
components in the two more frequently used ICS/LABA combinations
(budesonide/formoterol and fluticasone/salmeterol) for the management of COPD.
Whereas the basic mechanism of action is similar for all ICS (binding with the
intracellular glucocorticoid receptor, which mediates both genomic and non
genomic effects), the pharmacokinetic and characteristics of ICS are quite
different in terms of receptor affinity, bioavailability, lipophilicity and drug 
persistence in the airways. Fluticasone persists longer in airway mucus and
requires more time to dissolve in the lining fluid and then enter the airway
wall, whereas budesonide is cleared more quickly from the airways. Comparative
efficacy of the two major ICS/LABA combinations recommended for the treatment of 
COPD show similar efficacy in terms of reduction of exacerbations, improvement in
forced expiratory volume in the first second (FEV1) and quality of life. One
retrospective cohort study suggested a greater efficacy for the
budesonide/formoterol combination on hospital or emergency department admissions,
oral corticosteroid courses, and addition of tiotropium, and an observational
real-life study reported a greater reduction of COPD exacerbations with
budesonide/formoterol than with fluticasom/salmeterol combination. Among the
potential side effects of chronic ICS treatment in patients with COPD, recently
the use of fluticasone or fluticasone/salmeterol combination has been associated 
with a higher prevalence of pneumonia in the major long-term studies. On the
other hand, no similar increased risk of pneumonia has been reported in patients 
with COPD treated with the budesonide/formoterol combination. A recent
population-based cohort study from the Quebec database showed that the adjusted
odds ratio for having severe pneumonia was higher for fluticasone (2.1) than for 
budesonide (1.17) or other ICS (1.41). Of the ICS studied, only fluticasone
demonstrated a dose-related increase in risk of pneumonia in patients with COPD. 
This difference between fluticasone and budesonide may be explained by the longer
retention of fluticasone in the airways, with potentially greater inhibition of
type-1 innate immunity. Therefore, the risk:benefit ratio should be evaluated
thoroughly when choosing an ICS/LABA combination for patients with COPD.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pupt.2014.10.006 
PMID: 25445928  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. BMC Pulm Med. 2014 Nov 18;14:178. doi: 10.1186/1471-2466-14-178.

Efficacy and safety of aclidinium bromide/formoterol fumarate fixed-dose
combinations compared with individual components and placebo in patients with
COPD (ACLIFORM-COPD): a multicentre, randomised study.

Singh D(1), Jones PW, Bateman ED, Korn S, Serra C, Molins E, Caracta C, Gil EG,
Leselbaum A.

Author information: 
(1)University of Manchester, Medicines Evaluation Unit, Langley Building,
University Hospital of South Manchester NHS Foundation Trust, Southmoor Road,
Manchester M23 9QZ, UK. dsingh@meu.org.uk.

BACKGROUND: Aclidinium/formoterol is a twice-daily (BID) fixed-dose combination
(FDC) in development for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). The
efficacy and safety of aclidinium/formoterol versus monotherapy and placebo in
patients with COPD was assessed.
METHODS: In this 24-week double-blind, parallel-group, active- and
placebo-controlled, multicentre Phase III study, patients (≥40 years,
post-bronchodilator forced expiratory volume in 1 second [FEV1]/forced vital
capacity <70% and FEV1 ≥30% but <80% predicted normal) were randomised 2:2:2:2:1 
to aclidinium/formoterol 400/12 μg (n = 385) or 400/6 μg (n = 381), aclidinium
400 μg (n = 385), formoterol 12 μg (n = 384) or placebo (n = 194) BID via
Genuair®/Pressair®a.
RESULTS: At Week 24, aclidinium/formoterol 400/12 μg and 400/6 μg lead to
significant improvements from baseline in 1-hour post-dose FEV1 versus aclidinium
(125 mL [95% CI: 90, 160; p < 0 · 001] and 69 mL [95% CI: 34, 105; p < 0.001],
respectively) and trough FEV1 versus formoterol (85 mL [95% CI: 51, 119; p <
0.001] and 53 mL [95% CI: 19, 87; p < 0.01], respectively; co-primary endpoints).
Additionally, aclidinium/formoterol 400/12 μg and 400/6 μg provided significant
improvements in Transition Dyspnoea Index (TDI) focal score versus placebo (1.29 
units [95% CI: 0.73, 1.86; p < 0.001] and 1.16 units [95% CI: 0.59, 1.73; p <
0.001], respectively; secondary endpoint). All treatments were well tolerated,
with safety profiles of the FDCs similar to those of placebo and monotherapy.
CONCLUSIONS: Both aclidinium/formoterol BID doses significantly improved
bronchodilation versus monotherapy, and dyspnoea versus placebo, with no increase
in safety risk. Aclidinium/formoterol may be an effective treatment for patients 
with COPD.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov: NCT01462942.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2466-14-178 
PMCID: PMC4273456
PMID: 25404569  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Value Health. 2014 Nov;17(7):A598-9. doi: 10.1016/j.jval.2014.08.2070. Epub 2014 
Oct 26.

The Potential Societal Cost Benefits of Improved Inhalation Technique With
Duoresp® Spiromax® (Budesonide + Formoterol Fumarate Dihydrate) Compared With
Symbicort® Turbuhaler® for the Management of Asthma and Chronic Obstructive
Pulmonary Disease in Sweden.

Lewis A(1), Blackney M(1), Torvinen S(2), Lindqvist F(3), Safioti G(3),
Grundström J(4), Polyzoi M(4), Plich A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Covance Inc., London, UK. (2)Teva Pharmaceuticals Europe B. V, Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands. (3)Teva Pharmaceuticals AB, Helsingborg, Sweden. (4)Parexel
International, Stockholm, Sweden.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jval.2014.08.2070 
PMID: 27202062  [PubMed]


101. Value Health. 2014 Nov;17(7):A591. doi: 10.1016/j.jval.2014.08.2027. Epub 2014
Oct 26.

The Budget Impact of Duoresp® Spiromax® (Budesonide + Formoterol Fumarate
Dihydrate) Compared With Symbicort® Turbohaler® for the Management of Asthma and 
Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease in the United Kingdom: Impact on Health
Care Costs and Inhalation Technique.

Lewis A(1), Blackney M(1), Torvinen S(2), Holmes J(3), Osborne M(3), Dale J(3),
Chandler S(3), Plich A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Covance Inc., London, UK. (2)Teva Pharmaceuticals Europe B. V, Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands. (3)Teva UK Limited, Essex, UK.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jval.2014.08.2027 
PMID: 27202019  [PubMed]


102. Mol Pharmacol. 2015 Jan;87(1):64-76. doi: 10.1124/mol.114.093393. Epub 2014 Oct
16.

Superiority of combined phosphodiesterase PDE3/PDE4 inhibition over PDE4
inhibition alone on glucocorticoid- and long-acting β2-adrenoceptor
agonist-induced gene expression in human airway epithelial cells.

BinMahfouz H(1), Borthakur B(1), Yan D(1), George T(1), Giembycz MA(1), Newton
R(2).

Author information: 
(1)Airways Inflammation Research Group, Snyder Institute for Chronic Diseases,
Faculty of Medicine, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada. (2)Airways 
Inflammation Research Group, Snyder Institute for Chronic Diseases, Faculty of
Medicine, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada rnewton@ucalgary.ca.

Glucocorticoids, also known as corticosteroids, induce effector gene
transcription as a part of their anti-inflammatory mechanisms of action. Such
genomic effects can be significantly enhanced by long-acting β2-adrenoceptor
agonists (LABAs) and may contribute to the clinical superiority of inhaled
corticosteroid (ICS)/LABA combinations in asthma and chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD) over ICSs alone. Using models of cAMP- and
glucocorticoid-induced transcription in human bronchial epithelial BEAS-2B cells,
we show that combining inhibitors of phosphodiesterase (PDE) 3 and PDE4 provides 
greater benefits compared with inhibiting either PDE alone. In respect to
cAMP-dependent transcription, inhibitors of PDE3 (siguazodan, cilostazol) and
PDE4 (rolipram, GSK256066, roflumilast N-oxide) each sensitized to the LABA,
formoterol. This effect was magnified by dual PDE3 and PDE4 inhibition.
Siguazodan plus rolipram was also more effective at inducing cAMP-dependent
transcription than either inhibitor alone. Conversely, the concentration-response
curve describing the enhancement of dexamethasone-induced, glucocorticoid
response element-dependent transcription by formoterol was displaced to the left 
by PDE4, but not PDE3, inhibition. Overall, similar effects were described for
bona fide genes, including RGS2, CD200, and CRISPLD2. Importantly, the
combination of siguazodan plus rolipram prolonged the duration of gene expression
induced by formoterol, dexamethasone, or dexamethasone plus formoterol. This was 
most apparent for RGS2, a bronchoprotective gene that may also reduce the
proinflammatory effects of constrictor mediators. Collectively, these data
provide a rationale for the use of PDE3 and PDE4 inhibitors in the treatment of
COPD and asthma where they may enhance, sensitize, and prolong the effects of
LABA/ICS combination therapies.

Copyright © 2014 by The American Society for Pharmacology and Experimental
Therapeutics.

DOI: 10.1124/mol.114.093393 
PMID: 25324049  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Mol Pharmacol. 2015 Jan;87(1):103-20. doi: 10.1124/mol.114.095364. Epub 2014 Oct 
16.

Salmeterol's extreme β2 selectivity is due to residues in both extracellular
loops and transmembrane domains.

Baker JG(1), Proudman RG(2), Hill SJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Cell Signalling, School of Life Sciences, Queen's Medical Centre, University
of Nottingham, Nottingham, United Kingdom jillian.baker@nottingham.ac.uk. (2)Cell
Signalling, School of Life Sciences, Queen's Medical Centre, University of
Nottingham, Nottingham, United Kingdom.

Salmeterol is a long-acting β2-agonist, widely used as an inhaled treatment of
asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. It has very high β2-affinity
(log KD -8.95) and is very selective for the β2-adrenoceptor (1000-fold
selectivity over the β1-adrenoceptor). This study used a mutagenesis approach to 
determine the exact amino acids in the human β2-adrenoceptor responsible for this
very high selectivity. Wild-type β2- and β1-adrenoceptors, chimeric
β2/β1-adrenoceptors, and receptors with single-point mutations were transfected
into Chinese hamster ovary-K1 cells, and affinity and function were studied using
[(3)H]CGP 12177 [(-)-4-(3-tert-butylamino-2-hydroxypropoxy)-benzimidazol-2-one]
whole-cell binding and [(3)H]cAMP accumulation. Extracellular loop 3 (and
specifically amino acid K305) had the largest single effect by reducing
salmeterol's affinity for the β2-adrenoceptor by 31-fold. H296 in transmembrane 6
also had a major effect (18-fold reduction in salmeterol affinity). Combining
these, in the double mutant β2-H296K-K305D, reduced salmeterol's affinity by
275-fold, to within 4-fold of that of the β1-adrenoceptor, without affecting the 
affinity or selectivity of other β2-agonists (salbutamol, formoterol, fenoterol, 
clenbuterol, or adrenaline). Another important amino acid was Y308 in
transmembrane 7, although this also affected the affinity and selectivity of
other agonists. F194 in extracellular loop 2 and R304 in extracellular loop 3
also had minor effects. None of these mutations (including the double mutant
β2-H296K-K305D) affected the efficacy or duration of action of salmeterol. This
suggests that the high affinity and selectivity of salmeterol are due to specific
amino acids within the receptor itself, but that the duration of action is at
least in part due to other factors, for example lipophilicity.

Copyright © 2014 by The American Society for Pharmacology and Experimental
Therapeutics.

DOI: 10.1124/mol.114.095364 
PMID: 25324048  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2015;839:7-12. doi: 10.1007/5584_2014_43.

Tregs and HLA-DR expression in sputum cells of COPD patients treated with
tiotropium and formoterol.

Holownia A(1), Wielgat P, Stasiak-Barmuta A, Kwolek A, Jakubow P, Szepiel P,
Chyczewska E, Braszko JJ, Mroz RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacology, Medical University of Bialystok, 15a
Waszyngtona St., Bialystok, Poland, holow_sinai@hotmail.com.

Immune cells expressing the activation markers HLA-DR and regulatory T cells
(Tregs) may be involved in the regulation of chronic inflammation in chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). In this study we analyzed native and
activated cell profiles in sputum of 22 stable COPD patients receiving formoterol
(F) or formoterol + tiotropium (F + T) for 3 months. Cells were isolated from
induced sputum and were examined on Coulter flow cytometer using fluorescent
antibodies specific for CD3, CD4, CD8, CD14, CD19, CD25, CD127, and HLA-DR
antigens. Cell profiles and cell activation were assessed by analysis of HLA-DR, 
CD25, and CD127 co-expression in double-stained samples. Tregs were defined as
CD4⁺CD25(high) CD127(low) cells. We found that the combined therapy significantly
decreased the CD8⁺ cell number (p < 0.01). At baseline, HLA-DR was expressed in
about 10 % of sputum T or B cells and a higher expression was found on monocytes.
The HLA-DR expression on lymphocytes, but not monocytes, was significantly lower 
(p < 0.01) in patients treated with F + T. Fractions of activated [CD4⁺ CD25⁺]
cells were also significantly lower in the combined therapy group, except for the
subpopulation of CD4⁺CD25(high) CD127(low) cells which was not altered. We
conclude that tiotropium in add-on therapy to formoterol affects Treg cell
profiles and decreases HLA-DR expression in airway lymphocytes.

DOI: 10.1007/5584_2014_43 
PMID: 25315616  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. NPJ Prim Care Respir Med. 2014 Oct 2;24:14069. doi: 10.1038/npjpcrm.2014.69.

Impact of multiple-dose versus single-dose inhaler devices on COPD patients'
persistence with long-acting β₂-agonists: a dispensing database analysis.

van Boven JF(1), van Raaij JJ(1), van der Galiën R(1), Postma MJ(1), van der
Molen T(2), Dekhuijzen PN(3), Vegter S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Unit of PharmacoEpidemiology and PharmacoEconomics, Department of Pharmacy,
University of Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands. (2)Department of Primary
Care, University Medical Centre Groningen, University of Groningen, Groningen,
The Netherlands. (3)Department of Pulmonary Diseases, Radboud University Medical 
Centre, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: With a growing availability of different devices and types of
medication, additional evidence is required to assist clinicians in prescribing
the optimal medication in relation to chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD) patients' persistence with long-acting β2-agonists (LABAs).
AIMS: To assess the impact of the type of inhaler device (multiple-dose versus
single-dose inhalers) on 1-year persistence and switching patterns with LABAs.
METHODS: A retrospective observational cohort study was performed comparing a
cohort of patients initiating multiple-dose inhalers and a cohort initiating
single-dose inhalers. The study population consisted of long-acting
bronchodilator naive COPD patients, initiating inhalation therapy with mono-LABAs
(formoterol, indacaterol or salmeterol). Analyses were performed using pharmacy
dispensing data from 1994 to 2012, obtained from the IADB.nl database. Study
outcomes were 1-year persistence and switching patterns. RESULTS were adjusted
for initial prescriber, initial medication, dosing regimen and relevant
comorbidities.
RESULTS: In all, 575 patients initiating LABAs were included in the final study
cohort. Among them, 475 (83%) initiated a multiple-dose inhaler and 100 (17%) a
single-dose inhaler. Further, 269 (47%) initiated formoterol, 9 (2%) indacaterol 
and 297 (52%) salmeterol. There was no significant difference in persistence
between users of multiple-dose or single-dose inhalers (hazard ratio: 0.98, 95%
confidence interval: 0.76-1.26, P=0.99). Over 80% re-started or switched
medication.
CONCLUSIONS: There seems no impact of inhaler device (multiple-dose versus
single-dose inhalers) on COPD patients' persistence with LABAs. Over 80% of
patients who initially seemed to discontinue LABAs, re-started their initial
medication or switched inhalers or medication within 1 year.

DOI: 10.1038/npjpcrm.2014.69 
PMCID: PMC4373462
PMID: 25274453  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Postepy Dermatol Alergol. 2014 Aug;31(4):235-46. doi: 10.5114/pdia.2014.45070.
Epub 2014 Sep 9.

The adherence and illness perception of patients diagnosed with asthma or chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease treated with polytherapy using new generation
Cyclohaler.

Olszanecka-Glinianowicz M(1), Almgren-Rachtan A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Health Promotion and Obesity Management Unit, Department of Pathophysiology,
Medical Faculty in Katowice, Medical University of Silesia. Head of the Unit:
Prof. Magdalena Olszanecka-Glinianowicz MD, PhD. (2)Safety and Pharmacovigilance 
Department, Europharma Rachtan Ltd., Katowice, Poland.

INTRODUCTION: The factors influencing adherence of patients diagnosed with asthma
and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) include the complexity of the
therapy, fear of side effects of drugs, method of taking the drug, dosage
regimen, polypharmacy, adverse events, knowledge about the essence of the disease
and its complications, illness perception and priorities in life, training on the
use of the inhaler, the duration of treatment, social support, and drug
availability.
AIM: To assess the adherence of patients diagnosed with asthma and COPD treated
with polytherapy with fluticasone propionate and formoterol fumarate using the
Fantasmino inhaler in relation to primary diagnosis and illness perception as
well as patients' and doctors' opinion about this form of therapy.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: A questionnaire survey covering adherence, illness
perception and opinion about polytherapy using new generation Cyclohaler
performed by pulmonologists, allergologists and general practitioners in 3,618
patients with asthma and 2,602 with COPD.
RESULTS: On visit 1, a lower adherence rate was observed in COPD than in the
asthma group (72.0% vs. 61.5%; p < 0.01). During the observation, the adherence
rate increased significantly in the COPD group, only (61.5% vs. 73.0%; p < 0.01).
A negative correlation between total MMAS-8 and BIPQ scores was observed in both 
study groups (R = -0.15; p < 0.001 and R = -0.24; p < 0.001, respectively).
During the observation, a percentage of patients who believed that the
administration of the two drugs in a single inhaler considerably facilitates
their use increased significantly in both study groups. In addition, an increased
percentage of doctors believed that this therapeutic option facilitated education
of patients and decreased the number of errors made by the patients.
CONCLUSIONS: The illness perception, younger age, disease duration and severity
are predictors of adherence to treatment with fluticasone propionate and
formoterol fumarate using the Fantasmino inhaler among patients with asthma and
COPD. The positive opinion of patients and doctors about administration of
fluticasone propionate and formoterol fumarate using the Fantasmino inhaler
increased during observation.

DOI: 10.5114/pdia.2014.45070 
PMCID: PMC4171677
PMID: 25254009  [PubMed]


107. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2014 Sep 19;(9):CD010509. doi:
10.1002/14651858.CD010509.pub2.

Aclidinium bromide for stable chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Ni H(1), Soe Z, Moe S.

Author information: 
(1)Internal Medicine, SEGi University, Hospital Teluk Intan, Jalan Changkat Jong,
Teluk Intan, Perak Darul Ridzuan, Malaysia, 36000.

Comment in
    Am Fam Physician. 2015 Jun 1;91(11):760.

BACKGROUND: Bronchodilators are the mainstay for symptom relief in the management
of stable chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Aclidinium bromide is a
new long-acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA) that differs from tiotropium by its 
higher selectivity for M3 muscarinic receptors with a faster onset of action.
However, the duration of action of aclidinium is shorter than for tiotropium. It 
has been approved as maintenance therapy for stable, moderate to severe COPD, but
its efficacy and safety in the management of COPD is uncertain compared to other 
bronchodilators.
OBJECTIVES: To assess the efficacy and safety of aclidinium bromide in stable
COPD.
SEARCH METHODS: We identified randomised controlled trials (RCT) from the
Cochrane Airways Group Specialised Register of trials (CAGR), as well as
www.clinicaltrials.gov, World Health Organization (WHO) International Clinical
Trials Registry Platform (ICTRP), US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) website
and Almirall Clinical Trials Registry and Results. We contacted Forest
Laboratories for any unpublished trials and checked the reference lists of
identified articles for additional information. The last search was performed on 
7 April 2014 for CAGR and 11 April 2014 for other sources.
SELECTION CRITERIA: Parallel-group RCTs of aclidinium bromide compared with
placebo, long-acting beta2-agonists (LABA) or LAMA in adults with stable COPD.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Two review authors independently selected studies, 
assessed the risk of bias, and extracted data. We sought missing data from the
trial authors as well as manufacturers of aclidinium. We used odds ratios (OR)
for dichotomous data and mean difference (MD) for continuous data, and reported
both with their 95% confidence intervals (CI). We used standard methodological
procedures expected by The Cochrane Collaboration. We applied the GRADE approach 
to summarise results and to assess the overall quality of evidence.
MAIN RESULTS: This review included 12 multicentre RCTs randomly assigning 9547
participants with stable COPD. All the studies were industry-sponsored and had
similar inclusion criteria with relatively good methodological quality. All but
one study included in the meta-analysis were double-blind and scored low risk of 
bias. The study duration ranged from four weeks to 52 weeks. Participants were
more often males, mainly Caucasians, mean age ranging from 61.7 to 65.6 years,
and with a smoking history of 10 or more pack years. They had moderate to severe 
symptoms at randomisation; the mean post-bronchodilator forced expiratory volume 
in one second (FEV1) was between 46% and 57.6% of the predicted normal value, and
the mean St George's Respiratory Questionnaire score (SGRQ) ranged from 45.1 to
50.4 when reported.There was no difference between aclidinium and placebo in
all-cause mortality (low quality) and number of patients with exacerbations
requiring a short course of oral steroids or antibiotics, or both (moderate
quality). Aclidinium improved quality of life by lowering the SGRQ total score
with a mean difference of -2.34 (95% CI -3.18 to -1.51; I(2) = 48%, 7 trials,
4442 participants) when compared to placebo. More patients on aclidinium achieved
a clinically meaningful improvement of at least four units decrease in SGRQ total
score (OR 1.49; 95% CI 1.31 to 1.70; I(2) = 34%; number needed to treat (NNT) =
10, 95% CI 8 to 15, high quality evidence) over 12 to 52 weeks than on placebo.
Aclidinium also resulted in a significantly greater improvement in pre-dose FEV1 
than placebo with a mean difference of 0.09 L (95% CI 0.08 to 0.10; I(2) = 39%, 9
trials, 4963 participants). No trials assessed functional capacity. Aclidinium
reduced the number of patients with exacerbations requiring hospitalisation by 4 
to 20 fewer per 1000 over 4 to 52 weeks (OR 0.64; 95% CI 0.46 to 0.88; I(2) = 0%,
10 trials, 5624 people; NNT = 77, 95% CI 51 to 233, high quality evidence)
compared to placebo. There was no difference in non-fatal serious adverse events 
(moderate quality evidence) between aclidinium and placebo.Compared to
tiotropium, aclidinium did not demonstrate significant differences for
exacerbations requiring oral steroids or antibiotics, or both,
exacerbation-related hospitalisations and non-fatal serious adverse events (very 
low quality evidence). Inadequate data prevented the comparison of aclidinium to 
formoterol or other LABAs.
AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: Aclidinium is associated with improved quality of life and 
reduced hospitalisations due to severe exacerbations in patients with moderate to
severe stable COPD compared to placebo. Overall, aclidinium did not significantly
reduce mortality, serious adverse events or exacerbations requiring oral steroids
or antibiotics, or both.Currently, the available data are insufficient and of
very low quality in comparisons of the efficacy of aclidinium versus tiotropium. 
The efficacy of aclidinium versus LABAs cannot be assessed due to inaccurate
data. Thus additional trials are recommended to assess the efficacy and safety of
aclidinium compared to other LAMAs or LABAs.

DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD010509.pub2 
PMID: 25234126  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Drugs. 2014 Sep;74(14):1635-57. doi: 10.1007/s40265-014-0284-7.

Turning a molecule into a medicine: the development of indacaterol as a novel
once-daily bronchodilator treatment for patients with COPD.

Murphy L(1), Rennard S, Donohue J, Molimard M, Dahl R, Beeh KM, Dederichs J,
Fülle HJ, Higgins M, Young D.

Author information: 
(1)Novartis Horsham Research Centre, Novartis Pharmaceuticals UK Limited,
Wimblehurst Road, Horsham, West Sussex, RH12 5AB, UK,
lorraine.murphy@novartis.com.

Indacaterol is the first once-daily, long-acting β2-adrenergic agonist (LABA)
approved for the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
Indacaterol was developed using a combination of informed drug design and
molecular chemistry to generate a β2-adrenergic agonist with a fast onset and
long duration of action, enabling once-daily dosing with an acceptable safety
profile. Early preclinical studies with indacaterol demonstrated these
characteristics, and this promising molecule was taken into clinical development,
originally for asthma treatment. Subsequent safety concerns over LABA monotherapy
in patients with asthma redirected indacaterol's development to centre on COPD,
where a good evidence base and guideline recommendations for bronchodilator
monotherapy existed. Clinical development was initially complicated by different 
inhaler devices and differing doses of indacaterol. Using a phase III innovative 
adaptive-design clinical trial (INHANCE), indacaterol 150 and 300 μg once-daily
doses were selected to be taken forward into the phase III INERGIZE programme.
This programme delivered placebo-controlled and active-comparator data, including
comparisons with formoterol, tiotropium and salmeterol/fluticasone, as well as
the use of indacaterol in combination with tiotropium. Together, these studies
provided a comprehensive assessment of the benefit-risk profile of indacaterol,
allowing for regulatory submission. Indacaterol was first approved at once-daily 
doses of 150 and 300 μg in the European Union in 2009, followed by 150 µg in
Japan (2011) and China (2012), and 75 μg in the United States (2011). To date,
indacaterol is approved and marketed in more than 100 countries worldwide for
once-daily maintenance treatment of COPD.

DOI: 10.1007/s40265-014-0284-7 
PMID: 25212789  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Springerplus. 2014 Aug 9;3:419. doi: 10.1186/2193-1801-3-419. eCollection 2014.

The 24-h FEV1 time profile of olodaterol once daily via Respimat® and formoterol 
twice daily via Aerolizer® in patients with GOLD 2-4 COPD: results from two
6-week crossover studies.

Feldman GJ(1), Bernstein JA(2), Hamilton A(3), Nivens MC(4), Korducki L(5),
LaForce C(6).

Author information: 
(1)S. Carolina Pharmaceutical Research, 141 Harold Fleming Court, North Grove
Medical Park, Spartanburg, South Carolina 29303 USA. (2)Department of Internal
Medicine, Bernstein Clinical Research Center, Cincinnati, Ohio USA. (3)Boehringer
Ingelheim, Burlington, Ontario Canada. (4)Boehringer Ingelheim Pharmaceuticals
Inc, Biberach an der Riss, Germany. (5)Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma GmbH & Co. KG,
Ridgefield, Connecticut USA. (6)North Carolina Clinical Research, Raleigh, North 
Carolina USA.

ABSTRACT: These studies evaluated the 24-h forced expiratory volume in 1 sec
(FEV1) profile of once-daily (QD) olodaterol compared to placebo and twice-daily 
(BID) formoterol in patients with moderate to very severe chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease. In two replicate, randomized, double-blind, double-dummy,
four-way crossover studies, patients received olodaterol 5 and 10 μg QD,
formoterol 12 μg BID, or placebo for 6 weeks in addition to usual-care background
maintenance therapy. Co-primary end points were FEV1 area under the curve from
0-12 h (AUC0-12) response (change from baseline) and FEV1 AUC from 12-24 h
(AUC12-24) response after 6 weeks, with FEV1 AUC from 0-24 h response identified 
as a key secondary end point. Other secondary end points included FEV1 AUC from
0-3 h and trough FEV1 responses, as well as corresponding forced vital capacity
responses. With both olodaterol doses, FEV1 increased to near-maximal 30 min
post-morning dose, which was sustained over 24 h. FEV1 also increased within
30 min post-morning dose of formoterol and was sustained over 12 h; the second
formoterol dose resulted in a further increase, sustained for an additional 12 h.
FEV1 AUC0-12 and AUC12-24 responses with both QD olodaterol doses and BID
formoterol were significantly greater than placebo at 6 weeks (P < .0001).
Secondary end-point outcomes were consistent with those of the co-primary end
points. These data, together with those from the wider phase III clinical
program, provide evidence for the 24-h bronchodilator efficacy of olodaterol QD
in this patient population.
TRIAL REGISTRY: ClinicalTrials.gov; NCT00931385 and NCT00932646.

DOI: 10.1186/2193-1801-3-419 
PMCID: PMC4152473
PMID: 25187881  [PubMed]


110. Eur J Radiol. 2014 Nov;83(11):2093-101. doi: 10.1016/j.ejrad.2014.08.004. Epub
2014 Aug 17.

Feasibility assessment of using oxygen-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging for
evaluating the effect of pharmacological treatment in COPD.

Morgan AR(1), Parker GJ(2), Roberts C(2), Buonaccorsi GA(3), Maguire NC(3),
Hubbard Cristinacce PL(4), Singh D(5), Vestbo J(5), Bjermer L(6), Jögi J(7), Taib
Z(8), Sarv J(8), Bruijnzeel PL(8), Olsson LE(8), Bondesson E(8), Nihlén U(9),
McGrath DM(4), Young SS(10), Waterton JC(11), Nordenmark LH(8).

Author information: 
(1)Bioxydyn Ltd, Manchester, UK; Centre for Imaging Sciences and Biomedical
Imaging Institute, Manchester Academic Health Sciences Centre, University of
Manchester, Manchester, UK. Electronic address: alex.morgan@bioxydyn.com.
(2)Bioxydyn Ltd, Manchester, UK; Centre for Imaging Sciences and Biomedical
Imaging Institute, Manchester Academic Health Sciences Centre, University of
Manchester, Manchester, UK. (3)Bioxydyn Ltd, Manchester, UK. (4)Centre for
Imaging Sciences and Biomedical Imaging Institute, Manchester Academic Health
Sciences Centre, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK. (5)University of
Manchester, Medicines Evaluation Unit, Manchester Academic Health Sciences
Centre, University Hospital of South Manchester, Manchester, UK. (6)Department of
Respiratory Medicine & Allergology, Skåne University Hospital, Lund, Sweden.
(7)Department of Clinical Physiology, Skåne University Hospital and Lund
University, Lund, Sweden. (8)AstraZeneca R&D, Mölndal, Sweden. (9)Department of
Respiratory Medicine & Allergology, Skåne University Hospital, Lund, Sweden;
AstraZeneca R&D, Mölndal, Sweden. (10)AstraZeneca R&D, Alderley Park, UK.
(11)Centre for Imaging Sciences and Biomedical Imaging Institute, Manchester
Academic Health Sciences Centre, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK;
AstraZeneca R&D, Alderley Park, UK.

OBJECTIVES: Oxygen-enhanced MRI (OE-MRI) biomarkers have potential value in
assessment of COPD, but need further evaluation before treatment-induced changes 
can be interpreted. The objective was to evaluate how OE-MRI parameters of
regional ventilation and oxygen uptake respond to standard pharmacological
interventions in COPD, and how the response compares to that of gold standard
pulmonary function tests.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: COPD patients (n=40), mean FEV1 58% predicted normal,
received single-dose inhaled formoterol 9μg, or placebo, followed by 8 weeks
treatment bid with a combination of budesonide and formoterol Turbuhaler(®)
320/9μg or formoterol Turbuhaler(®). OE-MRI biomarkers were obtained, as well as 
X-ray computed tomography (CT) biomarkers and pulmonary function tests, in a
two-center study. An ANCOVA statistical model was used to assess effect size of
intervention measurable in OE-MRI parameters of lung function.
RESULTS: OE-MRI data were successfully acquired at both study sites. 8-week
treatment with budesonide/formoterol significantly decreased lung wash-out time
by 31% (p<0.01), decreased the change in lung oxygen level upon breathing pure
oxygen by 13% (p<0.05) and increased oxygen extraction from the lung by 58%
(p<0.01). Single-dose formoterol increased both lung wash-out time (+47%, p<0.05)
and lung oxygenation time (+47%, p<0.05). FEV1 was improved by single-dose
formoterol (+12%, p<0.001) and 8 weeks of budesonide/formoterol (+ 18%, p<0.001),
consistent with published studies.
CONCLUSIONS: In COPD, OE-MRI parameters showed response to both single-dose
bronchodilatory effects of a β2-agonist, formoterol, and 8-week treatment with an
inhaled corticosteroid, budesonide, and the measurements are feasible in a
small-scale multi-center trial setting.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejrad.2014.08.004 
PMID: 25176287  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Biochem Pharmacol. 2014 Oct 1;91(3):400-8. doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2014.07.026. Epub
2014 Aug 12.

Extracellular matrix composition is modified by β₂-agonists through cAMP in COPD.

Lambers C(1), Qi Y(2), Eleni P(3), Costa L(2), Zhong J(2), Tamm M(2), Block
LH(4), Roth M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Respiratory Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine II, Medical 
University of Vienna, A-1090 Vienna, Austria. Electronic address:
christopher.lambers@meduniwien.ac.at. (2)Pulmonary Cell Research, Dept
Biomedicine and Pneumology, Department of Internal Medicine, University Hospital 
and University of Basel CH-4031 Basel, Switzerland. (3)Pharmacology, School of
Medicine, University of Thessaloniki, GR-54621 Thessaloniki, Greece. (4)Division 
of Respiratory Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine II, Medical University
of Vienna, A-1090 Vienna, Austria.

Long acting β₂-agonists (LABA) have been reported to modify the extracellular
matrix (ECM) composition in the airway wall. Based on our earlier studies we here
investigated the mechanism underlying the control of ECM modification by LABA in 
primary human airway smooth muscle cells. Cells were treated with formoterol or
salmeterol (30 min) before TGF-β₁ stimulation (2-3 days) Using RT-PCT,
immuno-blotting and ELISA the de novo synthesis and deposition of collagen
type-I, -III, -IV and fibronectin were determined. Matrix metalloproteinases
(MMP)-2 and -9 were analyzed by zymography. Both LABA activated cAMP and its
corresponding transcription factor CREB within 60 min and thus partly reduced
TGF-β₁-induced gene transcription of collagen type-I, -III, fibronectin and
connective tissue growth factor (CTGF). The inhibitory effect of both LABA on
collagen type-I and -III deposition involved a cAMP dependent mechanism, while
the inhibitory effect of the two drugs on TGF-β1-induced fibronectin deposition
and on CTGF secretion was independent of cAMP. Interestingly, none of the two
LABA reduced CTGF-induced synthesis of collagen type-I or type-III deposition. In
addition, none of the two LABA modified collagen type-IV deposition or the
expression and activity of MMP-2 or MMP-9. Our results show that LABA can prevent
de novo deposition of specific ECM components through cAMP dependent and
independent signaling. However, they do not reduce all ECM components by the same
mechanism and they do not reduce existing collagen deposits. This might explain
some of the controversial reports on the anti-remodeling effect of LABA in
chronic inflammatory lung diseases.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bcp.2014.07.026 
PMID: 25107701  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Br J Clin Pharmacol. 2014 Aug;78(2):282-300. doi: 10.1111/bcp.12334.

Inhaled corticosteroids in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: a pro-con
perspective.

Babu KS(1), Kastelik JA, Morjaria JB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Queen Alexandra Hospital, Cosham,
Portsmouth, Hampshire, UK.

Current guidelines limit regular use of inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) to a
specific subgroup of patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)
in whom the forced expiratory volume in 1 s is <60% of predicted and who have
frequent exacerbations. In these patients, there is evidence that ICS reduce the 
frequency of exacerbations and improve lung function and quality of life.
However, a review of the literature suggests that the evidence available may be
interpreted to favour or contradict these observations. It becomes apparent that 
COPD is a heterogeneous condition. Clinicians therefore need to be aware of the
heterogeneity as well as having an understanding of how ICS may be used in the
context of the specific subgroups of patients with COPD. This review argues for
and against the use of ICS in COPD by providing an in-depth analysis of the
currently available evidence.

© 2014 The British Pharmacological Society.

DOI: 10.1111/bcp.12334 
PMCID: PMC4137821
PMID: 25099256  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2014 Jul 18;9:775-83. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S64491. 
eCollection 2014.

A US database study characterizing patients initiating a budesonide-formoterol
combination versus tiotropium bromide as initial maintenance therapy for chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease.

Kern DM(1), Williams SA(2), Tunceli O(1), Wessman C(3), Zhou S(1), Pethick N(2), 
Elhefni H(2), Trudo F(2).

Author information: 
(1)HealthCore Inc., Wilmington, DE, US. (2)AstraZeneca, Wilmington, DE, USA.
(3)AstraZeneca, Mölndal, Sweden.

OBJECTIVE: To compare clinical and demographic characteristics, resource
utilization and costs of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) patients
prior to initiating budesonide-formoterol combination (BFC) or
tiotropium-maintenance therapy.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: This cross-sectional study used claims-based diagnosis to 
identify COPD patients in the HealthCore Integrated Research Database who
initiated BFC or tiotropium therapy between March 1, 2009 and January 31, 2012
(intake period); the index date was defined as the initial prescription fill for 
either agent. Patients diagnosed with respiratory tract cancer or receiving
inhaled corticosteroids/long-acting β2-adrenergic agonists or tiotropium in 12
months prior to index date were excluded. Categorical variables were evaluated
with χ(2) tests; mean cost differences were evaluated using γ-regression.
RESULTS: Overall, 6,940 BFC and 10,831 tiotropium patients were identified. The
BFC group was younger (mean age 64 versus 67 years), with a greater proportion of
females (54% versus 51%). BFC-treated patients had more comorbid respiratory
conditions, including asthma (25% versus 13%), but fewer comorbid cardiovascular 
conditions, including atherosclerosis (7% versus 10%) and myocardial infarction
(4% versus 6%). A greater proportion of BFC patients received prior respiratory
medication, including oral corticosteroids (46% versus 35%) and short-acting
β2-agonists (44% versus 35%). Tiotropium-treated patients had a greater mean
number of COPD-related outpatient visits (4.6 versus 4.1). BFC-treated patients
had lower total all-cause ($17,259 versus $17,926) and COPD-related ($1,718
versus $1,930) health care costs, driven by lower all-cause and COPD-related
inpatient expenditures.
CONCLUSION: Initiators of BFC or tiotropium showed differences in clinical and
demographic characteristics and health care utilization and costs prior to
starting COPD maintenance therapy.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S64491 
PMCID: PMC4111649
PMID: 25071369  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2014 Jun 27;9:687-95. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S47792. 
eCollection 2014.

Differential pharmacology and clinical utility of emerging combination treatments
in the management of COPD--role of umeclidinium/vilanterol.

Malerba M(1), Morjaria JB(2), Radaeli A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Brescia, Brescia, Italy.
(2)Department of Academic Respiratory Medicine, Hull York Medical School,
University of Hull, Castle Hill Hospital, Cottingham, United Kingdom.
(3)Department of Emergency, Spedali Civili di Brescia, Brescia, Italy.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a preventable and treatable
disease characterized by airflow limitation that is not fully reversible.
Bronchodilator therapy is the cornerstone in COPD treatment. Bronchodilation in
COPD is mainly achieved via administration of long- and ultralong-acting
β2-agonists and with long-acting muscarinic antagonists. New combinations of
bronchodilators with dual-acting muscarinic antagonist and β2-agonist properties 
have been licensed, and others are currently being developed with the aim of
achieving once-daily dosing, and therefore may improve the likelihood of
treatment compliance. These combination bronchodilators include glycopyrronium
bromide/indacaterol maleate, umeclidinium (UMEC) bromide/vilanterol trifenatate
(VI), aclidinium bromide/formoterol and tiotropium bromide/olodaterol (Boehringer
Ingelheim, Germany). This review will focus mainly on studies and clinical trials
involving the novel fixed-dose combination of UMEC/VI at doses of 125/25 μg and
62.5/25 μg in patients with COPD. Data from large clinical trials involving more 
than 4,500 COPD patients indicate that UMEC/VI is an effective once-daily
treatment in COPD with improved pulmonary function. Future studies assessing the 
impact of this combination on exacerbations, delay in disease progression, and
health status in patients with COPD are warranted.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S47792 
PMCID: PMC4085305
PMID: 25061288  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Respir Med. 2014 Sep;108(9):1327-35. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2014.06.009. Epub 2014
Jul 3.

A randomized study of formoterol fumarate in a porous particle metered-dose
inhaler in patients with moderate-to-severe COPD.

Quinn D(1), Seale JP(2), Reisner C(3), Fischer T(4), Golden M(5), Fernandez C(6),
Darken P(7), St Rose E(8), Thomas M(9), Tardie G(10), Orevillo C(11).

Author information: 
(1)P3 Research Ltd., First Floor 121 Adelaide Road, Newtown, Wellington 6021, New
Zealand. Electronic address: dean@p3research.co.nz. (2)Woolcock Institute of
Medical Research, 431 Glebe Point Road, Glebe, Sydney, NSW 2037, Australia.
Electronic address: jpseale@pharmacol.usyd.edu.au. (3)Pearl Therapeutics, 280
Headquarters Plaza, East Tower, 2nd Floor, Morristown, NJ 07960, USA. Electronic 
address: creisner@pearltherapeutics.com. (4)Pearl Therapeutics, 280 Headquarters 
Plaza, East Tower, 2nd Floor, Morristown, NJ 07960, USA. Electronic address:
tfischer@pearltherapeutics.com. (5)Pearl Therapeutics, 280 Headquarters Plaza,
East Tower, 2nd Floor, Morristown, NJ 07960, USA. Electronic address:
mgolden@pearltherapeutics.com. (6)Pearl Therapeutics, 280 Headquarters Plaza,
East Tower, 2nd Floor, Morristown, NJ 07960, USA. Electronic address:
cfernandez@pearltherapeutics.com. (7)Pearl Therapeutics, 280 Headquarters Plaza, 
East Tower, 2nd Floor, Morristown, NJ 07960, USA. Electronic address:
pdarken@pearltherapeutics.com. (8)Pearl Therapeutics, 280 Headquarters Plaza,
East Tower, 2nd Floor, Morristown, NJ 07960, USA. Electronic address:
estrose@pearltherapeutics.com. (9)Emphron Informatics Pty Ltd, Level 3, 88
Jephson St, Toowong, Queensland 4066, Australia. Electronic address:
mervyn.thomas@emphron.com. (10)Pearl Therapeutics, 280 Headquarters Plaza, East
Tower, 2nd Floor, Morristown, NJ 07960, USA. Electronic address:
gtardie@pearltherapeutics.com. (11)Pearl Therapeutics, 280 Headquarters Plaza,
East Tower, 2nd Floor, Morristown, NJ 07960, USA. Electronic address:
corevillo@pearltherapeutics.com.

Erratum in
    Respir Med. 2015 Oct;109(10):1369.

BACKGROUND: Formoterol fumarate (FF) is a well-established long-acting
β2-agonist. This represents the first clinical study of FF in a metered-dose
inhaler (FF MDI) based on proprietary lipid-based porous-particle engineering
technology.
METHODS: In this randomized, double-blind, 5-period, crossover study
(NCT00880490), subjects received 2.4, 4.8, and 9.6 μg of FF MDI, open-label
Foradil(®) Aerolizer(®) (FA) 12 μg, and placebo. Spirometry was performed at
baseline, 15 and 30 min, and 1, 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 11.5, and 12 h post-dose.
RESULTS: Thirty-four subjects were enrolled. Improvement in forced expiratory
volume in 1 s (FEV1) was similar between FF MDI 9.6 μg and FA. Change in FEV1
area under the curve for 0-12 h (AUC0-12) for each FF MDI dose demonstrated
superior efficacy versus placebo (P < .001 for all 3 doses). Over 12 h and at
each time point, FF MDI 9.6 μg was non-inferior to FA for FEV1 AUC0-12 with the
95% CI's supporting a maximum difference of approximately 45 mL. Peak and trough 
FEV1, forced vital capacity, peak expiratory flow rate, peak inspiratory
capacity, and pharmacokinetics confirmed the primary endpoint, with dose ordering
of the FF MDI 2.4, 4.8, and 9.6 μg, and comparability of FF MDI 9.6 μg to FA. All
3 doses of FF MDI were safe and well-tolerated, with a safety profile similar to 
that of placebo and FA.
CONCLUSIONS: The efficacy and pharmacokinetic profile of FF MDI 9.6 μg were
comparable to FA 12 μg and with similar safety to placebo and FA.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: This clinical trial was registered on ClinicalTrials.gov,
Identifier: NCT NCT00880490.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2014.06.009 
PMID: 25060541  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2014 Jul 5;9:697-714. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S62502. 
eCollection 2014.

Lung function efficacy and symptomatic benefit of olodaterol once daily delivered
via Respimat® versus placebo and formoterol twice daily in patients with GOLD 2-4
COPD: results from two replicate 48-week studies.

Koch A(1), Pizzichini E(2), Hamilton A(3), Hart L(3), Korducki L(4), De Salvo
MC(5), Paggiaro P(6).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Clinic III for Pneumology, Allergology, Sleep and Respiratory
Medicine, University Hospital Bochum-Bergmannsheil, Bochum, Germany. (2)NUPAIVA
(Asthma Research Center), Universidade Federal de Santa Catarina, Santa Catarina,
Brazil. (3)Boehringer Ingelheim, Burlington, Ontario, Canada. (4)Boehringer
Ingelheim Pharmaceuticals Inc., Ridgefield, CT, USA. (5)Centro Médico Dra. De
Salvo, Fundación Respirar, Buenos Aires, Argentina. (6)Cardio-Thoracic and
Vascular Department, University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy.

Two replicate, multicenter, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled,
parallel-group, Phase III studies investigated the long-term efficacy and safety 
of once-daily olodaterol via Respimat® versus placebo and formoterol over 48
weeks in patients with moderate to very severe chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease receiving usual-care background therapy. Patients received once-daily
olodaterol 5 or 10 μg, twice-daily formoterol 12 μg, or placebo. Co-primary end
points were forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1) area under the curve from
0-3 hours response, FEV1 trough response, and Mahler transition dyspnea index
total score after 24 weeks; secondary end points included St George's Respiratory
Questionnaire. Overall, 904 (Study 1222.13) and 934 (Study 1222.14) patients
received treatment. Olodaterol significantly improved FEV1 area under the curve
from 0-3 hours versus placebo in both studies (with olodaterol 5 μg, 0.151 L and 
0.129 L; with olodaterol 10 μg, 0.165 L and 0.154 L; for all comparisons
P<0.0001) and FEV1 trough responses versus placebo (0.053-0.085 L; P<0.01), as
did formoterol. Primary analysis revealed no significant difference in transition
dyspnea index focal score for any active treatment versus placebo. Post hoc
analysis using pattern mixture modeling (accounting for discontinuations)
demonstrated statistical significance for olodaterol versus placebo. St George's 
Respiratory Questionnaire total score was significantly improved with olodaterol,
but not formoterol, versus placebo. No safety signals were identified from
adverse-event or other safety data. Once-daily olodaterol 5 μg and 10 μg is
efficacious in patients with moderate to very severe chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease on usual-care maintenance therapy, with a satisfactory safety
profile.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S62502 
PMCID: PMC4094569
PMID: 25045258  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Respir Med. 2014 Sep;108(9):1355-62. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2014.04.015. Epub 2014
May 2.

Appraisal of lens opacity with mometasone furoate/formoterol fumarate combination
in patients with COPD or asthma.

Maspero J(1), Cherrez I(2), Doherty DE(3), Tashkin DP(4), Kuna P(5), Kuo WL(6),
Gates D(6), Nolte H(6), Chylack LT Jr(7).

Author information: 
(1)Fundacion CIDEA Allergy and Respiratory Research Unit, Buenos Aires,
Argentina. Electronic address: maspero@ciudad.com.ar. (2)Respiralab Allergy and
Respiratory Center, Kennedy Hospital, Guayaquil, Ecuador. (3)University of
Kentucky, Lexington, KY, USA. (4)David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los
Angeles, CA, USA. (5)Medical University of Lodz, Poland. (6)Merck & Co., Inc.,
Whitehouse Station, NJ, USA. (7)Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.

BACKGROUND: Long-term corticosteroid use may increase cataract risk. The Lens
Opacities Classification System (LOCS) III ranked lens opacities as Class 1:
0.5-0.9 unit; Class 2: 1.0-1.4 units; or Class 3: ≥1.5 units in clinical trials
of combined mometasone furoate and formoterol (MF/F) administered by metered-dose
inhaler (MDI). We examined retrospectively shifts in lenticular opacity in
patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) or asthma.
METHODS: We analyzed pooled LOCS III data from two COPD studies and separately
analyzed LOCS III data from an asthma study. COPD subjects were randomized to
twice daily MF/F 200/10 μg, MF/F 400/10 μg, MF 400 μg, F 10 μg, and placebo;
asthma subjects were randomized to MF/F 200/10 μg, MF/F 400/10 μg, fluticasone
propionate/salmeterol (FP/S) 250/50 μg, and FP/S 500/50 μg. Lenticular opacity
changes were analyzed post hoc for proportions of subjects with LOCS III grade
increases ≥0.5, ≥1.0, or ≥1.5 units at weeks 26 and 52.
RESULTS: Proportions of subjects in the COPD studies with Class 1 (≥0.5 unit), 2 
(≥1.0 unit), or 3 (≥1.5 units) increases in LOCS III at week 26 (N = 1675) ranged
from 15.5 to 18.6%, 3.3-6.0%, and 0.9-2.2%, respectively. At week 52 (N = 1085), 
proportions of active-treated subjects with Class 1, 2, or 3 increases in LOCS
III ranged from 26.6 to 28.9%, 6.3-10.7%, and 2.6-5.9%, respectively. Treatment
differences in lenticular shifts were generally small and nonsignificant in the
asthma study.
CONCLUSION: No clinically relevant trends were observed in the LOCS III
assessment of lenticular shifts during treatment of COPD and asthma patients,
although further study may be needed to confirm the findings presented here. In
these trials, MF/F effects on lens opacity were not observed. (Clinicaltrials.gov
numbers: NCT00383435, NCT00383721, and NCT00379288.).

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2014.04.015 
PMID: 25044280  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Respir Investig. 2014 Jul;52(4):251-60. doi: 10.1016/j.resinv.2014.03.004. Epub
2014 May 6.

Formoterol and budesonide inhibit rhinovirus infection and cytokine production in
primary cultures of human tracheal epithelial cells.

Yamaya M(1), Nishimura H(2), Nadine L(3), Kubo H(4), Nagatomi R(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Advanced Preventive Medicine for Infectious Disease, Tohoku
University Graduate School of Medicine, 2-1 Seiryo-machi, Aoba-ku, Sendai
980-8575, Japan. Electronic address: myamaya@med.tohoku.ac.jp. (2)Virus Research 
Center, Clinical Research Division, Sendai National Hospital, Sendai, Japan.
Electronic address: hide-nishimura@mte.biglobe.ne.jp. (3)Department of Advanced
Preventive Medicine for Infectious Disease, Tohoku University Graduate School of 
Medicine, 2-1 Seiryo-machi, Aoba-ku, Sendai 980-8575, Japan. Electronic address: 
nadinececile@med.tohoku.ac.jp. (4)Department of Advanced Preventive Medicine for 
Infectious Disease, Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine, 2-1
Seiryo-machi, Aoba-ku, Sendai 980-8575, Japan. Electronic address:
hkubo@med.tohoku.ac.jp. (5)Medicine and Science in Sports and Exercise, Tohoku
University Graduate School of Medicine, Sendai, Japan. Electronic address:
nagatomi@med.tohoku.ac.jp.

BACKGROUND: Long-acting β(2) agonists (LABAs) and inhaled corticosteroids (ICSs) 
reduce the frequency of exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
and bronchial asthma. However, inhibitory effects of LABAs and ICSs on the
replication of rhinovirus (RV), the major cause of exacerbations, have not been
demonstrated.
METHODS: Primary cultures of human tracheal epithelial cells were infected with a
major group RV, type 14 rhinovirus (RV14), to examine the effects of formoterol
and budesonide on RV infection and infection-induced airway inflammation.
RESULTS: Treatment with formoterol and budesonide 72 h before and after RV14
infection reduced RV14 titers and cytokine concentrations, including interleukin 
(IL)-1β, IL-6 and IL-8, in supernatants and viral RNA within cells. Formoterol
and budesonide reduced mRNA expression and protein concentration of intercellular
adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1), the receptor for RV14. Formoterol reduced the
number and fluorescence intensity of acidic endosomes through which RV RNA enters
the cytoplasm. Formoterol and budesonide reduced the activation of the nuclear
factor kappa-B protein p65 in nuclear extracts. The effects of formoterol plus
budesonide were additive with respect to RV14 replication, cytokine production,
ICAM-1 expression, acidic endosome fluorescence intensity, and p65 activation.
The selective β(2)-adrenergic receptor antagonist, ICI 118551
[erythro-dl-1-(7-methylindan-4-yloxy)-3-isopropylaminobutan-2-ol], reversed the
inhibitory effects of formoterol on RV14 titers and RNA levels, the
susceptibility of cells to RV14 infection, cytokine production, acidic endosomes,
ICAM-1 expression, and p65 activation.
CONCLUSIONS: Formoterol and budesonide may inhibit RV infection by reducing the
ICAM-1 levels and/or acidic endosomes and modulate airway inflammation associated
with RV infections.

Copyright © 2014 The Japanese Respiratory Society. Published by Elsevier B.V. All
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.resinv.2014.03.004 
PMID: 24998372  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. J Aerosol Med Pulm Drug Deliv. 2014 Oct;27(5):329-40. doi:
10.1089/jamp.2013.1099. Epub 2014 Jun 30.

Evaluation of in vitro and in vivo flow rate dependency of budesonide/formoterol 
Easyhaler(®).

Malmberg LP(1), Everard ML, Haikarainen J, Lähelmä S.

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Allergy, Helsinki University Central Hospital , Helsinki,
Finland .

BACKGROUND: The Easyhaler(®) (EH) device-metered dry powder inhaler containing
budesonide and formoterol is being developed for asthma and chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD). As a part of product optimization, a series of in vitro
and in vivo studies on flow rate dependency were carried out.
METHODS: Inspiratory flow parameters via EH and Symbicort(®) Turbuhaler(®) (TH)
inhalers were evaluated in 187 patients with asthma and COPD. The 10(th), 50(th),
and 90(th) percentile flow rates achieved by patients were utilized to study in
vitro flow rate dependency of budesonide/formoterol EH and Symbicort TH. In
addition, an exploratory pharmacokinetic study on pulmonary deposition of active 
substances for budesonide/formoterol EH in healthy volunteers was performed.
RESULTS: Mean inspiratory flow rates through EH were 64 and 56 L/min in
asthmatics and COPD patients, and through TH 79 and 72 L/min, respectively.
Children with asthma had marginally lower PIF values than the adults. The
inspiratory volumes were similar in all groups between the inhalers. Using
weighted 10(th), 50(th), and 90(th) percentile flows the in vitro delivered doses
(DDs) and fine particle doses (FPDs) for EH were rather independent of flow as
98% of the median flow DDs and 89%-93% of FPDs were delivered already at 10(th)
percentile air flow. Using±15% limits, EH and TH had similar flow rate dependency
profiles between 10(th) and 90(th) percentile flows. The pharmacokinetic study
with budesonide/formoterol EH in healthy subjects (n=16) revealed a trend for a
flow-dependent increase in lung deposition for both budesonide and formoterol.
CONCLUSIONS: Comparable in vitro flow rate dependency between
budesonide/formoterol EH and Symbicort TH was found using the range of clinically
relevant flow rates. The results of the pharmacokinetic study were in accordance 
with the in vitro results showing only a trend of flow rate-dependant increase in
lung deposition of active substances with EH.

DOI: 10.1089/jamp.2013.1099 
PMCID: PMC4175975
PMID: 24978441  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2014 Jun 5;9:569-76. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S65693.
eCollection 2014.

Outcomes and costs of treating chronic obstructive pulmonary disease with inhaled
fixed combinations: the Italian perspective of the PATHOS study.

Roggeri A(1), Micheletto C(2), Roggeri DP(1).

Author information: 
(1)ProCure Solutions, Bergamo, Italy. (2)Respiratory Unit, Mater Salutis
Hospital, Legnago, Verona, Italy.

PURPOSE: Fixed-dose combinations of inhaled corticosteroids and long-acting
β2-agonists have proven to prevent and reduce chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD) exacerbations. The aim of this analysis was to explore the
clinical consequences and direct health care costs of applying the findings of
the PATHOS (An Investigation of the Past 10 Years Health Care for Primary Care
Patients with Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease) study to the Italian
context.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Effectiveness data from the PATHOS study, a
population-based, retrospective, observational registry study conducted in
Sweden, in terms of reduction in COPD and pneumonia-related hospitalizations,
were considered, in order to estimate the differences in resource consumption
between patients treated with budesonide/formoterol and fluticasone/salmeterol.
The base case considers the average dosages of the two drugs reported in the
PATHOS study and the actual public price in charges to the Italian National
Health Service, while the difference in hospitalization rates reported in the
PATHOS study was costed based on Italian real-world data.
RESULTS: The PATHOS study demonstrated a significant reduction in COPD
hospitalizations and pneumonia-related hospitalizations in patients treated with 
budesonide/formoterol versus fluticasone/salmeterol (-29.1% and -42%,
respectively). In the base case, the treatment of a patient for 1 year with
budesonide/formoterol led to a saving of €499.90 (€195.10 for drugs, €193.10 for 
COPD hospitalizations, and €111.70 for pneumonia hospitalizations) corresponding 
to a -27.6% difference compared with fluticasone/salmeterol treatment.
CONCLUSION: Treatment of COPD with budesonide/formoterol compared with
fluticasone/salmeterol could lead to a reduction in direct health care costs,
with relevant improvement in clinical outcomes.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S65693 
PMCID: PMC4051514
PMID: 24940053  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Trials. 2014 May 1;15:153. doi: 10.1186/1745-6215-15-153.

Comparison of conventional medicine, TCM treatment, and combination of both
conventional medicine and TCM treatment for patients with chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease: study protocol of a randomized comparative effectiveness
research trial.

Li JS(1), Xie Y, Li SY, Yu XQ.

Author information: 
(1)The Geriatric Department, Henan University of Traditional Chinese Medicine,
Longzihu University Town, Zhengdong New District, Zhengzhou, People's Republic of
China. li_js8@163.com.

BACKGROUND: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) affects millions
worldwide. Although many therapies exist and are being developed to relieve
symptoms and reduce mortality, few data are available to understand which of the 
therapeutic alternatives is the most cost-effective for COPD patients in everyday
clinical practice, especially for traditional Chinese medicine (TCM). Comparative
effectiveness research can help patients, clinicians, and decision-makers make
best informed treatment decisions where such evidence was previously lacking.
This study aims to compare the effectiveness and economic evaluation of three
treatments: (1) conventional Western medicine; (2) TCM treatments, which have
been evaluated and have certain effect; and (3) a combination of both
conventional Western medicine and TCM treatments, and then determine which
treatment is the most suitable for COPD patients.
METHODS/DESIGN: A multicenter, pragmatic, randomized, controlled trial is
adopted. A total of 360 patients will be recruited and randomly assigned to one
of the three treatments group, with 120 in each group. Patients in the
conventional Western medicine group will be given Salbutamol, Formoterol,
Salmeterol/fluticasone, respectively, according to the guidelines. For the TCM
group, patients will be given Bufei granule, Bu-Fei Jian-Pi granule, Bu-Fei
Yi-Shen granule, and Yi-Qi Zi-Shen granule based on their corresponding TCM
syndrome patterns, respectively. For the combination of conventional medicine and
TCM treatments group, patients will be given a combination of conventional
Western medicine and TCM granules. Treatments in each group are recognized as a
whole comprehensive intervention. After the 26-week treatment, another 26 weeks
will be followed up. The outcome measures including the frequency and duration of
acute exacerbations, lung function, dyspnea, exercise capacity, quality of life, 
and economic evaluation will be assessed.
DISCUSSION: It is hypothesized that each of the three treatments will have
beneficial effects in reducing the frequency and duration of acute exacerbations,
improving exercise capacity and psychosocial function of COPD patients. In
addition, the combination of conventional medicine and TCM treatments may be most
suitable for COPD patients with better effectiveness and economic evaluation.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov NCT01836016.

DOI: 10.1186/1745-6215-15-153 
PMCID: PMC4017822
PMID: 24885672  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Rev Recent Clin Trials. 2014;9(2):96-101.

Indacaterol in the Treatment of Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease: From
Clinical Trials to Daily Practice.

Incorvaia C(1), Ridolo E, Riario-Sforza E, Montagni M, Riario-Sforza GG.

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary Rehabilitation Unit, ICP Hospital, Via Bignami 1, Milan, Italy.
cristoforo.incorvaia@gmail.com.

Indacaterol was introduced as an agent of the new generation of very long acting 
beta2-agonists (VLABA) that provides a 24-hour activity of bronchodilation and
allows a once-daily OD dosing. The first trial showed a significantly higher
efficacy of indacaterol vs. placebo in patients with chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD). The following trials were aimed at evaluating its
performance compared with other bronchodilators. The results can be summarized in
a comparable efficacy of indacaterol, mainly assessed by the increase in FEV1
value but also by quality of life and other patient- reported outcomes (PROs),
compared with the OD antimuscarinic tiotropium bromide, and in a slightly higher 
efficacy compared with the LABA formoterol and salmeterol administered
twice-daily. No problems of safety and tolerability were reported in the trials
as well as in specific studies, every kind of adverse event, including
cardiovascular effects, being similarly frequent with indacaterol and with
placebo. Concerning the real-life management, in respect to LABA, the OD dosing
makes indacaterol more convenient for COPD patients and is likely to positively
influence the patient's adherence. Since adherence to medical treatment of
chronic diseases, and particularly COPD is a crucial issue in medicine, such
aspect should confer to indacaterol a valuable role in clinical practice. The
recently approved combination of indacaterol with the antimuscarinic
glycopyrronium [QVA149], based on the demonstration of positive effects on both
lung function and PROs, is likely to be a further option for patients with severe
COPD.


PMID: 24882396  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Drugs. 2014 May;74(7):737-55. doi: 10.1007/s40265-014-0214-8.

Management of asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease with combination
inhaled corticosteroids and long-acting β-agonists: a review of comparative
effectiveness research.

Mapel DW(1), Roberts MH.

Author information: 
(1)Lovelace Clinic Foundation, 2309 Renard Place SE, Albuquerque, NM, 87106, USA,
dmapel@comcast.net.

The value of combination therapy with inhaled corticosteroids and long-acting
β-agonists (ICS/LABA) is well recognized in the management of asthma and chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Despite differences in the pharmacological 
properties between two well-established ICS/LABA products (budesonide/formoterol 
and fluticasone/salmeterol), data from randomized clinical trials (RCTs) and
meta-analyses suggest that these two products perform similarly under RCT
conditions. In contrast, a few recently reported real-world comparative
effectiveness studies have suggested that there are substantial differences
between ICS/LABA combination treatments in terms of clinical and healthcare
outcomes in patients with asthma or COPD. The purpose of this article is to
provide a brief review of the benefits, as well as the limitations, of
comparative effectiveness research (CER) in the therapeutic area of asthma and
COPD. We conducted a structured literature review of the current CER studies on
ICS/LABA combinations in asthma and COPD. These articles were then used to
illustrate the unique challenges of CER studies, providing a summary of study
results and limitations. We focus particularly on difficult biases and
confounding factors that may be introduced before, during, and after the
initiation of therapy. Beyond being a review of these two ICS/LABA combination
treatments, this article is intended to help those who wish to assess the quality
of CER published projects in asthma and COPD, or guide investigators who wish to 
design new CER studies for chronic respiratory disease treatments.

DOI: 10.1007/s40265-014-0214-8 
PMCID: PMC4030099
PMID: 24797158  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2014 Mar 26;(3):CD010844. doi:
10.1002/14651858.CD010844.pub2.

Long-acting inhaled therapy (beta-agonists, anticholinergics and steroids) for
COPD: a network meta-analysis.

Kew KM(1), Dias S, Cates CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Population Health Research Institute, St George's, University of London,
Cranmer Terrace, London, UK, SW17 0RE.

BACKGROUND: Pharmacological therapy for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD) is aimed at relieving symptoms, improving quality of life and preventing
or treating exacerbations.Treatment tends to begin with one inhaler, and
additional therapies are introduced as necessary. For persistent or worsening
symptoms, long-acting inhaled therapies taken once or twice daily are preferred
over short-acting inhalers. Several Cochrane reviews have looked at the risks and
benefits of specific long-acting inhaled therapies compared with placebo or other
treatments. However for patients and clinicians, it is important to understand
the merits of these treatments relative to each other, and whether a particular
class of inhaled therapies is more beneficial than the others.
OBJECTIVES: To assess the efficacy of treatment options for patients whose
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease cannot be controlled by short-acting
therapies alone. The review will not look at combination therapies usually
considered later in the course of the disease.As part of this network
meta-analysis, we will address the following issues.1. How does long-term
efficacy compare between different pharmacological treatments for COPD?2. Are
there limitations in the current evidence base that may compromise the
conclusions drawn by this network meta-analysis? If so, what are the implications
for future research?
SEARCH METHODS: We identified randomised controlled trials (RCTs) in existing
Cochrane reviews by searching the Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews (CDSR).
In addition, we ran a comprehensive citation search on the Cochrane Airways Group
Register of trials (CAGR) and checked manufacturer websites and reference lists
of other reviews. The most recent searches were conducted in September 2013.
SELECTION CRITERIA: We included parallel-group RCTs of at least 6 months'
duration recruiting people with COPD. Studies were included if they compared any 
of the following treatments versus any other: long-acting beta2-agonists (LABAs; 
formoterol, indacaterol, salmeterol); long-acting muscarinic antagonists (LAMAs; 
aclidinium, glycopyrronium, tiotropium); inhaled corticosteroids (ICSs;
budesonide, fluticasone, mometasone); combination long-acting beta2-agonist
(LABA) and inhaled corticosteroid (LABA/ICS) (formoterol/budesonide,
formoterol/mometasone, salmeterol/fluticasone); and placebo.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: We conducted a network meta-analysis using Markov
chain Monte Carlo methods for two efficacy outcomes: St George's Respiratory
Questionnaire (SGRQ) total score and trough forced expiratory volume in one
second (FEV1). We modelled the relative effectiveness of any two treatments as a 
function of each treatment relative to the reference treatment (placebo). We
assumed that treatment effects were similar within treatment classes (LAMA, LABA,
ICS, LABA/ICS). We present estimates of class effects, variability between
treatments within each class and individual treatment effects compared with every
other.To justify the analyses, we assessed the trials for clinical and
methodological transitivity across comparisons. We tested the robustness of our
analyses by performing sensitivity analyses for lack of blinding and by
considering six- and 12-month data separately.
MAIN RESULTS: We identified 71 RCTs randomly assigning 73,062 people with COPD to
184 treatment arms of interest. Trials were similar with regards to methodology, 
inclusion and exclusion criteria and key baseline characteristics. Participants
were more often male, aged in their mid sixties, with FEV1 predicted normal
between 40% and 50% and with substantial smoking histories (40+ pack-years). The 
risk of bias was generally low, although missing information made it hard to
judge risk of selection bias and selective outcome reporting. Fixed effects were 
used for SGRQ analyses, and random effects for Trough FEV1 analyses, based on
model fit statistics and deviance information criteria (DIC). SGRQ SGRQ data were
available in 42 studies (n = 54,613). At six months, 39 pairwise comparisons were
made between 18 treatments in 25 studies (n = 27,024). Combination LABA/ICS was
the highest ranked intervention, with a mean improvement over placebo of -3.89
units at six months (95% credible interval (CrI) -4.70 to -2.97) and -3.60 at 12 
months (95% CrI -4.63 to -2.34). LAMAs and LABAs were ranked second and third at 
six months, with mean differences of -2.63 (95% CrI -3.53 to -1.97) and -2.29
(95% CrI -3.18 to -1.53), respectively. Inhaled corticosteroids were ranked
fourth (MD -2.00, 95% CrI -3.06 to -0.87). Class differences between LABA, LAMA
and ICS were less prominent at 12 months. Indacaterol and aclidinium were ranked 
somewhat higher than other members of their classes, and formoterol 12 mcg,
budesonide 400 mcg and formoterol/mometasone combination were ranked lower within
their classes. There was considerable overlap in credible intervals and rankings 
for both classes and individual treatments. Trough FEV1 Trough FEV1 data were
available in 46 studies (n = 47,409). At six months, 41 pairwise comparisons were
made between 20 treatments in 31 studies (n = 29,271). As for SGRQ, combination
LABA/ICS was the highest ranked class, with a mean improvement over placebo of
133.3 mL at six months (95% CrI 100.6 to 164.0) and slightly less at 12 months
(mean difference (MD) 100, 95% CrI 55.5 to 140.1). LAMAs (MD 103.5, 95% CrI 81.8 
to 124.9) and LABAs (MD 99.4, 95% CrI 72.0 to 127.8) showed roughly equivalent
results at six months, and ICSs were the fourth ranked class (MD 65.4, 95% CrI
33.1 to 96.9). As with SGRQ, initial differences between classes were not so
prominent at 12 months. Indacaterol and salmeterol/fluticasone were ranked
slightly better than others in their class, and formoterol 12, aclidinium,
budesonide and formoterol/budesonide combination were ranked lower within their
classes. All credible intervals for individual rankings were wide.
AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: This network meta-analysis compares four different classes 
of long-acting inhalers for people with COPD who need more than short-acting
bronchodilators. Quality of life and lung function were improved most on
combination inhalers (LABA and ICS) and least on ICS alone at 6 and at 12 months.
Overall LAMA and LABA inhalers had similar effects, particularly at 12 months.
The network has demonstrated the benefit of ICS when added to LABA for these
outcomes in participants who largely had an FEV1 that was less than 50%
predicted, but the additional expense of combination inhalers and any potential
for increased adverse events (which has been established by other reviews)
require consideration. Our findings are in keeping with current National
Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) guidelines.

DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD010844.pub2 
PMID: 24671923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Prescrire Int. 2014 Feb;23(146):36-9.

Glycopyrronium for inhalation. COPD: another antimuscarinic with cardiac adverse 
effects that require monitoring.

[No authors listed]

The most effective way of slowing chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)
progression is to eliminate exposure to the inhaled triggering factor, which is
usually tobacco smoke. At best, inhaled bronchodilators have only a limited
impact on the symptoms of COPD. In the absence of a better alternative,
salbutamol, a beta-2 agonist, or ipratropium, an antimuscarinic, are tried first,
despite their adverse effects. "Long-acting" beta-2 agonists are an option for
patients with permanent symptoms, especially dyspnoea that disrupts sleep.
Glycopyrronium, a long-acting antimuscarinic, is authorised in the European Union
for maintenance treatment of adults with COPD. Clinical evaluation does not
include any trials versus salbutamol. It is based on three trials, in a total of 
2051 patients that compared glycopyrronium versus placebo and sometimes versus
tiotropium, another long-acting inhaled antimuscarinic. Mortality rates were
similar in the different arms of these trials. There was no difference in
efficacy between glycopyrronium and tiotropium. In two of these trials, which
lasted at least 26 weeks, "serious" cardiac adverse events were more frequent
with glycopyrronium than with placebo or tiotropium. However, the number of
events was too small to determine the precise cardiac harms associated with
glycopyrronium. The European Medicines Agency has therefore asked for a specific 
registry to be created. The adverse effect profile of glycopyrronium appears
similar to that of inhaled antimuscarinics, including atropinic disorders and
upper respiratory infections. The inhaler is simple to use and does not require
hand-breath coordination. In practice, glycopyrronium does not provide a
therapeutic advantage in the treatment of patients with COPD. When an inhaled
long-acting drug is contemplated, it is best to choose a beta-2 agonist
(formoterol or salmeterol), used either continuously or on demand.


PMID: 24669382  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2014 Mar 10;(3):CD010115. doi:
10.1002/14651858.CD010115.pub2.

Inhaled steroids and risk of pneumonia for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Kew KM(1), Seniukovich A.

Author information: 
(1)Population Health Research Institute, St George's, University of London,
Cranmer Terrace, London, UK, SW17 0RE.

Comment in
    Ann Intern Med. 2014 Aug 19;161(4):JC8.

BACKGROUND: Inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) are anti-inflammatory drugs that have
proven benefits for people with worsening symptoms of chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD) and repeated exacerbations. They are commonly used as
combination inhalers with long-acting beta2-agonists (LABA) to reduce
exacerbation rates and all-cause mortality, and to improve lung function and
quality of life. The most common combinations of ICS and LABA used in combination
inhalers are fluticasone and salmeterol, budesonide and formoterol and a new
formulation of fluticasone in combination with vilanterol, which is now
available. ICS have been associated with increased risk of pneumonia, but the
magnitude of risk and how this compares with different ICS remain unclear. Recent
reviews conducted to address their safety have not compared the relative safety
of these two drugs when used alone or in combination with LABA.
OBJECTIVES: To assess the risk of pneumonia associated with the use of
fluticasone and budesonide for COPD.
SEARCH METHODS: We identified trials from the Cochrane Airways Group Specialised 
Register of trials (CAGR), clinicaltrials.gov, reference lists of existing
systematic reviews and manufacturer websites. The most recent searches were
conducted in September 2013.
SELECTION CRITERIA: We included parallel-group randomised controlled trials
(RCTs) of at least 12 weeks' duration. Studies were included if they compared the
ICS budesonide or fluticasone versus placebo, or either ICS in combination with a
LABA versus the same LABA as monotherapy for people with COPD.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Two review authors independently extracted study
characteristics, numerical data and risk of bias information for each included
study.We looked at direct comparisons of ICS versus placebo separately from
comparisons of ICS/LABA versus LABA for all outcomes, and we combined these with 
subgroups when no important heterogeneity was noted. After assessing for
transitivity, we conducted an indirect comparison to compare budesonide versus
fluticasone monotherapy, but we could not do the same for the combination
therapies because of systematic differences between the budesonide and
fluticasone combination data sets.When appropriate, we explored the effects of
ICS dose, duration of ICS therapy and baseline severity on the primary outcome.
Findings of all outcomes are presented in 'Summary of findings' tables using
GRADEPro.
MAIN RESULTS: We found 43 studies that met the inclusion criteria, and more
evidence was provided for fluticasone (26 studies; n = 21,247) than for
budesonide (17 studies; n = 10,150). Evidence from the budesonide studies was
more inconsistent and less precise, and the studies were shorter. The populations
within studies were more often male with a mean age of around 63, mean pack-years
smoked over 40 and mean predicted forced expiratory volume of one second (FEV1)
less than 50%.High or uneven dropout was considered a high risk of bias in almost
40% of the trials, but conclusions for the primary outcome did not change when
the trials at high risk of bias were removed in a sensitivity
analysis.Fluticasone increased non-fatal serious adverse pneumonia events
(requiring hospital admission) (odds ratio (OR) 1.78, 95% confidence interval
(CI) 1.50 to 2.12; 18 more per 1000 treated over 18 months; high quality), and no
evidence suggested that this outcome was reduced by delivering it in combination 
with salmeterol or vilanterol (subgroup differences: I(2) = 0%, P value 0.51), or
that different doses, trial duration or baseline severity significantly affected 
the estimate. Budesonide also increased non-fatal serious adverse pneumonia
events compared with placebo, but the effect was less precise and was based on
shorter trials (OR 1.62, 95% CI 1.00 to 2.62; six more per 1000 treated over nine
months; moderate quality). Some of the variation in the budesonide data could be 
explained by a significant difference between the two commonly used doses: 640
mcg was associated with a larger effect than 320 mcg relative to placebo
(subgroup differences: I(2) = 74%, P value 0.05).An indirect comparison of
budesonide versus fluticasone monotherapy revealed no significant differences
with respect to serious adverse events (pneumonia-related or all-cause) or
mortality. The risk of any pneumonia event (i.e. less serious cases treated in
the community) was higher with fluticasone than with budesonide (OR 1.86, 95% CI 
1.04 to 3.34); this was the only significant difference reported between the two 
drugs. However, this finding should be interpreted with caution because of
possible differences in the assignment of pneumonia diagnosis, and because no
trials directly compared the two drugs.No significant difference in overall
mortality rates was observed between either of the inhaled steroids and the
control interventions (both high-quality evidence), and pneumonia-related deaths 
were too rare to permit conclusions to be drawn.
AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: Budesonide and fluticasone, delivered alone or in
combination with a LABA, are associated with increased risk of serious adverse
pneumonia events, but neither significantly affected mortality compared with
controls. The safety concerns highlighted in this review should be balanced with 
recent cohort data and established randomised evidence of efficacy regarding
exacerbations and quality of life. Comparison of the two drugs revealed no
statistically significant difference in serious pneumonias, mortality or serious 
adverse events. Fluticasone was associated with higher risk of any pneumonia when
compared with budesonide (i.e. less serious cases dealt with in the community),
but variation in the definitions used by the respective manufacturers is a
potential confounding factor in their comparison.Primary research should
accurately measure pneumonia outcomes and should clarify both the definition and 
the method of diagnosis used, especially for new formulations such as fluticasone
furoate, for which little evidence of the associated pneumonia risk is currently 
available. Similarly, systematic reviews and cohorts should address the
reliability of assigning 'pneumonia' as an adverse event or cause of death and
should determine how this affects the applicability of findings.

DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD010115.pub2 
PMID: 24615270  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. J Thorac Dis. 2013 Dec;5(6):806-14. doi: 10.3978/j.issn.2072-1439.2013.10.11.

Role of indacaterol, a once-daily bronchodilator, in chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease.

Seth HD(1), Sultan S(1), Gotfried MH(2).

Author information: 
(1)Banner Good Samaritan Medical Center, Phoenix, AZ, USA. (2)Pulmonary
Associates PA, Phoenix, AZ, USA ; University of Arizona, Phoenix, AZ, USA.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is characterized by progressive
airflow obstruction that can lead to lung destruction and dyspnea. Although there
has been a slight reduction in mortality in recent decades, COPD is still a
serious health problem that has enormous costs and utilizes significant medical
resources. There have been a number of pharmacologic interventions that have been
developed for the treatment of COPD. Current guidelines recommend the use of
long-acting bronchodilators for the treatment of moderate and severe stage COPD, 
since they have been shown to improve lung function, respiratory symptoms, and
quality of life. Indacaterol is a once-daily beta2-agonist (β2-agonist) delivered
by a single-dose dry powder inhaler used for the treatment of COPD. It is
currently approved at a dose of 75 μg in the United States and a dose of 150 μg
with a maximal dose of 300 μg in Europe and other countries. Several studies show
that indacaterol was statistically superior to both long-acting β2-agonist,
formoterol and salmeterol, as well as, noninferior to tiotropium. Indacaterol is 
generally well tolerated and has a good safety profile. Other studies show that
there is an additive bronchodilator response with the addition of indacaterol to 
tiotropium, which would provide a once-daily treatment option for patient with
moderate to severe COPD. This review discusses the pharmacokinetic, comparative
efficacy and safety data for indacaterol.

DOI: 10.3978/j.issn.2072-1439.2013.10.11 
PMCID: PMC3886694
PMID: 24409359  [PubMed]


128. PLoS One. 2013 Dec 26;8(12):e83881. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0083881.
eCollection 2013.

Budesonide/formoterol enhances the expression of pro Surfactant Protein-B in
lungs of COPD patients.

Um SJ(1), Lam S(2), Coxson H(3), Man SF(4), Sin DD(5).

Author information: 
(1)UBC James Hogg Research Centre for Cardiovascular and Pulmonary Research, St. 
Paul's Hospital/Providence Health Care, University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, BC, Canada ; Department of Medicine (Division of Respiratory
Medicine), Dong-A University, Busan, Korea. (2)Department of Medicine (Division
of Respiratory Medicine), University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada ;
BC Cancer Agency, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada. (3)UBC
James Hogg Research Centre for Cardiovascular and Pulmonary Research, St. Paul's 
Hospital/Providence Health Care, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC,
Canada ; Department of Radiology, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, 
Canada. (4)UBC James Hogg Research Centre for Cardiovascular and Pulmonary
Research, St. Paul's Hospital/Providence Health Care, University of British
Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada. (5)UBC James Hogg Research Centre for
Cardiovascular and Pulmonary Research, St. Paul's Hospital/Providence Health
Care, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada ; Department of
Medicine (Division of Respiratory Medicine), University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, BC, Canada.

RATIONALE & AIM: Pulmonary surfactants are essential components of lung
homeostasis. In chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), surfactant
expression decreases in lungs whereas, there is a paradoxical increase in protein
expression in plasma. The latter has been associated with poor health outcomes in
COPD. The purpose of this study was to determine the relationship of surfactants 
and other pneumoproteins in bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) fluid and plasma to
airflow limitation and the effects of budesonide/formoterol on this relationship.
METHODS: We recruited (clinical trials.gov identifier: NCT00569712) 7 smokers
without COPD and 30 ex and current smokers with COPD who were free of
exacerbations for at least 4 weeks. All subjects were treated with
budesonide/formoterol 400/12 µg twice a day for 4 weeks. BAL fluid and plasma
samples were obtained at baseline and the end of the 4 weeks. We measured
lung-predominant pneumoproteins: pro-Surfactant Protein-B (pro-SFTPB), Surfactant
Protein-D (SP-D), Club Cell Secretory Protein-16 (CCSP-16) and Pulmonary and
Activation-Regulated Chemokine (PARC/CCL-18) in BAL fluid and plasma.
RESULTS: BAL Pro-SFTPB concentrations had the strongest relationship with airflow
limitation as measured by FEV1/FVC (Spearman rho=0.509; p=0.001) and FEV1% of
predicted (Spearman rho= 0.362; p=0.028). Plasma CCSP-16 concentrations were also
significantly related to airflow limitation (Spearman rho=0.362; p=0.028 for
FEV1% of predicted). The other biomarkers in BAL fluid or plasma were not
significantly associated with airflow limitation. In COPD subjects,
budesonide/formoterol significantly increased the BAL concentrations of pro-SFTPB
by a median of 62.46 ng/ml (p=0.022) or 48.7% from baseline median value.
CONCLUSION: Increased severity of COPD is associated with reduced Pro-SFTPB
levels in BAL fluid. Short-term treatment with budesonide/formoterol increases
these levels in BAL fluid. Long term studies will be needed to determine the
clinical relevance of this observation.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0083881 
PMCID: PMC3873417
PMID: 24386300  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2014 Jan 1;24(1):249-53. doi: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2013.11.028.
Epub 2013 Nov 21.

Design, synthesis and evaluation of dual pharmacology β2-adrenoceptor agonists
and PDE4 inhibitors.

Huang L(1), Shan W(2), Zhou Q(1), Xie J(3), Lai K(3), Li X(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Drug Synthesis and Pharmaceutical Process, School of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510006, China.
(2)Jiangsu Hansoh Pharmaceutical Research Institute Co., Ltd, Lianyungang 222000,
China. (3)State Key Laboratory of Respiratory Diseases, The First Affiliated
Hospital of Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou 510120, China. (4)Institute
of Drug Synthesis and Pharmaceutical Process, School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 
Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510006, China. Electronic address:
lixs@mail.sysu.edu.cn.

A novel series of formoterol-phthalazinone hybrids were synthesised and evaluated
as dual pharmacology β2-adrenoceptor agonists and PDE4 inhibitors. Most of the
hybrids displayed high β2-adrenoceptor agonist and moderate PDE4 inhibitory
activities. The most potent compound, (R,R)-11c, exhibited agonist (EC50=1.05nM, 
pEC50=9.0) and potent PDE4B2 inhibitory activities (IC50=0.092μM).

Copyright © 2013. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2013.11.028 
PMID: 24300734  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2013;8:569-79. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S49307. Epub
2013 Nov 22.

Effect of high-dose N-acetylcysteine on airway geometry, inflammation, and
oxidative stress in COPD patients.

De Backer J(1), Vos W, Van Holsbeke C, Vinchurkar S, Claes R, Parizel PM, De
Backer W.

Author information: 
(1)FluidDA nv, Kontich, Belgium.

BACKGROUND: Previous studies have demonstrated the potential beneficial effect of
N-acetylcysteine (NAC) in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). However, 
the required dose and responder phenotype remain unclear. The current study
investigated the effect of high-dose NAC on airway geometry, inflammation, and
oxidative stress in COPD patients. Novel functional respiratory imaging methods
combining multislice computed tomography images and computer-based flow
simulations were used with high sensitivity for detecting changes induced by the 
therapy.
METHODS: Twelve patients with Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung
Disease stage II COPD were randomized to receive NAC 1800 mg or placebo daily for
3 months and were then crossed over to the alternative treatment for a further 3 
months.
RESULTS: Significant correlations were found between image-based resistance
values and glutathione levels after treatment with NAC (P = 0.011) and
glutathione peroxidase at baseline (P = 0.036). Image-based resistance values
appeared to be a good predictor for glutathione peroxidase levels after NAC (P = 
0.02), changes in glutathione peroxidase levels (P = 0.035), and reduction in
lobar functional residual capacity levels (P = 0.00084). In the limited set of
responders to NAC therapy, the changes in airway resistance were in the same
order as changes induced by budesonide/formoterol.
CONCLUSION: A combination of glutathione, glutathione peroxidase, and imaging
parameters could potentially be used to phenotype COPD patients who would benefit
from addition of NAC to their current therapy. The findings of this small pilot
study need to be confirmed in a larger pivotal trial.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S49307 
PMCID: PMC3842218
PMID: 24293993  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2013 Nov 10;(11):CD003794. doi:
10.1002/14651858.CD003794.pub4.

Combined corticosteroid and long-acting beta₂-agonist in one inhaler versus
placebo for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Nannini LJ(1), Poole P, Milan SJ, Holmes R, Normansell R.

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary Section, Hospital E Peron, Ruta 11 Y Jm Estrada, G. Baigorria, Santa
Fe - Rosario, Argentina, 2152.

Update of
    Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2007;(4):CD003794.

BACKGROUND: Both long-acting beta2-agonists (LABA) and inhaled corticosteroids
(ICS) have been recommended in guidelines for the treatment of chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Their coadministration in a combination
inhaler may facilitate adherence to medication regimens and improve efficacy.
OBJECTIVES: To determine the efficacy and safety of combined ICS and LABA for
stable COPD in comparison with placebo.
SEARCH METHODS: We searched the Cochrane Airways Group Specialised Register of
trials, reference lists of included studies and manufacturers' trial registries. 
The date of the most recent search was June 2013.
SELECTION CRITERIA: We included randomised and double-blind studies of at least
four weeks' duration. Eligible studies compared combined ICS and LABA
preparations with placebo.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Two review authors independently assessed study
risk of bias and extracted data. Dichotomous data were analysed as fixed-effect
odds ratios (OR) or rate ratios (RR) with 95% confidence intervals (95% CI), and 
continuous data as mean differences with 95% confidence intervals.
MAIN RESULTS: Nineteen studies met the inclusion criteria (with 10,400
participants randomly assigned, lasting between 4 and 156 weeks, mean 42 weeks). 
Studies used three different combined preparations (fluticasone/salmeterol,
budesonide/formoterol or mometasone/formoterol). The studies were generally at
low risk of bias for blinding but at unclear or high risk for attrition bias
because of participant dropouts. Compared with placebo, both
fluticasone/salmeterol and budesonide/formoterol reduced the rate of
exacerbations. Mometasone/formoterol reduced the number of participants
experiencing one or more exacerbation. Pooled analysis of the combined therapies 
indicated that exacerbations were less frequent when compared with placebo (Rate 
Ratio 0.73; 95% CI 0.69 to 0.78, 7 studies, 7495 participants); the quality of
this evidence when GRADE criteria were applied was rated as moderate.
Participants included in these trials had on average one or two exacerbations per
year, which means that treatment with combined therapy would lead to a reduction 
of one exacerbation every two to four years in these individuals. An overall
reduction in mortality was seen, but this outcome was dominated by the results of
one study (TORCH) of fluticasone/salmeterol. Generally, deaths in the smaller,
shorter studies were too few to contribute to the overall estimate. Further
longer studies on budesonide/formoterol and mometasone/formoterol are required to
clarify whether this is seen more widely. When a baseline risk of death of 15.2% 
from the placebo arm of TORCH was used, the three-year number needed to treat for
an additional beneficial outcome (NNTB) with fluticasone/salmeterol to prevent
one extra death was 42 (95% CI 24 to 775). All three combined treatments led to
statistically significant improvement in health status measurements, although the
mean differences observed are relatively small in relation to the minimum
clinically important difference. Furthermore, symptoms and lung function
assessments favoured combined treatments. An increase in the risk of pneumonia
was noted with combined inhalers compared with placebo treatment (OR 1.62, 95% CI
1.36 to 1.94), and the quality of this evidence was rated as moderate, but no
dose effect was seen. The three-year NNTH for one extra case of pneumonia was 17,
based on a 12.3% risk of pneumonia in the placebo arm of TORCH. Fewer
participants withdrew from the combined treatment arms for adverse events or lack
of efficacy.
AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: Combined inhaler therapy led to around a quarter fewer COPD
exacerbations than were seen with placebo. A significant reduction in all-cause
mortality was noted, but this outcome was dominated by one trial (TORCH),
emphasising the need for further trials of longer duration. Increased risk of
pneumonia is a concern; however, this did not translate into increased
exacerbations, hospitalisations or deaths. Current evidence does not suggest any 
major differences between inhalers in terms of effects, but nor is the evidence
strong enough to demonstrate that all are equivalent. To permit firmer
conclusions about the effects of combined therapy, more data are needed,
particularly in relation to the profile of adverse events and benefits in
relation to different formulations and doses of inhaled ICS. Head-to-head
comparisons are necessary to determine whether one combined inhaler is better
than the others.

DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD003794.pub4 
PMID: 24214176  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2014 Jan;348(1):12-24. doi: 10.1124/jpet.113.204586. Epub
2013 Oct 25.

Induction of regulator of G-protein signaling 2 expression by long-acting
β2-adrenoceptor agonists and glucocorticoids in human airway epithelial cells.

Holden NS(1), George T, Rider CF, Chandrasekhar A, Shah S, Kaur M, Johnson M,
Siderovski DP, Leigh R, Giembycz MA, Newton R.

Author information: 
(1)Airways Inflammation Research Group, Snyder Institute for Chronic Diseases,
Faculty of Medicine, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada (N.S.H.,
T.G., C.F.R., A.C., S.S., M.K., R.L., M.A.G., R.N.); GlaxoSmithKline Research and
Development, Uxbridge, Middlesex, United Kingdom (M.J.); and Department of
Physiology and Pharmacology, School of Medicine, West Virginia University,
Morgantown, West Virginia (D.P.S.).

In asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) multiple mediators act
on Gαq-linked G-protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) to cause bronchoconstriction.
However, acting on the airway epithelium, such mediators may also elicit
inflammatory responses. In human bronchial epithelial BEAS-2B cells (bronchial
epithelium + adenovirus 12-SV40 hybrid), regulator of G-protein signaling (RGS) 2
mRNA and protein were synergistically induced in response to combinations of
long-acting β2-adrenoceptor agonist (LABA) (salmeterol, formoterol) plus
glucocorticoid (dexamethasone, fluticasone propionate, budesonide). Equivalent
responses occurred in primary human bronchial epithelial cells. Concentrations of
glucocorticoid plus LABA required to induce RGS2 expression in BEAS-2B cells were
consistent with the levels achieved therapeutically in the lungs. As RGS2 is a
GTPase-activating protein that switches off Gαq, intracellular free calcium
([Ca(2+)]i) flux was used as a surrogate of responses induced by histamine,
methacholine, and the thromboxane receptor agonist U46619
[(Z)-7-[(1S,4R,5R,6S)-5-[(E,3S)-3-hydroxyoct-1-enyl]-3-oxabicyclo[2.2.1]heptan-6-
yl]hept-5-enoic acid]. This was significantly attenuated by salmeterol plus
dexamethasone pretreatment, or RGS2 overexpression, and the protective effect of 
salmeterol plus dexamethasone was abolished by RGS2 RNA silencing. Although
methacholine and U46619 induced interleukin-8 (IL-8) release and this was
inhibited by RGS2 overexpression, the repression of U46619-induced IL-8 release
by salmeterol plus dexamethasone was unaffected by RGS2 knockdown. Given a role
for Gαq-mediated pathways in inducing IL-8 release, we propose that RGS2 acts
redundantly with other effector processes to repress IL-8 expression. Thus, RGS2 
expression is a novel effector mechanism in the airway epithelium that is induced
by glucocorticoid/LABA combinations. This could contribute to the efficacy of
glucocorticoid/LABA combinations in asthma and COPD.

DOI: 10.1124/jpet.113.204586 
PMID: 24163441  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2013 Oct 15;(10):CD010177. doi:
10.1002/14651858.CD010177.pub2.

Long-acting beta2-agonists for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Kew KM(1), Mavergames C, Walters JA.

Author information: 
(1)Population Health Sciences and Education, St George's, University of London,
Cranmer Terrace, London, UK, SW17 0RE.

BACKGROUND: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a respiratory disease
that causes progressive symptoms of breathlessness, cough and mucus build-up. It 
is the fourth or fifth most common cause of death worldwide and is associated
with significant healthcare costs.Inhaled long-acting beta2-agonists (LABAs) are 
widely prescribed to manage the symptoms of COPD when short-acting agents alone
are no longer sufficient. Twice-daily treatment with an inhaled LABA is aimed at 
relieving symptoms, improving exercise tolerance and quality of life, slowing
decline and even improving lung function and preventing and treating
exacerbations.
OBJECTIVES: To assess the effects of twice-daily long-acting beta2-agonists
compared with placebo for patients with COPD on the basis of clinically
important endpoints, primarily quality of life and COPD exacerbations.
SEARCH METHODS: We searched the Cochrane Airways Group trials register,
ClinicalTrials.gov and manufacturers' websites in June 2013.
SELECTION CRITERIA: Parallel, randomised controlled trials (RCTs) recruiting
populations of patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Studies were 
required to be at least 12 weeks in duration and designed to assess the safety
and efficacy of a long-acting beta2-agonist against placebo.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Data and characteristics were extracted
independently by two review authors, and each study was assessed for potential
sources of bias. Data for all outcomes were pooled and subgrouped by LABA agent
(formoterol 12 μg, formoterol 24 μg and salmeterol 50 μg) and then were
separately analysed by LABA agent and subgrouped by trial duration. Sensitivity
analyses were conducted for the proportion of participants taking inhaled
corticosteroids and for studies with high or uneven rates of attrition.
MAIN RESULTS: Twenty-six RCTs met the inclusion criteria, randomly assigning
14,939 people with COPD to receive twice-daily LABA or placebo. Study duration
ranged from three months to three years; the median duration was six months.
Participants were more often male with moderate to severe symptoms at
randomisation; mean forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1) was between 33%
and 55% predicted normal in the studies, and mean St George's Respiratory
Questionnaire score (SGRQ) ranged from 44 to 55 when reported.Moderate-quality
evidence showed that LABA treatment improved quality of life on the SGRQ (mean
difference (MD) -2.32, 95% confidence interval (CI) -3.09 to -1.54; I(2) = 50%;
17 trials including 11,397 people) and reduced the number of exacerbations
requiring hospitalisation (odds ratio (OR) 0.73, 95% CI 0.56 to 0.95; I(2) = 10%;
seven trials including 3804 people). In absolute terms, 18 fewer people per 1000 
were hospitalised as the result of an exacerbation while receiving LABA therapy
over a weighted mean of 7 months (95% CI 3 to 31 fewer). Scores were also
improved on the Chronic Respiratory Disease Questionnaire (CRQ), and more people 
receiving LABA treatment showed clinically important improvement of at least four
points on the SGRQ.The number of people who had exacerbations requiring a course 
of oral steroids or antibiotics was also lower among those taking LABA (52 fewer 
per 1000 treated over 8 months; 95% CI 24 to 78 fewer, moderate quality
evidence).Mortality was low, and combined findings of all studies showed that
LABA therapy did not significantly affect mortality (OR 0.90, 95% CI 0.75 to
1.08; I(2) = 21%; 23 trials including 14,079 people, moderate quality evidence). 
LABA therapy did not affect the rate of serious adverse events (OR 0.97, 95% CI
0.83 to 1.14; I(2) = 34%, moderate quality evidence), although there was
significant unexplained heterogeneity, especially between the two formoterol
doses.LABA therapy improved predose FEV1 by 73 mL more than placebo (95% CI 48 to
98; I(2) = 71%, low quality evidence), and people were more likely to withdraw
from placebo than from LABA therapy (OR 0.74, 95% CI 0.69 to 0.80; I(2) = 0%).
Higher rates of withdrawal in the placebo arm may reduce our confidence in some
results, but the disparity is more likely to reduce the magnitude of difference
between LABA and placebo than inflate the true effect; removing studies at
highest risk of bias on the basis of high and unbalanced attrition did not change
conclusions for the primary outcomes.
AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: Moderate-quality evidence from 26 studies showed that
inhaled long-acting beta2-agonists are effective over the medium and long term
for patients with moderate to severe COPD. Their use is associated with improved 
quality of life and reduced exacerbations, including those requiring
hospitalisation. Overall, findings showed that inhaled LABAs did not
significantly reduce mortality or serious adverse events.

DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD010177.pub2 
PMID: 24127118  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. J Pharm Pract. 2014 Feb;27(1):79-83. doi: 10.1177/0897190013504963. Epub 2013 Oct
4.

Combination of inhaled corticosteroid and bronchodilator-induced delirium in an
elderly patient with lung disease.

Moss JM(1), Kemp DW, Brown JN.

Author information: 
(1)Geriatric Research Education and Clinical Center, Veterans Affairs Medical
Center Durham, NC, USA.

Steroid psychosis has been well described with oral glucocorticoids, however, our
search of the literature did not identify an association between delirium and the
combination of inhaled glucocorticoids and long-acting beta-agonists. We describe
the occurrence of delirium with the combination of an inhaled glucocorticoid and 
bronchodilator. An elderly male described confusion and hallucinations within 1
week after initiation of budesonide/formoterol for chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease. The combination inhaler was discontinued with resolution of symptoms.
Several weeks later, the patient was hospitalized and restarted on the
combination inhaler. The patient was alert and oriented on admission, however,
confusion and hallucinations progressed throughout his hospital stay. The
combination inhaler was discontinued and his confusion and hallucinations
resolved by discharge. The temporal relationship of these events and a probable
Naranjo association allows for reasonable assumption that the use of the
budesonide/formoterol combination inhaler caused or contributed to the
occurrences of delirium in this elderly patient. The onset of delirium was likely
due to the systemic absorption of the glucocorticoid from lung deposition,
complicated in an individual with several predisposing risk factors for delirium.
Health care providers should be aware of this potential adverse drug reaction
when prescribing inhaled medications to older patients at risk for delirium.

DOI: 10.1177/0897190013504963 
PMID: 24097913  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Respir Res. 2013 Oct 7;14:100. doi: 10.1186/1465-9921-14-100.

Comparative efficacy of long-acting bronchodilators for COPD: a network
meta-analysis.

Cope S(1), Donohue JF, Jansen JP, Kraemer M, Capkun-Niggli G, Baldwin M, Buckley 
F, Ellis A, Jones P.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical Science, St George's University of London, London SW17
0RE, UK. pjones@sgul.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: Clinicians are faced with an increasingly difficult choice regarding 
the optimal bronchodilator for patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD) given the number of new treatments. The objective of this study is
to evaluate the comparative efficacy of indacaterol 75/150/300 μg once daily
(OD), glycopyrronium bromide 50 μg OD, tiotropium bromide 18 μg/5 μg OD,
salmeterol 50 μg twice daily (BID), formoterol 12 μg BID, and placebo for
moderate to severe COPD.
METHODS: Forty randomized controlled trials were combined in a Bayesian network
meta-analysis. Outcomes of interest were trough and post-dose forced expiratory
volume in 1 second (FEV1), St. George's Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ) score
and responders (≥4 points), and Transition Dyspnea Index (TDI) score and
responders (≥1 point) at 6 months.
RESULTS: Indacaterol was associated with a higher trough FEV1 than other active
treatments (difference for indacaterol 150 μg and 300 μg versus placebo: 152 mL
(95% credible interval (CrI): 126, 179); 160 mL (95% CrI: 133, 187)) and the
greatest improvement in SGRQ score (difference for indacaterol 150 μg and 300 μg 
versus placebo: -3.9 (95% CrI -5.2, -2.6); -3.6 (95% CrI -4.8, -2.3)).
Glycopyrronium and tiotropium 18 μg resulted in the next best estimates for both 
outcomes with minor differences (difference for glycopyrronium versus tiotropium 
for trough FEV1 and SGRQ: 18 mL (95% CrI: -16, 51); -0.55 (95% CrI: -2.04, 0.92).
CONCLUSION: In terms of trough FEV1 and SGRQ score indacaterol, glycopyrronium,
and tiotropium are expected to be the most effective bronchodilators.

DOI: 10.1186/1465-9921-14-100 
PMCID: PMC4014806
PMID: 24093477  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2013;8:425-32. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S49179. Epub
2013 Sep 18.

Role of indacaterol and the newer very long-acting β2-agonists in patients with
stable COPD: a review.

Ridolo E(1), Montagni M, Olivieri E, Riario-Sforza GG, Incorvaia C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of Parma, Parma. 
erminia.ridolo@unipr.it

Bronchodilators are central drugs in the management of patients with chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Indacaterol was the first agent of the
novel family of very long-acting β2-agonists to be used as an inhaled
bronchodilator for COPD and provides 24-hour therapeutic action, thus allowing
once-daily administration. Data from clinical trials show that indacaterol has a 
bronchodilator effect similar to that of the anticholinergic tiotropium bromide
and slightly higher efficacy compared with the long-acting β2-agonists,
salmeterol and formoterol. Moreover, the safety profile is excellent and
comparable with that of placebo. Concerning adherence with drug treatment and
real-life management in respect to long-acting β2-agonists, once-daily dosing
makes indacaterol more convenient for COPD patients and is likely to enhance
patient adherence. Other very long-acting β2-agonists currently in development
include vilanterol, olodaterol, and carmoterol, and these have shown good
characteristics for clinical use in the studies reported thus far.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S49179 
PMCID: PMC3785397
PMID: 24082783  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Drugs R D. 2013 Sep;13(3):215-22. doi: 10.1007/s40268-013-0027-3.

Inhaler competence and patient satisfaction with Easyhaler®: results of two
real-life multicentre studies in asthma and COPD.

Gálffy G(1), Mezei G, Németh G, Tamási L, Müller V, Selroos O, Orosz M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonology, Semmelweis University Faculty of Medicine,
Budapest, Hungary.

OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to investigate patients' inhaler competence 
and satisfaction with the Easyhaler(®) dry powder inhaler.
DESIGN: Two open, uncontrolled, non-randomised studies.
SETTING: Real life based on patients attending 56 respiratory clinics in Hungary.
PARTICIPANTS: Patients with asthma or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD) (n = 1016).
INTERVENTION: In a 3-month study, adult patients (age range 18-88 years; n = 797)
received twice-daily inhalations of formoterol via Easyhaler(®), and in a
consequential study (from one visit to another, with 3-12 months in-between)
children and adolescents (age range 4-17 years; n = 219) received salbutamol via 
Easyhaler(®) as needed.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Control of six Easyhaler(®) handling steps and patients'
satisfaction with Easyhaler(®) based on questionnaires.
RESULTS: Correct performances (minimum and maximum of the six steps) were noticed
after one demonstration in 92-98% of the adults, 87-99% of the elderly, 81-96% of
the children and 83-99% of the adolescents. These figures had markedly increased 
at the last visit. Repeat instructions were necessary in 26% of the cases.
Investigators found Easyhaler(®) easy to teach in 87% of the patients and
difficult in only 0.5%. Patients found Easyhaler(®) easy to learn and use, and
the patients' (and parents') satisfaction with the inhaler was very high. Lung
function values [forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1), forced vital capacity
(FVC), peak expiratory flow (PEF)] improved statistically significantly during
the studies, indicating good inhaler competence and treatment adherence.
CONCLUSION: Investigators found Easyhaler(®) easy to teach and patients found it 
easy to use, and their satisfaction with the device was high.

DOI: 10.1007/s40268-013-0027-3 
PMCID: PMC3784057
PMID: 24043456  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Ther Adv Respir Dis. 2013 Dec;7(6):311-9. doi: 10.1177/1753465813499789. Epub
2013 Sep 3.

The combination of umeclidinium bromide and vilanterol in the management of
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: current evidence and future prospects.

Feldman GJ(1), Edin A.

Author information: 
(1)South Carolina Pharmaceutical Research, Alliance Biomedical Group
International, 141 Harold Fleming Court, Spartanburg, SC 29303, USA.

The defining feature of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is
progressive airflow limitation that causes air trapping and hyperinflation. The
increasing hyperinflation results in dyspnea along with associated inability to
engage in the activities of daily living. The American Thoracic Society (ATS),
European Respiratory Society (ERS) and Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive 
Lung Disease (GOLD) treatment guidelines all place bronchodilators as the
foundation of pharmacological management of COPD. In patients with
moderate-to-very-severe respiratory impairment, adding regular treatment with one
or more long-acting bronchodilators is recommended [long-acting β2-agonists
(LABAs) or long-acting muscarinic antagonists (LAMAs)]. A growing body of
evidence shows that LAMA and LABA co-administration is more effective than either
drug class alone in managing stable COPD to improve lung function, symptoms and
health status. Recently, new drug applications (NDAs) for a fixed-dose
combination (FDC) of umeclidinium (UMEC), a LAMA, and vilanterol (VI), a LABA, at
UMEC/VI doses of 125/25 and 62.5/25 µg have been submitted by sponsors to the US 
Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and to the European Medicines Agency (EMA).
Thus, UMEC/VI has become the first FDC LAMA/LABA product that has reached a
regulatory approval stage. Other LAMA/LABA once-daily combinations coming through
development include FDCs of tiotropium and olodaterol, glycopyrronium and
indacaterol, and twice-daily aclidinium and formoterol. The aim of this review is
to explore currently available data for once-daily UMEC/VI in the context of the 
evolving standards of COPD management.

DOI: 10.1177/1753465813499789 
PMID: 24004659  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. J Thorac Dis. 2013 Aug;5(4):559-66. doi: 10.3978/j.issn.2072-1439.2013.07.35.

The role of indacaterol for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).

Cazzola M(1), Bardaro F, Stirpe E.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Respiratory Clinical Pharmacology, Department of System Medicine,
University of Rome "Tor Vergata", Rome, Italy.

Indacaterol is the first long-acting β2-agonist (LABAs) approved for the
treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) that allows for
once-daily (OD) administration. It is rapidly acting, with an onset of action in 
5 minutes, like salbutamol and formoterol but with a sustained bronchodilator
effect, that last for 24 hours, like tiotropium. In long-term clinical studies
(12 weeks to 1 year) in patients with moderate to severe COPD, OD indacaterol 150
or 300 μg improved lung function (primary endpoint) significantly more than
placebo, and improvements were significantly greater than twice-daily formoterol 
12 μg or salmeterol 50 μg, and noninferior to OD tiotropium bromide 18 μg.
Indacaterol was well tolerated at all doses and with a good overall safety
profile. Cost-utility analyses show that indacaterol 150 μg has lower total costs
and better outcomes than tiotropium and salmeterol. These findings suggest that
indacaterol can be considered a first choice drug in the treatment of the patient
with mild/moderate stable COPD. However, in people with COPD who remain
symptomatic on treatment with indacaterol, adding a long-acting muscarinic
antagonist (LAMA) is the preferable option. In any case, it is advisable to
combine indacaterol with a OD inhaled corticosteroid (ICS), such as mometasone
furoate or ciclesonide, in patients with low FEV1, and, in those patients who
have many symptoms and a high risk of exacerbations, to combine it with a LAMA
and a OD ICS.

DOI: 10.3978/j.issn.2072-1439.2013.07.35 
PMCID: PMC3755680
PMID: 23991316  [PubMed]


140. J Thorac Dis. 2013 Aug;5(4):549-58. doi: 10.3978/j.issn.2072-1439.2013.08.04.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease in China: the potential role of
indacaterol.

Gao J(1), Prasad N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Diseases, Peking Union Medical College Hospital,
Peking Union Medical College and Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing,
China;

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is becoming a leading cause of
morbidity and mortality in China, with tobacco smoking, biomass fuel use and
genetic susceptibility being the major risk factors. COPD poses a high economic
burden with the total expenditure per patient costing 40% and nearly one-third of
an average family income in urban and rural areas of China, respectively. Despite
the use of the Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease strategy
document being recommended for the diagnosis and management of COPD, the majority
of patients with COPD go undiagnosed or are not managed appropriately by
physicians. Long-acting β2-agonists (LABAs) have long been used for symptomatic
management of COPD, with salmeterol and formoterol being the commonly used
twice-daily treatments. Indacaterol is the first once-daily LABA, approved at a
dose of 150 µg once daily in China. Several phase III studies have shown that
indacaterol 150 µg improves lung function, breathlessness, health status,
exacerbations, rescue medication use and symptoms, as compared with placebo and
other bronchodilators, in patients with COPD, with a rapid onset of action
following first dose and a good safety and tolerability profile. In this review
we elaborate on the efficacy and safety results from several such studies.

DOI: 10.3978/j.issn.2072-1439.2013.08.04 
PMCID: PMC3755687
PMID: 23991315  [PubMed]


141. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2013 Aug 30;(8):CD006826. doi:
10.1002/14651858.CD006826.pub2.

Combined corticosteroid and long-acting beta(2)-agonist in one inhaler versus
inhaled corticosteroids alone for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Nannini LJ(1), Poole P, Milan SJ, Kesterton A.

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary Section, Hospital E Peron, Ruta 11 Y Jm Estrada, G. Baigorria, Santa
Fe - Rosario, Argentina, 2152.

Update of
    Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2007;(4):CD006826.

BACKGROUND: Both long-acting beta(2)-agonists and inhaled corticosteroids have
been recommended in guidelines for the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD). Their co-administration in a combined inhaler is intended to
facilitate adherence to medication regimens and to improve efficacy. Three
preparations are currently available: fluticasone propionate/salmeterol (FPS).
budesonide/formoterol (BDF) and mometasone furoate/formoterol (MF/F).
OBJECTIVES: To assess the efficacy and safety of combined long-acting
beta2-agonist and inhaled corticosteroid (LABA/ICS) preparations, as measured by 
clinical endpoints and pulmonary function testing, compared with inhaled
corticosteroids (ICS) alone, in the treatment of adults with chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD).
SEARCH METHODS: We searched the Cochrane Airways Group Specialised Register of
trials, which is compiled from systematic searches of multiple literature
databases. The search was conducted in June 2013. In addition, we checked the
reference lists of included studies and contacted the relevant manufacturers.
SELECTION CRITERIA: Studies were included if they were randomised and
double-blind. Compared studies combined LABA/ICS with the ICS component.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Two review authors independently assessed trial
quality and extracted data. The primary outcomes were exacerbations, mortality
and pneumonia. Health-related quality of life (as measured by validated scales), 
lung function and side effects were secondary outcomes. Dichotomous data were
analysed as fixed-effect odds ratios with 95% confidence intervals (CIs), and
continuous data as mean differences or rate ratios and 95% CIs.
MAIN RESULTS: A total of 15 studies of good methodological quality met the
inclusion criteria by randomly assigning 7814 participants with predominantly
poorly reversible, severe COPD. Data were most plentiful for the FPS combination.
Exacerbation rates were significantly reduced with combination therapies (rate
ratio 0.87, 95% CI 0.80 to 0.94, 6 studies, N = 5601) compared with ICS alone.
The mean exacerbation rate in the control (ICS) arms of the six included studies 
was 1.21 exacerbations per participant per year (range 0.88 to 1.60), and we
would expect this to be reduced to a rate of 1.05 (95% CI 0.97 to 1.14) among
those given combination therapy. Mortality was also lower with the combination
(odds ratio (OR) 0.78, 95% CI 0.64 to 0.94, 12 studies, N = 7518) than with ICS
alone, but this was heavily weighted by a three-year study of FPS. When this
study was removed, no significant mortality difference was noted. The reduction
in exacerbations did not translate into significantly reduced rates of
hospitalisation due to COPD exacerbation (OR 0.93, 95% CI 0.80 to 1.07, 10
studies, N = 7060). Lung function data favoured combination treatment in the FPS,
BDF and MF/F trials, but the improvement was small. Small improvements in
health-related quality of life were measured on the St George's Respiratory
Questionnaire (SGRQ) with FPS or BDF compared with ICS, but this was well below
the minimum clinically important difference. Adverse event profiles were similar 
between the two treatments arms, and rates of pneumonia when it was diagnosed by 
chest x-ray (CXR) were lower than those reported in earlier trials.
AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: Combination ICS and LABA offer some clinical benefits in
COPD compared with ICS alone, especially for reduction in exacerbations. This
review does not support the use of ICS alone when LABAs are available. Adverse
events were not significantly different between treatments. Further long-term
assessments using practical outcomes of current and new 24-hour LABAs will help
determine their efficacy and safety. For robust comparisons as to their relative 
effects, long-term head-to-head comparisons are needed.

DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD006826.pub2 
PMID: 23990350  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Expert Rev Clin Pharmacol. 2013 Sep;6(5):503-17. doi:
10.1586/17512433.2013.828419. Epub 2013 Aug 24.

Once-daily glycopyrronium via the Breezhaler® device for the treatment of COPD:
pharmacological and clinical profile.

Molimard M(1), D'Andrea P.

Author information: 
(1)Département de Pharmacologie, CHU de Bordeaux-Univ. Bordeaux Ségalen-INSERM,
U657, 33076 Bordeaux Cedex, France.

In the management of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), there is an
unmet medical need for effective bronchodilator treatments that not only have a
fast onset of action, but also a long duration of action and are delivered using 
a simple, easy-to-use device. Long-acting muscarinic antagonists such as
glycopyrronium and tiotropium, along with long-acting beta-2 agonists such as
indacaterol, formoterol and salmeterol are the pillars of pharmacological therapy
for the long-term management of patients with COPD. Glycopyrronium, the
quaternary ammonium ion of glycopyrronium bromide, acts as a competitive
antagonist by selectively binding to the muscarinic receptors in the bronchial
smooth musculature, thus inhibiting acetylcholine-mediated bronchoconstriction.
Glycopyrronium is an inhaled once-daily long-acting muscarinic antagonist
recently approved for the maintenance treatment of patients with COPD.
Glycopyrronium is administered by a single-dose, dry-powder inhaler, the
Breezhaler® device, designed specifically to have a low internal resistance, be
easy to use and confirm efficient drug delivery in patients with a wide range of 
COPD severities, irrespective of the age. Glycopyrronium has been shown to
provide rapid and sustained improvements in lung function, dyspnea, health
status, exercise endurance and exacerbation risk and an acceptable safety and
tolerability profile.

DOI: 10.1586/17512433.2013.828419 
PMID: 23971870  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. PLoS One. 2013 Aug 14;8(8):e70784. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0070784. eCollection
2013.

Indacaterol for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: systematic review and
meta-analysis.

Chung VC(1), Ma PH, Hui DS, Tam WW, Tang JL.

Author information: 
(1)Jockey Club School of Public Health and Primary Care, The Chinese University
of Hong Kong, Hong Kong.

BACKGROUND: Inhaled bronchodilators are the first-line therapy for COPD.
Indacaterol is a novel addition to existing long-acting bronchodilators.
OBJECTIVES: Systematic review of randomized controlled trials (RCT) ON efficacy
and safety of indacaterol as compared: 1) with placebo at different dosages, 2)
with existing bronchodilators; (3) as add-on treatment to tiotropium.
METHODS: We searched 13 electronic databases, including MEDLINE, EMBASE and
CENTRAL, and contacted the manufacturer for unpublished data. Primary outcome was
mean FEV1 change at 12(th) week, secondary outcomes included changes in SGRQ, TDI
and BODE index at 6 months, exacerbation at 1 year, and worsening of symptoms.
RESULTS: Twelve eligible RCTs of moderate risk of bias included data from 10,977 
patients. Compared to placebo, indacaterol improved FEV1 by a weighted mean
difference (WMD) of 0.16 L (95%CI: 0.15, 0.18 L, p<0.001), homogeneously above
the minimally important difference of 0.10 L. It offered clinically relevant
improvement in all secondary outcomes except exacerbation. Magnitude of benefit
did not differ significantly by dosage, but one treatment related death was
reported at 300 ug. Efficacy of Indacaterol was similar to formoterol and
salmeterol (FEV1 WMD = 0.04 L, 95%CI: 0.01 L, 0.07 L, p = 0.02); and tiotropium
(FEV1 WMD = 0.01 L, 95%CI: -0.01, 0.03 L, p = 0.61). The use of indacaterol on
top of tiotropium yielded additional improvement on FEV1 (WMD = 0.07 L, 95%CI:
0.05 L, 0.10 L, p<0.001).
CONCLUSION: Indacaterol is safe and beneficial for patients with COPD at dosage
≤150 ug. It may serve as a good alternative to existing bronchodilators, or as an
add-on to tiotropium for unresponsive patients. Use of higher dosage requires
further justification.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0070784 
PMCID: PMC3743831
PMID: 23967106  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2013;8:353-63. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S21625. Epub
2013 Jul 25.

Indacaterol: a comprehensive review.

Rossi A(1), Polese G.

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary Unit, Cardiovascular and Thoracic Department, University and General
Hospital, Verona, Italy. andrea.rossi2@ospedaleuniverona.it

At present there is no cure for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
However, some nonpharmacologic treatments, such as rehabilitation and lung volume
reduction surgery, as well as pharmacologic intervention, can relieve some of the
patient's symptoms and improve quality of life, while also reducing the rate of
exacerbations and hospitalizations. There needs to be a paradigm shift away from 
the unjustified nihilistic approach to COPD towards considering it a preventable 
and treatable disease. After patients quit smoking and start to lead healthier
lifestyles, long-acting bronchodilators, such as long-acting beta-adrenergic
agents (LABA) and long-acting antimuscarinic agents (LAMA), are recommended as
the cornerstone of treatment for COPD, either as monotherapy or in combination.
COPD is characterized by a reduced maximum expiratory flow and slow forced
emptying of the lungs, which progress over time and are not completely
reversible. In this condition, gas gets trapped in the lungs and pulmonary
hyperinflation occurs. LABA and LAMA improve airway patency and deflate the
lungs. Indacaterol is the first once-daily LABA approved for treatment of COPD,
and is administered by inhalation through the Breezhaler® device. The speed of
bronchodilation is similar to that with salbutamol (ie, about five minutes) and
longer (ie, 24 hours) than that with traditional LABA, with the same 12-hour
effect as salmeterol and formoterol, both of which require twice-daily
administration. This is why indacaterol has been called the "ultra-LABA". On the 
one hand, the fast onset of action provides immediate relief of symptoms, and on 
the other, its constant 24-hour bronchodilation provides "pharmacologic stenting"
which facilitates lung emptying, thereby decreasing trapped gas and pulmonary
hyperinflation. Once-daily administration of a fast and long-acting
bronchodilator can improve patient adherence with therapy, which is known to be a
major problem for many medical treatments. Dose-finding trials have shown that 75
μg is the minimum dose needed to achieve clinically important improvement.
However, indacaterol 150 μg and 300 μg achieve an even greater improvement in
lung function and patient-oriented outcomes. Further, these two doses of
indacaterol significantly reduce pulmonary hyperinflation, thereby improving
exercise tolerance and ability to perform day-to-day activities. It is more
effective on lung volumes at the 300 μg dose than formoterol, and better than
salmeterol and tiotropium at the 150 μg dose, at least in the acute setting. It
is noteworthy that few studies document these results in patients with COPD and
moderate airflow obstruction. These are exactly the kind of patients our research
should be concentrating on, in view of the accelerated decay in forced expiratory
volume in one second at this stage of the disease. Finally, all the relevant
studies show that indacaterol is consistently well tolerated by patients with
COPD at every stage, and that it has a high safety profile.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S21625 
PMCID: PMC3728154
PMID: 23922496  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2013 Nov;45(11):2444-55. doi:
10.1016/j.biocel.2013.07.019. Epub 2013 Aug 2.

Regulation of Akt-mTOR, ubiquitin-proteasome and autophagy-lysosome pathways in
response to formoterol administration in rat skeletal muscle.

Joassard OR(1), Amirouche A, Gallot YS, Desgeorges MM, Castells J, Durieux AC,
Berthon P, Freyssenet DG.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Physiologie de l'Exercice, Université de Lyon, F-42023
Saint-Etienne, France.

Administration of β2-agonists triggers skeletal muscle anabolism and hypertrophy.
We investigated the time course of the molecular events responsible for rat
skeletal muscle hypertrophy in response to 1, 3 and 10 days of formoterol
administration (i.p. 2000μg/kg/day). A marked hypertrophy of rat tibialis
anterior muscle culminated at day 10. Phosphorylation of Akt, ribosomal protein
S6, 4E-BP1 and ERK1/2 was increased at day 3, but returned to control level at
day 10. This could lead to a transient increase in protein translation and could 
explain previous studies that reported increase in protein synthesis following
β2-agonist administration. Formoterol administration was also associated with a
significant reduction in MAFbx/atrogin-1 mRNA level (day 3), suggesting that
formoterol can also affect protein degradation of MAFbx/atrogin1 targeted
substrates, including MyoD and eukaryotic initiation factor-3f (eIF3-f).
Surprisingly, mRNA level of autophagy-related genes, light chain 3 beta (LC3b)
and gamma-aminobutyric acid receptor-associated protein-like 1 (Gabarapl1), as
well as lysosomal hydrolases, cathepsin B and cathepsin L, was significantly and 
transiently increased after 1 and/or 3 days, suggesting that autophagosome
formation would be increased in response to formoterol administration. However,
this has to be relativized since the mRNA level of Unc-51-like kinase1 (Ulk1),
BCL2/adenovirus E1B interacting protein3 (Bnip3), and transcription factor EB
(TFEB), as well as the protein content of Ulk1, Atg13, Atg5-Atg12 complex and
p62/Sqstm1 remained unchanged or was even decreased in response to formoterol
administration. These results demonstrate that the effects of formoterol are
mediated, in part, through the activation of Akt-mTOR pathway and that other
signaling pathways become more important in the regulation of skeletal muscle
mass with chronic administration of β2-agonists.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biocel.2013.07.019 
PMID: 23916784  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Ther Adv Respir Dis. 2013 Oct;7(5):264-71. doi: 10.1177/1753465813497527. Epub
2013 Aug 1.

Comparison of the bronchodilator and systemic effects of AZD3199, an inhaled
ultra-long-acting β₂-adrenoceptor agonist, with formoterol in patients with
asthma.

Bjermer L(1), Rosenborg J, Bengtsson T, Lötvall J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine and Allergology, Skåne University Hospital,
Getingevägen 4, 22185 Lund, Sweden.

OBJECTIVES: Pharmacologically mediated bronchodilation is important in the
management of asthma, and is primarily achieved with β₂-agonists. Novel compounds
should preferably have a longer duration of action and a better systemic side
effect profile than established alternatives at comparable peak bronchodilation. 
This single-dose crossover study was conducted to investigate and compare with
formoterol the bronchodilatory and systemic effects, tolerability and safety of
AZD3199, a novel ultra-long-acting β₂-agonist (uLABA).
METHODS: Patients with asthma (n = 37) were randomized to receive AZD3199 (120,
480, 1920 µg), formoterol (9, 36 µg) or placebo inhaled via a Turbuhaler™.
Bronchodilation was evaluated by maximum (E(max)) and average 22-26 h (E₂₂₋₂₆)
forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1). Serum potassium was evaluated by
minimum (E(min)) and 0-4 h average (E(av)) determined from serial measurements.
AZD3199 and formoterol were compared on the basis of relative dose potency.
Adverse events, clinical laboratory tests and physical examinations were markers 
for safety and tolerability, with plasma AZD3199 as the indicator of drug
exposure.
RESULTS: All active treatments dose-dependently increased E(max) and AZD3199 (480
and 1920 µg) and formoterol (36 µg) significantly increased E(₂₂₋₂₆) versus
placebo. Relative dose potency between AZD3199 and formoterol was 50-fold on the 
microgram scale with respect to E max and 11-fold with respect to E(₂₂₋₂₆).
Small, dose-dependent effects on potassium, heart rate and QTc were seen after
administration of AZD3199 compared with placebo. These well-known dose-related
class effects of β₂-agonists were mild. Notably, serum potassium suppression was 
less pronounced after AZD3199 compared with formoterol at similar
bronchodilation. Overall, AZD3199 was well tolerated.
CONCLUSIONS: AZD3199 480 µg and 1920 µg produced 24-hour bronchodilation. At
comparable peak bronchodilator effect, AZD3199 was associated with a lower level 
of systemic side effects than formoterol. AZD3199 was well tolerated, with no
safety concerns identified to preclude further investigation. ClinicalTrials.gov 
study identifier: NCT00736489.

DOI: 10.1177/1753465813497527 
PMID: 23907810  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. COPD. 2013 Aug;10(4):466-72. doi: 10.3109/15412555.2013.771162. Epub 2013 Apr 5.

Combined therapy with tiotropium and formoterol in chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease: effect on the 6-minute walk test.

Jayaram L(1), Wong C, McAuley S, Rea H, Zeng I, O'Dochartaigh C.

Author information: 
(1)Western Health, Department of Respiratory and Sleep Medicine, Footscray,
Victoria, Australia. jayaram.lata@gmail.com

Combined therapy with tiotropium and long-acting beta 2 agonists confers
additional improvement in symptoms, lung function and aspects of health-related
quality of life (QOL) compared with each drug alone in patients with COPD.
However, the efficacy of combined therapy on walking distance, a surrogate
measure of daily functional activity and morbidity remains unclear. The aim was, 
therefore, to quantify the benefit of this therapy on the six minute walk test.
Secondary outcomes included change in lung function, symptoms, the BODE index and
QOL. In a double-blind, crossover study, 38 participants with moderate to severe 
COPD on tiotropium were randomised to receive either formoterol or placebo for 6 
weeks. Following a 2-week washout period, participants crossed over to the
alternate arm of therapy for a further 6 weeks. Thirty-six participants, with an 
average age of 64.3 years and FEV1 predicted of 53%, completed the study.
Combined therapy improved walking distance by a mean of 36 metres [95% CI: 2.4,
70.1; p = 0.04] compared with tiotropium. FEV1 increased in both groups (160 mL
combination therapy versus 30 mL tiotropium) with a mean difference of 110 mL
(95% CI: -100, 320; p = 0.07) between groups, These findings further support the 
emerging advantages of combined therapy in COPD. Australian New Zealand Clinical 
Trials.

DOI: 10.3109/15412555.2013.771162 
PMID: 23875741  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Respir Med. 2013 Nov;107(11):1709-21. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2013.06.007. Epub 2013 
Jul 13.

Cost effectiveness of adding budesonide/formoterol to tiotropium in COPD in four 
Nordic countries.

Nielsen R(1), Kankaanranta H, Bjermer L, Lange P, Arnetorp S, Hedegaard M,
Stenling A, Mittmann N.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medicine, University of Bergen, Jonas Lies vei 65, N-5021 Bergen,
Norway; Department of Thoracic Medicine, Haukeland University Hospital, Jonas
Lies vei 65, N-5021 Bergen, Norway. Electronic address: rune.nielsen@med.uib.no.

OBJECTIVE: Assess the cost effectiveness of budesonide/formoterol (BUD/FORM)
Turbuhaler(®)+tiotropium (TIO) HandiHaler(®) vs. placebo (PBO)+TIO in patients
with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) eligible for inhaled
corticosteroids/long-acting β2-agonists (ICS/LABA).
METHODS: The cost-effectiveness analysis was based on the 12-week, randomised,
double-blind CLIMB trial. The study included 659 patients with pre-bronchodilator
forced expiratory volume in 1 s ≤ 50% and ≥1 exacerbation requiring systemic
glucocorticosteroids or antibiotics the preceding year. Patients received
BUD/FORM 320/9 μg bid + TIO 18 μg qd or PBO bid + TIO 18 μg qd. Effectiveness was
defined as the number of severe exacerbations (hospitalisation/emergency room
visit/systemic glucocorticosteroids) avoided. A sub-analysis included antibiotics
in the definition of an exacerbation. Resource use from CLIMB was combined with
Danish (DKK), Finnish (€), Norwegian (NOK) and Swedish (SEK) unit costs (2010).
The incremental cost-effectiveness ratios (ICERs) for BUD/FORM + TIO vs.
PBO + TIO were estimated using descriptive statistics and uncertainty around
estimates using bootstrapping. Analyses were conducted from the societal and
healthcare perspectives in Denmark, Finland, Norway and Sweden.
RESULTS: From a societal perspective, the ICER was estimated at €174/severe
exacerbation avoided in Finland while BUD/FORM + TIO was dominant in the other
countries. From the healthcare perspective, ICERs were DKK 1580 (€212), €307 and 
SEK 1573 (€165) per severe exacerbation avoided for Denmark, Finland and Sweden, 
respectively, while BUD/FORM + TIO was dominant in Norway. Including antibiotics 
decreased ICERs by 8-15%. Sensitivity analyses showed that results were overall
robust.
CONCLUSION: BUD/FORM + TIO represents a clinical and economic benefit to health
systems and society for the treatment of COPD in the Nordic countries.
(ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT00496470).

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2013.06.007 
PMID: 23856511  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2013;788:19-23. doi: 10.1007/978-94-007-6627-3_3.

Siglec-8 in induced sputum of COPD patients.

Mroz RM(1), Holownia A, Wielgat P, Sitko A, Skopinski T, Chyczewska E, Braszko
JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chest Diseases and Tuberculosis, Bialystok Medical University,
14 Zurawia St., Bialystok, Poland, robmroz@wp.pl.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is related to infiltration and
activation of inflammatory cells in airways and pulmonary tissue. In COPD,
neutrophils are prominent, while eosinophilic influx is typical to asthma.
Inflammatory cells express sialic acid-binding immunoglobulin like lectins called
Siglecs, a family of innate immune receptors that are transmembrane I-type
lectins binding sialic acid. One member of the Siglec family, Siglec-8, is
expressed mostly in eosinophils and may be an important therapeutic target in
asthma or COPD. The aim of our project was to quantify Siglec-8 expression in
induced sputum cells of COPD patients treated with long-acting beta2-agonists
(LABA) or combined with long-acting antimuscarinic agents (LAMA) - tiotropium
bromide. Thirty stable COPD patients (21 males and 9 females, mean age 67 years) 
receiving 12 μg BID formoterol therapy were assessed before and after 3 months'
add-on therapy consisting of 18 μg QID tiotropium. In all patients, spirometry,
lung volumes, and DLCO were performed before and after therapy. The patients were
subjected to sputum induction before and after therapy. Sputum cells were
isolated and processed to obtain cell membranes. Siglec-8 protein expression was 
assessed using Western blot. In patients receiving tiotropium and formoterol,
improved FEV1 and lung volumes were observed compared with formoterol-only
treated patients. The mean Siglec-8 level was significantly higher in
eosinophilic subgroup of COPD patients compared with non-eosinophilic patients
before therapy 40,000 vs. 15,000 Adj. Vol. INT/mm(2). Our data show that Siglec-8
may be involved in COPD pathogenesis and may influence COPD phenotyping.

DOI: 10.1007/978-94-007-6627-3_3 
PMID: 23835953  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2013;788:1-6. doi: 10.1007/978-94-007-6627-3_1.

Altered histone deacetylase activity and iNOS expression in cells isolated from
induced sputum of COPD patients treated with tiotropium.

Holownia A(1), Mroz RM, Wielgat P, Skopinski T, Kolodziejczyk A, Sitko A,
Chyczewska E, Braszko JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacology, Medical University of Bialystok, 15a
Waszyngtona St., Bialystok, 15-274, Poland, holow_sinai@hotmail.com.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is the only major disease with
increasing death rate. In COPD, progressive reduction in quality of life is
closely related to the increasing limitation of airflow due to chronic
bronchitis, cell hyperplasia, fibrosis, and irreversible lung damage. Signaling
pathways involved in inflammatory processes in COPD and inflammatory response to 
therapy are unknown. Our aim was to isolate cells from induced sputum of COPD
patients treated with formoterol or formoterol + tiotropium and assess enzymatic 
activity of histone deacetylases (HDACs) acetylated histone 4 (AcH4) and
expression of inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS). HDACs are important in
signal transduction and inflammation. iNOS is generating nitric oxide (NO)
relevant to blood pressure regulation, inflammation and infections. Thirty stable
COPD patients (21 males and 9 females, mean age 67 years) receiving 12 μg b.i.d. 
formoterol were assayed before and after 3 months add-on therapy consisting of 18
μg q.i.d. tiotropium. In all patients, spirometry, lung volumes, and DLCO were
performed before and after tiotropium therapy and all patients were subjected to 
sputum induction. Sputum cells were isolated and processed to obtain cytosolic
and nuclear fractions. HDAC activity was measured in nuclear fraction using
colorimetric assay. Expression AcH4 and iNOS was quantified using Western blot.
In patients receiving both drugs, FEV1 and lung volumes significantly improved
compared with formoterol-only treated patients. Mean HDAC activity was slightly
decreased (P < 0.05), while AcH4 levels and iNOS expression were significantly
elevated in tiotropium-treated patients (increase by about 65 %; P < 0.01 and 77 
%; P < 0.01 respectively). Our data show that beneficial effects of tiotropium in
add-on therapy to formoterol may be related to altered histone signaling and
increased iNOS expression.

DOI: 10.1007/978-94-007-6627-3_1 
PMID: 23835951  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. BMJ. 2013 May 29;346:f3306. doi: 10.1136/bmj.f3306.

Pneumonia and pneumonia related mortality in patients with COPD treated with
fixed combinations of inhaled corticosteroid and long acting β2 agonist:
observational matched cohort study (PATHOS).

Janson C(1), Larsson K, Lisspers KH, Ställberg B, Stratelis G, Goike H, Jörgensen
L, Johansson G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Sciences, Respiratory Medicine, Uppsala University,
Uppsala, Sweden. christer.janson@medsci.uu.se

Erratum in
    BMJ. 2013;346:f4375.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the occurrence of pneumonia and pneumonia related
events in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) treated with
two different fixed combinations of inhaled corticosteroid/long acting β2
agonist.
DESIGN: Observational retrospective pairwise cohort study matched (1:1) for
propensity score.
SETTING: Primary care medical records data linked to Swedish hospital, drug, and 
cause of death registry data for years 1999-2009.
PARTICIPANTS: Patients with COPD diagnosed by a physician and prescriptions of
either budesonide/formoterol or fluticasone/salmeterol.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Yearly pneumonia event rates, admission to hospital
related to pneumonia, and mortality.
RESULTS: 9893 patients were eligible for matching (2738 in the
fluticasone/salmeterol group; 7155 in the budesonide/formoterol group), yielding 
two matched cohorts of 2734 patients each. In these patients, 2115 (39%) had at
least one recorded episode of pneumonia during the study period, with 2746
episodes recorded during 19,170 patient years of follow up. Compared with
budesonide/formoterol, rate of pneumonia and admission to hospital were higher in
patients treated with fluticasone/salmeterol: rate ratio 1.73 (95% confidence
interval 1.57 to 1.90; P<0.001) and 1.74 (1.56 to 1.94; P<0.001), respectively.
The pneumonia event rate per 100 patient years for fluticasone/salmeterol versus 
budesonide/formoterol was 11.0 (10.4 to 11.8) versus 6.4 (6.0 to 6.9) and the
rate of admission to hospital was 7.4 (6.9 to 8.0) versus 4.3 (3.9 to 4.6). The
mean duration of admissions related to pneumonia was similar for both groups, but
mortality related to pneumonia was higher in the fluticasone/salmeterol group (97
deaths) than in the budesonide/formoterol group (52 deaths) (hazard ratio 1.76,
1.22 to 2.53; P=0.003). All cause mortality did not differ between the treatments
(1.08, 0.93 to 1.14; P=0.59).
CONCLUSIONS: There is an intra-class difference between fixed combinations of
inhaled corticosteroid/long acting β2 agonist with regard to the risk of
pneumonia and pneumonia related events in the treatment of patients with COPD.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: Clinical Trials.gov NCT01146392.


PMCID: PMC3666306
PMID: 23719639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2013;8:231-8. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S42866. Epub
2013 May 7.

Symptom variability in COPD: a narrative review.

Lopez-Campos JL(1), Calero C, Quintana-Gallego E.

Author information: 
(1)Unidad Medico-Quirúrgica de Enfermedades Respiratorias, Instituto de
Biomedicina de Sevilla (IBiS), Hospital Universitario Virgen del Rocio, Seville, 
Spain. lcampos@separ.es

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) has traditionally been considered an
inexorably progressive disease, associated with a constant increase of symptoms
that occur as the forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1) worsens, only
intermittently interrupted by exacerbations. However, this paradigm has been
challenged in recent decades by the available evidence. Recent studies have
pointed out that COPD-related symptoms are not consistently perceived by patients
in the same way, showing not only seasonal variation, but also changes in symptom
perception during a week or even within a single day. According to the available 
data, patients experience the biggest increase in respiratory symptoms during the
first hours of the early morning, followed by the nighttime. This variation over 
time is of considerable importance, since it impacts on daily life activities and
health-related quality of life, as measured by a recently developed ad hoc
questionnaire. Additionally, recent clinical trials have suggested that the use
of rapid-onset long-acting bronchodilators may have an impact on morning
symptoms, despite their current use as maintenance treatment for a determined
period. Although this hypothesis is to be validated in future long-term clinical 
trials comparing fast-onset versus slow-onset inhaled drugs in COPD, it may bring
forward a new concept of long-term bronchodilator therapy. At the present time,
the two available long-acting, fast-onset bronchodilators used in the treatment
of COPD are formoterol and the recently marketed indacaterol. Newer drugs have
also been shown to have a rapid onset of action in preclinical studies. Health
care professionals caring for COPD patients should consider this variation in the
perception of symptoms during their clinical interview as a potential new target 
in the long-term treatment plan.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S42866 
PMCID: PMC3653762
PMID: 23687444  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Respir Res. 2013 May 8;14:49. doi: 10.1186/1465-9921-14-49.

Combination bronchodilator therapy in the management of chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease.

Tashkin DP(1), Ferguson GT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, 405 Hilgard
Avenue, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA. DTashkin@mednet.ucla.edu

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) represents a significant cause of
global morbidity and mortality, with a substantial economic impact. Recent
changes in the Global initiative for chronic Obstructive Lung Disease (GOLD)
guidance refined the classification of patients for treatment using a combination
of spirometry, assessment of symptoms, and/or frequency of exacerbations. The aim
of treatment remains to reduce existing symptoms while decreasing the risk of
future adverse health events. Long-acting bronchodilators are the mainstay of
therapy due to their proven efficacy. GOLD guidelines recommend combining
long-acting bronchodilators with differing mechanisms of action if the control of
COPD is insufficient with monotherapy, and recent years have seen growing
interest in the additional benefits that combination of long-acting muscarinic
antagonists (LAMAs), typified by tiotropium, with long-acting β(2)-agonists
(LABAs), such as formoterol and salmeterol. Most studies have examined free
combinations of currently available LAMAs and LABAs, broadly showing a benefit in
terms of lung function and other patient-reported outcomes, although evidence is 
limited at present. Several once- or twice-daily fixed-dose LAMA/LABA
combinations are under development, most involving newly developed monotherapy
components. This review outlines the existing data for LAMA/LABA combinations in 
the treatment of COPD, summarizes the ongoing trials, and considers the evidence 
required to inform the role of LAMA/LABA combinations in treatment of this
disease.

DOI: 10.1186/1465-9921-14-49 
PMCID: PMC3651866
PMID: 23651244  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Respirology. 2013 Jul;18(5):866-73. doi: 10.1111/resp.12090.

Budesonide/formoterol via Turbuhaler® versus formoterol via Turbuhaler® in
patients with moderate to severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: phase III
multinational study results.

Fukuchi Y(1), Samoro R, Fassakhov R, Taniguchi H, Ekelund J, Carlsson LG,
Ichinose M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Juntendo University, Tokyo, Japan.
yfukuchi@tea.ocn.ne.jp

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: The efficacy and tolerability of budesonide/formoterol 
versus formoterol in patients with moderate to severe chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD) was evaluated.
METHODS: In this randomized, double-blind, parallel-group, phase III study
(NCT01069289), patients with moderate to severe COPD for ≥2 years received either
budesonide/formoterol 160/4.5 μg two inhalations twice daily via Turbuhaler® or
formoterol 4.5 μg two inhalations twice daily via Turbuhaler® for 12 weeks.
Salbutamol was available as reliever medication. Primary outcome variable: change
from baseline to average during treatment in pre-dose forced expiratory volume in
1 s (FEV1 ).
RESULTS: One thousand two hundred ninety-three patients were randomized
(budesonide/formoterol n = 636; formoterol n = 657). Both budesonide/formoterol
and formoterol increased pre-dose FEV1 versus baseline (improvements of 4.6% and 
1.5% over baseline, respectively), with the increase from baseline being
significantly greater with budesonide/formoterol versus formoterol
(budesonide/formoterol:formoterol ratio 1.032; 95% confidence interval:
1.013-1.052; P = 0.0011). The budesonide/formoterol group had a significantly
prolonged time to first exacerbation versus the formoterol group (hazard ratio:
0.679; 95% confidence interval: 0.507-0.909; P = 0.0094) and significantly
greater improvements in many secondary outcome measures. Both treatments were
well tolerated; the incidence and type of adverse events were similar: most
commonly reported (budesonide/formoterol vs formoterol): COPD (8.0% vs 9.4%) and 
nasopharyngitis (5.5% vs 4.9%).
CONCLUSIONS: Budesonide/formoterol 160/4.5 μg two inhalations twice daily was
effective and well tolerated in patients with moderate to severe COPD, offering
benefits over formoterol alone in terms of improved lung function and reduced
risk of exacerbation.

© 2013 The Authors. Respirology © 2013 Asian Pacific Society of Respirology.

DOI: 10.1111/resp.12090 
PMID: 23551359  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2013;8:107-16. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S36592. Epub
2013 Mar 4.

Comparison of the systemic bioavailability of mometasone furoate after oral
inhalation from a mometasone furoate/formoterol fumarate metered-dose inhaler
versus a mometasone furoate dry-powder inhaler in patients with chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease.

Kosoglou T(1), Hubbell J, Xuan F, Cutler DL, Meehan AG, Kantesaria B, Wittmer BA.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Pharmacology, Merck Sharp & Dohme Corp, Whitehouse Station, NJ, USA. 
teddy.kosoglou2@merck.com

BACKGROUND: Coadministration of mometasone furoate (MF) and formoterol fumarate
(F) produces additive effects for improving symptoms and lung function and
reduces exacerbations in patients with asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD). The present study assessed the relative systemic exposure to MF
and characterized the pharmacokinetics of MF and formoterol in patients with
COPD.
METHODS: This was a single-center, randomized, open-label, multiple-dose,
three-period, three-treatment crossover study. The following three treatments
were self-administered by patients (n = 14) with moderate-to-severe COPD: MF 400 
μg/F 10 μg via a metered-dose inhaler (MF/F MDI; DULERA(®)/ZENHALE(®)) without a 
spacer device, MF/F MDI with a spacer, or MF 400 μg via a dry-powder inhaler
(DPI; ASMANEX(®) TWISTHALER(®)) twice daily for 5 days. Plasma samples for MF and
formoterol assay were obtained predose and at prespecified time points after the 
last (morning) dose on day 5 of each period of the crossover. The geometric mean 
ratio (GMR) as a percent and the corresponding 90% confidence intervals (CI) were
calculated for treatment comparisons.
RESULTS: Systemic MF exposure was lower (GMR 77%; 90% CI 58, 102) following
administration by MF/F MDI compared to MF DPI. Additionally, least squares
geometric mean systemic exposures of MF and formoterol were lower (GMR 72%; 90%
CI 61, 84) and (GMR 62%; 90% CI 52, 74), respectively, following administration
by MF/F MDI in conjunction with a spacer compared to MF/F MDI without a spacer.
MF/F MDI had a similar adverse experience profile as that seen with MF DPI. All
adverse experiences were either mild or moderate in severity; no serious adverse 
experience was reported.
CONCLUSION: Systemic MF exposures were lower following administration by MF/F MDI
compared with MF DPI. Additionally, systemic MF and formoterol exposures were
lower following administration by MF/F MDI with a spacer versus without a spacer.
The magnitude of these differences with respect to systemic exposure was not
clinically relevant.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S36592 
PMCID: PMC3595976
PMID: 23525511  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2013;8:117-25. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S28576. Epub
2013 Mar 15.

Ten years of tiotropium: clinical impact and patient perspectives.

Yohannes AM(1), Connolly MJ, Hanania NA.

Author information: 
(1)Manchester Metropolitan University, Department of Health Professions, UK.
a.yohannes@mmu.ac.uk

Tiotropium bromide is an anticholinergic agent that has gained worldwide
acceptance as a first-line, once daily maintenance therapy for patients with
moderate-to-severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. The purpose of this
review is to synthesize the evidence base in the past 10 years on the development
of tiotropium and its efficacy compared to other able interventions such as
long-acting beta agonists (LABAs), as well as to assess its safety profile and
its effects on health-related outcomes in patients with COPD. Treatment with
tiotropium bromide has generally improved patients' health-related quality of
life, reduced the number of patients suffering from acute exacerbations,
decreased the number of hospitalizations, improved dyspnea, and reduced adverse
events compared to placebo. In the past decade, several studies have examined the
safety and efficacy of tiotropium in comparison to placebo and to LABAs
(salmeterol, formoterol, and indacaterol) over periods ranging from 3 months to
48 months of follow-up. Head-to-head comparisons of tiotropium 18μg (once daily) 
with salmeterol 50μg (twice daily) in well-controlled trials demonstrated that
tiotropium was superior in reducing acute exacerbation events and in improving
quality of life. In a few short-term studies, indacaterol was comparable to
tiotropium in its efficacy in improving health-related outcomes. Although the
safety record of tiotropium has been exemplary in comparison to placebo,
anticholinergic events such as dry mouth can be encountered in some patients.
While the long-term safety of tiotropium when delivered in the HandiHaler® has
been well documented, its delivery using the Respimat® Soft Mist Inhaler™ was
associated with an elevated risk of cardiovascular complications, including
increased mortality when compared to placebo. The exact mechanism for this is not
known but is being investigated in a large multinational study that will evaluate
the long-term safety of different doses of tiotropium delivered by the Respimat® 
soft mist inhaler versus the HandiHaler®. Further studies are required to
investigate the efficacy and safety of tiotropium in comparison with novel LABAs 
such as indacaterol and vilanterol, and with other emerging novel anticholinergic
agents such as aclidinium bromide and NVA237 (glycopyrronium bromide).

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S28576 
PMCID: PMC3600941
PMID: 23515335  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. J Intern Med. 2013 Jun;273(6):584-94. doi: 10.1111/joim.12067. Epub 2013 Apr 1.

Combination of budesonide/formoterol more effective than fluticasone/salmeterol
in preventing exacerbations in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: the PATHOS 
study.

Larsson K(1), Janson C, Lisspers K, Jørgensen L, Stratelis G, Telg G, Ställberg
B, Johansson G.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Lung and Allergy Research, National Institute of Environmental
Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. kjell.larsson@ki.se

OBJECTIVES: Combinations of inhaled corticosteroids (ICSs) and long-acting β2
-agonists (LABAs) are recommended for patients with moderate and severe chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). However, it is not known whether different 
fixed combinations are equally effective. The aim of this study was to
investigate exacerbation rates in primary care patients with COPD treated with
budesonide/formoterol compared with fluticasone/salmeterol.
METHODS: Patients with physician-diagnosed COPD and a record of postdiagnosis
treatment with a fixed combination of budesonide/formoterol or
fluticasone/salmeterol were included. Data from primary care medical records were
linked to those from Swedish national hospital, drug and cause of death
registers. Pairwise (1 : 1) propensity score matching was carried out at the
index date (first prescription) by prescribed fixed ICS/LABA combination.
Exacerbations were defined as hospitalizations, emergency visits and collection
of oral steroids or antibiotics for COPD. Yearly event rates were compared using 
Poisson regression.
RESULTS: Matching of 9893 patients (7155 budesonide/formoterol and 2738
fluticasone/salmeterol) yielded two cohorts of 2734 patients, comprising 19 170
patient-years. The exacerbation rates were 0.80 and 1.09 per patient-year in the 
budesonide/formoterol and fluticasone/salmeterol groups, respectively (difference
of 26.6%; P < 0.0001); yearly rates for COPD-related hospitalizations were 0.15
and 0.21, respectively (difference of 29.1%; P < 0.0001). All other healthcare
outcomes were also significantly reduced with budesonide/formoterol versus
fluticasone/salmeterol.
CONCLUSIONS: Long-term treatment with fixed combination budesonide/formoterol was
associated with fewer healthcare utilization-defined exacerbations than
fluticasone/salmeterol in patients with moderate and severe COPD.

© 2013 The Association for the Publication of the Journal of Internal Medicine.

DOI: 10.1111/joim.12067 
PMID: 23495860  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Expert Opin Pharmacother. 2013 Apr;14(6):775-81. doi:
10.1517/14656566.2013.776539. Epub 2013 Mar 9.

Aclidinium bromide/formoterol fumarate fixed-dose combination for the treatment
of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Cazzola M(1), Rogliani P, Matera MG.

Author information: 
(1)University of Rome, Department of System Medicine, Rome Tor Vergata, Italy.
mario.cazzola@uniroma2.it

INTRODUCTION: Combining a long-acting β(2)-agonist (LABA) and a long-acting
antimuscarinic agent (LAMA) is potentially a good pharmacological approach to
improve clinical results in stable moderate chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD) patients when symptoms are not adequately controlled with tiotropium
monotherapy. Consequently, there is a strong interest in developing a LABA/LAMA
fixed-dose combination therapy in an attempt to simplify the treatment.
AREAS COVERED: An aclidinium bromide/formoterol fumarate fixed-dose combination
is under development. The few clinical data at our disposal suggest that the
addition of formoterol fumarate to aclidinium bromide results in greater
bronchodilation than formoterol fumarate or aclidinium bromide alone. However, a 
large Phase III program is involving a huge number of patients with
moderate-to-severe COPD and consists of large long-term (from 24 to 52 weeks)
pivotal clinical trials that have been designed to fulfil both European Medicines
Agency (EMA) and Food and Drug Administration (FDA) requirements and are
evaluating the efficacy and safety of this fixed-dose combination.
EXPERT OPINION: Studies assessing the impact of aclidinium bromide/formoterol
fumarate fixed-dose combination on COPD exacerbations, exercise capacity and
hospitalisations are clearly needed to better detect its potential effects of
disease modification in COPD. Moreover, it seems pragmatic to proceed with its
introduction in the market at a highly competitive price.

DOI: 10.1517/14656566.2013.776539 
PMID: 23472632  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Curr Med Chem. 2013;20(12):1477-95.

Long-acting beta-agonists and their association with inhaled corticosteroids in
COPD.

Fuso L(1), Mores N, Valente S, Malerba M, Montuschi P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Geriatrics, Faculty of Medicine, Catholic 
University of the Sacred Heart, Rome, Italy.

Inhaled bronchodilators, including beta(2)-agonists and antimuscaric receptor
antagonists, are the mainstay of pharmacotherapy in chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD). The short-acting beta(2)-agonists, including salbutamol, and
fenoterol, have a rapid onset of action, a bronchodilating effect for 3-6 h and
are used on demand. The long-acting beta(2)-agonists (LABAs), including
salmeterol and formoterol, have 12-hour duration of action and are used with a
twice-daily dosing regimen for long-term COPD treatment. Unlike salmeterol,
formoterol has a rapid onset of action. Pharmacological characteristics required 
by novel inhaled LABAs include 24 h bronchodilator effect in vivo which would
make them suitable for once daily administration (ultra-LABA), high potency and
selectivity for beta(2)-adrenoceptors, rapid onset of action, low oral
bioavailability (< 5%) after inhalation, and high systemic clearance.
Indacaterol, which has been approved for long-term treatment of COPD in Europe
and in the USA, has a 24-h duration of action and a once-daily dosing regimen.
Newer ultra-LABAs, including olodaterol, vilanterol, milveterol, carmoterol, and 
abediterol, are in development. Combination with ICS (fluticasone/salmeterol,
budesonide/formoterol, beclomethasone/formoterol) appears to provide an
additional benefit over the monocomponent therapy, although the extent of this
benefit is variable and often not clinically significant in all the endpoints
assessed. In patients with COPD, treatment with ICS is associated with increased 
risk of pneumonia which should be carefully considered when assessing the
risk/benefit ratio of ICS/LABA combinations. Subphenotyping of patients with COPD
(e.g., frequent exacerbations, sputum eosinophilia, mixed asthma/COPD phenotype) 
might help identify those patients who are most likely to benefit from addition
of ICS to bronchodilating treatment. Ultra-LABA/ long-acting muscarinic receptor 
antagonist (LAMA) combination treatment is under development and is likely to
become a standard pharmacological strategy for COPD. Dual-pharmacology inhaled
muscarinic antagonist-beta(2) agonist (MABA) molecules provide a new approach to 
the treatment of COPD.


PMID: 23409722  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Mol Pharmacol. 2013 Apr;83(4):894-906. doi: 10.1124/mol.112.083493. Epub 2013 Feb
6.

Phosphodiesterase 4 inhibitors augment the ability of formoterol to enhance
glucocorticoid-dependent gene transcription in human airway epithelial cells: a
novel mechanism for the clinical efficacy of roflumilast in severe chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease.

Moodley T(1), Wilson SM, Joshi T, Rider CF, Sharma P, Yan D, Newton R, Giembycz
MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology & Pharmacology, University of Calgary, 3280 Hospital 
Drive NW, Calgary, Alberta, Canada T2N 4N1.

Post-hoc analysis of two phase III clinical studies found that the
phosphodiesterase 4 (PDE4) inhibitor, roflumilast, reduced exacerbation frequency
in patients with severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) who were
taking inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) concomitantly, whereas patients not taking
ICS derived no such benefit. In contrast, in two different trials also performed 
in patients with severe COPD, roflumilast reduced exacerbation rates in the
absence of ICS, indicating that PDE4 inhibition alone is sufficient for
therapeutic activity to be realized. Given that roflumilast is recommended as an 
"add-on" medication to patients with severe disease who will inevitably be taking
a long-acting β2-adrenoceptor agonist (LABA)/ICS combination therapy, we tested
the hypothesis that roflumilast augments the ability of glucocorticoids to induce
genes with anti-inflammatory activity. Using a glucocorticoid response element
(GRE) luciferase reporter transfected into human airway epithelial cells [both
bronchial epithelium + adenovirus 12 - SV40 hybrid (BEAS-2B) cells and primary
cultures], roflumilast enhanced fluticasone propionate-induced GRE-dependent
transcription. Roflumilast also produced a sinistral displacement of the
concentration-response curves that described the augmentation of GRE-dependent
transcription by the LABA formoterol. In BEAS-2B cells and primary airway
epithelia, roflumilast interacted with formoterol in a positive cooperative
manner to enhance the expression of several glucocorticoid-inducible genes that
have anti-inflammatory potential. We suggest that the ability of roflumilast and 
formoterol to interact in this way supports the concept that these drugs together
may impart clinical benefit beyond that achievable by an ICS alone, a PDE4
inhibitor alone, or an ICS/LABA combination therapy. Roflumilast may, therefore, 
be especially effective in patients with severe COPD.

DOI: 10.1124/mol.112.083493 
PMID: 23389862  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2013;8:53-64. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S39018. Epub
2013 Jan 25.

The safety of long-acting β2-agonists in the treatment of stable chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease.

Decramer ML(1), Hanania NA, Lötvall JO, Yawn BP.

Author information: 
(1)Respiratory Division, UZ Leuven, Campus Gasthuisberg, Herestraat 49, Leuven,
Belgium. marc.decramer@uzleuven.be

BACKGROUND: Inhaled long-acting bronchodilators are the mainstay of
pharmacotherapy for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Both the
twice-daily long-acting β(2)-adrenoceptor agonists (LABAs) salmeterol and
formoterol and the once-daily LABA indacaterol are indicated for use in COPD.
This review examines current evidence for the safety of LABAs in COPD, focusing
on their effect on exacerbations and deaths.
METHODS: We searched PubMed for placebo-controlled studies evaluating long-term
(≥24 weeks) use of formoterol, salmeterol, or indacaterol in patients with stable
COPD, published between January 1990 and September 2012. We summarized data
relating to exacerbations and adverse events, particularly events related to
COPD.
RESULTS: From 20 studies examined (8774 LABA-treated patients), there was no
evidence of an association between LABA treatment and increased exacerbations,
COPD-related adverse events, or deaths. Where analyzed as an efficacy outcome,
LABA treatment was generally associated with significant or numerical reductions 
in COPD exacerbations compared with placebo. Incidences of COPD-related adverse
events were similar for active and placebo treatments. The incidence of adverse
events typically associated with the β(2)-agonist drug class such as skeletal
muscle tremors and palpitations was low (often <1% of patients), and there were
no reports of increased incidence of cardiac arrhythmias. The systemic effects of
β(2)-adrenoceptor stimulation, such as high glucose and potassium levels, were
considered minor.
CONCLUSION: Current evidence from clinical studies of the safety and tolerability
profile of LABAs supports their long-term use in COPD.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S39018 
PMCID: PMC3558319
PMID: 23378756  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Pulm Pharmacol Ther. 2013 Jun;26(3):336-41. doi: 10.1016/j.pupt.2013.01.005. Epub
2013 Jan 20.

Multidetector-row computed tomography assessment of adding budesonide/formoterol 
to tiotropium in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Yasui H(1), Inui N, Furuhashi K, Nakamura Y, Uto T, Sato J, Yasuda K, Takehara Y,
Suda T, Chida K.

Author information: 
(1)Second Division, Department of Internal Medicine, Hamamatsu University School 
of Medicine, 1-20-1 Handayama, Hamamatsu 431-3192, Japan.

BACKGROUND: In patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD),
multidetector-row computed tomography (MDCT) showed that tiotropium dilated the
inner diameters in airways from the third to the sixth generation of the bronchi.
Here we aimed to evaluate the morphological effect by adding a
budesonide/formoterol combination to tiotropium in COPD patients using
three-dimensional MDCT.
METHODS: Pulmonary function tests, St. George's Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ) 
and MDCT imaging studies were performed at the beginning and after
budesonide/formoterol combination treatment for 12 weeks in 14 patients with
COPD.
RESULTS: The median age was 73.5 years and the mean forced expiratory volume in
1 s (FEV1) as a percentage of the predicted value was 57.2 ± 18.3%. The luminal
area in the fifth generation bronchi and the emphysema volume/CT-derived total
lung volume were significantly correlated with FEV1 at baseline (r = 0.682,
p < 0.02 and r = -0.868, p < 0.001, respectively). The average luminal area and
wall area percentage in the third, fourth and fifth generations were correlated
with the SGRQ total score. Budesonide/formoterol induced insignificant pulmonary 
function changes and significant symptoms improvement. CT images showed an
increased inner luminal area and decreased wall area after budesonide/formoterol 
treatment. Average luminal area was significantly increased from 24.3 ± 9.7 to
26.0 ± 9.9 mm(2) in the third generation, 13.0 ± 6.5 to 14.7 ± 7.3 mm(2) in the
fourth generation, 8.0 ± 4.8 to 9.4 ± 4.9 mm(2) in the fifth generation and
5.6 ± 2.7 to 6.7 ± 3.6 mm(2) in the sixth generation (p < 0.01). The average
increase of the third generation luminal area was correlated with the FEV1
increase (r = 0.632, p < 0.03). The wall area percentage significantly decreased 
from 51.5 ± 9.2 to 49.1 ± 9.7 in the third generation, 56.1 ± 9.7 to 53.0 ± 11.1 
in the fourth generation, and 62.3 ± 9.9 to 57.6 ± 9.8 in the fifth generation
(p < 0.05). Emphysema volume/CT-derived total lung volume was unchanged with
treatment.
CONCLUSION: MDCT demonstrated budesonide/formoterol induced bronchodilation in
the non-small airway. CT imaging can evaluate drug therapeutic effect and may
provide additional insights into pharmacotherapy for COPD.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pupt.2013.01.005 
PMID: 23340058  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Lung. 2013 Apr;191(2):135-46. doi: 10.1007/s00408-012-9444-2. Epub 2013 Jan 10.

Safety and efficacy of 12-week or longer indacaterol treatment in
moderate-to-severe COPD patients: a systematic review.

Jiang FM(1), Liang ZA, Zheng QL, Wang RC, Luo J, Li CT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, West China Medical School and West China
Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu, 610000, Sichuan, China.

BACKGROUND: This is a meta-analysis of the safety and efficacy of indacaterol in 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) with treatment duration of
≥12 weeks.
METHODS: Randomized controlled trials (RCTs) reported in English (to September
30, 2012) were identified from PubMed, the Cochrane Library, Embase, websites,
reference lists, and manual searches. Two reviewers independently assessed the
quality of the trials and extracted information.
RESULTS: Five RCTs were eligible. Five involved indacaterol, two salmeterol, one 
formoterol, and one tiotropium. Four studies had placebos. Using trough forced
expiratory volume in 1 s as a measure of therapeutic effect, indacaterol was
superior to the other β2-agonists, tiotropium, and placebo at weeks 12, 26, and
52. Indacaterol had a greater effect on the transition dyspnoea index compared
with placebo, formoterol, and salmeterol, but not open-label tiotropium. In
reducing the as-needed use of salbutamol, indacaterol were superior to placebo,
tiotropium, and formoterol, but not salmeterol (5, 95 % confidence interval (CI),
-2.15, 12.15). Indacaterol improved St George's Respiratory Questionnaire scores 
more than placebo and open-label tiotropium, but not formoterol. Indacaterol
seemed to cause more adverse events than placebo only at a dose of 600 μg daily
and a duration of 52 weeks (risk ratio 1.15; 95 % CI, 1.04, 1.26). The total and 
serious adverse events and adverse events leading to discontinuation were
comparable with open-label tiotropium and the β2-agonists.
CONCLUSIONS: Indacaterol is effective and well-tolerated as a bronchodilator for 
the maintenance of moderate to severe COPD.

DOI: 10.1007/s00408-012-9444-2 
PMID: 23306410  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. World Allergy Organ J. 2012 Jun;5(6):66-72. doi: 10.1097/WOX.0b013e31825eff8b.

In vitro effects of Beta-2 agonists on skeletal muscle differentiation,
hypertrophy, and atrophy.

Wannenes F(1), Magni L, Bonini M, Dimauro I, Caporossi D, Moretti C, Bonini S.

Author information: 
(1)1Institute of Translational Pharmacology, National Research Council, Rome,
Italy 2Department of Medicine, "Sapienza" University, Rome, Italy 3Department of 
Health Science, University of Rome 'Foro Italico', Rome, Italy 4Department of
Internal Medicine, Endocrinology Unit, University of Tor Vergata, Rome, Italy
5Department of Internal Medicine, Second University of Naples, Naples, Italy.

BACKGROUND: : Beta-2 agonists are widely used in the treatment of asthma and
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease for their effect on airway smooth muscle
relaxation. They also act on skeletal muscle, although their reported ergogenic
effect is controversial.
AIM: : To evaluate the in vitro effects of short-acting and long-acting beta-2
agonists on adrenergic receptor (ADR) expression, hypertrophy, and atrophy
markers, in a skeletal muscle cell line.
METHODS: : The C2C12 cell line was used as a model of skeletal muscle
differentiation. ADR messenger RNA expression was evaluated in proliferating
myoblasts, committed cells, and differentiated myotubes, in basal conditions and 
after treatment with 10 M clenbuterol, salbutamol, salmeterol, and formoterol.
Effect of beta-2 agonists on gene and protein expression of hypertrophy and
atrophy markers was assessed in differentiated myotubes.
RESULTS: : Our study shows that beta-2 ADR messenger RNA was expressed and
progressively increased during cell differentiation. Beta-2 agonist treatment did
not affect its expression. Skeletal muscle hypertrophy markers (fast and slow
myosin, myogenin) were not modulated by any of the beta-2 agonists evaluated.
However, clenbuterol induced a significant, dose-dependent downregulation of
skeletal muscle atrophy genes (atrogin-1, MuRF-1, and cathepsin L).
CONCLUSIONS: : The reported ergogenic effect of beta-2 agonists, if any, should
be considered as drug-specific and not class-specific and that of clenbuterol is 
mediated by the inhibition of the atrophic pathway.

DOI: 10.1097/WOX.0b013e31825eff8b 
PMCID: PMC3651181
PMID: 23283108  [PubMed]


165. Klin Med (Mosk). 2013;91(12):21-5.

[Effect of basic therapy on clinical symptoms, quality of life and systemic
inflammation in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease].

[Article in Russian]

Baranova II, Leshchenko IV.

The study included 38 men with moderately severe chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD) (mean age 60.6 ± 10.2 yr) and 42 ones with severe COPD (mean age
61.2 ± 7.2 yr). They were treated with tiotropium bromide, formoterol and
beclomethasone dipropionate for 24 weeks (stage 1), TB alone for 12 weeks (stage 
2) and TB+formoterol (long-acting bronchodilators, LABD) for another 12 weeks.
Each stage was followed by evaluation of COPD symptoms using the St-George's
Hospital questionnaire, daily requirements for short-acting beta-2 agonists
(SABA), heart rate (HR), forced expiratory volume in the 1st second (FEV-1)
before and after SABA test, hemoglobin saturation with oxygen in arterial blood
during pulse oxymetry before and after 6 min walking test, blood surfactant
protein D level (SP-D). The control group was comprised of 34 healthy men (mean
age 62.3 ± 5.8 yr). Patients with moderately severe COPD experienced worsening of
clinical symptoms (p < 0.001), required more SABA (p < 0.001), had increased HR
(p = 0.01) and SP-D levels (p = 0.01) whereas FEV-1 (p = 0.05) decreased during
stage 2 as compared with stage 1. Positive dynamics of all these variables except
COPD symptoms and HR was observed at stage 3. Alteration in the extent of basal
therapy in patients with stage III COPD did not result in dynamics of clinical
and laboratory characteristics. The data obtained suggest the necessity of
combined therapy with LABD or triple basal therapy of moderately severe COPD and 
the possibility of therapy with one or two LABD having different sites of action 
in the patients with clinically stable stage II COPD.


PMID: 25702425  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. J Thorac Dis. 2012 Dec;4(6):583-7. doi: 10.3978/j.issn.2072-1439.2012.11.02.

Comparison of the lung function change in patients with COPD and bronchial asthma
before and after treatment with budesonide/formoterol.

Gao SY(1), Huang JQ, Luo YF, Li ZP, Xie CM, Guo YB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, the First Affiliated Hospital of Fujian
Medical University, Fuzhou 350005, P. R. China;

OBJECTIVE: This study investigated the rapid onset of bronchodilation effect and 
compared lung function changes following budesonide/formoterol (Symbicort
Turbuhaler®) inhalation in Chinese patients with moderate-severe chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and bronchial asthma.
METHODS: In this open-label, parallel-group clinical study, patients eligible for
study were divided into COPD group (n=62, mean age 68.16±8.75 years) and asthma
group (n=30, mean age 45.80±12.35 years). Lung function tests (include FEV1, FVC,
FEV1/FVC, and IC) were performed at baseline (t=0 min time point, value before
inhalation of budesonide/formoterol), and then eligible patients received two
inhalations of budesonide/formoterol (160/4.5 μg). Lung function tests were
reassessed at t=3, 10 and 30 min time point. The primary end-point was lung
function change 3 min after drug inhalation, and the secondary end-points were
comparison of the gas flow rate (ΔFEV1) and volume responses (ΔFVC, ΔIC) between 
COPD and asthma patients after inhalation of budesonide/formoterol.
RESULTS: Compared with the baseline, all patients significantly improved their
lung function (included FEV1, FVC, FEV1/FVC, and IC) at 3 min (P<0.05). Greater
bronchodilation efficacy was found in the asthma group compared with the COPD
group (P<0.05). In the asthmatic patients, the curves of FEV1, FVC, FEV1/FVC, IC,
showed improvement with an ascending trend at all time points from 3 to 30 min.
Whereas in the COPD patients, only the curves of FEV1, FVC, IC showed similar
pattern. We found that ΔFVC was significantly higher than ΔFEV1 in both groups
(P<0.05), but no significant difference between ΔIC and ΔFEV1 (P>0.05). Compared 
with COPD group, asthma group had higher level of ΔFEV1 and ΔIC (P<0.05), but no 
significant difference for ΔFVC can be found.
CONCLUSIONS: Budesonide/formoterol has a fast onset of bronchodilation effect in 
patients with moderate-severe COPD and asthma. Greater efficacy was found in the 
asthma group compared with the COPD group. The gas flow rate and volume responses
in patients with COPD differ from those with asthma after inhalation of
Budesonide/formoterol.

DOI: 10.3978/j.issn.2072-1439.2012.11.02 
PMCID: PMC3506807
PMID: 23205282  [PubMed]


167. Ann Thorac Med. 2012 Oct;7(4):238-42. doi: 10.4103/1817-1737.102185.

Abrupt withdrawal of inhaled corticosteroids does not result in spirometric
deterioration in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: Effect of phenotyping?

Al-Kassimi FA(1), Alhamad EH, Al-Hajjaj MS, Abba AA, Raddaoui E, Shaikh SA.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Department, College of Medicine, King Saud University, Saudi Arabia.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Some studies show a decline of FEV(1) only one month
after withdrawal of inhaled corticosteroids (ICS), while others show no decline. 
We speculate that the presence of an asthma phenotype in the Chronic Obstructive 
Pulmonary Disease (COPD) population, and that its exclusion may result in no
spirometric deterioration.
METHODS: We performed a prospective clinical observation study on 32 patients who
fulfilled the Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive lung disease definition
of COPD (Grade II-IV). They were divided into two phenotypic groups. 1.
Irreversible asthma (A and B) (n = 13): A. Asthma: Bronchial biopsy shows diffuse
thickening of basement membrane (≥ 6.6 μm). B. Airflow limitation (AFL) likely to
be asthma: KCO > 80% predicted if the patient refused biopsy. 2. COPD (A and B)
(n = 19): A. COPD: hypercapneic respiratory failure with raised bicarbonate,
panlobular emphysema with multiple bullas, or bronchial biopsy showing squamous
metaplasia and epithelial/subepithelial inflammation without thickening of the
basement membrane. B. AFL likely to be COPD: KCO < 80% predicted.
RESULTS: The asthma phenotype was significantly younger, had a strong association
with hypertrophy of nasal turbinates, and registered a significant improvement of
FEV(1) (350 ml) vs a decline of - 26.5 ml in the COPD phenotype following therapy
with budesonide/formoterol for one year. Withdrawal of budesonide for 4 weeks in 
the COPD phenotype resulted in FEV(1) + 1.33% (SD ± 5.71) and FVC + 1.24% (SD ±
5.32); a change of <12% in all patients.
CONCLUSIONS: We recorded no spirometric deterioration after exclusion of the
asthma phenotype from a COPD group.

DOI: 10.4103/1817-1737.102185 
PMCID: PMC3506105
PMID: 23189102  [PubMed]


168. Respir Res. 2012 Nov 27;13:109. doi: 10.1186/1465-9921-13-109.

Differential effects of formoterol on thrombin- and PDGF-induced proliferation of
human pulmonary arterial vascular smooth muscle cells.

Goncharova EA(1), Khavin IS, Goncharov DA, Krymskaya VP.

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary, Allergy & Critical Care Division, Department of Medicine,
University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
goncharo@mail.med.upenn.edu

BACKGROUND: Increased pulmonary arterial vascular smooth muscle (PAVSM) cell
proliferation is a key pathophysiological component of pulmonary vascular
remodeling in pulmonary arterial hypertension (PH). The long-acting β2-adrenergic
receptor (β2AR) agonist formoterol, a racemate comprised of (R,R)- and
(S,S)-enantiomers, is commonly used as a vasodilator in chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD). PH, a common complication of COPD, increases patients' 
morbidity and reduces survival. Recent studies demonstrate that formoterol has
anti-proliferative effects on airway smooth muscle cells and bronchial
fibroblasts. The effects of formoterol and its enantiomers on PAVSM cell
proliferation are not determined. The goals of this study were to examine effects
of racemic formoterol and its enantiomers on PAVSM cell proliferation as it
relates to COPD-associated PH.
METHODS: Basal, thrombin-, PDGF- and chronic hypoxia-induced proliferation of
primary human PAVSM cells was examined by DNA synthesis analysis using BrdU
incorporation assay. ERK1/2, mTORC1 and mTORC2 activation were determined by
phosphorylation levels of ERK1/2, ribosomal protein S6 and S473-Akt using
immunoblot analysis.
RESULTS: We found that (R,R) and racemic formoterol inhibited basal, thrombin-
and chronic hypoxia-induced proliferation of human PAVSM cells while (S,S)
formoterol had lesser inhibitory effect. The β2AR blocker propranolol abrogated
the growth inhibitory effect of formoterol. (R,R), but not (S,S) formoterol
attenuated basal, thrombin- and chronic hypoxia-induced ERK1/2 phosphorylation,
but had little effect on Akt and S6 phosphorylation levels. Formoterol and its
enantiomers did not significantly affect PDGF-induced DNA synthesis and
PDGF-dependent ERK1/2, S473-Akt and S6 phosphorylation in human PAVSM cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Formoterol inhibits basal, thrombin-, and chronic hypoxia-, but not 
PDGF-induced human PAVSM cell proliferation and ERK1/2, but has little effect on 
mTORC1 and mTORC2 signaling. Anti-proliferative effects of formoterol depend
predominantly on its (R,R) enantiomer and require the binding with β2AR. These
data suggest that (R,R) formoterol may be considered as potential adjuvant
therapy to inhibit PAVSM cell proliferation in COPD-associated PH.

DOI: 10.1186/1465-9921-13-109 
PMCID: PMC3545871
PMID: 23186269  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Ther Adv Respir Dis. 2013 Apr;7(2):81-6. doi: 10.1177/1753465812465784. Epub 2012
Nov 12.

Nebulized arformoterol: what is its place in the management of COPD?

Miles MC(1), Donohue JF, Ohar JA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care, Allergy, and Immunologic Disease,
Department of Internal Medicine, Wake Forest School of Medicine, Winston Salem,
NC 27157, USA.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a serious global health burden.
Comprehensive management of COPD includes both pharmacologic and
non-pharmacologic interventions aimed at improving disease-related functional
capacity, health-related quality of life, and survival. The primary medications
used for treatment of COPD are inhaled bronchodilator drugs which are delivered
directly to the patient's airways through a number of different mechanisms.
Arformoterol, the (R,R) enantiomer of racemic formoterol, was the first
long-acting beta agonist approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) 
for nebulized delivery. We discuss the pharmacology, clinical efficacy, and
safety of arformoterol, and provide recommendations for its use during
longitudinal management of patients with COPD.

DOI: 10.1177/1753465812465784 
PMID: 23147985  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2013 Jan;344(1):218-30. doi: 10.1124/jpet.112.198481. Epub 
2012 Nov 6.

In vitro pharmacological characterization of vilanterol, a novel long-acting
β2-adrenoceptor agonist with 24-hour duration of action.

Slack RJ(1), Barrett VJ, Morrison VS, Sturton RG, Emmons AJ, Ford AJ, Knowles RG.

Author information: 
(1)Respiratory TAU, GlaxoSmithKline, Gunnels Wood Road, Stevenage, Hertfordshire 
SG1 2NY, UK. Robert.X.Slack@gsk.com

Vilanterol trifenatate (vilanterol) is a novel, long-acting β(2)-adrenoceptor
(β(2)-AR) agonist with 24 h activity. In this study, we describe the preclinical 
pharmacological profile of vilanterol using radioligand binding and cAMP studies 
in recombinant assays as well as human and guinea pig tissue systems to
characterize β(2)-AR binding and functional properties. Vilanterol displayed a
subnanomolar affinity for the β(2)-AR that was comparable with that of salmeterol
but higher than olodaterol, formoterol, and indacaterol. In cAMP functional
activity studies, vilanterol demonstrated similar selectivity as salmeterol for
β(2)- over β(1)-AR and β(3)-AR, but a significantly improved selectivity profile 
than formoterol and indacaterol. Vilanterol also showed a level of intrinsic
efficacy that was comparable to indacaterol but significantly greater than that
of salmeterol. In cellular cAMP production and tissue-based studies measuring
persistence and reassertion, vilanterol had a persistence of action comparable
with indacaterol and longer than formoterol. In addition, vilanterol demonstrated
reassertion activity in both cell and tissue systems that was comparable with
salmeterol and indacaterol but longer than formoterol. In human airways,
vilanterol was shown to have a faster onset and longer duration of action than
salmeterol, exhibiting a significant level of bronchodilation 22 h after
treatment. From these investigations, the data for vilanterol are consistent,
showing that it is a novel, potent, and selective β(2)-AR receptor agonist with a
long duration of action. This pharmacological profile combined with clinical data
is consistent with once a day dosing of vilanterol in the treatment of both
asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).

DOI: 10.1124/jpet.112.198481 
PMID: 23131596  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2012 Sep 12;(9):CD009157. doi:
10.1002/14651858.CD009157.pub2.

Tiotropium versus long-acting beta-agonists for stable chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease.

Chong J(1), Karner C, Poole P.

Author information: 
(1)University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand. jimmy_chong@xtra.co.nz

BACKGROUND: Tiotropium and long-acting beta(2)-agonists (LABAs) are both accepted
in the routine management for people with stable chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD). There are new studies which have compared tiotropium with LABAs, 
including some that have evaluated recently introduced LABAs.
OBJECTIVES: To compare the relative clinical effects of tiotropium bromide alone 
versus LABA alone, upon measures of quality of life, exacerbations, lung function
and serious adverse events, in people with stable COPD.To critically appraise and
summarise current evidence on the costs and cost-effectiveness associated with
tiotropium compared to LABA in people with COPD.
SEARCH METHODS: We identified randomised controlled trials (RCTs) from the
Cochrane Airways Group Specialised Register of trials and economic evaluations
from searching NHS EED and HEED (date of last search February 2012). We found
additional trials from web-based clinical trial registers.
SELECTION CRITERIA: We included RCTs and full economic evaluations if they
compared effects of tiotropium alone with LABAs alone in people with COPD. We
allowed co-administration of standard COPD therapy.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Two review authors independently assessed studies
for inclusion, then extracted data on study quality and outcomes. We contacted
study authors and trial sponsors for additional information. We analysed data
using the Cochrane Review Manager(RevMan 5.1) software.
MAIN RESULTS: Seven clinical studies totalling 12,223 participants with COPD were
included in the review. The studies used similar designs and were generally of
good methodological quality. Inclusion criteria for RCTs were similar across the 
included studies, although studies varied in terms of smoking history and COPD
severity of participants. They compared tiotropium (which was delivered by
HandiHaler in all studies) with salmeterol (four studies, 8936 participants),
formoterol (one study, 431 participants) and indacaterol (two studies, 2856
participants). All participants were instructed to discontinue anticholinergic or
long-acting beta(2)-agonist bronchodilators during treatment, but could receive
inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) at a stable dose. Study duration ranged from 3 to
12 months. We extracted data for 11,223 participants. In general, the treatment
groups were well matched at baseline. Overall, the risk of bias across the
included RCTs was low.In the analysis of the primary outcomes in this review, a
high level of heterogeneity amongst studies meant that we did not pool data for
St George's Respiratory Questionnaire quality of life score. Subgroup analyses
based on the type of LABA found statistically significant differences among
effects on quality of life depending on whether tiotropium was compared with
salmeterol, formoterol or indacaterol. Tiotropium reduced the number of
participants experiencing one or more exacerbations compared with LABA (odds
ratio (OR) 0.86; 95% confidence interval (CI) 0.79 to 0.93). For this outcome,
there was no difference seen among the different types of LABA. There was no
statistical difference in mortality observed between the treatment groups.For
secondary outcomes, tiotropium was associated with a reduction in the number of
COPD exacerbations leading to hospitalisation compared with LABA treatment (OR
0.87; 95% 0.77 to 0.99), but not in the overall rate of all-cause
hospitalisations. There was no statistically significant difference in forced
expiratory volume in one second (FEV(1)) or symptom score between tiotropium and 
LABA-treated participants. There was a lower rate of non-fatal serious adverse
events recorded with tiotropium compared with LABA (OR 0.88; 95% CI 0.78 to
0.99). The tiotropium group was also associated with a lower rate of study
withdrawals (OR 0.89; 95% CI 0.81 to 0.99).We identified six full economic
evaluations assessing the cost and cost-effectiveness of tiotropium and
salmeterol. The studies were based on an economic model or empirical analysis of 
clinical data from RCTs. They all looked at maintenance costs and the costs for
COPD exacerbations, including respiratory medications and hospitalisations. The
setting for the evaluations was primary and secondary care in the UK, Greece,
Netherlands, Spain and USA. All the studies estimated tiotropium to be superior
to salmeterol based on better clinical outcomes (exacerbations or quality of
life) and/or lower total costs. However, the authors of all evaluations reported 
there was substantial uncertainty around the results.
AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: In people with COPD, the evidence is equivocal as to
whether or not tiotropium offers greater benefit than LABAs in improving quality 
of life; however, this is complicated by differences in effect among the LABA
types. Tiotropium was more effective than LABAs as a group in preventing COPD
exacerbations and disease-related hospitalisations, although there were no
statistical differences between groups in overall hospitalisation rates or
mortality during the study periods. There were fewer serious adverse events and
study withdrawals recorded with tiotropium compared with LABAs. Symptom
improvement and changes in lung function were similar between the treatment
groups. Given the small number of studies to date, with high levels of
heterogeneity among them, one approach may be to give a COPD patient a
substantial trial of tiotropium, followed by a LABA (or vice versa), then to
continue prescribing the long-acting bronchodilator that the patient prefers.
Further studies are needed to compare tiotropium with different LABAs, which are 
currently ongoing. The available economic evidence indicates that tiotropium may 
be cost-effective compared with salmeterol in several specific settings, but
there is considerable uncertainty around this finding.

DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD009157.pub2 
PMID: 22972134  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2012 Sep 12;(9):CD006829. doi:
10.1002/14651858.CD006829.pub2.

Combined corticosteroid and long-acting beta(2)-agonist in one inhaler versus
long-acting beta(2)-agonists for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Nannini LJ(1), Lasserson TJ, Poole P.

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary Section, Hospital E Peron, G. Baigorria, Argentina.
nanninilj@cimero.org.ar.

Comment in
    Ann Intern Med. 2013 Feb 19;158(4):JC9.

Update of
    Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2007;(4):CD006829.

BACKGROUND: Both inhaled steroids (ICS) and long-acting beta(2)-agonists (LABA)
are used in the management of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). This 
updated review compared compound LABA plus ICS therapy (LABA/ICS) with the LABA
component drug given alone.
OBJECTIVES: To assess the efficacy of ICS and LABA in a single inhaler with
mono-component LABA alone in adults with COPD.
SEARCH METHODS: We searched the Cochrane Airways Group Specialised Register of
trials. The date of the most recent search was November 2011.
SELECTION CRITERIA: We included randomised, double-blind controlled trials. We
included trials comparing compound ICS and LABA preparations with their component
LABA preparations in people with COPD.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Two authors independently assessed study risk of
bias and extracted data. The primary outcomes were exacerbations, mortality and
pneumonia, while secondary outcomes were health-related quality of life (measured
by validated scales), lung function, withdrawals due to lack of efficacy,
withdrawals due to adverse events and side-effects. Dichotomous data were
analysed as random-effects model odds ratios or rate ratios with 95% confidence
intervals (CIs), and continuous data as mean differences and 95% CIs. We rated
the quality of evidence for exacerbations, mortality and pneumonia according to
recommendations made by the GRADE working group.
MAIN RESULTS: Fourteen studies met the inclusion criteria, randomising 11,794
people with severe COPD. We looked at any LABA plus ICS inhaler (LABA/ICS) versus
the same LABA component alone, and then we looked at the 10 studies which
assessed fluticasone plus salmeterol (FPS) and the four studies assessing
budesonide plus formoterol (BDF) separately. The studies were well-designed with 
low risk of bias for randomisation and blinding but they had high rates of
attrition, which reduced our confidence in the results for outcomes other than
mortality.Primary outcomes There was low quality evidence that exacerbation rates
in people using LABA/ICS inhalers were lower in comparison to those with LABA
alone, from nine studies which randomised 9921 participants (rate ratio 0.76; 95%
CI 0.68 to 0.84). This corresponds to one exacerbation per person per year on
LABA and 0.76 exacerbations per person per year on ICS/LABA. Our confidence in
this effect was limited by statistical heterogeneity between the results of the
studies (I(2) = 68%) and a risk of bias from the high withdrawal rates across the
studies. When analysed as the number of people experiencing one or more
exacerbations over the course of the study, FPS lowered the odds of an
exacerbation with an odds ratio (OR) of 0.83 (95% CI 0.70 to 0.98, 6 studies,
3357 participants). With a risk of an exacerbation of 47% in the LABA group over 
one year, 42% of people treated with LABA/ICS would be expected to experience an 
exacerbation. Concerns over the effect of reporting biases led us to downgrade
the quality of evidence for this effect from high to moderate.There was no
significant difference in the rate of hospitalisations (rate ratio 0.79; 95% CI
0.55 to 1.13, very low quality evidence due to risk of bias, statistical
imprecision and inconsistency). There was no significant difference in mortality 
between people on combined inhalers and those on LABA, from 10 studies on 10,680 
participants (OR 0.92; 95% CI 0.76 to 1.11, downgraded to moderate quality
evidence due to statistical imprecision). Pneumonia occurred more commonly in
people randomised to combined inhalers, from 12 studies with 11,076 participants 
(OR 1.55; 95% CI 1.20 to 2.01, moderate quality evidence due to risk of bias in
relation to attrition) with an annual risk of around 3% on LABA alone compared to
4% on combination treatment. There were no significant differences between the
results for either exacerbations or pneumonia from trials adding different doses 
or types of inhaled corticosteroid.Secondary outcomes ICS/LABA was more effective
than LABA alone in improving health-related quality of life measured by the St
George's Respiratory Questionnaire (1.58 units lower with FPS; 2.69 units lower
with BDF), dyspnoea (0.09 units lower with FPS), symptoms (0.07 units lower with 
BDF), rescue medication (0.38 puffs per day fewer with FPS, 0.33 puffs per day
fewer with BDF), and forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV(1)) (70 mL
higher with FPS, 50 mL higher with BDF). Candidiasis (OR 3.75) and upper
respiratory infection (OR 1.32) occurred more frequently with FPS than SAL. We
did not combine adverse event data relating to candidiasis for BDF studies as the
results were very inconsistent.
AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: Concerns over the analysis and availability of data from
the studies bring into question the superiority of ICS/LABA over LABA alone in
preventing exacerbations. The effects on hospitalisations were inconsistent and
require further exploration. There was moderate quality evidence of an increased 
risk of pneumonia with ICS/LABA. There was moderate quality evidence that
treatments had similar effects on mortality. Quality of life, symptoms score,
rescue medication use and FEV(1) improved more on ICS/LABA than on LABA, but the 
average differences were probably not clinically significant for these outcomes. 
To an individual patient the increased risk of pneumonia needs to be balanced
against the possible reduction in exacerbations.More information would be useful 
on the relative benefits and adverse event rates with combination inhalers using 
different doses of inhaled corticosteroids. Evidence from head-to-head
comparisons is needed to assess the comparative risks and benefits of the
different combination inhalers.

DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD006829.pub2 
PMCID: PMC4170910
PMID: 22972099  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Int Arch Allergy Immunol. 2013;160(1):27-36. doi: 10.1159/000338430. Epub 2012
Aug 31.

Corticosteroids plus long-acting β2-agonists prevent double-stranded RNA-induced 
upregulation of B7-H1 on airway epithelium.

Kan-O K(1), Matsumoto K, Inoue H, Fukuyama S, Asai Y, Watanabe W, Kurokawa M,
Araya J, Kuwano K, Nakanishi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute for Diseases of the Chest, Graduate School of Medical
Sciences, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Airway viral infections provoke exacerbations of asthma and chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease. B7-H1 is a costimulatory molecule that is
implicated in an escape mechanism of viruses from host immune systems. This
escape may be associated with the persistence of viral infection and lead to
exacerbation of underlying diseases. We have shown that an analog of viral
double-stranded RNA, polyinosinic-polycytidylic acid (poly IC), upregulated the
expression of B7-H1 on airway epithelial cells, an effect which was
corticosteroid-resistant. We investigated the effects of corticosteroids plus
long-acting β(2)-agonists (LABAs; fluticasone/salmeterol or
budesonide/formoterol) on the expression of B7-H1.
METHODS: BEAS-2B cells and primary airway epithelial cells were stimulated with
poly IC or respiratory syncytial virus. The expression of B7-H1 was assessed by
flow cytometry.
RESULTS: Poly IC upregulated the expression of B7-H1, which was suppressed by
high-concentration corticosteroids but not by LABAs. The upregulation was
suppressed by very low-concentration corticosteroids when used in combination
with LABAs. Their combination also suppressed the virus-induced upregulation of
B7-H1. Poly IC stimulation induced the nuclear translocation of nuclear factor ĸB
(NF-ĸB). Inhibitors of NF-ĸB activation prevented the poly IC-induced
upregulation of B7-H1. Low-concentration corticosteroids in combination with
LABAs enhanced the de novo induction of IĸBα, the endogenous inhibitor of NF-ĸB
activation.
CONCLUSIONS: Fluticasone/salmeterol or budesonide/formoterol attenuate the
virus-associated upregulation of B7-H1 on airway epithelial cells via suppression
of NF-ĸB activation.

Copyright © 2012 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000338430 
PMID: 22948082  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Ann Thorac Med. 2012 Jul;7(3):140-4. doi: 10.4103/1817-1737.98846.

Comparison of the effect of high-dose inhaled budesonide and fluticasone on
adrenal function in patients with severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Fahim A(1), Faruqi S, Wright CE, Kastelik JA, Morice AH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiovascular and Respiratory Studies, Department of Respiratory 
Medicine,Castle Hill Hospital, Cottingham, HU16 5JQ, UK.

INTRODUCTION: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a leading cause of 
respiratory-related morbidity and mortality. Inhaled steroids are frequently used
in patients with moderate to severe disease and may lead to adrenal suppression.
OBJECTIVES: The aim of this study was to compare the effect of inhaled
budesonide/formoterol with inhaled fluticasone/salmeterol in severe COPD.
METHODS: It was a prospective open-label crossover study of 22 patients. Adrenal 
suppression was measured by overnight urinary cortisol/creatinine ratio. The
measurements were taken while patients were on either combination for at least 4 
weeks.
RESULTS: A total of 12 patients completed the study. The mean age was 64 years (8
males, 4 females). The mean FEV1 was 1 L (range, 0.5-1.8). There was no
significant difference in adrenal suppression measured by overnight urinary
cortisol/creatinine ratio (budesonide 5.2 ± 4.3, fluticasone 4.7 ± 3.1; 95% CI
-2.2 to 1.2; P = 0.52) and urinary cortisol concentration (budesonide 51 ± 53,
fluticasone 43 ± 31 [nmol/l]; 95% CI -35 to 20; P = 0.56).
CONCLUSION: Inhaled budesonide and fluticasone have no significantly different
effect on adrenal function in moderate to severe COPD. The adverse event profile 
of high-dose inhaled steroids should not influence the choice of medication.

DOI: 10.4103/1817-1737.98846 
PMCID: PMC3425045
PMID: 22924071  [PubMed]


175. J Investig Med. 2012 Oct;60(7):1048-53. doi: 10.2310/JIM.0b013e3182673ff9.

Long-acting beta 2 agonists suppress IP-10 expression in human bronchial
epithelial cells.

Chien JW(1), Chu YT, Yang SN, Kuo CH, Wang WL, Kuo PL, Jong YJ, Hung CH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Changhua Christian Hospital, Changhua City, Changhua
County, Taiwan, ROC.

BACKGROUND: Interferon-γ-inducible protein (IP)-10 (CXCL10) is an important
chemokine secreted by the airway epithelium that functions as a biomarker for
virus-induced asthma. Long-acting beta 2 (β2) agonists (LABAs) are frequently
used as inhaled medication for asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. 
However, previous research failed to investigate the effects of LABAs on IP-10 in
bronchial epithelial cells.
OBJECTIVE: To study the effects and signaling pathways of formoterol and
salmeterol on polyriboinosinic polyribocytidylic acid (poly I:C)-induced IP-10
expression in BEAS-2B cells.
METHODS: BEAS-2B cells were pretreated with formoterol and salmeterol for 2 hours
before poly I:C stimulation. ICI 118551 (β2 adrenoreceptor antagonist) or
mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) inhibitors were added 30 minutes before
LABAs were added. Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay and real-time polymerase
chain reaction were used to measure IP-10 protein and messenger RNA levels.
Mitogen-activated protein kinase inhibitors and Western blotting were used to
identify MAPK pathways, whereas bioassay revealed the MAPK functions.
RESULTS: Long-acting β2 agonists significantly down-regulated the poly
I:C-induced IP-10 protein and messenger RNA expression in BEAS-2B cells. ICI
118551 reversed this effect. Forskolin, a cyclic adenosine monophosphate
activator, produced a similar inhibitory effect. Western blotting showed that
formoterol suppressed poly I:C-induced IP-10 expression via the c-Jun N-terminal 
kinase-c-Jun pathway.
CONCLUSION: Long-acting β2 agonists down-regulate poly I:C-induced IP-10
expression in BEAS-2B cells via the β2 adrenoreceptor-cyclic adenosine
monophosphate and c-Jun N-terminal kinase/c-Jun pathways. Long-acting β2 agonists
also inhibit IP-10 production in bronchial epithelial cells and may prolong viral
elimination.

DOI: 10.2310/JIM.0b013e3182673ff9 
PMID: 22914602  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. J Pharm Pharmacol. 2012 Sep;64(9):1245-53. doi: 10.1111/j.2042-7158.2011.01370.x.
Epub 2011 Oct 27.

Co-deposition of a triple therapy drug formulation for the treatment of chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease using solution-based pressurised metered dose
inhalers.

Adi H(1), Young PM, Traini D.

Author information: 
(1)Advanced Drug Delivery Group, Faculty of Pharmacy, The University of Sydney,
Sydney, NSW, Australia.

OBJECTIVES: The formulation of multi-drug pressurised metered dose inhalers
(pMDIs) opens up exciting therapeutic opportunities for the treatment of asthma
and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). We have investigated the
formulation of a solution-based triple therapy pMDI containing ipratropium,
formoterol, budesonide and ethanol as co-solvent.
METHODS: This system was characterised for in-vitro performance and compared with
marketed pMDIs (Atrovent and Symbicort).
KEY FINDINGS: No significant difference was found in the stage deposition of each
drug from the triple therapy formulation, suggesting that the droplets contained 
a fixed ratio of the three components used. Stage deposition of formoterol and
budesonide from the suspension-based marketed Symbicort were significantly
different, suggesting that the two drugs were deposited as separate entities.
Calculation of the mass median aerodynamic diameter (MMAD) of each formulation
suggested Atrovent (ipratropium, MMAD = 0.9 ± 0.0 µm) to have a small particle
size, similar to the triple therapy formulation. Atrovent, like the triple
therapy formulation was solution based and it contained ethanol as a co-solvent
(triple therapy formulation, MMAD = 1.3 ± 0.0 µm).
CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrated the feasibility of formulating a
solution-based pMDI containing a triple therapy with identical deposition pattern
for the treatment of several respiratory diseases where multi-drug cell targeting
is required.

© 2011 The Authors. JPP © 2011 Royal Pharmaceutical Society.

DOI: 10.1111/j.2042-7158.2011.01370.x 
PMID: 22881437  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2012;7:415-20. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S31526. Epub
2012 Jul 5.

Efficacy of indacaterol 75 μg versus fixed-dose combinations of
formoterol-budesonide or salmeterol-fluticasone for COPD: a network
meta-analysis.

Cope S(1), Kraemer M, Zhang J, Capkun-Niggli G, Jansen JP.

Author information: 
(1)MAPI Consultancy, Boston, MA 02114, USA.

BACKGROUND: The purpose of this study was to update our network meta-analysis in 
order to compare the efficacy of indacaterol 75 μg with that of a fixed-dose
combination of formoterol and budesonide (FOR/BUD) and a fixed-dose combination
salmeterol and fluticasone (SAL/FP) for the treatment of chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD) based on evidence identified previously in addition to
two new randomized clinical trials.
METHODS: Fifteen randomized, placebo-controlled clinical trials including COPD
patients were evaluated: indacaterol 75 μg once daily (n = 2 studies),
indacaterol 150 μg once daily (n = 5), indacaterol 300 μg once daily (n = 4),
FOR/BUD 9/160 μg twice daily (n = 2), FOR/BUD 9/320 μg twice daily (n = 2),
SAL/FP 50/500 μg twice daily (n = 4), and SAL/FP 50/250 μg twice daily (n = 1).
All trials were analyzed simultaneously using a Bayesian network meta-analysis
and relative treatment effects between all regimens were obtained.
Treatment-by-covariate interactions were included where possible to improve the
similarity of the trials. Outcomes of interest were trough forced expiratory
volume in 1 second (FEV(1)) and transitional dyspnea index at 12 weeks.
RESULTS: Based on the results without adjustment for covariates, indacaterol 75
μg resulted in a greater improvement in FEV(1) at 12 weeks compared with FOR/BUD 
9/160 μg (difference in change from baseline 0.09 L [95% credible interval
0.04-0.13]) and FOR/BUD 9/320 μg (0.07 L [0.03-0.11]) and was comparable with
SAL/FP 50/250 μg (0.00 L [-0.07-0.07]) and SAL/FP 50/500 μg (0.01 L
[-0.04-0.05]). For transitional dyspnea index, data was available only for
indacaterol 75 μg versus SAL/FP 50/500 μg (-0.49 points [-1.87-0.89]).
CONCLUSION: Based on results of a network meta-analysis with and without
covariates, indacaterol 75 μg is expected to be at least as efficacious as
FOR/BUD (9/320 μg and 9/160 μg) and comparable with SAL/FP (50/250 μg and 50/500 
μg) in terms of lung function. In terms of breathlessness (transitional dyspnea
index) at 12 weeks, the results are inconclusive given the limited data.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S31526 
PMCID: PMC3402062
PMID: 22848154  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2013;756:9-14. doi: 10.1007/978-94-007-4549-0_2.

Tiotropium increases PPARγ and decreases CREB in cells isolated from induced
sputum of COPD patients.

Holownia A(1), Mroz RM, Skopinski T, Kolodziejczyk A, Chyczewska E, Braszko JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacology, Medical University of Bialystok,
Bialystok, Poland. holow_sinai@hotmail.com

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is characterized by progressive
airflow limitation and chronic inflammation of airways and lung parenchyma. Our
aim was to assess two important elements of intracellular signaling involved in
regulation of inflammation in COPD in patients subjected to long-acting
beta2-agonist or long-acting beta2-agonist plus long-acting antimuscarinic:
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPARγ) protein, which has
antiinflammatory and immunomodulatory properties and cAMP response element
binding protein (CREB) and activated (CREB-P) protein which has histone
acetyltransferase activity and increases histone acetylation and transcriptional 
activation of chromatin. Twenty one stable COPD patients (18 males and 3 females,
mean age 65 years) receiving 12 μg B.I.D formoterol were assayed before and after
3 month add-on therapy, consisting of 18 μg Q.D. tiotropium. In all patients,
sputum induction, spirometry, lung volumes, and DLCO were performed before and
after therapy. Sputum cells were isolated and processed to isolate cytosolic and 
nuclear fractions. PPARγ, CREB, or CREB-P proteins were quantified in subcellular
fractions using Western blot. Tiotropium add-on therapy improved respiratory
parameters: FEV1 and lung volumes. After therapy mean expression of PPARγ in cell
nuclei was significantly increased by about 180%, while CREB and phosphorylated
CREB levels in cytosol and nuclei were decreased by about 30%. Our data show that
the mechanism whereby tiotropium reduces exacerbations may be associated not only
with persistent increase in airway functions and reduced hyperinflation mediated 
by muscarinic receptors, but also with possible anti-inflammatory effects of the 
drug, involving increased PPARγ and decreased CREB signaling.

DOI: 10.1007/978-94-007-4549-0_2 
PMID: 22836613  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Pulm Pharmacol Ther. 2012 Oct;25(5):371-6. doi: 10.1016/j.pupt.2012.06.009. Epub 
2012 Jul 2.

COPD treatment: real life and experimental effects on peripheral NK cells, their 
receptors expression and their IFN-γ secretion.

Folli C(1), Chiappori A, Pellegrini M, Garelli V, Riccio AM, De Ferrari L, Braido
F, Canonica GW.

Author information: 
(1)Allergy & Respiratory Diseases Clinic, DIMI-University of Genova, IRCCS AOU
San Martino-IST, Genova, Italy.

A role in pulmonary immunity has been ascribed to Natural Killer (NK) cells and
several in vitro studies have shown a corticosteroid-induced inhibition of NK
cells mediated cytotoxicity. Several clinical trials on chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD) have suggested a relationship between COPD treatment and
occurrence of respiratory infections. Aims of our study were to investigate if
real life COPD treatment affects peripheral blood NK cells total count and their 
receptors expression and to assess if different doses of formoterol and
budesonide, administered alone or in combination, are able to modulate the
surface expression of activating (NKp30, NKp44, NKp46 and NKG2D) and inhibitory
(KIR2DL2/L3, KIR3DL1 and NKG2A) receptors on peripheral blood NK cells of COPD
patients. Moreover, we evaluated the potential effect of treatment with
budesonide and/or formoterol on IFN-γ secretion in vitro. NK cells were isolated 
from peripheral blood of 7 healthy volunteers, 9 chronic bronchitis (CB) and 11
COPD patients. Total NK cells count and activating and inhibitory receptors
expression were evaluated. NK cells were cultured for 20h in 96-well plates with 
IL-2 (100IU/ml)+IL-12 (2.5ng/ml), with or without budesonide (Bud; 1 and 0.01μM) 
and formoterol (For; 30 and 0.3nM) alone or in combination. Cells were analyzed
by flow cytometry and IFN-γ was measured in cell supernatants by ELISA test. No
difference between real life treated COPD, CB and healthy subjects was found
concerning NK total count and NK cell receptors expression. When cells were
stimulated over night with cytokines and treated with drugs, only NKG2D receptor 
was modulated. Its expression was significantly downregulated by budesonide alone
and in combination with formoterol in COPD patients. IFN-γ production induced by 
stimulation with IL-2+IL-12 was decreased in a highly significant way (p<0.01) by
all treatments in all groups. Even if in vitro experiments with budesonide, alone
or in combination with formoterol, showed a modulation of NKG2D receptor
expression and IFN-γ production, our ex vivo results show that real life LABA and
ICS treatment does not influence peripheral NK cells count and their receptors
phenotype.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pupt.2012.06.009 
PMID: 22766315  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Respir Med. 2012 Oct;106(10):1404-12. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2012.05.012. Epub 2012 
Jun 28.

Addition of tiotropium to formoterol improves inspiratory muscle strength after
exercise in COPD.

Canto ND(1), Ribeiro JP, Neder JA, Chiappa GR.

Author information: 
(1)Exercise Biochemistry and Physiology Laboratory, Postgraduate Program in
Health Sciences, Health Sciences Unit, University of Southern Santa Catarina,
Criciuma, Brazil.

BACKGROUND: The addition of tiotropium bromide (TIO) to formoterol fumarate (FOR)
improves exercise performance in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD). In this study, we test the hypothesis that the addition of TIO to
FOR may improve respiratory muscle performance and oxygen uptake kinetics after
exercise in patients with COPD.
METHODS: Thirty eight patients with COPD were randomized to a 2 week treatment
with FOR 12 μg twice a day plus TIO 18 μg once a day (FOR + TIO) or FOR 12 μg
twice a day plus placebo (FOR + PLA) once a day, using a double-blind crossover
design. Inspiratory muscle. Strength was measured before, immediately after, as
well as 2, 5, and 10 min during recovery of exercise. Time to limit of tolerance 
on a constant work load exercise test and oxygen uptake kinetics during recovery 
were evaluated before and after intervention.
RESULTS: Only FOR + TIO improved resting (63 ± 10 cm to 84 ± 11 cmH(2)O) and
post-exercise (49 ± 7 cm to 84 ± 11 cmH(2)O) maximal inspiratory pressure. Time
to limit of tolerance on the constant work load test was increased by FOR + PLA
and by FOR + TIO, but the size of the increment was significantly larger with
FOR + TIO (40.7 ± 7.6% vs. 84.5 ± 8.2%; p < 0.05). Only FOR + TIO improved oxygen
uptake kinetics during recovery (69 ± 21 to 60 ± 18 s). The improvement in
maximal inspiratory pressure (0.78, p < 0.001) and in oxygen uptake kinetics
(-0.91, p < 0.001) correlated with the change in time to the limit of tolerance.
CONCLUSIONS: The addition of TIO to FOR improves inspiratory muscle strength and 
oxygen uptake kinetics after exercise in COPD patients.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2012.05.012 
PMID: 22748747  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. BMC Pulm Med. 2012 Jun 25;12:29. doi: 10.1186/1471-2466-12-29.

Efficacy of once-daily indacaterol 75 μg relative to alternative bronchodilators 
in COPD: a study level and a patient level network meta-analysis.

Cope S(1), Zhang J, Williams J, Jansen JP.

Author information: 
(1)Mapi Consultancy, Boston, MA, USA.

BACKGROUND: The objective of this study was to evaluate the comparative efficacy 
of indacaterol 75 μg once daily (OD), tiotropium 18 μg OD, salmeterol 50 μg twice
daily (BID), formoterol 12 μg BID, and placebo for the treatment of chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) based on individual patient data (IPD) from 
randomized controlled trials (RCTs) from the indacaterol trial program and
aggregate data (AD) identified from a systematic review of RCTs.
METHODS: 22 RCTs were included in the AD analysis that evaluated: indacaterol 75 
μg (n = 2 studies), indacaterol 150 μg n = 5 (i.e. salmeterol 50 μg) (n = 5),
indacaterol 300 μg (n = 2), tiotropium 18 μg (n = 10), salmeterol 50 μg (n = 7), 
and formoterol 12 μg (n = 4). All of the studies except for one head-to-head
comparison (tiotropium vs. salmeterol) were placebo controlled. Outcomes of
interest were trough forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1) and St. George's
Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ) total score at week 12. The AD from all trials
was analysed simultaneously using a Bayesian network meta-analysis (NMA) and
relative treatment effects between all regimens were obtained. In a separate
analysis, the IPD available from the 6 indacaterol RCTs was analysed in a NMA.
Treatment-by-covariate interactions were included in both analyses to improve
similarity of the trials.
RESULTS: All interventions compared were more efficacious than placebo regarding 
FEV1 at 12 weeks. Indacaterol 75 μg is expected to result in a comparable FEV1 at
12 weeks to tiotropium and salmeterol based on both IPD and AD analyses. In
comparison to formoterol, the IPD and AD results indicate indacaterol 75 μg is
more efficacious (IPD = 0.07 L difference; 95%Credible Interval (CrI) 0.02 to
0.11; AD = 0.05 L difference; 95%CrI 0.01; 0.09). In terms of SGRQ total score at
12 weeks, indacaterol 75 μg and formoterol were more efficacious than placebo,
whereas for tiotropium and salmeterol the credible intervals included zero for
the AD results only (tiotropium: -2.99 points improvement versus placebo; 95%CrI 
-6.48 to 0.43; salmeterol:-2.52; 95%CrI: -5.34; 0.44). Both IPD and AD results
suggest that indacaterol 75 μg is expected to be comparable to all active
treatments.
CONCLUSIONS: Based on a synthesis of currently available AD RCT evidence as well 
as an IPD network meta-analysis of six RCTs, indacaterol 75 μg is expected to be 
at least as efficacious as formoterol and comparable to tiotropium and salmeterol
regarding FEV1. Furthermore, indacaterol 75 μg shows comparable level of
improvement in health-related quality of life to tiotropium, salmeterol, and
formoterol, as measured by the SGRQ.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2466-12-29 
PMCID: PMC3512498
PMID: 22732017  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Pulm Pharmacol Ther. 2012 Aug;25(4):293-302. doi: 10.1016/j.pupt.2012.05.008.
Epub 2012 May 29.

Characteristics of AZD9708, a novel, selective β2-adrenoceptor agonist with rapid
onset and long duration of action.

Nicholls DJ(1), Jordan S, Cadogan E, Lawson M, Austin RP, Paine SW, Gardiner P,
Bonnert R, Connolly S, Young A.

Author information: 
(1)AstraZeneca R&D Charnwood, Loughborough LE11 5RH, UK.
david.nicholls@astrazeneca.com

Here we describe the pre-clinical pharmacological profile of AZD9708, a novel
long-acting β(2)-adrenoceptor agonist that has potential as a once-daily therapy 
for asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). AZD9708 is a potent 
and selective agonist at the human β(2)-adrenoceptor, with selectivity over human
β(1)- and β(3)-adrenoceptors of >500 and >24 fold, respectively. AZD9708 relaxes 
carbachol-induced contraction of human bronchial rings with a time to 90% of
maximal relaxation of 13-20 min, similar to that seen with formoterol and quicker
than salmeterol. In anesthetized guinea pigs, AZD9708 provides significant
protection against histamine-induced airway constriction at 24 h after
intratracheal and nebulized doses. This is longer than with intratracheal
salmeterol, which is bronchoprotective for approximately 8 h, and formoterol,
which is bronchoprotective for 8 and 12 h following nebulized and intratracheal
dosing, respectively. AZD9708 also shows the potential for a greater therapeutic 
margin than widely used β(2)-adrenoceptor agonists such as formoterol. At a
defined efficacy dose that provides 80% bronchoprotection (ED(80)), formoterol
leads to a decrease in blood potassium levels in guinea pigs, whilst AZD9708 is
not associated with significant reductions in potassium levels at doses up to 7
times the ED(80). [(14)C]AZD9708 is associated with extensive protein binding in 
both human (mean 1.0% free) and rat (mean 2.6% free) plasma. This pharmacological
profile indicates the potential of AZD9708 to become an important addition to the
range of bronchodilators available for the treatment of patients with obstructive
airways disease.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pupt.2012.05.008 
PMID: 22659538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Pharmacol Res. 2012 Oct;66(4):343-8. doi: 10.1016/j.phrs.2012.05.007. Epub 2012
May 31.

Bronchodilators modulate inflammation in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
subjects.

Santus P(1), Buccellati C, Centanni S, Fumagalli F, Busatto P, Blasi F, Sala A.

Author information: 
(1)Università degli Studi di Milano, Dipartimento di Scienze della Salute,
Pneumologia Riabilitativa, Fondazione Salvatore Maugeri-Istituto Scientifico di
Milano-IRCCS, Via Camaldoli 64, Milano, Italy.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is characterized by neutrophilic
airway inflammation and oxidative stress. Leukotriene B₄ (LTB₄), a potent
proinflammatory mediator, is synthesized by 5-lipoxygenase (5-LO), which is
activated by the presence of lipid hydroperoxides resulting from oxidative stress
on biological membranes. We proposed to evaluate the effect of a four week
treatment with two different bronchodilators of common practice in COPD
treatment, on the production of reactive oxygen species (ROS), in particular
superoxide anions, and of LTB₄ by peripheral blood neutrophils obtained from COPD
subjects. 24 subjects among the COPD outpatients were enrolled, and randomized to
receive either formoterol (12 μg bid) or tiotropium (18 μg od). Peripheral blood 
neutrophils were obtained at the start and at the end of the treatment, and
production of superoxide anions and of LTB₄ were evaluated as previously
published. The results obtained showed a decrease in the unstimulated production 
of superoxide by isolated neutrophils in both groups, but tiotropium only was
effective in modulating the production of LTB₄, while formoterol caused an
increased production of superoxide in response to fMLP, when compared to values
obtained before treatment. In conclusion, tiotropium showed a better
antiinflammatory activity profile when compared to formoterol in a clinical
setting, reducing superoxide and LTB₄ production by peripheral neutrophils
obtained from COPD subjects.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.phrs.2012.05.007 
PMID: 22659487  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Eur Respir J. 2013 Jan;41(1):12-7. doi: 10.1183/09031936.00207611. Epub 2012 May 
31.

A trial of beclomethasone/formoterol in COPD using EXACT-PRO to measure
exacerbations.

Singh D(1), Kampschulte J, Wedzicha JA, Jones PW, Cohuet G, Corradi M,
Higenbottam T, Petruzzelli S, Vestbo J.

Author information: 
(1)University of Manchester, Medicines Evaluation Unit, University Hospital of
South Manchester Foundation Trust, Manchester Academic Health Science Centre,
Manchester, UK. dsingh@meu.org.uk

Combination inhalers containing corticosteroids and long-acting β-agonists are
used to reduce exacerbation rates in patients with severe chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD). The FORWARD (Foster 48-week Trial to Reduce
Exacerbations in COPD) clinical trial in severe COPD patients is a comparison of 
extrafine beclomethasone dipropionate and formoterol in a combination inhaler
with extrafine formoterol; the co-primary end-points are exacerbation rates over 
48 weeks and improvement in forced expiratory volume in 1 s over 12 weeks. The
traditional physician diagnosis of exacerbations is a co-primary outcome, and the
Exacerbations of Chronic Pulmonary Disease Tool (EXACT) means of collecting
patient-reported outcome data are also being used to enhance the detection of
exacerbation events. EXACT data are being collected using a novel application of 
a digital platform technology. FORWARD is therefore expected to provide
information on the ability of EXACT to detect and measure exacerbations in a
large clinical trial setting. The study design of FORWARD is described in this
article.

DOI: 10.1183/09031936.00207611 
PMID: 22653766  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2012 Jun 22;423(1):134-9. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.05.096. Epub 2012 May 24.

Lung epithelial-C/EBPβ contributes to LPS-induced inflammation and its
suppression by formoterol.

Roos AB(1), Barton JL, Miller-Larsson A, Dahlberg B, Berg T, Didon L, Nord M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Respiratory Medicine Unit, Karolinska Institutet,
Stockholm, Sweden. abraham.roos@ki.se

The inflammatory processes associated with pulmonary disorders remains
incompletely understood. CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein (C/EBP)β is implicated in
inflammatory lung disorders as well as in β(2)-adrenoceptor signaling. We
hypothesized that C/EBPβ in the lung epithelium contributes to lipopolysaccharide
(LPS)-induced airway neutrophilia and expression of neutrophil chemoattractant
chemokine (C-X-C) motif ligand (CXCL)1, as well as the suppressive effects of
long-acting β(2)-agonists (LABAs) and glucocorticoids (GCs). To investigate this,
mice with a lung epithelial-specific deletion of C/EBPβ (Cebpb(ΔLE)) and control 
littermates (Cebpb(fl/fl)) were pre-treated with a LABA, formoterol and/or a GC, 
budesonide, and challenged with LPS. Inflammatory cell recruitment in
bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) fluid and pulmonary expression of inflammatory
mediators were investigated. In addition, the ability of formoterol to increase
C/EBP transactivation was assessed in vitro. LPS-challenged Cebpb(ΔLE) mice
exhibited fewer BAL neutrophils and lower pulmonary expression of CXCL1 versus
Cebpb(fl/fl) mice. Suppression of LPS-induced neutrophilia by formoterol was
impaired in Cebpb(ΔLE) mice and Cxcl1 expression was increased. However,
suppression of the neutrophilia by budesonide with/without formoterol was
preserved. Further studies indicated that C/EBP transactivation was increased by 
the cAMP elevating agent forskolin and formoterol in a β(2)-adrenoceptor
dependent manner. Thus, C/EBPβ in the lung epithelium contributes to LPS-induced 
CXCL1 expression and airway neutrophilia as well as to the suppressive effects of
formoterol. Reduced C/EBPβ activity, observed in smokers with chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease, may impair the responsiveness to LABAs when used without GCs.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.05.096 
PMID: 22634316  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2012 Aug;342(2):497-509. doi: 10.1124/jpet.112.193284. Epub
2012 May 15.

Pharmacological characterization of abediterol, a novel inhaled β(2)-adrenoceptor
agonist with long duration of action and a favorable safety profile in
preclinical models.

Aparici M(1), Gómez-Angelats M, Vilella D, Otal R, Carcasona C, Viñals M, Ramos
I, Gavaldà A, De Alba J, Gras J, Cortijo J, Morcillo E, Puig C, Ryder H, Beleta
J, Miralpeix M.

Author information: 
(1)Almirall R&D Center, Sant Feliu de Llobregat, Barcelona, Spain.
monica.aparici@almirall.com

Abediterol is a novel potent, long-acting inhaled β(2)-adrenoceptor agonist in
development for the treatment of asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease. Abediterol shows subnanomolar affinity for the human β(2)-adrenoceptor
and a functional selectivity over β(1)-adrenoceptors higher than that of
formoterol and indacaterol in both a cellular model with overexpressed human
receptors and isolated guinea pig tissue. Abediterol is a full agonist at the
human β(2)-adrenoceptor (E(max) = 91 ± 5% of the maximal effect of isoprenaline).
The potency and onset of action that abediterol shows in isolated human bronchi
(EC(50) = 1.9 ± 0.4 nM; t½ onset = 7-10 min) is not significantly different from 
that of formoterol, but its duration of action (t½ ∼ 690 min) is similar to that 
of indacaterol. Nebulized abediterol inhibits acetylcholine-induced
bronchoconstriction in guinea pigs in a concentration-dependent manner, with
higher potency and longer duration of action (t½ = 36 h) than salmeterol (t½ = 6 
h) and formoterol (t½ = 4 h) and similar duration of action to indacaterol up to 
48 h. In dogs, the bronchoprotective effect of abediterol is more sustained than 
that of salmeterol and indacaterol at doses without effects on heart rate, thus
showing a greater safety margin (defined as the ratio of dose increasing heart
rate by 5% and dose inhibiting bronchospasm by 50%) than salmeterol, formoterol, 
and indacaterol (5.6 versus 3.3, 2.2, and 0.3, respectively). In conclusion, our 
results suggest that abediterol has a preclinical profile for once-daily dosing
in humans together with a fast onset of action and a favorable cardiovascular
safety profile.

DOI: 10.1124/jpet.112.193284 
PMID: 22588259  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2012 Apr 18;(4):CD008989. doi:
10.1002/14651858.CD008989.pub2.

Long-acting beta(2)-agonist in addition to tiotropium versus either tiotropium or
long-acting beta(2)-agonist alone for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Karner C(1), Cates CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Population Health Sciences and Education, St George’s, University of London,
London, UK. ckarner@sgul.ac.uk.

Update in
    Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2015;(10):CD008989.

BACKGROUND: Long-acting bronchodilators comprising long-acting beta(2)-agonists
and the anticholinergic agent tiotropium are commonly used for managing
persistent symptoms of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Combining these
treatments, which have different mechanisms of action, may be more effective than
the individual components. However, the benefits and risks of combining
tiotropium and long-acting beta(2)-agonists for the treatment of chronic
obstructive pulmonary (COPD) disease are unclear.
OBJECTIVES: To assess the relative effects of treatment with tiotropium in
addition to long-acting beta(2)-agonist compared to tiotropium or long-acting
beta(2)-agonist alone in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
SEARCH METHODS: We searched the Cochrane Airways Group Specialised Register of
trials and clinicaltrials.gov up to January 2012.
SELECTION CRITERIA: We included parallel group, randomised controlled trials of
three months or longer comparing treatment with tiotropium in addition to
long-acting beta(2)-agonist against tiotropium or long-acting beta(2)-agonist
alone for patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Two review authors independently assessed trials
for inclusion and then extracted data on trial quality and the outcome results.
We contacted study authors for additional information. We collected information
on adverse effects from the trials.
MAIN RESULTS: Five trials were included in this review, mostly recruiting
participants with moderate or severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. All
of them compared tiotropium in addition to long-acting beta(2)-agonist to
tiotropium alone, but only one trial additionally compared a combination of the
two types of bronchodilator with long-acting beta(2)-agonist (formoterol) alone. 
Two studies used the long-acting beta(2)-agonist indacaterol, two used formoterol
and one used salmeterol.Compared to tiotropium alone (3263 patients), treatment
with tiotropium plus long-acting beta(2)-agonist resulted in a slightly larger
improvement in the mean health-related quality of life (St George's Respiratory
Questionnaire (SGRQ) MD -1.61; 95% CI -2.93 to -0.29). In the control arm,
tiotropium alone, the SGRQ improved by falling 4.5 units from baseline and with
both treatments the improvement was a fall of 6.1 units from baseline (on
average). High withdrawal rates in the trials increased the uncertainty in this
result, and the GRADE assessment for this outcome was therefore moderate. There
were no significant differences in the other primary outcomes (hospital admission
or mortality).The secondary outcome of pre-bronchodilator FEV(1) showed a small
mean increase with the addition of long-acting beta(2)-agonist (MD 0.07 L; 95% CI
0.05 to 0.09) over the control arm, which showed a change from baseline ranging
from 0.03 L to 0.13 L on tiotropium alone. None of the other secondary outcomes
(exacerbations, symptom scores, serious adverse events, and withdrawals) showed
any statistically significant differences between the groups. There were wide
confidence intervals around these outcomes and moderate heterogeneity for both
exacerbations and withdrawals.The results from the one trial comparing the
combination of tiotropium and long-acting beta(2)-agonist to long-acting
beta(2)-agonist alone (417 participants) were insufficient to draw firm
conclusions for this comparison.
AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: The results from this review indicate a small mean
improvement in health-related quality of life for patients on a combination of
tiotropium and long-acting beta(2)-agonist compared to tiotropium alone, but it
is not clear how clinically important this mean difference may be. Hospital
admission and mortality have not been shown to be altered by adding long-acting
beta(2)-agonists to tiotropium. There were not enough data to determine the
relative efficacy and safety of tiotropium plus long-acting beta(2)-agonist
compared to long-acting beta(2)-agonist alone. There were insufficient data to
make comparisons between the different long-acting beta(2)-agonists when used in 
addition to tiotropium.

DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD008989.pub2 
PMCID: PMC4164463
PMID: 22513969  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Pulm Pharmacol Ther. 2012 Jun;25(3):248-53. doi: 10.1016/j.pupt.2012.03.008. Epub
2012 Apr 4.

A randomised, placebo- and active-controlled dose-finding study of aclidinium
bromide administered twice a day in COPD patients.

Singh D(1), Magnussen H, Kirsten A, Mindt S, Caracta C, Seoane B, Jarreta D,
Garcia Gil E.

Author information: 
(1)University of Manchester, Medicines Evaluation Unit, University Hospital of
South Manchester, Langley Building, Southmoor Road, Manchester M23 9QZ, UK.
dsingh@meu.org.uk

Erratum in
    Pulm Pharmacol Ther. 2013 Apr;26(2):305.

This Phase IIb, double-blind, double-dummy, placebo- and
active-comparator-controlled crossover study (ClinicalTrials.gov identifier:
NCT01120093) assessed efficacy and safety of three doses of aclidinium bromide in
patients with moderate to severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Patients 
were randomised to one of five treatment sequences each consisting of twice-daily
(BID) aclidinium 100 μg, 200 μg, 400 μg (via Genuair®*), formoterol 12 μg (via
Aerolizer®) and matched placebo for 7 days, with a 5- to 9-day washout period.
Primary endpoint was mean change from baseline in forced expiratory volume in 1 s
(FEV1) normalised area under the curve (AUC)0-12 on Day 7. Secondary endpoints
were: change from baseline in FEV1 normalised AUC12-24, FEV1 normalised AUC0-24
and morning pre-dose FEV1 on Day 7. Adverse events were monitored throughout the 
study. Of 79 randomised patients, 68 (86.1%) completed the study. After 7 days of
treatment, aclidinium and formoterol produced statistically significantly greater
changes from baseline in FEV1 normalised AUC0-12 vs placebo (p<0.0001). FEV1
normalised AUC12-24, FEV1 normalised AUC0-24, and morning pre-dose FEV1 were also
statistically significantly greater with all aclidinium doses vs placebo
(p<0.0001). Improvements in primary and secondary endpoints were statistically
significantly greater with aclidinium 400 μg vs 100 μg. The safety profile of
aclidinium was comparable to placebo. These results demonstrated that twice-daily
aclidinium produced dose-dependent clinically meaningful improvements in FEV1
compared with placebo. This study also confirmed the use of an aclidinium BID
dosing regimen and established aclidinium 200 μg and 400 μg as suitable doses for
further investigation in Phase III trials.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pupt.2012.03.008 
PMID: 22497752  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Drugs. 2012 Mar 5;72(4):543-63. doi: 10.2165/11208490-000000000-00000.

Indacaterol: a review of its use as maintenance therapy in patients with chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease.

McKeage K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Adis, Auckland, New Zealand. demail@adis.co.nz

Indacaterol inhalation powder (Onbrez® Breezhaler®) is a long-acting, selective
β(2)-adrenoceptor agonist that is indicated for the maintenance bronchodilator
treatment of airflow obstruction in adults with chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD). This article reviews the clinical efficacy and tolerability of
indacaterol 150 and 300 μg once daily in adults with moderate to severe COPD, as 
well as reviewing indacaterol's pharmacological properties and results of a
cost-utility analysis. Indacaterol has a fast onset of action after the first
dose and is effective over 24 hours, allowing for once-daily administration. In
short-term trials (≤21 days) in patients with COPD, once-daily indacaterol 150 or
300 μg significantly improved lung function, exercise endurance and lung
hyperinflation relative to placebo. In large, longer-term clinical studies (12
weeks to 1 year) in patients with moderate to severe COPD, once-daily indacaterol
150 or 300 μg improved lung function (primary endpoint) significantly more than
placebo, and improvements were significantly greater than twice-daily formoterol 
12 μg or salmeterol 50 μg, and noninferior to once-daily tiotropium bromide 18 μg
(all agents were administered via inhalation). Overall, indacaterol improved
dyspnoea, use of rescue medication and general health status significantly more
than placebo, salmeterol or tiotropium bromide, and the degree of improvement in 
these endpoints was similar to or greater than that achieved with formoterol.
Improvements were sustained over the long term (1 year), with no evidence of
tolerance. Combination therapy with indacaterol plus tiotropium bromide improved 
lung function, dyspnoea, rescue medication use and general health status
significantly more than tiotropium bromide alone in patients with moderate to
severe COPD. Indacaterol is generally well tolerated when used alone or in
combination with tiotropium bromide in patients with COPD and has not been
associated with any safety issues. The most common adverse event in clinical
trials was COPD worsening, which occurred more commonly with placebo than
indacaterol. Indacaterol was not associated with an increased risk of
cardiovascular adverse events. In a cost-utility analysis from a German
healthcare payer perspective, once-daily indacaterol 150 μg was dominant (i.e.
more effective with lower total costs) to once-daily tiotropium bromide 18 μg and
twice-daily salmeterol 50 μg in the treatment of patients with COPD. In
conclusion, indacaterol provides a valuable option for the maintenance treatment 
of adults with COPD.

DOI: 10.2165/11208490-000000000-00000 
PMID: 22356291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Pulm Pharmacol Ther. 2012 Apr;25(2):178-84. doi: 10.1016/j.pupt.2012.01.003. Epub
2012 Jan 28.

Additive anti-inflammatory effects of beta 2 adrenoceptor agonists or
glucocorticosteroid with roflumilast in human peripheral blood mononuclear cells.

Tannheimer SL(1), Sorensen EA, Haran AC, Mansfield CN, Wright CD, Salmon M.

Author information: 
(1)Respiratory Research, Gilead Sciences Inc., 199 East Blaine St., Seattle, WA
98102, USA. Stacey.Tannheimer@gilead.com

The phosphodiesterase 4 inhibitor (PDE4i) roflumilast has been approved in the US
and EU for treatment of GOLD stage 3 and 4 chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
(COPD). Inhaled β2 adrenoceptor agonist bronchodilators and anti-inflammatory
glucocorticosteroids are also used as standard of care in COPD. We investigated
the anti-inflammatory interaction of roflumilast in combination with long-acting 
β2 agonists (LABA), salmeterol or formoterol, or a glucocorticosteroid,
dexamethasone, on cytokine production from LPS-stimulated human primary
peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC). Salmeterol or formoterol caused a
concentration-dependent inhibition of tumor necrosis factor-α (TNFα) secretion
with an IC50 of 0.33 pM (C.I. 0.006-19) and 34 pM (C.I. 13-87), respectively.
When roflumilast was evaluated, the addition of salmeterol (1 nM) to roflumilast 
caused the IC50 for roflumilast to shift from 1.8 nM (C.I. 0.8-4) to 4.1 pM
(C.I.0.3-69) (p < 0.01), and maximal inhibition increased from 72.5 ± 3.2% to
90.9 ± 3.1%. Addition of formoterol to roflumilast also produced an increased
TNFα inhibition more than either drug alone (p < 0.05). The inhibition of TNFα
production with salmeterol was both β2 adrenoceptor- and protein kinase
A-dependent. Addition of roflumilast (10 nM) in the presence of dexamethasone
increased the inhibition of LPS-induced TNFα and CCL3. Roflumilast in combination
with salmeterol, formoterol, or dexamethasone increased the inhibition of
LPS-induced TNFα from human PBMC, in an additive manner. Addition of roflumilast 
to either a β2 adrenoceptor agonist or a glucocorticosteroid may provide superior
anti-inflammatory activity and greater efficacy in COPD patients and be dose
sparing.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pupt.2012.01.003 
PMID: 22306235  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Br J Pharmacol. 2012 Oct;167(4):775-86. doi: 10.1111/j.1476-5381.2012.01864.x.

Corticosteroid insensitivity is reversed by formoterol via
phosphoinositide-3-kinase inhibition.

Rossios C(1), To Y, Osoata G, Ito M, Barnes PJ, Ito K.

Author information: 
(1)Airway Disease Section, NHLI, Imperial College, London, UK.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD) show a poor response to corticosteroids, which has been linked to
oxidative stress. Here we show that the long-acting β(2) -agonist formoterol (FM)
reversed corticosteroid insensitivity under oxidative stress via inhibition of
phosphoinositide-3-kinase (PI3K) signalling.
EXPERIMENTAL APPROACH: Responsiveness to corticosteroids dexamethasone (Dex),
budesonide (Bud) and fluticasone propionate (FP) was determined, as IC(50) values
on TNF-α-induced interleukin 8 release, in U937 monocytic cell line treated with 
hydrogen peroxide (H(2) O(2) ) or peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) from
patients with COPD or severe asthma.
KEY RESULTS: PBMCs from severe asthma and COPD were less sensitive to Dex
compared with those from healthy subjects. Both FM (10(-9)  M) and salmeterol
(SM, 10(-8)  M) reversed Dex insensitivity in severe asthma, but only FM restored
Dex sensitivity in COPD. Although H(2) O(2) exposure decreased steroid
sensitivity in U937 cells, FM restored responsiveness to Bud and FP while the
effects of SM were weaker. Additionally, FM, but not SM, partially inhibited H(2)
O(2) -induced PI3Kδ-dependent (PKB) phosphorylation. H(2) O(2) decreased
SM-induced cAMP production in U937 cells, but did not significantly affect the
response to FM. The reduction of SM effects by H(2) O(2) was reversed by
pretreatment with LY294002, a PI3K inhibitor, or IC87114, a PI3Kδ inhibitor.
CONCLUSION AND IMPLICATIONS: FM reversed oxidative stress-induced corticosteroid 
insensitivity and decreased β(2) adrenoceptor-dependent cAMP production via
inhibition of PI3Kδ signalling. FM will be more effective than SM, when combined 
with corticosteroids, for the treatment of respiratory diseases under conditions 
of high oxidative stress, such as in COPD.

© 2012 The Authors. British Journal of Pharmacology © 2012 The British
Pharmacological Society.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1476-5381.2012.01864.x 
PMCID: PMC3575778
PMID: 22251095  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Ther Adv Respir Dis. 2012 Apr;6(2):97-105. doi: 10.1177/1753465811433579. Epub
2012 Jan 16.

Effects of tiotropium and formoterol on quiet breathing pattern assessed by
optoelectronic plethysmography in COPD patients: a pilot study.

Dal Negro RW(1), Turati C, Micheletto C, Menegoni F.

Author information: 
(1)Lung Department, Orlandi General Hospital, Via Ospedale 2, Bussolengo (VR)
37012, Italy. rdalnegro@ulss22.ven.it

INTRODUCTION: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a disease
characterized by an airflow limitation that is not fully reversible.
β(2)-agonists and anticholinergics represent the most effective therapeutic
options. Optoelectronic plethysmography (OEP) is a novel technology, which
provides noninvasive steady-state measurements of chest wall kinematics, together
with the assessment of the relative contribution of all different thoracic and
abdominal compartments to tidal volume.
OBJECTIVES: The aim of this pilot study was to investigate the changes in quiet
breathing due to different long-acting bronchodilators (namely, formoterol and
tiotropium) administered to COPD patients of different severity.
METHODS: Eight moderate-to-severe COPD patients were studied according to a
randomized crossover design. All subjects received both the long-acting
bronchodilators: formoterol (long-acting β(2)-agonist, 24 µg) and tiotropium
(long-acting anticholinergic bronchodilator, 18 µg). The effect of
bronchodilators on quiet breathing was evaluated by means of OEP at base
conditions, and 2 and 7 hours after inhalation.
RESULTS: Both bronchodilators caused changes in the quiet breathing pattern in
COPD patients that had previously reported only negligible changes in FEV(1)
(ΔFEV(1) = 2.6% after salbutamol). The main changes were observed in increased
ventilation per minute, inspiratory and expiratory flow, and decreased
breath-by-breath variability. Formoterol induced its main effects during the
first 2 hours after inhalation, while tiotropium caused improvements between 2
and 7 hours.
CONCLUSION: Even though a greater cohort of COPD patients is needed in order to
confirm the present results, this pilot study reports a novel piece of evidence
concerning the effects of bronchodilators on quiet breathing pattern in severe
and very severe COPD patients.

DOI: 10.1177/1753465811433579 
PMID: 22250038  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Clin Drug Investig. 2012 Mar 1;32(3):147-55. doi:
10.2165/11630880-000000000-00000.

Onset of action of formoterol versus salmeterol via dry powder inhalers in
moderate chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: a randomized, placebo-controlled,
double-blind, crossover study.

Cazzola M(1), Paggiaro P, Palange P, Bjermer L, Ausin P, Carlsson LG, Ekelund J, 
Lotvall J.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Respiratory Clinical Pharmacology, Department of Internal Medicine,
University of Rome Tor Vergata, Rome, Italy. Mario.cazzola@uniroma2.it

BACKGROUND: Bronchodilator therapy is central to the symptomatic management of
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), and treatment with short-acting
bronchodilators is recommended in patients with mild COPD.
OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to evaluate the onset of effect of single-dose
formoterol 9 μg versus single-dose salmeterol 50 μg in patients with moderate
COPD.
METHODS: In this multicentre, double-blind, double-dummy, placebo-controlled,
three-way single-dose crossover study, patients ≥40 years of age with moderate
COPD were randomized to single-dose formoterol 9 μg via Turbuhaler® plus placebo 
via Diskus®, single-dose salmeterol 50 μg via Diskus® plus placebo via
Turbuhaler® or placebo via Turbuhaler® and Diskus® (washout period 2-7 days).
Terbutaline 0.5 mg/actuation via Turbuhaler® was used as reliever medication
throughout. The primary endpoint was forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV₁) 
at 5 minutes post-dose. Secondary endpoints included proportion of patients
achieving ≥12% increase in FEV₁ at 5 minutes post-dose.
RESULTS: 109 patients were randomized, and 108 completed the study. The increase 
in FEV₁ 5 minutes post-dose versus pre-dose was 7.2% for formoterol, 4.1% for
salmeterol and 0.7% for placebo, and significantly greater for formoterol versus 
salmeterol (ratio of treatment effects: 1.030; 95% CI 1.008, 1.052; p = 0.009),
for formoterol versus placebo (1.064, 95% CI 1.041, 1.087; p < 0.001) and for
salmeterol versus placebo (1.033, 95% CI 1.011, 1.056; p = 0.003). The
proportions of patients with ≥12% increase in FEV₁ 5 minutes post-dose were
23.1%, 9.2% and 6.4% for formoterol, salmeterol and placebo, respectively; this
was statistically significantly larger after formoterol than salmeterol
(p = 0.008) or placebo (p < 0.001). All treatments were well tolerated.
CONCLUSION: In COPD patients, formoterol 9 μg has an onset of bronchodilatory
effect that is more rapid than salmeterol 50 μg based on FEV₁ at 5 minutes
post-dose.
CLINICAL TRIAL REGISTRATION: Clinicaltrials.gov identifier: NCT01048333;
AstraZeneca study code: D5127C00001.

DOI: 10.2165/11630880-000000000-00000 
PMID: 22235841  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Respir Med. 2012 Apr;106(4):531-9. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2011.10.020. Epub 2011 Dec
23.

AZD9668, a neutrophil elastase inhibitor, plus ongoing budesonide/formoterol in
patients with COPD.

Kuna P(1), Jenkins M, O'Brien CD, Fahy WA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Internal Medicine, Asthma and Allergy, Barlicki University
Hospital, Medical University of Lodz, Lodz, Poland. piotr.kuna@umed.lodz.pl

BACKGROUND: Neutrophil elastase (NE) is implicated in chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD). AZD9668 is a reversible and selective inhibitor of NE, 
well tolerated at doses of 60 mg bid during Phase I/IIa development.
METHODS: This 12-week, randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, Phase IIb,
trial (NCT01023516), investigated the efficacy and safety of AZD9668 (60 mg bid) 
versus placebo in patients with symptomatic COPD and a history of exacerbation
receiving maintenance budesonide/formoterol. Primary outcome variable: forced
expiratory volume in one second (FEV1). Secondary endpoints included:
post-bronchodilator FEV1, pre- and post-bronchodilator forced vital capacity,
FEV6, forced expiratory flow between 25% and 75% of vital capacity and
inspiratory capacity; peak expiratory flow and FEV1 measured at home;
EXAcerbations of Chronic pulmonary disease Tool and Breathlessness, Cough and
Sputum Scores; St George's respiratory questionnaire for COPD (SGRQ-C) scores;
exacerbations; and safety assessments.
RESULTS: Six hundred and fifteen patients were randomised: placebo (302), AZD9668
60 mg bid (313). AZD9668 showed no effect on lung function: change in mean
pre-bronchodilator FEV1 versus placebo was 0.01L (95% confidence interval: -0.03,
0.05; p=0.533). AZD9668 did not significantly improve respiratory signs and
symptoms, SGRQ-C score or time to first exacerbation. Adverse events were similar
for AZD9668 and placebo.
CONCLUSIONS: Three months' treatment with AZD9668 did not improve lung function, 
respiratory signs and symptoms or SGRQ-C score when added to
budesonide/formoterol maintenance therapy in patients with COPD. In the absence
of definitive biomarkers of short-term disease progression, further research is
needed to determine the optimal duration of studies to evaluate NE inhibitors as 
disease-modifying agents.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2011.10.020 
PMID: 22197578  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Eur Respir J. 2012 Aug;40(2):298-305. doi: 10.1183/09031936.00072511. Epub 2011
Dec 19.

The acute effect of budesonide/formoterol in COPD: a multi-slice computed
tomography and lung function study.

De Backer LA(1), Vos W, De Backer J, Van Holsbeke C, Vinchurkar S, De Backer W.

Author information: 
(1)Dept of Respiratory Medicine, Antwerp University Hospital, Wilrijkstraat 10,
2650 Edegem, Antwerp, Belgium. lieve.debacker@ua.ac.be

The Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease (GOLD) classification 
of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) does not always match with other 
clinical disease descriptors such as exacerbation frequency and quality of life, 
indicating that forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV(1)) is not a perfect
descriptor of the disease. The aim of this study was to find out whether changes 
in airway geometry after inhalation of the most commonly used inhalation therapy 
in severe COPD can more adequately be described with an image-based approach than
with spirometry. 10 COPD GOLD stage III patients were assessed in a double-blind 
crossover study. Airway volumes were analysed using segmentation of multi-slice
computed tomography (MSCT) images; airway resistance was determined using
computational fluid dynamics (CFD). Distal airway volume significantly increased 
(p=0.011) in patients 4 h after receiving a budesonide/formoterol combination
from 9.6±4.67 cm(3) to 10.14±4.81 cm(3). Also CFD-determined airway resistance
significantly decreased (p=0.047) from 0.051±0.021 kPa·s·L(-1) to 0.043±0.019
kPa·s·L(-1). None of the lung function parameters showed a significant change.
Only functional residual capacity (FRC) showed a trend to decline (p=0.056). Only
the image-based parameters were able to predict the visit at which the
combination product was administered. This study showed that imaging is a
sensitive, complementary tool to describe changes in airway structure.

DOI: 10.1183/09031936.00072511 
PMID: 22183484  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. J Clin Pharm Ther. 2012 Apr;37(2):204-11. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2710.2011.01285.x. 
Epub 2011 Jul 11.

Effect of long-acting beta-agonists on the frequency of COPD exacerbations: a
meta-analysis.

Wang J(1), Nie B, Xiong W, Xu Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China.
wangjianmiao2010@126.com

WHAT IS KNOWN AND OBJECTIVE:   Inhaled long-acting beta-agonists have been
licensed for the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) since 
the late 1990s, and they improve lung function and symptoms of dyspnoea. However,
the evidence that long-acting beta-agonists alone can reduce the rate of COPD
exacerbations is not conclusive. This meta-analysis was performed to evaluate
their effect on the frequency of exacerbations.
METHODS: MEDLINE, EMBASE, CINAHL and the Cochrane trials database were searched
for the review. Randomized controlled trials of greater than or equal to 24weeks'
treatment duration comparing long-acting beta-agonists (LABAs) with placebo were 
reviewed. Studies were pooled to yield odds ratios (ORs) with 95% confidence
intervals (CIs).
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION: Seventeen randomized controlled trials (11871 randomized 
subjects) met the inclusion criteria and were selected for analysis. Salmeterol, 
formoterol and indacaterol significantly reduced COPD exacerbations compared with
placebo. Salmeterol significantly reduced COPD exacerbations with both study arms
exposed or not exposed to inhaled corticosteroids (ICS). The summary ORs were
0·79 (95% CI: 0·67-0·92; P<0·01) and 0·80 (95% CI: 0·65-0·99; P=0·04),
respectively. However, when both arms were not exposed to ICS, there was no
significant reduction in exacerbations with formoterol compared with placebo. The
'summary OR was 0·93 (95% CI: 0·75-1·15; P=0·50).
WHAT IS NEW AND CONCLUSION: Long-acting beta-agonists reduce the frequency of
COPD exacerbations. Salmeterol, formoterol and indacaterol significantly reduced 
COPD exacerbations compared with placebo. Salmeterol but not formoterol decreased
exacerbations significantly in the absence of ICS.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2710.2011.01285.x 
PMID: 21740451  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2017 Jan 19;12:339-349. doi:
10.2147/COPD.S125058. eCollection 2017.

Indacaterol/glycopyrronium versus salmeterol/fluticasone in Asian patients with
COPD at a high risk of exacerbations: results from the FLAME study.

Wedzicha JA(1), Zhong N(2), Ichinose M(3), Humphries M(4), Fogel R(5), Thach
C(5), Patalano F(6), Banerji D(5).

Author information: 
(1)National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College London, London, UK.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Respiratory Disease, National Clinical Research Center
of Respiratory Disease, Guangzhou Institute of Respiratory Disease, The First
Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, Guangdong,
People's Republic of China. (3)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Tohoku
University Graduate School of Medicine, Sendai, Japan. (4)Beijing Novartis Pharma
Co. Ltd., Shanghai, People's Republic of China. (5)Novartis Pharmaceuticals
Corporation, East Hanover, NJ, USA. (6)Novartis Pharma AG, Basel, Switzerland.

BACKGROUND: The FLAME study demonstrated that indacaterol/glycopyrronium
(IND/GLY), the fixed-dose combination of a long-acting β2-agonist (LABA, IND) and
a long-acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA, GLY), was superior to
salmeterol/fluticasone combination (SFC) in preventing exacerbations in COPD
patients with a high risk of exacerbations. In this study, we report a
prespecified analysis of the efficacy and safety of IND/GLY versus SFC in Asian
patients from the FLAME study.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Patients from Asian centers with moderate-to-very severe
COPD and ≥1 exacerbation in the previous year from the 52-week, randomized FLAME 
study were included. IND/GLY was compared versus SFC for effects on
exacerbations, lung function (forced expiratory volume in 1 second [FEV1] and
forced vital capacity [FVC]), health status (St George's Respiratory
Questionnaire [SGRQ]), rescue medication use, and safety.
RESULTS: A total of 510 Asian patients (IND/GLY, n=250 or SFC, n=260) were
included. Compared to the overall FLAME population, the Asian cohort had more
males, a shorter duration of COPD, fewer patients using inhaled corticosteroid
(ICS) at screening, fewer current smokers, and more patients with very severe
COPD. IND/GLY significantly reduced the rate of moderate/severe exacerbations
(rate ratio: 0.75; 95% confidence interval: 0.58-0.97; P=0.027) and prolonged
time to first moderate/severe exacerbation versus SFC (hazard ratio: 0.77; 95%
confidence interval: 0.59-1.01; P=0.055). Predose trough FEV1 and FVC
significantly improved in Asian patients (P<0.001). IND/GLY improved SGRQ for
COPD (SGRQ-C score; P=0.006) and reduced rescue medication use (P=0.058) at week 
52. Pneumonia incidence was 3.6% with IND/GLY and 7.7% with SFC (P=0.046).
CONCLUSION: In exacerbating Asian COPD patients, IND/GLY was more effective than 
SFC.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S125058 
PMCID: PMC5261570
PMID: 28176893  [PubMed - in process]


2. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2017 Jan 19;12:367-381. doi:
10.2147/COPD.S119908. eCollection 2017.

Comparative efficacy of long-acting β2-agonists as monotherapy for chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease: a network meta-analysis.

Donohue JF(1), Betts KA(2), Du EX(2), Altman P(3), Goyal P(4), Keininger DL(4),
Gruenberger JB(4), Signorovitch JE(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonary Diseases and Critical Care Medicine, The University of
North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC. (2)Analysis Group, Inc., Los Angeles, CA.
(3)Novartis Pharmaceutical Corporation, East Hanover, NJ, USA. (4)Novartis Pharma
AG, Basel, Switzerland. (5)Analysis Group, Inc., Boston, MA, USA.

PURPOSE: Long-acting β2-agonists (LABAs) have demonstrated efficacy in patients
with COPD in clinical trials. The purpose of this study was to assess the
comparative efficacy of all available dosages of all LABA monotherapies using a
network meta-analysis.
METHODS: A systematic literature review identified 33 randomized controlled
trials of LABA monotherapies (salmeterol 50 μg twice daily [BID]; formoterol 12
μg BID; indacaterol 75, 150, and 300 μg once daily [OD]; olodaterol 5 and 10 μg
OD, and vilanterol 25 μg OD). Clinical efficacy was evaluated at 12 and 24 weeks 
in terms of trough forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1), transition
dyspnea index focal score, St George's Respiratory Questionnaire total score, and
rate of COPD exacerbations. The relative effectiveness of all LABA monotherapies 
was estimated by Bayesian network meta-analysis.
RESULTS: At 12 and 24 weeks, indacaterol 300 and 150 μg OD were associated with
statistically significant improvement in trough FEV1 compared to all other LABA
monotherapies; vilanterol 25 μg OD was superior to formoterol 12 μg BID. At 12
weeks, indacaterol 75 μg OD was associated with significant improvement in trough
FEV1 compared to formoterol 12 μg BID and olodaterol (5 and 10 μg OD); salmeterol
50 μg BID was superior to formoterol 12 μg BID and olodaterol 5 μg OD.
Indacaterol 300 μg OD was also associated with significant improvement in
transition dyspnea index focal score compared to all other LABAs at 12 or 24
weeks. Indacaterol 150 μg OD had significantly better results in exacerbation
rates than olodaterol 5 μg and olodaterol 10 μg OD.
CONCLUSION: Indacaterol 300 μg, followed by 150 and 75 μg, were the most
effective LABA monotherapies for moderate to severe COPD.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S119908 
PMCID: PMC5261557
PMID: 28176892  [PubMed - in process]


3. BMC Pulm Med. 2017 Jan 31;17(1):25. doi: 10.1186/s12890-017-0372-z.

Immediate salbutamol responsiveness does not predict long-term benefits of
indacaterol in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Burgel PR(1), Le Gros V(2), Decuypère L(2), Bourdeix I(2), Perez T(3), Deslée
G(4).

Author information: 
(1)Respiratory Medicine, APHP-Hôpital Cochin-Université Paris Descartes, 27 rue
du Faubourg St Jacques, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Paris, 75014, France.
pierre-regis.burgel@aphp.fr. (2)Respiratory Medical Department, Novartis Pharma
SAS, Rueil-Malmaison, Paris, France. (3)Pulmonary Department, CHU de Lille,
Université de Lille, Lille, France. (4)Respiratory Medicine, INSERM UMRS 903,
Hôpital Maison Blanche-CHU de Reims, Reims, France.

BACKGROUND: The purpose of this study was to evaluate the correlation between
immediate responsiveness with the short-acting β2-agonist salbutamol and effects 
of treatment with the ultra-long-acting β2-agonist indacaterol in patients with
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
METHODS: The REVERBREZ study was a phase IV, multicentre, open-label study in
which patients with moderate-to-severe COPD received indacaterol 150 μg
once-daily for 5 months. The primary endpoint was the correlation between
immediate response of forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1) post-inhalation of
salbutamol (400 μg) at study entry and the change from baseline in trough FEV1
after 1 month of indacaterol. Secondary endpoints included dyspnoea measured by
the modified Medical Research Council (mMRC) grade and health-related quality of 
life measured by the clinical COPD questionnaire (CCQ).
RESULTS: Of the 602 patients enrolled from 177 centres in France, 543 patients
received at least one indacaterol dose, 512 patients completed 1 month of
indacaterol treatment (primary endpoint), and 400 patients completed 5 months of 
treatment. At study entry, mean FEV1 values before and after salbutamol
inhalation were 1.54 ± 0.50 L and 1.65 ± 0.53 L, respectively. Based on the
magnitude of an immediate response of FEV1 after salbutamol inhalation at study
entry, patients were classified into reversible (Rv, ≥12% and ≥200 mL from
pre-salbutamol value; n = 106) and non-reversible (NRv, <12% or <200 mL from
pre-salbutamol value; n = 431) groups. After 1 month of indacaterol treatment,
mean absolute and relative difference in trough FEV1 were 100 mL and 9%,
respectively. No significant correlation was found between the immediate FEV1
response to salbutamol at study entry and change from baseline in trough FEV1
after 1 month of indacaterol treatment (correlation coefficient = 0.056 [95%
CI;-0.032, 0.144] for absolute response and 0.028 [95% CI;-0.06, 0.116] for
relative response). At all subsequent visits, mMRC and CCQ scores, and FEV1
improved from baseline with no significant difference between the Rv and NRv
groups.
CONCLUSIONS: Immediate FEV1 response to salbutamol did not predict the long-term 
benefits observed with indacaterol treatment in patients with COPD. Patients
considered reversible or non-reversible to salbutamol showed comparable
improvements in lung function, dyspnoea and health-related quality of life.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov: NCT01272362 . Date: January 5, 2011.

DOI: 10.1186/s12890-017-0372-z 
PMCID: PMC5282899
PMID: 28143447  [PubMed - in process]


4. Vnitr Lek. 2016 Winter;62(12):1011-1020.

[Current position of new fixed-dose combination of tiotropium and olodaterol -
its role in the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease in the Czech
Republic].

[Article in Czech]

Koblížek V, Svoboda M.

COPD is a serious pulmonary disease with rising global socioeconomic impact. From
the perspective of the Czech Republic COPD was responsible for 21 000 acute
hospitalizations and 3 500 deaths, mortality reaches 33/100 000 in 2015. Early
stages of disease may be associated with a significant reduction of exercise
capacity and the reduction of activities of daily living. Moreover early stages
of bronchial obstruction are associated with the fastest lung function decline.
Finally, early elimination of the risk of inhalation exposure is able to
influence the course of the disease and to reduce its mortality. Most current
treatment strategies and national recommendations attributed central role to
bronchodilator drugs. Long-acting bronchodilators (LAMA and LABA) creates an
essential component of the treatment of symptomatic individuals in the Czech COPD
guidelines as well. Actual version of this document constitutes as standard
therapy: long-lasting inhaled bronchodilators, targeted efforts to eliminate
inhalation risk, vaccination, regular exercise, repeated inhalation technique
training, identification, and treatment of relevant comorbidities. All other
drugs (inhaled-corticosteroids, mucoactive medication, roflumilast, antibiotics),
and non-pharmacological (lung volume reductions, nutrition support, long-term
oxygen, home non-invasive ventilation, lung transplantation, palliative care)
procedures are intended for a specific subgroups of patients only. The newest
type of bronchodilator therapy is represented by a fixed dual bronchodilation.
Currently we can use four original drug combinations: titropium + olodaterol,
glycopyrronium + indacaterol, umeklidinium + vilanterol and aclidinium +
formoterol in the Czech Republic. This area is an enterprising research. For
example comprehensive scientific program covering eight studies on 15 000 COPD
patients (TOviTO) assess the therapeutic benefits of tiotropium + olodaterolu in 
terms of lung function, quality of life, exercise tolerance, daily physical
activity and the incidence of acute exacerbations. Meanwhile the published
results of analyzed studies TONADO, OTEMTO, VIVACITO, and the first results of
the study DYNAGITO have showed that fixed dual bronchodilation should be a
mandatory treatment to all the symptomatic COPD patients. Unfortunately "face to 
face" comparison of different drug combinations is still missing. However, the
treatment with tiotropium + olodaterol combination has been demonstrated to
significantly (35 %) reduce the occurrence of clinically significant
deterioration, which may lead to the stabilization of this multicomponent
disease.Key words: COPD - hospitalizations - inhaled bronchodilators - mortality 
- treatment.


PMID: 28139131  [PubMed - in process]


5. Tuberc Respir Dis (Seoul). 2017 Jan;80(1):52-59. doi: 10.4046/trd.2017.80.1.52.
Epub 2016 Dec 30.

Safety and Effectiveness of Indacaterol in Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease 
Patients in South Korea.

Yum HK(1), Kim HR(2), Chang YS(3), Shin KC(4), Kim S(5), Oh YM(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Inje University Seoul Paik Hospital, Inje
University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea. (2)Department of Internal Medicine,
Wonkwang University School of Medicine, Iksan, Korea. (3)Department of Internal
Medicine, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea. (4)Division of
Pulmonology and Allergy, Department of Internal Medicine, Regional Center for
Respiratory Disease, Yeungnam University College of Medicine, Daegu, Korea.
(5)Novartis Korea Ltd., Seoul, Korea. (6)Department of Pulmonary and Critical
Care Medicine, Asan Medical Center, University of Ulsan College of Medicine,
Seoul, Korea.

BACKGROUND: Inhaled indacaterol (Onbrez Breezhaler), a long-acting β2-agonist, is
approved in over 100 countries, including South Korea, as a once-daily
bronchodilator for maintenance and treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD). Here, we present an interim analysis of a post-marketing
surveillance study conducted to evaluate the real-world safety and effectiveness 
of indacaterol in the Korean population.
METHODS: This was an open-label, observational, prospective study in which COPD
patients, who were newly prescribed with indacaterol (150 or 300 µg), were
evaluated for 12 or 24 weeks. Safety was assessed based on the incidence rates of
adverse events (AEs) and serious adverse events (SAEs). Effectiveness was
evaluated based on physician's assessment by considering changes in symptoms and 
lung function, if the values of forced expiratory volume in 1 second were
available.
RESULTS: Safety data were analyzed in 1,016 patients of the 1,043 enrolled COPD
patients receiving indacaterol, and 784 patients were included for the
effectiveness analysis. AEs were reported in 228 (22.44%) patients, while 98
(9.65%) patients reported SAEs. The COPD condition improved in 348 patients
(44.4%), while the condition was maintained in 396 patients (50.5%), and only 40 
patients (5.1%) exhibited worsening of ailment as compared with baseline. During 
the treatment period, 90 patients were hospitalized while nine patients died. All
deaths were assessed to be not related to the study drug by the investigator.
CONCLUSION: In real-life clinical practice in South Korea, indacaterol was well
tolerated in COPD patients, and can be regarded as an effective option for their 
maintenance treatment.

DOI: 10.4046/trd.2017.80.1.52 
PMCID: PMC5256353
PMID: 28119747  [PubMed - in process]


6. J Inflamm (Lond). 2017 Jan 17;14:2. doi: 10.1186/s12950-017-0149-4. eCollection
2017.

Effects of corticosteroid plus long-acting beta2-agonist on the expression of
PD-L1 in double-stranded RNA-induced lung inflammation in mice.

Hamano S(1), Matsumoto K(1), Tonai K(1), Fukuyama S(1), Kan-O K(1), Seki N(1),
Inoue H(2), Nakanishi Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute for Diseases of the Chest, Graduate School of Medical
Sciences, Kyushu University, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka, 812-8582 Japan. (2)Department
of Pulmonary Medicine, Graduate School of Medical and Dental Sciences, Kagoshima 
University, Kagoshima, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Airway viral infections cause the exacerbations of asthma and chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease. PD-L1, also known as B7-H1, is an
immune-checkpoint molecule that plays a role in an escape mechanism of viruses
from the host immune systems. This escape may be associated with the persistence 
of viral infection and the exacerbation of the underlying diseases. In a study in
vitro, we have shown that corticosteroids plus long-acting beta2-agonists (LABAs)
attenuate the upregulation of PD-L1 on airway epithelial cells stimulated with an
analog of viral double-stranded RNA, polyinosinic-polycytidylic acid (poly I:C). 
To address its biological relevance in vivo, we investigated the effect of
corticosteroid plus LABA on the expression of PD-L1 in double-stranded
RNA-induced lung inflammation in mice.
METHODS: Mice were intratracheally administered with poly I:C. The expression of 
PD-L1 on the lung cells was assessed by flow cytometry and inflammation was
assessed for bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF). Independent as well as
combination effects of ciclesonide and indacaterol were examined.
RESULTS: Administration of low dose poly I:C upregulated the expression of PD-L1,
induced neutrophilia and increased keratinocyte-derived chemokine (KC),
macrophage inflammatory protein-1β (MIP-1β), and IL-6 in BALF. The upregulation
of PD-L1, neutrophilic inflammation and increase of KC were suppressed by
ciclesonide plus indacaterol, but not by either when administered independently. 
Although the upregulation of PD-L1 by high dose poly I:C was suppressed by
ciclesonide plus indacaterol, neutrophilia and increased KC, MIP-1β, and IL-6 in 
BALF were not attenuated.
CONCLUSIONS: Ciclesonide plus indacaterol attenuate double-stranded RNA-induced
upregulation of PD-L1 in the lungs.

DOI: 10.1186/s12950-017-0149-4 
PMCID: PMC5240396
PMID: 28115915  [PubMed - in process]


7. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2016 Dec 30;12:141-168. doi:
10.2147/COPD.S116719. eCollection 2017.

Dual bronchodilation in COPD: lung function and patient-reported outcomes - a
review.

Price D(1), Østrem A(2), Thomas M(3), Welte T(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Primary Care Respiratory Medicine, Division of Applied Health
Sciences, University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen, UK; Observational and Pragmatic
Research Institute, Singapore. (2)Gransdalen Legesenter, Oslo, Norway.
(3)Department of Primary Care Research, University of Southampton, Southampton,
UK. (4)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Hannover Medical School, Hannover,
Germany.

Several fixed-dose combinations (FDCs) of long-acting bronchodilators (a
long-acting muscarinic antagonist [LAMA] plus a long-acting β2-agonist [LABA])
are available for the treatment of COPD. Studies of these FDCs have demonstrated 
substantial improvements in lung function (forced expiratory volume in 1 second) 
in comparison with their respective constituent monocomponents. Improvements in
patient-reported outcomes (PROs), such as symptoms and health status, as well as 
exacerbation rates, have been reported compared with a LABA or LAMA alone, but
results are less consistent. The inconsistencies may in part be owing to
differences in study design, methods used to assess study end points, and patient
populations. Nevertheless, these observations tend to support an association
between improvements in forced expiratory volume in 1 second and improvements in 
symptom-based outcomes. In order to assess the effects of FDCs on PROs and
evaluate relationships between PROs and changes in lung function, we performed a 
systematic literature search of publications reporting randomized controlled
trials of FDCs. Results of this literature search were independently assessed by 
two reviewers, with a third reviewer resolving any conflicting results. In total,
22 Phase III randomized controlled trials of FDC bronchodilators in COPD were
identified, with an additional study including a post-literature search (ten for 
indacaterol-glycopyrronium once daily, eight for umeclidinium-vilanterol once
daily, three for tiotropium-olodaterol once daily, and two for
aclidinium-formoterol twice daily). Results from these studies demonstrated that 
the LAMA-LABA FDCs significantly improved lung function compared with their
component monotherapies or other single-agent treatments. Furthermore, LABA-LAMA 
combinations also generally improved symptoms and health status versus
monotherapies, although some discrepancies between lung function and PROs were
observed. Overall, the safety profiles of the FDCs were similar to placebo.
Further research is required to examine more closely any relationship between
lung function and PROs in patients receiving LABA-LAMA combinations.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S116719 
PMCID: PMC5221557
PMID: 28115839  [PubMed - in process]


8. Respir Res. 2017 Jan 11;18(1):13. doi: 10.1186/s12931-016-0498-1.

Indacaterol and glycopyrronium versus indacaterol on body plethysmography
measurements in COPD-a randomised controlled study.

Salomon J(1), Stolz D(2), Domenighetti G(3), Frey JG(4), Turk AJ(5), Azzola A(6),
Sigrist T(7), Fitting JW(8), Schmidt U(9), Geiser T(10), Wild C(11), Kostikas
K(12), Clemens A(13), Brutsche M(14).

Author information: 
(1)Lung Centre Salem-Spital, Bern, Switzerland. (2)University Hospital Basel,
Basel, Switzerland. (3)Regional Hospital La Carità, Locarno, Switzerland.
(4)Hospital du Valais, Sion, Switzerland. (5)Hospital, Zürcher Rehazentrum Wald, 
Wald, Switzerland. (6)Regional Hospital Civico, Lugano, Switzerland. (7)Hospital,
Klinik Barmelweid, Barmelweid, Switzerland. (8)Lausanne University Hospital,
Lausanne, Switzerland. (9)Kliniken Valens, Rehabilitation Centre, Walenstadtberg,
St. Gallen, Switzerland. (10)University Hospital of Bern, Bern, Switzerland.
(11)Novartis Pharma Schweiz AG, Rotkreuz, Switzerland. (12)Novartis Pharma AG,
Basel, Switzerland. (13)Novartis Pharma AG, Basel, Switzerland.
andreas.clemens@novartis.com. (14)Cantonal Hospital, St. Gallen, Switzerland.

BACKGROUND: Dual bronchodilator therapy is recommended for symptomatic patients
with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). There are limited data on
effects of a combination of two long-acting bronchodilators on lung function
including body plethysmography.
METHODS: This multicentre, randomised, double-blind, single-dose, cross-over,
placebo-controlled study evaluated efficacy and safety of the free combination of
indacaterol maleate (IND) and glycopyrronium bromide (GLY) versus IND alone on
spirometric and body plethysmography parameters, including inspiratory capacity
(IC), forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1), forced vital capacity (FVC), total 
lung capacity (TLC) and airway resistance (Raw) in moderate-to-severe COPD
patients.
RESULTS: Seventy-eight patients with FEV1 % pred. (mean ± SD) 56 ± 13% were
randomised. The combination of IND + GLY versus IND presented a numerically
higher peak-IC (Δ = 0.076 L, 95% confidence interval [CI]: -0.010 - 0.161 L;
p = 0.083), with a statistically significant difference in mean IC over 4 h
(Δ = 0.054 L, 95%CI 0.022 - 0.086 L; p = 0.001). FEV1, FVC and Raw, but not TLC, 
were consistently significantly improved by IND + GLY compared to IND alone.
Safety profiles of both treatments were comparable.
CONCLUSION: The free combination of IND + GLY improved lung function parameters
as evaluated by spirometry and body plethysmography, with a similar safety
profile compared to IND alone.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: NCT01699685.

DOI: 10.1186/s12931-016-0498-1 
PMCID: PMC5225517
PMID: 28077140  [PubMed - in process]


9. Drug Ther Bull. 2017 Jan;55(1):2-5. doi: 10.1136/dtb.2017.1.0451. Epub 2017 Jan
5.

An update on LAMA/LABA combinations for COPD.

[No authors listed]

The management of symptoms of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)
typically involves the use of inhaled long-acting bronchodilators. Previously, we
have reviewed the long-acting muscarinic antagonists (LAMAs) ▼aclidinium,(1)
▼glycopyrronium,(2) tiotropium(3) and ▼umeclidinium,(4) and the long-acting beta2
agonists (LABAs) indacaterol,(5) ▼olodaterol,(6) and ▼vilanterol (in combination 
with fluticasone) in the management of COPD.(7) Four fixed-dose combinations of a
LAMA with a LABA are now available, all indicated as maintenance bronchodilator
treatment to relieve symptoms in adult patients with COPD. Here, we provide a
brief overview of the four combinations and consider the place of a LAMA/LABA in 
people with COPD and any factors that might help to choose between them.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://www.bmj.com/company/products-services/rights-and-licensing/.

DOI: 10.1136/dtb.2017.1.0451 
PMID: 28057707  [PubMed - in process]


10. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2017 Feb;360(2):324-340. doi: 10.1124/jpet.116.237743. Epub
2016 Dec 7.

GS-5759, a Bifunctional β2-Adrenoceptor Agonist and Phosphodiesterase 4 Inhibitor
for Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease with a Unique Mode of Action: Effects
on Gene Expression in Human Airway Epithelial Cells.

Joshi T(1), Yan D(1), Hamed O(1), Tannheimer SL(1), Phillips GB(1), Wright CD(1),
Kim M(1), Salmon M(1), Newton R(1), Giembycz MA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Physiology and Pharmacology (T.J., D.Y., O.H., M.A.G.) and Cell
Biology and Anatomy (R.N.), Snyder Institute for Chronic Diseases, Cumming School
of Medicine, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada; and Translational
Medicine, Biomarkers (S.L.T.), Inflammation Research (C.D.W., M.S.), and
Medicinal Chemistry (G.B.P., M.K.), Gilead Sciences Inc., Seattle, Washington.
(2)Departments of Physiology and Pharmacology (T.J., D.Y., O.H., M.A.G.) and Cell
Biology and Anatomy (R.N.), Snyder Institute for Chronic Diseases, Cumming School
of Medicine, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada; and Translational
Medicine, Biomarkers (S.L.T.), Inflammation Research (C.D.W., M.S.), and
Medicinal Chemistry (G.B.P., M.K.), Gilead Sciences Inc., Seattle, Washington
giembycz@ucalgary.ca.

(R)-6-[(3-{[4-(5-{[2-hydroxy-2-(8-hydroxy-2-oxo-1,2-dihydroquinolin-5-yl)ethyl]am
ino}pent-1-yn-1-yl)phenyl]
carbamoyl}phenyl)sulphonyl]-4-[(3-methoxyphenyl)amino]-8-methylquinoline-3-carbox
amide trifluoroacetic acid (GS-5759) is a bifunctional ligand composed of a
quinolinone-containing pharmacophore [β2-adrenoceptor agonist orthostere (β2A)]
found in several β2-adrenoceptor agonists, including indacaterol, linked
covalently to a phosphodiesterase 4 (PDE4) inhibitor related to
6-[3-(dimethylcarbamoyl)benzenesulphonyl]-4-[(3-methoxyphenyl)amino]-8-methylquin
oline-3-carboxamide (GSK 256066) by a pent-1-yn-1-ylbenzene spacer. GS-5759 had a
similar affinity for PDE4B1 and the native β2-adrenoceptor expressed on BEAS-2B
human airway epithelial cells. However, compared with the monofunctional parent
compound, β2A, the KA of GS-5759 for the β2-adrenoceptor was 35-fold lower.
Schild analysis determined that the affinities of the β-adrenoceptor antagonists,
(2R,3R)-1-[(2,3-dihydro-7-methyl-1H-inden-4-yl)oxy]-3-[(1-methylethyl)
amino]-2-butanol (ICI 118551) and propranolol, were agonist-dependent, being
significantly lower for GS-5759 than β2A. Collectively, these data can be
explained by "forced proximity," bivalent binding where the pharmacophore in
GS-5759 responsible for PDE4 inhibition also interacts with a nonallosteric
domain within the β2-adrenoceptor that enhances the affinity of β2A for the
orthosteric site. Microarray analyses revealed that, after 2-hour exposure,
GS-5759 increased the expression of >3500 genes in BEAS-2B cells that were highly
rank-order correlated with gene expression changes produced by indacaterol and
GSK 256066 in combination (Ind/GSK). Moreover, the line of regression began close
to the origin with a slope of 0.88, indicating that the magnitude of most gene
expression changes produced by Ind/GSK was quantitatively replicated by GS-5759. 
Thus, GS-5759 is a novel compound exhibiting dual β2-adrenoceptor agonism and
PDE4 inhibition with potential to interact on target tissues in a synergistic
manner. Such polypharmacological behavior may be particularly effective in
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and other complex disorders where multiple 
processes interact to promote disease pathogenesis and progression.

Copyright © 2017 by The American Society for Pharmacology and Experimental
Therapeutics.

DOI: 10.1124/jpet.116.237743 
PMID: 27927912  [PubMed - in process]


11. Indacaterol / Glycopyrronium -- Benefit Assessment According to §35a Social Code 
Book V [Internet].

Institute for Quality and Efficiency in Health Care.
Cologne, Germany: Institute for Quality and Efficiency in Health Care (IQWiG);
2014 Feb. Extract of Dossier Assessment No. A13-40.
IQWiG Dossier Assessment Extracts.

The aim of this report is to assess the added benefit of indacaterol /
glycopyrronium in comparison with the appropriate comparator therapy (ACT) in
adult patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) for maintenance 
bronchodilator treatment to relieve symptoms. The Federal Joint Committee (G-BA) 
specified the following ACT:The treatment of stable COPD of the severity stages
“moderate” (stage II), “severe” (stage III) and “very severe” (stage IV) was
conducted according to the recommendations of the most recently effective version
of the German National Care Guideline COPD 4. Long-acting beta-2 agonists
(formoterol, salmeterol) and / or tiotropium are recommended for long-term drug
treatment from stage II. In COPD stage III/IV with more than 2 exacerbations per 
year, inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) should be used in addition. The company
followed the specification of the G-BA and, from the options mentioned, chose
formoterol in combination with tiotropium as the ACT. However, it did not
consider the conditions for ICS use named above in the study inclusion. Deviating
from this, the criteria for ICS treatment specified by the G-BA were used in the 
present benefit assessment. The assessment for patients with COPD stages II to IV
was conducted based on patient-relevant outcomes. Only direct comparative
randomized controlled trials (RCTs) with a minimum duration of 6 months were
included in the assessment.

PMID: 27905766  [PubMed]


12. Clinicoecon Outcomes Res. 2016 Nov 7;8:667-674. eCollection 2016.

UK-specific cost-effectiveness of tiotropium + olodaterol fixed-dose combination 
versus other LAMA + LABA combinations in patients with COPD.

Tebboth A(1), Ternouth A(1), Gonzalez-Rojas N(2).

Author information: 
(1)Boehringer Ingelheim Ltd., Bracknell, UK. (2)Boehringer Ingelheim GmBH,
Ingelheim, Germany.

OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study is to assess the cost-effectiveness of other
long-acting muscarinic antagonist + long-acting β2 agonist combinations in
comparison with Spiolto(®) Respimat(®) (tiotropium + olodaterol fixed-dose
combination [FDC]) for maintenance treatment to relieve symptoms in adult
patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
METHODS: A previously published individual-level Markov model was adapted for the
perspective of the UK health care system, in line with recommendations from the
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Individuals progressed through
the model based on their forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1) value at
baseline and the post-improvement FEV1 value. Changes in FEV1 were taken from a
mixed treatment comparison. Costs were obtained from a published cost-utility
analysis of tiotropium in the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
in the UK. Uncertainty was assessed by deterministic and probabilistic
sensitivity analysis.
RESULTS: Duaklir(®) Genuair(®) (aclidinium bromide + formoterol fumarate FDC) and
the free-dose combination of tiotropium + salmeterol were dominated by tiotropium
+ olodaterol FDC. The quality-adjusted life years and costs were identical for
Ultibro(®) Breezhaler(®) (indacaterol + glycopyrronium FDC) and Anoro(™)
Ellipta(®) (umeclidinium + vilanterol FDC) compared with tiotropium + olodaterol 
FDC, resulting in identical incremental cost-effectiveness ratios.
CONCLUSION: This analysis shows tiotropium + olodaterol FDC to be a
cost-effective option for the maintenance treatment of adults with chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease in the UK.

DOI: 10.2147/CEOR.S116546 
PMCID: PMC5106216
PMID: 27853383  [PubMed - in process]


13. COPD. 2016 Dec;13(6):686-692. Epub 2016 Aug 11.

Efficacy and Safety of Indacaterol/Glycopyrronium (IND/GLY) Versus
Salmeterol/Fluticasone in Chinese Patients with Moderate-to-Severe Chronic
Obstructive Pulmonary Disease: The Chinese Cohort from the LANTERN Study.

Zhong N(1), Wang C(2), Zhou X(3), Zhang N(1), Humphries M(4), Wang L(4), Patalano
F(5), Banerji D(6).

Author information: 
(1)a State Key Laboratory of Respiratory Disease, National Clinical Research
Center for Respiratory Disease, Guangzhou Institute of Respiratory Disease, First
Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou Medical University , Guangzhou , Guangdong ,
China. (2)b Institute of Respiratory Disease, Xin Qiao Hospital, Third Military
Medical University , Chongqing City , Chongqing , China. (3)c Department of
Respiratory Medicine , Southwest Hospital, Third Military Medical University ,
Chongqing City , Chongqing , China. (4)d Beijing Novartis Pharma Co. Ltd. ,
Shanghai , China. (5)e Novartis Pharma AG , Basel , Switzerland. (6)f Novartis
Pharmaceuticals Corporation , East Hanover , New Jersey , USA.

Inhaled indacaterol/glycopyrronium fixed-dose combination (IND/GLY) is approved
in over 80 countries, including the EU, Japan, Australia and Switzerland and the 
US. The LANTERN study evaluated the efficacy of IND/GLY compared with inhaled
long-acting β2-agonist (LABA)/inhaled corticosteroid (ICS) or
salmeterol/fluticasone (SFC) in patients with moderate-to-severe COPD with a
history of ≤1 exacerbation in the previous year. Here we present the efficacy and
safety of IND/GLY versus SFC in the Chinese cohort from the LANTERN study.
LANTERN was a 26-week, multicenter, randomized, double-blind, double-dummy,
parallel-group study conducted in patients with moderate-to-severe COPD with a
history of ≤1 exacerbation in the previous year. The patients were randomized
(1:1) to once-daily IND/GLY (110/50 μg) or twice-daily SFC (50/500 μg). The
primary endpoint was non-inferiority of IND/GLY versus SFC in terms of trough
FEV1. Of the total 744 patients randomized in the LANTERN study, 598 (80.4%) were
from Mainland China and randomized to IND/GLY (n = 298) or SFC (n = 300), and 553
(92.5%) completed the study. IND/GLY showed superiority over SFC with a
statistically significant and clinically meaningful improvement in trough FEV1,
FEV1 AUC0-4h, peak FEV1 and trough forced vital capacity (FVC) change from the
baseline. Annualized rate of moderate or severe COPD exacerbations was
significantly lower (43%) with IND/GLY compared with SFC (rate ratio: 0.57, p =
0.015). Overall, adverse events were lower for IND/GLY (34.6%) versus SFC
(43.1%). IND/GLY was superior in achieving bronchodilation versus SFC in a
Chinese subgroup of patients from this study. Clinicaltrials.gov identifier:
NCT01709903.

DOI: 10.1080/15412555.2016.1182970 
PMID: 27715335  [PubMed - in process]


14. Appl Health Econ Health Policy. 2016 Oct;14(5):579-94. doi:
10.1007/s40258-016-0256-z.

Cost Effectiveness of the Long-Acting β2-Adrenergic Agonist (LABA)/Long-Acting
Muscarinic Antagonist Dual Bronchodilator Indacaterol/Glycopyrronium Versus the
LABA/Inhaled Corticosteroid Combination Salmeterol/Fluticasone in Patients with
Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease: Analyses Conducted for Canada, France,
Italy, and Portugal.

Reza Maleki-Yazdi M(1), Molimard M(2), Keininger DL(3), Gruenberger JB(3),
Carrasco J(4), Pitotti C(5), Sauvage E(6), Chehab S(7), Price D(8).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Respiratory Medicine, Women's College Hospital, University of
Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada. maleki.pccrc@on.aibn.com. (2)Department of Medical 
Pharmacology, CHU and University of Bordeaux, 33076, Bordeaux Cedex, France.
(3)Primary Care Franchise, Novartis Pharma AG, Postfach, 4002, Basel,
Switzerland. (4)Health Economics and Outcomes Research, Novartis Farma-Produtos
Farmacêuticos SA., Paço de Arcos, Portugal. (5)Health Economics, Novartis Farma
S.p.A., Largo Umberto Boccioni 1, 21041, Origgio, VA, Italy. (6)Strategy Pricing,
Novartis Pharma S.A.S., 2-4, rue Lionel Terray, BP 308, 92506, Rueil-Malmaison
Cedex, France. (7)Health Policy and Patient Access, Novartis Pharmaceuticals
Canada Inc., 385, boulev. Bouchard, CDN-Dorval, Quebec, H9S 1A9, Canada.
(8)Academic Primary Care, Division of Applied Health Sciences, University of
Aberdeen, Polwarth Building, Aberdeen, AB25 2ZD, UK.

OBJECTIVE: The objective of this study was to assess the cost effectiveness of
the dual bronchodilator indacaterol/glycopyrronium (IND/GLY) compared with
salmeterol/fluticasone combination (SFC) in patients with moderate-to-severe
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) who had a history of one or no
exacerbations in the previous year, in Canada, France, Italy, and Portugal.
METHODS: A patient-level simulation was developed to compare the costs and
outcomes of IND/GLY versus SFC based on data from the LANTERN trial
(NCT01709903). Monte-Carlo simulation methods were employed to follow individual 
patients over various time horizons. Population and efficacy inputs were derived 
from the LANTERN trial. Considering the payers' perspective, only direct costs
were included. Costs and health outcomes were discounted annually at 3.0 % for
all countries. Unit costs were taken from publically available sources with all
costs converted to euros (€). The cost base year was 2015. Deterministic and
probabilistic sensitivity analyses were undertaken to test the robustness of the 
model results.
RESULTS: IND/GLY was found to be the dominant (more effective and less costly)
treatment option compared with SFC in all four countries. The use of IND/GLY was 
associated with mean total cost savings per patient over a lifetime of €6202,
€1974, €1611, and €220 in Canada, France, Italy, and Portugal, respectively.
Sensitivity analysis showed that exacerbation rates had the largest impact on
incremental costs and quality-adjusted life-years (QALYs). The probability of
IND/GLY being cost effective was estimated to be >95 % for thresholds above
€5000/QALY.
CONCLUSION: In patients with moderate to severe COPD, IND/GLY is likely to be a
cost-effective treatment alternative compared with SFC.

DOI: 10.1007/s40258-016-0256-z 
PMID: 27516088  [PubMed - in process]


15. BMC Pulm Med. 2016 Jul 20;16(1):102. doi: 10.1186/s12890-016-0266-5.

Abediterol, a novel long-acting β2-agonist: bronchodilation, safety, tolerability
and pharmacokinetic results from a single-dose, dose-ranging, active-comparator
study in patients with COPD.

Beier J(1), Pujol H(2), Seoane B(2), Jimenez E(2), Astbury C(2), Massana E(3),
Ruiz S(2), de Miquel G(2).

Author information: 
(1)insaf Respiratory Research Institute, Biebricher Allee 34, 65187, Wiesbaden,
Germany. j.beier@insaf-wi.de. (2)AstraZeneca, Barcelona, Spain. (3)Almirall R&D
Centre, Barcelona, Spain.

BACKGROUND: Abediterol is a novel, once-daily long-acting β2-agonist in
development for the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and
asthma in combination with an anti-inflammatory agent. This Phase IIa,
randomised, double-blind, crossover study investigated the bronchodilation,
safety, tolerability and pharmacokinetics of abediterol in patients with moderate
to severe COPD.
METHODS: Seventy patients (aged ≥40 years, Global initiative for chronic
Obstructive Lung Disease Stage II/III) were randomised (1:1:1:1:1:1) to single
doses of abediterol 0.625, 2.5, 5 or 10 μg, indacaterol 150 μg or placebo.
Spirometry was performed up to 36 h post-dose. Pharmacokinetics were assessed in 
a subset of patients (N = 20). Safety and tolerability were evaluated throughout 
the study.
RESULTS: Abediterol (all doses) significantly improved change from baseline in
trough forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1) compared with placebo (0.102,
0.203, 0.233 and 0.259 L for abediterol 0.625, 2.5, 5 and 10 μg, respectively;
all p < 0.0001; primary endpoint). Abediterol 2.5, 5 and 10 μg significantly
improved trough FEV1 compared with indacaterol 150 μg (0.092, 0.122 and 0.148 L, 
respectively; all p < 0.0001). Improvements in bronchodilation were maintained at
all time points post-dose versus placebo (all abediterol doses) and from 15 or
30 min post-dose versus indacaterol 150 μg with abediterol 2.5, 5 and 10 μg (all 
p < 0.05). Abediterol had low systemic exposure; incidence of treatment-emergent 
adverse events was similar between treatment groups.
CONCLUSIONS: All doses of abediterol (0.625-10 μg) provided clinically and
statistically significant, dose-dependent improvements in bronchodilation versus 
placebo, and abediterol 2.5, 5 and 10 μg gave significant improvements versus
indacaterol. All doses of abediterol were safe and well tolerated in patients
with COPD.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: Clinicaltrials.gov NCT01425814 . Registered 29 August 2011.

DOI: 10.1186/s12890-016-0266-5 
PMCID: PMC4955259
PMID: 27439370  [PubMed - in process]


16. Am J Health Syst Pharm. 2016 Aug 1;73(15):1135-43. doi: 10.2146/ajhp150364. Epub 
2016 Jun 28.

Olodaterol for the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Ramadan WH(1), Kabbara WK(2), Abilmona RM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy Practice, School of Pharmacy, Lebanese American
University, Byblos, Lebanon. wramadan@lau.edu.lb. (2)Department of Pharmacy
Practice, School of Pharmacy, Lebanese American University, Byblos, Lebanon.
(3)Pharmalife Pharmacy, Beirut, Lebanon.

PURPOSE: Published data on the pharmacology, pharmacokinetics, efficacy, and
safety of the once-daily, long-acting β2-agonist (LABA) olodaterol are reviewed.
SUMMARY: Olodaterol (Striverdi Respimat, Boehringer Ingelheim), a LABA with high 
selectivity for β2-adrenergic receptors, is indicated for the treatment of
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD); the recommended dose is 5 μg, to be
delivered once daily via the Respimat inhaler. In 48- and 6-week Phase III
clinical trials of olodaterol evaluating various lung function and symptomatic
outcomes in patients with moderate to very severe COPD, olodaterol use was
associated with significant improvements in spirometry outcomes, such as
postbronchodilator forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV1), as well as
dyspnea severity and quality-of-life measures. Other clinical trials demonstrated
that olodaterol produced beneficial effects on FEV1 measures throughout the
24-hour dosing interval. A meta-analysis of data from 20 published research
reports indicated that olodaterol's efficacy was comparable to that of the
once-daily LABA indacaterol and that the combination of olodaterol and tiotropium
provided improvements in lung function greater than those provided by tiotropium 
alone. Analysis of pooled data from four long-term trials showed that
olodaterol's safety profile was comparable to that of formoterol; the most
frequently reported adverse effects associated with olodaterol use were
bronchitis, nasopharyngitis, and upper respiratory tract infection.
CONCLUSION: Once-daily olodaterol 5 μg is an effective therapy in improving lung 
function and symptomatic outcomes in patients with moderate to very severe COPD
receiving other maintenance therapy, with a satisfactory safety profile.

Copyright © 2016 by the American Society of Health-System Pharmacists, Inc. All
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.2146/ajhp150364 
PMID: 27354040  [PubMed - in process]


17. BMC Pulm Med. 2016 Jun 14;16(1):95. doi: 10.1186/s12890-016-0256-7.

Effects of indacaterol/glycopyrronium (QVA149) on lung hyperinflation and
physical activity in patients with moderate to severe COPD: a randomised,
placebo-controlled, crossover study (The MOVE Study).

Watz H(1), Mailänder C(2), Baier M(2), Kirsten A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary Research Institute at Lung Clinic Grosshansdorf, Airway Research
Center North, Member of the German Center for Lung Research, Woehrendamm 80,
D-22927, Grosshansdorf, Germany. H.Watz@pulmoresearch.de. (2)Novartis Pharma
GmbH, Nuremberg, Germany. (3)Pulmonary Research Institute at Lung Clinic
Grosshansdorf, Airway Research Center North, Member of the German Center for Lung
Research, Woehrendamm 80, D-22927, Grosshansdorf, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Physical activity limitation is common in chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD), and is associated with worse health status, and
increased hospitalisation and mortality. Long-acting bronchodilators, either
alone or in combination, have been shown to improve exercise intolerance.
However, none of these studies were designed with physical activity as primary
outcome. This study assessed the effect of indacaterol/glycopyrronium fixed dose 
combination (IND/GLY) 110/50 μg once daily (OD) versus placebo on lung
hyperinflation (inspiratory capacity [IC]) and physical activity in patients with
moderate-to-severe COPD.
METHODS: In this multicentre, randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled
crossover study, patients received IND/GLY or placebo OD in two 21-day treatment 
periods (14-day washout between periods). Eligible patients were ≥40 years of
age, current or ex-smokers (smoking history ≥10 pack-years), with post-salbutamol
forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1) 40-80 % predicted, and FEV1:forced vital
capacity <0.70. The co-primary endpoints were peak IC after 21 days and average
daily activity-related energy expenditure. Key secondary endpoints were average
number of steps per day and the duration of at least moderate activity per day.
Peak IC and FEV1 on Day 1, and trough IC and FEV1 after 21 days were other
secondary endpoints.
RESULTS: A total of 194 patients were randomised (65.5 % male, mean age
62.8 years, mean FEV1 61.6 % predicted), with 183 (94.3 %) completing the study. 
Compared with placebo, IND/GLY significantly increased peak IC after 21 days
(difference 202 mL, p < 0.0001), activity-related energy expenditure (difference 
36.7 kcal/day, p = 0.040), and the average number of steps per day (difference
358, p = 0.029), with a trend towards an improvement in the duration of at least 
moderate activity (difference 4.4 min, p = 0.264). IND/GLY was associated with
statistically significant improvements versus placebo in peak IC and FEV1 on Day 
1, and trough IC and FEV1 after 21 days. The incidence of treatment-emergent
adverse events was 22.8 % with IND/GLY and 22.9 % with placebo.
CONCLUSIONS: In this study, compared with placebo, IND/GLY reduced
hyperinflation, and, despite no patient education or lifestyle advice, improved
daily physical activity levels. This suggests that IND/GLY has the potential to
impact two of the main clinical concerns in the care of patients with COPD.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov number: NCT01996319 .

DOI: 10.1186/s12890-016-0256-7 
PMCID: PMC4908762
PMID: 27301417  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Expert Rev Respir Med. 2016 Jul;10(7):767-80. doi: 10.1080/17476348.2016.1190276.
Epub 2016 May 30.

Efficacy and safety of LABA/LAMA fixed-dose combinations approved in the US for
the management of COPD.

Banerji D(1), Mahler DA(2,)(3), Hanania NA(4).

Author information: 
(1)a Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corporation , East Hanover , NJ , USA. (2)b Geisel 
School of Medicine at Dartmouth , Hanover , NH , USA. (3)c Valley Regional
Hospital , Hanover , NH , USA. (4)d Section of Pulmonary and Critical Care
Medicine, Asthma and COPD Clinical Research Center , Baylor College of Medicine ,
Houston , TX , USA.

INTRODUCTION: Long-acting β2-agonists [LABAs] and long-acting muscarinic
antagonists [LAMAs]) are primary therapies for chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD). Despite improvements in lung function and patient-reported
outcomes (PROs) with these therapies, there is room to optimize outcomes further.
Combined use of LABAs and LAMAs is recommended when symptoms are not improved
with a single agent, and LABA/LAMA fixed-dose combinations (FDCs) are at the
forefront of drug development in COPD.
AREAS COVERED: This review focusses on the three LABA/LAMA FDCs
(indacaterol/glycopyrrolate(1) [IND/GLY] 27.5/15.6 µg twice daily,
umeclidinium/vilanterol [UMEC/VI] 62.5/25 µg once daily and tiotropium/olodaterol
[Tio/Olo] 5/5 µg once daily approved in the US. Phase III clinical trials have
shown benefits in lung function, dyspnea and health status with FDCs of IND/GLY, 
UMEC/VI and Tio/Olo versus placebo and monotherapies. Expert commentary: Data
from recent studies of three LABA/LAMA combinations, reviewed here, indicate that
dual bronchodilation may be beneficial above and beyond both the monotherapies
and LABA/ICS combinations, in providing improvements in lung function and PROs
for patients with COPD, which may encourage a shift away from the use of ICS in
COPD management, in particular for non-exacerbating patients.

DOI: 10.1080/17476348.2016.1190276 
PMID: 27223863  [PubMed - in process]


19. Respir Med. 2016 Jun;115:39-45. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2016.03.015. Epub 2016 Mar
22.

Long-term safety of glycopyrrolate: A randomized study in patients with
moderate-to-severe COPD (GEM3).

Mahler DA(1), Gifford AH(2), Satti A(3), Jessop N(4), Eckert JH(5), D'Andrea
P(6), Mota F(7), Banerjee R(8).

Author information: 
(1)Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth, Hanover, NH 03755, USA; Valley
Regional Hospital, Claremont, NH 03743, USA. Electronic address:
mahlerdonald@gmail.com. (2)Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth, Hanover, NH
03755, USA. Electronic address: alex.h.gifford@hitchcock.org. (3)Temple
University College of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, USA. Electronic address:
aditi.satti@tuhs.temple.edu. (4)Novartis Pharma AG, Basel, Switzerland.
Electronic address: nicola.jessop@novartis.com. (5)Novartis Pharma AG, Basel,
Switzerland. Electronic address: joerg.eckert@novartis.com. (6)Novartis
Pharmaceuticals Corporation, East Hanover, NJ, USA. Electronic address:
peter.dandrea@novartis.com. (7)Novartis Pharma AG, Basel, Switzerland. Electronic
address: fernando.mota@novartis.com. (8)Novartis Healthcare Pvt. Ltd., Hyderabad,
India. Electronic address: rudrani-1.banerjee@novartis.com.

BACKGROUND: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is one of the leading
causes of death in the United States. Long-acting muscarinic antagonists (LAMAs) 
are a class of medications used as maintenance therapy for COPD. The GEM3
(Glycopyrrolate Effect on syMptoms and lung function) study assessed the
long-term safety and efficacy of a LAMA, glycopyrrolate (GLY) 15.6 μg twice daily
(b.i.d.), compared with an approved long-acting β2-agonist (LABA), indacaterol
(IND) 75 μg once daily (q.d.) in patients with stable, symptomatic COPD with
moderate-to-severe airflow limitation.
METHODS: This 52-week, multicenter, double-blind, parallel-group study randomized
patients (1:1) of the United States to receive GLY 15.6 μg b.i.d. or IND 75 μg
q.d. both delivered via the Neohaler(®) device. The primary objective was to
assess the safety and tolerability in terms of adverse event (AE) reporting rates
over 52 weeks. Safety was also determined by evaluating multiple secondary
endpoints, including vital signs, electrocardiograms (ECGs), and time to first
moderate or severe exacerbation. Efficacy-related secondary endpoints included
pre-dose forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV1) and forced vital capacity 
(FVC).
RESULTS: Of the 511 randomized patients (GLY, n = 254; IND, n = 257), 81.6%
completed the study. The overall incidences of AEs (GLY, 77.3%; IND, 77.0%) and
serious AEs (GLY, 13.1%; IND, 13.3%) were comparable between the groups. The
incidence of major adverse cardiovascular events was low and comparable between
the groups. No clinically relevant differences for vital signs or ECG parameters 
were observed between the treatment groups. The three sudden deaths reported
within 30 days of the treatment (GLY, n = 2; IND, n = 1) were adjudicated as
unrelated to the study medication. In terms of efficacy, GLY 15.6 μg b.i.d.
showed improvements in pre-dose FEV1 and FVC from baseline, which was comparable 
to those with IND 75 μg q.d., with no statistically significant differences. No
significant differences were observed between the treatment groups in the time to
first moderate or severe COPD exacerbation.
CONCLUSION: GLY 15.6 μg b.i.d. showed a long-term safety profile comparable to
that of IND 75 μg q.d. and provided rapid and sustained bronchodilation over 52
weeks in patients with COPD with moderate-to-severe airflow limitation.
CLINICAL TRIAL REGISTRATION NUMBER: NCT01697696.

Copyright © 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2016.03.015 
PMID: 27215502  [PubMed - in process]


20. N Engl J Med. 2016 Jun 9;374(23):2222-34. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1516385. Epub 2016
May 15.

Indacaterol-Glycopyrronium versus Salmeterol-Fluticasone for COPD.

Wedzicha JA, Banerji D, Chapman KR, Vestbo J, Roche N, Ayers RT, Thach C, Fogel
R, Patalano F, Vogelmeier CF; FLAME Investigators.

Collaborators: Ambrosino N, Budani H, Carminio C, Casal E, De Salvo M, Delgado
Vizcarra G, Fazio C, Gene R, Hasner C, Luna C, Maillo M, Mariño G, Massola F,
Mattarucco W, Molina A, Otaola M, Rey LB, Rodriguez A, Rojas RA, Taborda J,
Tolcachier A, Victorio C, Wehbe L, Willigs Rolon M, Yanez A, Voves R, Wuertz J,
Wuertz P, Ablinger O, Forstner B, Wallner G, Olschewski H, Koeberl G, Studnicka
M, Kaehler C, Vincken W, Driesen P, Demedts I, Janssens W, Martinot JB, Aumann J,
Derom E, Ninane V, Corhay JL, Bogerd SP, Vanderheyde K, Fremault A, Schlesser M, 
Janssens E, Jordens P, Verhaeghe W, Verbuyst R, Ilieva-Fartunova V, Shikov R,
Hodzhev V, Kostov K, Ivanov Y, Peneva M, Youroukova V, Georgiev O, Subashki M,
Milcheva V, Chapman KR, Del Carpio J, Fera T, Field S, Killorn P, Landry D,
Larivee P, Pek B, Tellier G, Mazza G, Sherkin M, Frechette A, Soler T, Pavie J,
Miranda G, Zheng J, Huang W, Wen Z, Wang H, Cai B, Sun S, Wen F, Xiong W, Wang C,
Huang Y, Wang L, Xiao Z, Wen G, Liu J, Wan H, Chen P, Yan X, Huang J, Cao J, Li
Z, Huang M, Vallejo JS, Cardona G, Isaza D, Bolivar F, Tudoric N, Vuksan-Cusa T, 
Samarzija M, Tauchman A, Hadrava M, Holub S, Zitkova M, Ali M, Kopecka D,
Presperinova J, Povysilova L, Cmakalova M, Mares J, Kocianova J, Skacel Z, Kasak 
V, Musil J, Blahova M, Jirmanova I, Kolek V, Backer V, Ulrik CS, Nielsen C,
Ottesen A, Seersholm N, Boedtger U, Grzywacz Z, Meyer CN, Nielsen S, Jogi R,
Meren M, Samaruutel P, Venho K, Elo J, Patovirta RL, Nieminen E, Raatikainen L,
Saarelainen P, Herer B, Deslee G, Devouassoux G, Jasnot JY, Berger P, Proust A,
Bourdin A, Boye A, Ballenberger S, Beck E, Benedix A, Birkholz SC, Bollmann L,
Budweiser S, Deckelmann R, Deimling A, Eberhardt F, Eckhardt G, Eller J,
Esselmann A, Feldmeyer F, Feussner W, Foerster K, Franz KH, Fritzsche A, Gebhardt
R, Gernhold M, Gessner C, Haase PU, Heindl S, Hoheisel G, Hueting R, Jaeger B,
Jandl M, Junggeburth J, Kaessner F, Keller C, Kirschner J, Kleinecke-Pohl U,
Kroker A, Lammert-Huenger G, Ludwig-Sengpiel A, Mikloweit P, Mueller H, Noga O,
Reinhardt J, Rueckert P, Schaper L, Schlegel V, Schmoller T, Schuermann W,
Toepfer V, Wiemer S, Winkler J, Botzen U, Djacenko S, Entzian P, Herzig J,
Hofbauer P, Kornmann O, Marten I, Overlack A, Preiss G, Schlenska C, Sohrab S,
Steffen H, Westerhausen U, Zeisler KH, Zemke K, Zingler W, Zuechner D, Kaiser A, 
Tyler K, Ginko T, Marosis K, Gaga A, Siafakas N, Kakoura M, Koulouris N,
Vasilakopoulos T, Papiris S, Zarogoulidis K, Antoniadis A, Kallergis K,
Gourgoulianis K, Contreras E, Espana E, Gonzalez E, Guerra J, Martinez G, Hui DS,
Losonczy G, Vasas S, Varga J, Mark Z, Schlezak J, Balint B, Somfay A, Jonsson M, 
D'Souza G, Arbat A, Sundarakumar S, Vijaykumar NB, Dhar R, Shah N, Kashyap AK,
Srikanth K, Tripathi S, Gupta N, Samiuddin M, Swarnakar R, Paggiaro PL, Idotta G,
Mazza F, Cerveri I, Colombo F, Barbaro MP, Riario Sforza GG, Pomari C, Zucchi L, 
Gigliotti F, Clini E, Aiolfi S, Gasparini S, Ceriana P, Spanevello A, Carone M,
Barisione G, Miyao N, Kiyosue A, Nakatani Y, Harada T, Hayakawa H, Kato M, Ogushi
F, Nakamura H, Yoshida M, Hataji O, Matsui H, Matsumoto M, Taniguchi H, Takeda A,
Kishimoto N, Nishio M, Kinoshita M, Kato R, Hara N, Tamada T, Hashimoto S, Suzuki
M, Hiramatsu T, Shuto H, In KH, Lee S, Kim S, Kim J, Kim D, Park M, Kim J, Yoo C,
Lee Y, Babjoniseva A, Mitrofanova L, Smiltena I, Matukiene V, Nausediene V,
Miliauskas S, Susinskiene D, Vebriene J, Vaicius D, Volosevic T, Kiziela A,
Sileikiene V, Sansores R, Ramirez E, Diaz J, Caleco M, Llamas FS, Bantje T, Gans 
SJ, Goosens M, Sinninghe-Damste HE, de Hosson SM, Wielders PL, van der Valk P,
Michels AJ, Gronert J, Norheim PD, Sparby JA, Risberg K, Karlsson T, Roedolen T, 
Tomala T, Diaz D, Maliwat A, Hernandez JF, Antczak A, Mroz R, Siergiejko Z,
Waszkuc-Golonko J, Olechnowicz D, Napora P, Batura-Gabryel H, Barbara C, Cardoso 
J, Moita J, Rodrigues B, Pires N, Guimaraes JM, Andre N, Ribeiro V, Mihaicuta S, 
Petrui ID, Tudorache V, Bulugean L, Adina M, Rajnoveanu R, Olar D, Matei D, Toma 
C, Gica C, Ambert L, Mihaescu T, Alexandrescu D, Popovici C, Glontescu ID,
Boisteanu D, Vigdorovits M, Jimborean G, Mihaltan F, Abrosimov V, Platonov D,
Astafieva N, Nosov V, Martynenko T, Gantseva K, Shilkina N, Gaydar E, Ignatova G,
Khamitov R, Stankovic I, Cekerevac I, Ilic A, Vukcevic M, Hrebenar S, Lescisinova
H, Golubov A, Oravcova H, Zacik M, Zambova RT, Arpasova K, Orolin M, Jurco P,
Kretik V, Kavkova D, Mihalecova Y, Sarkanova K, Kovacikova L, Kubikova Y,
Rozborilova E, Smith C, Abdullah I, Bruning A, Visser S, Abdullah I, van Zyl-Smit
R, Richter D, Ras G, Joubert J, Irusen, de Saracho JO, Echave-Sustaeta J, Pascual
LR, Casan P, Ramos D, Roldan J, Gonzalez JE, Lista JD, Morera J, Sanchez I,
Caballero LM, Rodriguez E, Galdiz J, Naval E, Fernandez E, Santa Cruz A, Ruiz AB,
Costa JS, Ferrer A, Roig V, Velasco JL, Bjermer L, Jul-Nielsen H, Tengmark BO,
Blom KB, Perng DW, Yu CJ, Cheng SL, Hsu WH, Tsai YH, Hsiue TR, Lin MC, Boonsawat 
W, Pothirat C, Keeratichananont W, Nayci S, Saryal S, Gunen H, Sayiner A,
Ortakoylu G, Yorgancioglu A, Ozkurt S, Harrison R, Jones N, Bourne S, Saralaya D,
Kerrane J, DeSoyza A, Fuller L, Litchfield J, Bourke S, Collier D, Gunstone A.

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2016 Jun 9;374(23):2284-6.
    N Engl J Med. 2016 Sep;375(9):897-8.
    N Engl J Med. 2016 Sep;375(9):899-900.
    N Engl J Med. 2016 Sep;375(9):898-9.
    N Engl J Med. 2016 Sep;375(9):898.
    J Thorac Dis. 2016 Sep;8(9):2383-2386.
    Ann Transl Med. 2016 Dec;4(24):531.

BACKGROUND: Most guidelines recommend either a long-acting beta-agonist (LABA)
plus an inhaled glucocorticoid or a long-acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA) as
the first-choice treatment for patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD) who have a high risk of exacerbations. The role of treatment with 
a LABA-LAMA regimen in these patients is unclear.
METHODS: We conducted a 52-week, randomized, double-blind, double-dummy,
noninferiority trial. Patients who had COPD with a history of at least one
exacerbation during the previous year were randomly assigned to receive, by
inhalation, either the LABA indacaterol (110 μg) plus the LAMA glycopyrronium (50
μg) once daily or the LABA salmeterol (50 μg) plus the inhaled glucocorticoid
fluticasone (500 μg) twice daily. The primary outcome was the annual rate of all 
COPD exacerbations.
RESULTS: A total of 1680 patients were assigned to the indacaterol-glycopyrronium
group, and 1682 to the salmeterol-fluticasone group. Indacaterol-glycopyrronium
showed not only noninferiority but also superiority to salmeterol-fluticasone in 
reducing the annual rate of all COPD exacerbations; the rate was 11% lower in the
indacaterol-glycopyrronium group than in the salmeterol-fluticasone group (3.59
vs. 4.03; rate ratio, 0.89; 95% confidence interval [CI], 0.83 to 0.96; P=0.003).
The indacaterol-glycopyrronium group had a longer time to the first exacerbation 
than did the salmeterol-fluticasone group (71 days [95% CI, 60 to 82] vs. 51 days
[95% CI, 46 to 57]; hazard ratio, 0.84 [95% CI, 0.78 to 0.91], representing a 16%
lower risk; P<0.001). The annual rate of moderate or severe exacerbations was
lower in the indacaterol-glycopyrronium group than in the salmeterol-fluticasone 
group (0.98 vs. 1.19; rate ratio, 0.83; 95% CI, 0.75 to 0.91; P<0.001), and the
time to the first moderate or severe exacerbation was longer in the
indacaterol-glycopyrronium group than in the salmeterol-fluticasone group (hazard
ratio, 0.78; 95% CI, 0.70 to 0.86; P<0.001), as was the time to the first severe 
exacerbation (hazard ratio, 0.81; 95% CI, 0.66 to 1.00; P=0.046). The effect of
indacaterol-glycopyrronium versus salmeterol-fluticasone on the rate of COPD
exacerbations was independent of the baseline blood eosinophil count. The
incidence of adverse events and deaths was similar in the two groups. The
incidence of pneumonia was 3.2% in the indacaterol-glycopyrronium group and 4.8% 
in the salmeterol-fluticasone group (P=0.02).
CONCLUSIONS: Indacaterol-glycopyrronium was more effective than
salmeterol-fluticasone in preventing COPD exacerbations in patients with a
history of exacerbation during the previous year. (Funded by Novartis; FLAME
ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT01782326.).

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa1516385 
PMID: 27181606  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2016 Apr 15;11:785-97. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S54513.
eCollection 2016.

Dual therapy strategies for COPD: the scientific rationale for LAMA + LABA.

Cohen JS(1), Miles MC(2), Donohue JF(3), Ohar JA(2).

Author information: 
(1)United Lung and Sleep Clinic, Saint Paul, MN, USA. (2)Department of Internal
Medicine, Wake Forest School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, NC, USA. (3)University
of North Carolina Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a leading cause of morbidity,
mortality, and health care expenditure worldwide. Relaxation of airway smooth
muscle with inhaled bronchodilators is the cornerstone of treatment for stable
COPD, with inhaled corticosteroids reserved for those with a history of
exacerbations. Tiotropium has occupied center stage in COPD treatment for over 10
years and improves lung function, quality of life, exercise endurance, and
reduces the risk of COPD exacerbation. Long-acting β2-agonists (LABAs) improve
lung function, reduce dynamic hyperinflation, increase exercise tolerance,
health-related quality of life, and reduce acute exacerbation of COPD. The
combination of long-acting muscarinic antagonists (LAMAs) and LABAs is thought to
leverage different pathways to induce bronchodilation using submaximal drug
doses, increasing the benefits and minimizing receptor-specific side effects.
Umeclidinium/vilanterol is the first combination of LAMA/LABA to be approved for 
use in stable COPD in USA and Europe. Additionally, indacaterol/glycopyrronium
and aclidinium/formoterol have been approved in Europe and in numerous locations 
outside USA. Several other agents are in the late stages of development, most of 
which offer once-daily dosing. The benefits of new LAMA/LABA combinations include
improved pulmonary function, dyspnea, and health-related quality of life, and in 
some cases, reduced exacerbations. These evolving treatments will provide new
opportunities and challenges in the management of COPD.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S54513 
PMCID: PMC4841398
PMID: 27143870  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Int J Clin Pharmacol Ther. 2016 Jun;54(6):405-15. doi: 10.5414/CP202558.

Population pharmacokinetics of IND/GLY (indacaterol/glycopyrronium) in COPD
patients.

Demin I, Bartels C, Graham G, Bieth B, Gautier A, Tillmann HC, Sechaud R.

OBJECTIVE: Indacaterol/glycopyrronium (IND/GLY) is a fixed-dose combination (FDC)
of indacaterol, an inhaled long-acting β2-agonist (LABA), and glycopyrronium, an 
inhaled long-acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA), developed as a maintenance
bronchodilator treatment for patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
(COPD). A population pharmacokinetic (PK) analysis was performed to describe the 
PK profiles of indacaterol and glycopyrronium following the twice daily (b.i.d.) 
and once daily (o.d.) inhalation regimens as FDC or as monotherapies and to
determine the effect of covariates.
METHODS: PK data in 556 COPD patients were pooled from three phase 3 studies. Two
phase 3 studies investigated IND/GLY 27.5/12.5 μg b.i.d. and the third study
investigated IND/GLY 110/50 μg o.d. Body weight was included in the model with
fixed allometric coefficients for indacaterol and glycopyrronium.
RESULTS: Statistically significant effects of smoking, age, and sex on apparent
clearance of indacaterol; smoking, and estimated glomerular filtration rate at
baseline on apparent clearance and Japanese ethnicity on apparent central volume 
of distribution of glycopyrronium were identified.
CONCLUSION: Systemic exposure to indacaterol and glycopyrronium was shown to be
dose-proportional and time-independent following inhalation either as
monotherapies or FDC. None of the identified covariate effects was judged to be
clinically relevant. There is no PK drug-drug interaction between indacaterol and
glycopyrronium in its FDC.

DOI: 10.5414/CP202558 
PMID: 27049057  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Drugs R D. 2016 Jun;16(2):217-27. doi: 10.1007/s40268-016-0131-2.

Dual Bronchodilator Therapy with Umeclidinium/Vilanterol Versus Tiotropium plus
Indacaterol in Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease: A Randomized Controlled
Trial.

Kalberg C(1), O'Dell D(2), Galkin D(2), Newlands A(3), Fahy WA(3).

Author information: 
(1)GSK, PO Box 13398, Research Triangle Park, NC, 27709-3398, USA.
chris.j.kalberg@gsk.com. (2)GSK, PO Box 13398, Research Triangle Park, NC,
27709-3398, USA. (3)Respiratory Medicines Development Centre, GSK, Stockley Park,
Middlesex, UK.

INTRODUCTION: The fixed-dose, long-acting bronchodilator combination of
umeclidinium/vilanterol (UMEC/VI) has not previously been compared with a
combination of a long-acting muscarinic antagonist and long-acting β2-agonist in 
patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
METHODS: This 12-week, randomized, blinded, triple-dummy, parallel-group,
non-inferiority study compared once-daily UMEC/VI 62.5/25 mcg with once-daily
tiotropium (TIO) 18 mcg + indacaterol (IND) 150 mcg in patients with
moderate-to-very-severe COPD. The primary endpoint was the trough forced
expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1) on day 85 (predefined non-inferiority margin
-50 mL), and the secondary endpoint was the 0- to 6-h weighted mean (WM) FEV1 on 
day 84. Other efficacy endpoints [including rescue medication use, the Transition
Dyspnea Index (TDI) focal score, and the St. George's Respiratory Questionnaire
(SGRQ) score] and safety endpoints [adverse events (AEs), vital signs, and COPD
exacerbations] were also assessed.
RESULTS: Trough FEV1 improvements were comparable between treatment groups [least
squares (LS) mean changes from baseline to day 85: UMEC/VI 172 mL; TIO + IND
171 mL; treatment difference 1 mL; 95 % confidence interval (CI) -29 to 30 mL],
demonstrating non-inferiority between UMEC/VI and TIO + IND. The treatments
produced similar improvements in the trough FEV1 at other study visits and the 0-
to 6-h WM FEV1 (LS mean changes at day 84: UMEC/VI 235 mL; TIO + IND 258 mL;
treatment difference -23 mL; 95 % CI -54 to 8 mL). The results for
patient-reported measures (rescue medication use, TDI focal score, and SGRQ
score) were comparable; both treatments produced clinically meaningful
improvements in TDI and SGRQ scores. The incidence of AEs and COPD exacerbations,
and changes in vital signs were similar for the two treatments.
CONCLUSION: UMEC/VI and TIO + IND, given once daily, provided similar
improvements in lung function and patient-reported outcomes over 12 weeks in
patients with COPD, with comparable tolerability and safety profiles.
TRIAL NUMBERS: ClinicalTrials.gov study ID NCT02257385; GSK study no. 116961.

DOI: 10.1007/s40268-016-0131-2 
PMCID: PMC4875926
PMID: 27028749  [PubMed - in process]


24. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2016 Feb 26;11:407-15. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S91118.
eCollection 2016.

A cross-sectional study to assess inhalation device handling and patient
satisfaction in COPD.

Miravitlles M(1), Montero-Caballero J(2), Richard F(2), Santos S(3),
Garcia-Rivero JL(4), Ortega F(5), Ribera X(6).

Author information: 
(1)Pneumology Department, Hospital Universitari Vall d'Hebron, Ciber de
Enfermedades Respiratorias (CIBERES), Barcelona, Spain. (2)Boehringer Ingelheim
Pharma GmbH & Co KG, Ingelheim, Germany. (3)Pulmonology Department, Hospital
Universitari de Bellvitge, IDIBELL, Universitat de Barcelona, Ciber de
Enfermedades Respiratorias (CIBERES), Barcelona, Spain. (4)Pneumology Department,
Hospital de Laredo, Cantabria, Spain. (5)Pneumology Department, Hospital Virgen
del Rocío, Sevilla, Spain. (6)Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma GmbH & Co KG,
Barcelona, Spain.

Delivery of inhaled medications via an inhaler device underpins the effectiveness
of treatment for patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
Correct inhaler technique among patients is also a predictor of achieving
treatment compliance and adherence. Reporting of patient satisfaction with
inhalers is therefore gaining increasing attention and is now recognized as an
important patient-reported outcome in clinical trials involving patients with
COPD or asthma. In this cross-sectional study, we use the validated Patient
Satisfaction and Preference Questionnaire (PASAPQ) to assess the handling and
satisfaction for Respimat(®) Soft Mist™ Inhaler (SMI) compared with the
Breezhaler(®) dry powder inhaler (DPI) among patients with COPD in Spain.
Patients were already assigned to therapy with either SPIRIVA(®) (tiotropium)
Respimat(®) or with Hirobriz(®)/Onbrez(®)/Oslif(®) (indacaterol) Breezhaler(®)
for at least 3 but not more than 6 months before completing the PASAPQ at a
single visit to the study site. The primary endpoint of the trial was the mean
total PASAPQ score. Secondary endpoints were the performance score domain of the 
PASAPQ, the convenience score domain of the PASAPQ, and the overall satisfaction 
score of the PASAPQ. For the primary endpoint, the mean PASAPQ total score in the
Respimat(®) and Breezhaler(®) groups was 80.7 and 79.9, respectively (difference 
of 0.8, 95% confidence interval [CI] -2.9 to 4.5; P=0.67). The mean total
performance scores were 82.5 and 78.2 (difference of 4.3, 95% CI -0.3 to 8.9;
P=0.06), and the mean total convenience scores were 78.6 and 81.9 (difference of 
-3.3, 95% CI -7.0 to 0.4; P=0.08) for the Respimat(®) and Breezhaler(®) groups,
respectively. Patients gave the Respimat(®) SMI and the Breezhaler(®) DPI overall
satisfaction PASAPQ scores of 6.0 and 5.9, respectively, which shows that
patients were satisfied with these inhalers.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S91118 
PMCID: PMC4777273
PMID: 27013871  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Drug Saf. 2016 Jun;39(6):501-8. doi: 10.1007/s40264-016-0402-4.

Safety Considerations with Dual Bronchodilator Therapy in COPD: An Update.

Matera MG(1), Rogliani P(2), Calzetta L(2), Cazzola M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Medicine, Second University of Naples, Naples,
Italy. (2)Department of Systems Medicine, University of Rome Tor Vergata, Rome,
Italy. (3)Department of Systems Medicine, University of Rome Tor Vergata, Rome,
Italy. mario.cazzola@uniroma2.it.

Combining a long-acting β2-agonist (LABA) with a long-acting anti-muscarinic
agent (LAMA) provides synergistic benefit on airway smooth muscle relaxation,
which may have major implications for the use of LABA/LAMA combinations in the
treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). There are four
different approved LAMA/LABA fixed-dose combinations
(FDCs)-glycopyrronium/indacaterol, umeclidinium/vilanterol,
tiotropium/olodaterol, and aclidinium/formoterol-and another,
glycopyrronium/formoterol, that is still under clinical development. Many pivotal
trials have shown that all of these FDCs are more effective than monotherapies in
inducing bronchodilation and do not amplify the possible adverse events (AEs)
that are characteristic of LAMAs and LABAs when used as monotherapy.
Unfortunately, these clinical trials have included a very small and highly
selected fraction of the COPD patient population. Therefore, it is questionable
whether such data can be extrapolated to a larger, 'real-life' population of
patients with COPD, especially given that COPD patients with co-morbidities are
often excluded from clinical trials, COPD is a major risk factor for most
cardiovascular diseases, and both LAMAs and LABAs have a high potential to impact
cardiac activities. All clinical trials have been conducted under widely varying 
conditions and, consequently, AE rates of a drug observed in a clinical trial
cannot be directly compared with rates in the clinical trials of another drug and
may not reflect the rates observed in practice. Head-to-head studies comparing
the different LAMA/LABA FDCs that will include the true patients that we meet in 
our everyday practice are absolutely essential if we wish to make a therapeutic
choice that is not purely empirical.

DOI: 10.1007/s40264-016-0402-4 
PMID: 26924197  [PubMed - in process]


26. Pulm Pharmacol Ther. 2016 Apr;37:30-6. doi: 10.1016/j.pupt.2016.01.004. Epub 2016
Feb 1.

Pharmacokinetics of indacaterol and mometasone furoate delivered alone or in a
free or fixed dose combination in healthy subjects.

Vaidya SS(1), Khindri S(2), Calder N(2), Machineni S(3), Hara H(4), Majumdar
T(5), Febbraro S(6), Fuhr R(7), Woessner R(4).

Author information: 
(1)Drug Metabolism and Pharmacokinetics, Clinical
Pharmacokinetics/Pharmacodynamics, Novartis Institutes for BioMedical Research,
Cambridge, MA, USA. Electronic address: soniya.vaidya@novartis.com.
(2)Translational Medicine, Novartis Institutes for BioMedical Research, Horsham, 
UK. (3)Integrated Information Sciences, Novartis Healthcare Pvt. Ltd., Hyderabad,
India. (4)Drug Metabolism and Pharmacokinetics, Novartis Institutes for
BioMedical Research, Basel, Switzerland. (5)Drug Metabolism and Pharmacokinetics,
Novartis Institutes for BioMedical Research, East Hanover, NJ, USA. (6)Simbec
Research Ltd., Merthyr Tydfil, UK. (7)Early Phase Clinical Unit, PAREXEL, Berlin,
Germany.

PURPOSE: QMF149 is a fixed-dose combination of the long-acting β2 agonist,
indacaterol and the corticosteroid, mometasone furoate that is currently under
development for treatment of patients with asthma and chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease. We describe here a study designed to assess any
pharmacokinetic (PK) and/or biopharmaceutical interaction between indacaterol and
mometasone furoate when administered via the Breezhaler(®) device, either alone
or in a free or fixed combination (QMF149) in healthy adult subjects.
METHODS: In this randomized, open-label, four-way crossover study, subjects were 
randomized to receive indacaterol acetate 150 μg, mometasone furoate 320 μg,
alone and as free combination of the individual components, or QMF149
(indacaterol acetate 150 μg/mometasone furoate 320 μg) once daily for 14 days in 
each period, followed by a 7-day washout between periods. PK profiles were
characterized on Day 14 up to 168 h post-dose.
RESULTS: Indacaterol AUC0-24h,ss and Cmax,ss after administration of QMF149 were 
13% [ratio: 1.13; 90%CI: 1.09, 1.17] and 18% [ratio: 1.18; 90%CI: 1.12, 1.25]
higher, respectively, than indacaterol monotherapy. Mometasone furoate
AUC0-24h,ss and Cmax,ss after administration of QMF149 were 14% [ratio: 1.14;
90%CI: 1.09, 1.20] and 19% [ratio: 1.19; 90%CI: 1.13, 1.26], higher, respectively
than mometasone furoate monotherapy. The majority (three of four comparisons
between QMF149 and monotherapy) of the 90% confidence intervals of the
between-treatment ratios for AUC0-24h,ss and Cmax,ss were within the 0.80 to 1.25
interval and therefore fulfilled bioequivalence criteria. The 90% confidence
interval for Cmax,ss for MF for the QMF149 vs. monotherapy comparison was [1.13, 
1.26]. Although no definitive data can be provided on the basis of the present
study results, it is unlikely that the small observed differences in expsoure are
clinically meaningful. Multiple inhaled doses of indacaterol and mometasone
furoate, when administered alone, in free combination or as QMF149 were well
tolerated.
CONCLUSIONS: The QMF149 fixed dose combination treatment showed comparable
systemic exposure to the free combination and monotherapy treatments in terms of 
AUC0-24h,ss and Cmax,ss for both indacaterol and mometasone furoate, indicating
an absence of clinically relevant PK or biopharmaceutical interactions. These
data support further development of QMF149 without dose adjustment.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pupt.2016.01.004 
PMID: 26845343  [PubMed - in process]


27. Ther Adv Respir Dis. 2016 Apr;10(2):89-104. doi: 10.1177/1753465815624612. Epub
2016 Jan 8.

Comparative efficacy of fixed-dose combinations of long-acting muscarinic
antagonists and long-acting β2-agonists: a systematic review and network
meta-analysis.

Schlueter M(1), Gonzalez-Rojas N(2), Baldwin M(2), Groenke L(2), Voss F(2),
Reason T(3).

Author information: 
(1)IMS Health, 210 Pentonville Road, London N1 9JY, UK
mschlueter@uk.imshealth.com. (2)Boehringer Ingelheim GmbH,  Ingelheim am Rhein,
Germany. (3)IMS Health, London, UK.

BACKGROUND: A number of long-acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA)/long-acting
β2-agonist (LABA) fixed-dose combinations (FDCs) for treatment of
moderate-to-very severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) have
recently become available, but none have been directly compared in head-to-head
randomized controlled trials (RCTs). The purpose of this study was to assess the 
relative clinical benefit of all currently available LAMA/LABA FDCs using a
Bayesian network meta-analysis (NMA).
METHODS: A systematic literature review identified RCTs investigating the
efficacy, safety and quality of life associated with licensed LAMA/LABA FDCs for 
the treatment of moderate-to-very severe COPD. RCTs were screened for inclusion
in the NMA using prespecified eligibility criteria. Data were extracted for
outcomes of interest, including change in trough forced expiratory volume in 1
second (tFEV1) from baseline, St. George Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ)
percentage of responders, Transition Dyspnea Index (TDI) percentage of
responders, change in SGRQ score from baseline, change in TDI focal score from
baseline, moderate-to-severe exacerbations, all-cause discontinuation, and
discontinuation due to adverse events.
RESULTS: Following screening, a total of 27 trials from 26 publications with
30,361 subjects were eligible for inclusion in the NMA. Nonsignificant results
were seen in most analyses comparing efficacy, exacerbations and discontinuation 
rates of included LAMA/LABA FDCs (i.e. aclidinium/formoterol 400/12 µg,
glycopyrronium/indacaterol 110/50 µg, tiotropium + olodaterol 5/5 µg,
umeclidinium/vilanterol 62.5/25 µg). Meta-regression controlling for
post-bronchodilator percentage of tFEV1 predicted at baseline as well as
meta-regression adjusting for concomitant use of inhaled corticosteroids at
baseline was performed to assess the magnitude of effect modification and
produced similar results as observed in the base case analysis.
CONCLUSION: All LAMA/LABA FDCs were found to have similar efficacy and safety.
Definitive assessment of the relative efficacy of different treatments can only
be performed through direct comparison in head-to-head RCTs. In the absence of
such data, this indirect comparison may be of value in clinical and health
economic decision-making.

© The Author(s), 2016.

DOI: 10.1177/1753465815624612 
PMID: 26746383  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Cost Eff Resour Alloc. 2015 Dec 12;13:22. doi: 10.1186/s12962-015-0048-6.
eCollection 2015.

Cost-effectiveness of umeclidinium/vilanterol combination therapy compared to
tiotropium monotherapy among symptomatic patients with chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease in the UK.

Punekar YS(1), Roberts G(2), Ismaila A(3), O'Leary M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Value Evidence and Outcomes, GlaxoSmithKline R&D, Stockley Park, Uxbridge,
UB11 1BT UK. (2)Double Helix Consulting, London, W1U 6TQ UK. (3)Value Evidence
and Outcomes, GlaxoSmithKline R&D, RTP, Durham, NC 27709-3398 USA ; Clinical
Epidemiology and Biostatistics, McMaster University, Hamilton, ON L8S 4L8 Canada.

BACKGROUND: The cost-effectiveness of umeclidinium bromide-vilanterol (UMEC/VI)
versus tiotropium monotherapy in the UK was assessed using a UMEC/VI
treatment-specific economic model based on a chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD) disease-progression model.
METHODS: The model was implemented as a linked-equation model to estimate COPD
progression and associated health service costs, and its impact on
quality-adjusted life years (QALYs) and survival. Statistical risk equations for 
clinical endpoints and resource use were derived from the ECLIPSE and TORCH
studies, respectively. For the selected timeframe (1-40 years) and probabilistic 
analysis, model outputs included disaggregated costs, total costs, exacerbations,
life-years and QALYs gained, and incremental cost-effectiveness ratios (ICERs).
RESULTS: Random-effects meta-analysis of tiotropium comparator trials estimated
treatment effect of UMEC/VI as 92.17 mL (95 % confidence interval: 61.52, 122.82)
in forced expiratory volume in 1 s. With this benefit, UMEC/VI resulted in an
estimated annual exacerbation reduction of 0.04 exacerbations/patient and 0.36
life years gained compared to tiotropium over patient lifetime. With an
additional 0.18 QALYs/patient and an additional lifetime cost of £372/patient at 
price parity, the incremental cost effectiveness ratio (ICER) of UMEC/VI compared
to tiotropium was £2088/QALY. This ICER increased to £17,541/QALY when price of
UMEC/VI was increased to that of indacaterol plus tiotropium in separate
inhalers. The ICER improved when model duration was reduced from patient lifetime
to 1 or 5 years, or when treatment effect was assumed to last for 12 months
following treatment initiation.
CONCLUSION: UMEC/VI can be considered a cost-effective alternative to tiotropium 
at a certain price.

DOI: 10.1186/s12962-015-0048-6 
PMCID: PMC4676898
PMID: 26692823  [PubMed]


29. Umeclidinium/Vilanterol -- Benefit Assessment According to §35a Social Code Book 
V [Internet].

Institute for Quality and Efficiency in Health Care.
Cologne, Germany: Institute for Quality and Efficiency in Health Care (IQWiG);
2014 Oct. Extract of Dossier Assessment No. A14-22.
IQWiG Dossier Assessment Extracts.

The aim of this report is to assess the added benefit of umeclidinium/vilanterol 
as maintenance bronchodilator treatment for the relief of symptoms in adult
patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) in comparison with the
appropriate comparator therapy (ACT). The assessment was conducted in comparison 
with the ACT specified by the Federal Joint Committee (G-BA) and based on
patient-relevant outcomes and on randomized controlled trials (RCTs) with a
minimum duration of 24 weeks. This approach partially deviated from that of the
company, which only chose an ACT for one of the research questions. It followed
the specification of the G-BA and, from the options mentioned, chose tiotropium
as the comparator therapy. The company chose no comparator therapy for its other 
research question and claimed no added benefit. In its criteria for study
inclusion, the company considered the requirement that intervention and
comparator therapy can also be used in combination with inhaled corticosteroids
(ICS). However, it did not consider the conditions for the use of ICS according
to the ACT. Concomitant ICS treatment is not to be used in patients for one of
the research questions, whereas patients of the other research question are to
receive concomitant ICS treatment. Deviating from the company, the criteria for
ICS treatment specified by the G-BA were used in the present benefit assessment, 
and it is examined for the respective study whether the use of ICS concurred with
the G-BA’s specifications. The company additionally presented an indirect
comparison between umeclidinium/vilanterol and indacaterol/glycopyrronium.
Deviating from the company, this comparison was not considered because
indacaterol/glycopyrronium is not an ACT.

PMID: 26677486  [PubMed]


30. Ther Clin Risk Manag. 2015 Dec 4;11:1805-11. doi: 10.2147/TCRM.S73581.
eCollection 2015.

Differential pharmacology and clinical utility of long-acting bronchodilators in 
COPD - focus on olodaterol.

Matera MG(1), Ora J(2), Cazzola M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Medicine, Unit of Pharmacology, Second University
of Naples, Naples. (2)Division of Respiratory Medicine, University Hospital Tor
Vergata, Rome, Italy. (3)Division of Respiratory Medicine, University Hospital
Tor Vergata, Rome, Italy ; Department of Systems Medicine, Respiratory
Pharmacology Research Unit, University of Rome Tor Vergata, Rome, Italy.

Olodaterol (BI 1744 CL) is a novel, once-daily long-acting β2-agonist (LABA)
designed with the aim of improving β2-adrenoreceptor selectivity and intrinsic
activity. Phase III pivotal trials have documented that olodaterol Respimat Soft 
Mist inhaler 5 μg induces fast onset of bronchodilation, comparable with
formoterol at day 1. Moreover, significant lung function improvements have been
documented up to 48 weeks in patients with moderate to very severe chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Olodaterol was generally well tolerated and
had an acceptable cardiovascular and respiratory adverse event profile.
Regrettably, the clinical development of olodaterol is however still too partial 
to draw any firm conclusions on the positioning of this ultra-LABA as monotherapy
in the management of COPD. Waiting for further data on the impact of olodaterol
on different patient-reported outcomes, which however are widely available for
indacaterol, and mainly for a head-to-head comparison between these two
ultra-LABAs and between olodaterol long-acting antimuscarinic antagonists other
than tiotropium, we believe it is correct to follow the clinical indications of
indacaterol also for olodaterol. In any case, the parallel bronchodilating modes 
of action of olodaterol and tiotropium make them an attractive combination in
COPD. The results from the ongoing large TOviTO Phase III trial program have
documented the efficacy and safety of olodaterol/tiotropium fixed-dose
combination as maintenance therapy in patients with moderate to very severe COPD.
In particular, olodaterol/tiotropium fixed-dose combination provides a convincing
alternative for patients remaining symptomatic with olodaterol monotherapy.

DOI: 10.2147/TCRM.S73581 
PMCID: PMC4675639
PMID: 26676161  [PubMed]


31. BMC Pulm Med. 2015 Nov 11;15:145. doi: 10.1186/s12890-015-0138-4.

Mortality and drug therapy in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease: a network meta-analysis.

Scott DA(1), Woods B(2,)(3), Thompson JC(4), Clark JF(5), Hawkins N(6), Chambers 
M(7), Celli BR(8), Calverley P(9).

Author information: 
(1)ICON Health Economics and Epidemiology, Seacourt Tower, West Way, Oxford, OX2 
0JJ, UK. david.scott@iconplc.com. (2)ICON Health Economics and Epidemiology,
Seacourt Tower, West Way, Oxford, OX2 0JJ, UK. beth.woods@york.ac.uk. (3)Centre
for Health Economics, University of York, York, UK. beth.woods@york.ac.uk.
(4)ICON Health Economics and Epidemiology, Seacourt Tower, West Way, Oxford, OX2 
0JJ, UK. juliette.thompson@iconplc.com. (5)ICON Health Economics and
Epidemiology, Seacourt Tower, West Way, Oxford, OX2 0JJ, UK.
james.clark-wright@pharmagenesis.com. (6)ICON Health Economics and Epidemiology, 
Seacourt Tower, West Way, Oxford, OX2 0JJ, UK. neil.hawkins@iconplc.com.
(7)GlaxoSmithKline, Brentford, UK. mgchambers@ntlworld.com. (8)Brigham and
Women's Hospital, Harvard University, Boston, MA, USA. bcelli@copdnet.org.
(9)Institute of Aging and Chronic Disease, University of Liverpool, Liverpool,
UK. pmacal@liverpool.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: Increasing evidence suggests pharmacological treatments may impact on
overall survival in Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD) patients.
Individual clinical trials are rarely powered to detect mortality differences
between treatments and may not include all treatment options relevant to
healthcare decision makers.
METHODS: A systematic review was conducted to identify RCTs of COPD treatments
reporting mortality; evidence was synthesised using network meta-analysis (NMA). 
The analysis included 40 RCTs; a quantitative indirect comparison between 14
treatments using data from 55,220 patients was conducted.
RESULTS: The analysis reported two treatments reducing all-cause mortality;
salmeterol/fluticasone propionate combination (SFC) was associated with a
reduction in mortality versus placebo in the fixed effects (HR 0.79; 95 % Crl
0.67, 0.94) but not the random effects model (0.79; 0.56, 1.09). Indacaterol was 
associated with a reduction in mortality versus placebo in fixed (0.28; 0.08 to
0.85) and random effects (0.29; 0.08, 0.89) models. Mean estimates and credible
intervals for hazard ratios for indacaterol versus placebo are based on a small
number of events; estimates may change when the results of future studies are
included. These results were maintained across a variety of assumptions and
provide evidence that SFC and indacaterol may lead to improved survival in COPD
patients.
CONCLUSION: Results of an NMA of COPD treatments suggest that SFC and indacaterol
may reduce mortality. Further research is warranted to strengthen this
conclusion.

DOI: 10.1186/s12890-015-0138-4 
PMCID: PMC4642642
PMID: 26559138  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Value Health. 2015 Nov;18(7):A494. doi: 10.1016/j.jval.2015.09.1379. Epub 2015
Oct 20.

Systematic Review And Meta-Analysis Of The Effectiveness And Safety Of
Combination Therapy With Glycopirronium-Indacaterol Compared With Other First
Line Therapies In Patients With Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease.

Rosselli D(1), Karpf E(2), Olaya A(2), Castañeda-Cardona C(3), Triana JJ(3),
Bayona JG(3), Lasalvia P(3), Restrepo P(3), Laserna A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Pontifícia Universidade Javeriana, Bogotá, Colombia. (2)Novartis Colombia,
Bogotá, D.C., Colombia. (3)Pontificia Universidad Javeriana, Bogota, Colombia.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jval.2015.09.1379 
PMID: 26532774  [PubMed]


33. BMJ Open. 2015 Oct 26;5(10):e009183. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2015-009183.

Comparative safety and effectiveness of long-acting inhaled agents for treating
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: a systematic review and network
meta-analysis.

Tricco AC(1), Strifler L(2), Veroniki AA(2), Yazdi F(3), Khan PA(2), Scott A(2), 
Ng C(2), Antony J(2), Mrklas K(4), D'Souza J(2), Cardoso R(2), Straus SE(5).

Author information: 
(1)Knowledge Translation Program, Li Ka Shing Knowledge Institute, St. Michael's 
Hospital, Toronto, Ontario, Canada Epidemiology Division, Dalla Lana School of
Public Health, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. (2)Knowledge
Translation Program, Li Ka Shing Knowledge Institute, St. Michael's Hospital,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada. (3)Ottawa Hospital Research Institute, Center for
Practice Changing Research Building, The Ottawa Hospital-General Campus, Ottawa, 
Ontario, Canada. (4)Knowledge Translation Program, Li Ka Shing Knowledge
Institute, St. Michael's Hospital, Toronto, Ontario, Canada Alberta Health
Services, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada. (5)Knowledge Translation Program, Li Ka
Shing Knowledge Institute, St. Michael's Hospital, Toronto, Ontario, Canada
Department of Geriatric Medicine, University of Toronto, 27 Kings College Circle,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

OBJECTIVE: To compare the safety and effectiveness of long-acting β-antagonists
(LABA), long-acting antimuscarinic agents (LAMA) and inhaled corticosteroids
(ICS) for managing chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
SETTING: Systematic review and network meta-analysis (NMA).
PARTICIPANTS: 208 randomised clinical trials (RCTs) including 134,692 adults with
COPD.
INTERVENTIONS: LABA, LAMA and/or ICS, alone or in combination, versus each other 
or placebo.
PRIMARY AND SECONDARY OUTCOMES: The proportion of patients with
moderate-to-severe exacerbations. The number of patients experiencing mortality, 
pneumonia, serious arrhythmia and cardiovascular-related mortality (CVM) were
secondary outcomes.
RESULTS: NMA was conducted including 20 RCTs for moderate-to-severe exacerbations
for 26,141 patients with an exacerbation in the past year. 32 treatments were
effective versus placebo including: tiotropium, budesonide/formoterol,
salmeterol, indacaterol, fluticasone/salmeterol, indacaterol/glycopyrronium,
tiotropium/fluticasone/salmeterol and tiotropium/budesonide/formoterol.
Tiotropium/budesonide/formoterol was most effective (99.2% probability of being
the most effective according to the Surface Under the Cumulative RAnking (SUCRA) 
curve). NMA was conducted on mortality (88 RCTs, 97 526 patients);
fluticasone/salmeterol was more effective in reducing mortality than placebo,
formoterol and fluticasone alone, and was the most effective (SUCRA=71%). NMA was
conducted on CVM (37 RCTs, 55,156 patients) and the following were safest:
salmeterol versus each OF placebo, tiotropium and tiotropium (Soft Mist Inhaler
(SMR)); fluticasone versus tiotropium (SMR); and salmeterol/fluticasone versus
tiotropium and tiotropium (SMR). Triamcinolone acetonide was the most harmful
(SUCRA=81%). NMA was conducted on pneumonia occurrence (54 RCTs, 61 551
patients). 24 treatments were more harmful, including 2 that increased risk of
pneumonia versus placebo; fluticasone and fluticasone/salmeterol. The most
harmful agent was fluticasone/salmeterol (SUCRA=89%). NMA was conducted for
arrhythmia; no statistically significant differences between agents were
identified.
CONCLUSIONS: Many inhaled agents are available for COPD, some are safer and more 
effective than others. Our results can be used by patients and physicians to
tailor administration of these agents.
PROTOCOL REGISTRATION NUMBER: PROSPERO # CRD42013006725.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://www.bmj.com/company/products-services/rights-and-licensing/

DOI: 10.1136/bmjopen-2015-009183 
PMCID: PMC4636655
PMID: 26503392  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2015 Oct 5;10:2109-20. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S83071.
eCollection 2015.

A real-world evaluation of indacaterol and other bronchodilators in COPD: the
INFLOW study.

Juvelekian G(1), El-Sorougi W(2), Pothirat C(3), Yunus F(4), De Guia T(5), Kuo
HP(6), Basu Patnaik S(7), Pilipovic V(8).

Author information: 
(1)St Georges Hospital University Medical Center, Ashrafieh, Beirut, Lebanon.
(2)Chest Department, Faculty of Medicine, Helwan University, Cairo, Egypt.
(3)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care, Faculty of Medicine, Chiang Mai
University, Chiang Mai, Thailand. (4)Department of Pulmonology and Respiratory
Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Indonesia, Persahabatan Hospital,
Jakarta Timur, Indonesia. (5)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Philippine Heart
Center, Quezon City, Philippines. (6)Linkou Chang Gun Memorial Hospital, Taoyuan 
Hsien, Taiwan, ROC. (7)Novartis Healthcare Pvt Ltd, Rangareddy, Telangana, India.
(8)Novartis Pharma AG, Basel, Switzerland.

AIM: INFLOW (INdacaterol eFfectiveness and utiLizatiOn in COPD: real World
evaluation) was a prospective, noninterventional study assessing the
effectiveness and safety of long-acting bronchodilators in patients with chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) from the Middle East, Asia, and South
Africa.
METHODS: Patients newly prescribed or switched to indacaterol or other
long-acting β2-agonist (LABA), or tiotropium (monotherapy or in combination) were
evaluated over 6 months. The primary endpoint was the clinical COPD questionnaire
overall score at the end of the study.
RESULTS: Data were analyzed from 1,710 patients (mean postbronchodilator forced
expiratory volume in 1 second, 59% predicted) who received indacaterol (n=1,179),
other LABA (n=68), tiotropium (n=271), indacaterol plus tiotropium (n=167), or
other LABA plus tiotropium (n=25). Across treatments, clinical COPD questionnaire
overall score improved from baseline by 0.81-1.26 points (all P<0.0001), 63%-84% 
of patients were satisfied/very satisfied, and physicians rated effectiveness as 
good/very good in 63%-80% of cases. The indacaterol inhaler was rated easy/very
easy to use by the majority of patients, and physicians considered its use
clearly understood by most patients. All treatments had acceptable tolerability.
CONCLUSION: In real life clinical practice across a diverse region, indacaterol
and other long-acting bronchodilators improved health status and were well
regarded by patients and physicians.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S83071 
PMCID: PMC4599566
PMID: 26491281  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2015 Oct 22;(10):CD008989. doi:
10.1002/14651858.CD008989.pub3.

Long-acting beta2-agonist in addition to tiotropium versus either tiotropium or
long-acting beta2-agonist alone for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Farne HA(1), Cates CJ.

Author information: 
(1)National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College London, London, UK.

Update of
    Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2012;(4):CD008989.

BACKGROUND: Long-acting bronchodilators, comprising long-acting beta2-agonists
(LABA) and long-acting anti-muscarinic agents (LAMA, principally tiotropium), are
commonly used for managing persistent symptoms of chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD). Combining these treatments, which have different mechanisms of
action, may be more effective than the individual components. However, the
benefits and risks of combining tiotropium and LABAs for the treatment of COPD
are unclear.
OBJECTIVES: To compare the relative effects on markers of quality of life,
exacerbations, symptoms, lung function and serious adverse events in people with 
COPD randomised to LABA plus tiotropium versus tiotropium alone; or LABA plus
tiotropium versus LABA alone.
SEARCH METHODS: We searched the Cochrane Airways Group Specialised Register of
trials and ClinicalTrials.gov up to July 2015.
SELECTION CRITERIA: We included parallel-group, randomised controlled trials of
three months or longer comparing treatment with tiotropium in addition to LABA
against tiotropium or LABA alone for people with COPD.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Two review authors independently assessed trials
for inclusion and then extracted data on trial quality and the outcome results.
We contacted study authors for additional information. We collected information
on adverse effects from the trials.
MAIN RESULTS: This review included 10 trials on 10,894 participants, mostly
recruiting participants with moderate or severe COPD. All of the trials compared 
tiotropium in addition to LABA to tiotropium alone, and four trials additionally 
compared LAMA plus LABA with LABA alone. Four studies used the LABA olodaterol,
three used indacaterol, two used formoterol, and one used salmeterol.Compared to 
tiotropium alone, treatment with tiotropium plus LABA resulted in a slightly
larger improvement in mean health-related quality of life (St George's
Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ) (mean difference (MD) -1.34, 95% confidence
interval (CI) -1.87 to -0.80; 6709 participants; 5 studies). The MD was smaller
than the four units that is considered clinically important, but a responder
analysis indicated that 7% more participants receiving tiotropium plus LABA had a
noticeable benefit (greater than four units) from treatment in comparison to
tiotropium alone. In the control arm in one study, which was tiotropium alone,
the SGRQ improved by falling 4.5 units from baseline and with tiotropium plus
LABA the improvement was a fall of a further 1.3 units (on average). Most of the 
data came from studies using olodaterol. High withdrawal rates in the trials
increased the uncertainty in this result, and the GRADE assessment for this
outcome was therefore moderate. There were no significant differences in the
other primary outcomes (hospital admission or mortality).The secondary outcome of
pre-bronchodilator forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV1) showed a small
mean increase with the addition of LABA over the control arm (MD 0.06, 95% CI
0.05 to 0.07; 9573 participants; 10 studies), which showed a change from baseline
ranging from 0.03 L to 0.13 L with tiotropium alone. None of the other secondary 
outcomes (exacerbations, symptom scores, serious adverse events, and withdrawals)
showed any statistically significant differences between the groups. There was
moderate heterogeneity for both exacerbations and withdrawals.This review
included data on four LABAs: two administered twice daily (salmeterol,
formoterol) and two once daily (indacaterol, olodaterol). The results were
largely from studies of olodaterol and there was insufficient information to
assess whether the other LABAs were equivalent to olodaterol or each
other.Comparing LABA plus tiotropium treatment with LABA alone, there was a small
but significant improvement in SGRQ (MD -1.25, 95% CI -2.14 to -0.37; 3378
participants; 4 studies). The data came mostly from studies using olodaterol and,
although the difference was smaller than four units, this still represented an
increase of 10 people with a clinically important improvement for 100 treated.
There was also an improvement in FEV1 (MD 0.07, 95% CI 0.06 to 0.09; 3513
participants; 4 studies), and in addition an improvement in exacerbation rates
(odds ratio (OR) 0.80, 95% CI 0.69 to 0.93; 3514 participants; 3 studies).
AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: The results from this review indicated a small mean
improvement in health-related quality of life and FEV1 for participants on a
combination of tiotropium and LABA compared to either agent alone, and this
translated into a small increase in the number of responders on combination
treatment. In addition, adding tiotropium to LABA reduced exacerbations, although
adding LABA to tiotropium did not. Hospital admission and mortality were not
altered by adding LABA to tiotropium, although there may not be enough data.
While it is possible that this is affected by higher attrition in the tiotropium 
group, one would expect that participants withdrawn from the study would have had
less favourable outcomes; this means that the expected direction of attrition
bias would be to reduce the estimated benefit of the combination treatment. The
results were largely from studies of olodaterol and there was insufficient
information to assess whether the other LABAs were equivalent to olodaterol or
each other.

DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD008989.pub3 
PMID: 26490945  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. J Korean Med Sci. 2015 Oct;30(10):1453-8. doi: 10.3346/jkms.2015.30.10.1453. Epub
2015 Sep 12.

Effect of Indacaterol on Cough and Phlegm in Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary
Disease Patients: A Meta-Analysis of Five Randomized Controlled Trials.

Park J(1), Lee JS(2), Rhee C(3), Oh YM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Critical Care, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University
School of Medicine, Seoul, Korea. (2)Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care
Medicine, Asan Medical Center, University of Ulsan College of Medicine, Seoul,
Korea. ; Clinical Research Center for Chronic Obstructive Airway Diseases, Asan
Medical Center, University of Ulsan College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul St. Mary's Hospital, College of
Medicine, The Catholic University of Korea, Seoul, Korea.

We investigated the effects of indacaterol on cough and phlegm in patients with
stable chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). We performed a meta-analysis
with five randomized controlled trials (RCTs) of indacaterol in stable COPD
patients. The symptom severity was defined using the St. George's Respiratory
Questionnaire (SGRQ). We analyzed patients treated with 150 µg (n = 945) and 300 
µg (n = 832) out of 3,325 patients who completed the SGRQ from five RCTs. After a
12-week treatment of 150 µg indacaterol, cough improvement was reported in 36.5% 
(316/866) of patients treated with indacaterol vs. 32.2% (259/804) patients
treated with placebo (Relative Ratio [RR], 1.13; 95% confidence interval [CI],
0.99-1.29). Phlegm improvement was reported in 31.0% (247/798) of patients
treated with indacaterol vs. 30.6% (225/736) of patients treated with placebo
(RR, 1.01; 95% CI, 0.87-1.18). Dyspnea improvement was reported in 39.5%
(324/820) of patients treated with indacaterol vs. 31.5% (237/753) patients
treated with placebo (RR, 1.33; 95% CI, 1.03-1.71; P = 0.001, I(2) = 55.1%). Only
dyspnea improvement was significant compared to placebo even at the 300 µg
indacaterol dose. Compared to placebo, a 12-week treatment of the long-acting
beta-agonist, indacaterol might not have a significant effect on cough or phlegm 
in stable COPD.

DOI: 10.3346/jkms.2015.30.10.1453 
PMCID: PMC4575934
PMID: 26425042  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2015 Sep 9;10:1863-81. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S87082.
eCollection 2015.

Comparative efficacy of combination bronchodilator therapies in COPD: a network
meta-analysis.

Huisman EL(1), Cockle SM(2), Ismaila AS(3), Karabis A(1), Punekar YS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Mapi Group, Real World Strategy and Analytics and Strategic Market Access,
Houten, the Netherlands. (2)Value Evidence and Outcomes, GlaxoSmithKline,
Uxbridge, UK. (3)Value Evidence and Outcomes, GlaxoSmithKline R&D, Research
Triangle Park, NC, USA ; Clinical Epidemiology and Biostatistics, McMaster
University, Hamilton, ON, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Several new fixed-dose combination bronchodilators have been recently
launched, and assessing their efficacy relative to each other, and with open dual
combinations is desirable. This network meta-analysis (NMA) assessed the efficacy
of umeclidinium and vilanterol (UMEC/VI) with that of available dual
bronchodilators in single/separate inhalers.
METHODS: A systematic literature review identified randomized controlled trials
of ≥10 weeks among chronic obstructive pulmonary disease patients (≥40 years),
assessing the efficacy of combination bronchodilators in single or separate
inhalers. Comparative assessment was conducted on change from baseline in trough 
forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1), St George's Respiratory
Questionnaire (SGRQ) total scores, transitional dyspnea index (TDI) focal scores,
and rescue medication use at 12 weeks and 24 weeks using an NMA within a Bayesian
framework.
RESULTS: A systematic literature review identified 77 articles of 26 trials
comparing UMEC/VI, indacaterol/glycopyrronium (QVA149), formoterol plus
tiotropium (TIO) 18 μg, salmeterol plus TIO, or indacaterol plus TIO, with TIO
and placebo as common comparators at 12 weeks and approximately 24 weeks. The NMA
showed that at 24 weeks, efficacy of UMEC/VI was not significantly different
compared with QVA149 on trough FEV1 (14.1 mL [95% credible interval: -14.2,
42.3]), SGRQ total score (0.18 [-1.28, 1.63]), TDI focal score (-0.30 [-0.73,
0.13]), and rescue medication use (0.02 [-0.27, 0.32]); compared with salmeterol 
plus TIO on trough FEV1 (67.4 mL [-25.3, 159.4]), SGRQ total score (-0.11 [-1.84,
1.61]), and TDI focal score (0.58 [-0.33, 1.50]); and compared with formoterol
plus TIO 18 μg on SGRQ total score (-0.68 [-1.77, 0.39]). Results at week 12 were
consistent with week 24 outcomes. Due to lack of availability of evidence, no
comparison was made with formoterol plus TIO on FEV1 or TDI at 24 weeks.
CONCLUSION: UMEC/VI has comparable efficacy to other dual-bronchodilator
combinations on available efficacy endpoints.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S87082 
PMCID: PMC4573199
PMID: 26392761  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Expert Rev Respir Med. 2015 Oct;9(5):519-32. doi: 10.1586/17476348.2015.1081065. 
Epub 2015 Aug 26.

Dual bronchodilator therapy with aclidinium bromide/formoterol fumarate for
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

D'Urzo T(1), Donohue JF(2), Price D(3), Miravitlles M(4), Kerwin E(5).

Author information: 
(1)a 1 Department of Family and Community Medicine, University of Toronto,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada. (2)b 2 University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC,
USA. (3)c 3 University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen, UK. (4)d 4 Department of
Pneumology, Vall d'Hebron University Hospital, CIBER de Enfermedades
Respiratorias (CIBERES), Barcelona, Spain. (5)e 5 Clinical Research Institute,
Medford, OR, USA.

Inhaled bronchodilator therapy is a mainstay of treatment for chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD). Despite the number and types of treatments available,
the control of symptoms and exacerbations remains suboptimal, and adherence to,
and persistence with, inhaled therapy is generally poor. Results from clinical
studies suggest that dual bronchodilator therapy with long-acting muscarinic
receptor antagonists (LAMAs) and long-acting β2 adrenergic receptor agonists
(LABAs) may provide additional benefit over LAMA or LABA monotherapy without
additive effects on safety and tolerability. Several combinations of a LAMA plus 
a LABA have recently become available in a single inhaler for maintenance therapy
for adults with moderate-to-severe COPD, including aclidinium bromide/formoterol 
fumarate, glycopyrronium/indacaterol and umeclidinium/vilanterol. Here, we review
clinical data demonstrating significant improvements in bronchodilation, 24-h
symptoms, and health status with aclidinium/formoterol twice daily, and discuss
how this treatment can be implemented in clinical practice as part of a
patient-focused approach to disease control.

DOI: 10.1586/17476348.2015.1081065 
PMID: 26366803  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Breathe (Sheff). 2015 Mar;11(1):81-2. doi: 10.1183/20734735.111215.

Hot topics from the Assemblies.

[No authors listed]

INSTEAD: a randomised switch trial of indacaterol versus salmeterol/fluticasone
in moderate COPD Authors: Rossi A, van der Molen T, Ricardo del Olmo, et al. Eur 
Respir J 2014; 44: 6, 1548-1556 SUMMARY: Inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) remain a
highly controversial treatment for stable chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD). Data linking high-dose ICS with complications, such as pneumonia and
fractures, has necessitated a re-evaluation of their role in COPD management.
Guidelines currently suggest ICS for patients with a forced expiratory volume in 
1 s (FEV1) <50% predicted (or <60% in some regions) and a history of
exacerbations. Nevertheless, it is well known that ICS and combination
ICS/long-acting β-agonist (LABA) treatments are commonly used outside these
groups. In view of the increasingly recognised dangers of ICS treatment, data
demonstrating the safety of discontinuing ICS treatment is welcome.

DOI: 10.1183/20734735.111215 
PMCID: PMC4487384
PMID: 26306109  [PubMed]


40. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2015 Jul 23;10:1383-92. doi:
10.2147/COPD.S55488. eCollection 2015.

Clinical role of dual bronchodilation with an indacaterol-glycopyrronium
combination in the management of COPD: its impact on patient-related outcomes and
quality of life.

Rossi A(1), Zanardi E(2), Poletti V(3), Cazzola M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary Unit, University of Verona, Verona, Italy. (2)Department of
Respiratory and General Rehabilitation, ULSS 20, Verona, Italy. (3)Pulmonary
Unit, GB Morgani Hospital, AUSL 20, Forli, Italy. (4)Pulmonary Unit, University
of Rome, Tor Vergata, Italy.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is the result of persistent and
progressive pathologic abnormalities in the small airways, most often associated 
with alveolar loss. Smoking cessation is the most effective intervention to slow 
down the progression of COPD. Long-acting inhaled bronchodilators are prescribed 
for the symptomatic relief at any stage of disease severity. For patients whose
COPD cannot be not sufficiently controlled with long-acting bronchodilator
monotherapy, international guidelines suggest the possibility of associating a
long-acting beta2 agonist (LABA) with a long-acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA),
ie, dual bronchodilation. This is not a new concept as the combination of
short-acting agents has been popular in the past. In recent years, several
fixed-dose combinations containing a LAMA and a LABA in a single inhaler have
been approved by regulatory authorities in several countries. Among the new
LAMA/LABA combinations, the fixed-dose combination of indacaterol 110
µg/glycopyrronium 50 µg (QVA149) has been shown in a series of clinical trials to
be as safe as the single components and placebo, and more effective than placebo 
and the single components with regard to lung function, symptoms, and
patient-oriented outcomes. Furthermore, QVA149 achieved better bronchodilation
than salmeterol 50 µg/fluticasone 500 µg twice daily. Compared with tiotropium, a
well-recognized treatment for COPD, the percentage of patients that exceed the
minimal clinical important difference for dyspnea and health-related quality of
life measurements was superior with QVA149. Other patient-oriented outcomes, such
as daily symptoms, night-time awakening, and use of rescue medication
consistently favored QVA149. Finally, QVA149 was significantly superior to LAMAs 
for reducing all types of exacerbation. In conclusion, several years after
introduction of dual bronchodilation, the fixed-dose combination of indacaterol
110 µg/glycopyrronium 50 µg in a single inhaler for once-daily administration via
the Breezhaler device (QVA149) has been demonstrated to be a safe and effective
treatment for COPD patients.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S55488 
PMCID: PMC4516211
PMID: 26229457  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2015 Nov 1;192(9):1068-79. doi:
10.1164/rccm.201505-1048OC.

FLIGHT1 and FLIGHT2: Efficacy and Safety of QVA149 (Indacaterol/Glycopyrrolate)
versus Its Monocomponents and Placebo in Patients with Chronic Obstructive
Pulmonary Disease.

Mahler DA(1,)(2), Kerwin E(3), Ayers T(4), FowlerTaylor A(4), Maitra S(5), Thach 
C(4), Lloyd M(4), Patalano F(6), Banerji D(4).

Author information: 
(1)1 Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth, Hanover, New Hampshire. (2)2 Valley 
Regional Hospital, Claremont, New Hampshire. (3)3 Clinical Research Institute of 
Southern Oregon, Medford, Oregon. (4)4 Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corporation, East
Hanover, New Jersey. (5)5 Novartis Healthcare Pvt. Ltd., Hyderabad, India; and.
(6)6 Novartis Pharma AG, Basel, Switzerland.

Comment in
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2015 Nov 1;192(9):1028-30.

RATIONALE: Current Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease (GOLD) 
strategy recommends the combination of two long-acting bronchodilators of
different pharmacologic classes for the management of chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD) if symptoms are not adequately controlled by a single
bronchodilator.
OBJECTIVES: The FLIGHT1 and FLIGHT2 studies evaluated the efficacy and safety of 
QVA149 (indacaterol/glycopyrrolate), a fixed-dose combination of a long-acting
β2-agonist (indacaterol) and a long-acting muscarinic antagonist
(glycopyrrolate), compared with its monocomponents and placebo in patients with
moderate-to-severe COPD.
METHODS: FLIGHT1 and FLIGHT2 were 12-week, identical, multicenter, randomized,
double-blind, parallel-group, placebo- and active-controlled studies. Patients
were randomized (1:1:1:1) to indacaterol/glycopyrrolate (27.5/15.6 μg twice
daily), indacaterol (27.5 μg twice daily), glycopyrrolate (15.6 μg twice daily), 
or placebo, all delivered via the Neohaler device. The primary objective was to
demonstrate the superiority of indacaterol/glycopyrrolate versus its
monocomponents for standardized area under the curve from 0-12 hours for FEV1 at 
Week 12. Secondary objectives included St. George's Respiratory Questionnaire
total score and transition dyspnea index total score and reduction in daily
rescue medication use with indacaterol/glycopyrrolate versus placebo.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: In total, 2,038 patients were included in the
pooled analysis. Indacaterol/glycopyrrolate was statistically superior in terms
of FEV1 area under the curve from 0-12 hours compared with its monocomponents (P 
< 0.001). Statistically and clinically meaningful improvements in St. George's
Respiratory Questionnaire total score, transition dyspnea index total score, and 
reduction in rescue medication use were observed with indacaterol/glycopyrrolate 
compared with placebo (P < 0.001). The safety profile was comparable across the
treatment groups.
CONCLUSIONS: Indacaterol/glycopyrrolate twice daily can be an alternative
treatment option for the management of symptomatic patients with
moderate-to-severe COPD. Clinical trial registered with www.clinicaltrials.gov
(NCT 01727141 and NCT 0171251).

DOI: 10.1164/rccm.201505-1048OC 
PMID: 26177074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2015 Jun 17;10:1139-46. doi:
10.2147/COPD.S87058. eCollection 2015.

Effects of indacaterol versus tiotropium on respiratory mechanics assessed by the
forced oscillation technique in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease.

Inui N(1), Matsushima S(2), Kato S(2), Yasui H(2), Kono M(2), Fujisawa T(2),
Enomoto N(2), Nakamura Y(2), Toyoshima M(3), Suda T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Second Division, Department of Internal Medicine, Hamamatsu University School 
of Medicine, Handayama, Hamamatsu, Japan ; Department of Clinical Pharmacology
and Therapeutics, Hamamatsu University School of Medicine, Handayama, Hamamatsu, 
Japan. (2)Second Division, Department of Internal Medicine, Hamamatsu University 
School of Medicine, Handayama, Hamamatsu, Japan. (3)Department of Respiratory
Medicine, Hamamatsu Rosai Hospital, Shougen-cho, Hamamatsu, Japan.

The forced oscillation technique (FOT) can measure respiratory mechanics and has 
attracted attention in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). We aimed to 
evaluate the effects of only indacaterol and tiotropium monotherapies on airflow 
limitation and respiratory impedance. Pulmonary function tests, COPD assessment
test (CAT), and multifrequency FOT with MostGraph-01 were performed at the
beginning and after 8 weeks of treatment with indacaterol or tiotropium. The
resistance index, resistance at 5 Hz (R5), resistance at 20 Hz (R20), reactance
index, reactance at 5 Hz (X5), resonant frequency (Fres), and low-frequency
reactance area (ALX) were determined at whole-breath, inspiratory, and expiratory
phases. Eighty-two patients (mean age: 73 years; mean forced expiratory volume in
1 second (FEV1): 61.6%±19.0% predicted) were randomized to indacaterol or
tiotropium treatment. Both bronchodilators improved airflow limitation, with mean
trough improvements in FEV1 of 165 mL and 80 mL in the indacaterol and tiotropium
groups, respectively. The CAT score decreased in the indacaterol group (P<0.001; 
11.2±6.6 to 7.5±5.6). Compared with tiotropium, indacaterol significantly
improved FEV1, percent predicted FEV1, and CAT score (P=0.042, P=0.008, and
P=0.027, respectively). For respiratory impedance, indacaterol and tiotropium
changed R5, X5, Fres, and ALX at whole-breath, inspiratory, and expiratory
phases. In the indacaterol group, the changes in R5, R5-R20, X5, Fres, and ALX
were significantly correlated with the changes in FEV1. The use of the FOT may
enable the evaluation of the effects of bronchodilators in addition to
FEV1-indicated therapeutic effects in COPD.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S87058 
PMCID: PMC4476438
PMID: 26124653  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. J Hypertens. 2015 Jun;33 Suppl 1:e92-3. doi: 10.1097/01.hjh.0000467600.09175.5a.

7B.03: SAFETY OF BETA-AGONISTS WITH DIFFERENT DURATION OF ACTION IN PATIENTS WITH
ARTERIAL HYPERTENSION AND BRONCHO-OBSTRUCTIVE DISEASES.

Dolgusheva I(1), Agapova O, Zykov K, Sivacova O, Golitsyn P, Chazova I.

Author information: 
(1)1Russian Cardiology Complex, Department of Hypertension, Moscow, RUSSIA
2Moscow State University of Medicine and Dentistry named after A.I. Evdokimov,
Laboratory of Pulmonology, Moscow, RUSSIA.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the safety of beta-agonists (BA) with different duration
of action (short-acting (SABA), long-acting (LABA), ultra-long-acting (ULABA) in 
patients with arterial hypertension (AH) and chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD) or bronchial asthma.
DESIGN AND METHOD: 40 patients with AH and COPD (gr.1) and AH and asthma (gr.2)
were enrolled and examined initially. At the next three month patients were
treated with 3 types of BA: at the 1st month - with salbutamol (SABA), at 2nd
month -with formoterol (LABA), at 3rd month -with indacaterol (ULABA). Initially,
after one week and at the end of each month blood pressure (BP) and heart rate
(HR) on the visit, serum potassium in blood, electrocardiogram, were evaluate.
After one week and at the end of three month of treatment with BA all patients
underwent Holter monitoring and ambulatory blood pressure 24-monitoring (ABPM).
Results are presented as Mean ± sd.
RESULTS: Patients were 64 ± 7,7years (22-male,18-female), with BMI
29,8 ± 5,3 kg/m2; BP in gr.1 was 128,4 ± 14,3/81,1 ± 19,7 and 135 ± 13/83 ± 9,9
mmHg in gr.2, p = NS, initially. Baseline, 1-month, 2-month, 3-month BP and HR
levels on the visit were similar among all patients (p = NS). At the end of the
third month of treatment with BA different duration of action in gr.1 daily
average Systolic BP (SBP) was lowered than initially (129 ± 10,2 vs 124 ± 10,5,
p < 0,05). On the contrary in gr.2 daily average SBP became increased than
initially (122 ± 14,1 vs 127 ± 16, p < 0,05). Treatment with BA caused
significant serum potassium change in blood in both group: in gr.1 initially was 
4,5 ± 0,5 mmol/l, after SABA use - 4,2 ± 0,4(p < 0,05), LABA- 4,1 ± 0,4(p = NS), 
ULABA-4,2 ± 0,4(p < 0,05); in gr.2 initially was 4,4 ± 0,4 mmol/l, after use
SABA- 4,1 ± 0,3(p < 0,05), LABA- 4,3 ± 0,3(p = NS), ULABA-4,15 ± 0,6(p < 0,05).
In gr.2. three patients had hypokalemia.
CONCLUSIONS: Treatment with BA in patients with AH and bronchoobstructive
diseases significantly decreased levels of serum potassium in the blood in both
group and led to reduction of daily average SBP and in contrast treatment of
patients with AH and asthma resulted in increasing of daily average SBP. Our
results suggested the need for a different treatment of patients with AH and COPD
or asthma.

DOI: 10.1097/01.hjh.0000467600.09175.5a 
PMID: 26102971  [PubMed]


44. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2015 Apr 21;10:813-22. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S56067.
eCollection 2015.

Role of combined indacaterol and glycopyrronium bromide (QVA149) for the
treatment of COPD in Japan.

Horita N(1), Kaneko T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonology, Yokohama City University Graduate School of
Medicine, Yokohama, Japan.

Once-daily dual-bronchodilator therapy with combined indacaterol and
glycopyrronium bromide in one device (Ultibro, Breezhaler), often called QVA149, 
was first approved in 2013 in Japan and Europe. As of November 2014, more than 40
countries had approved this medication except for the USA. This is the first dual
bronchodilator in one device. Now, the Breezhaler is the only device that can
provide long-acting muscarinic antagonist (glycopyrronium bromide), long-acting
beta agonist (indacaterol), and a combination of the two medications (QVA149).
The choice among the three medications allows a patient to use the same
inhalation device even when the regimen is changed from single-bronchodilator
therapy to dual-bronchodilator therapy. In addition, the quick bronchodilation
effect and once-daily administration can improve patient adherence to medical
treatment for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). To our knowledge, as 
of November 2014, the safety and the efficacy of QVA149 have been evaluated in 14
randomized controlled trials. The 14 trials generally showed good safety
profiles, and there were better or not-inferior bronchodilator effects of QVA149 
when compared with placebo, or other inhaled medication. According to the
Japanese Respiratory Society guidelines, QVA149 is a combination of the two
first-line bronchodilators. Our meta-analysis indicated that QVA149 is superior
to the salmeterol-fluticasone combination to treat COPD in respect of the
frequency of adverse effects, exacerbation, pneumonia, and improvement of trough 
forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1). Thus, we believe that QVA149 can be 
a key medication for COPD treatments.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S56067 
PMCID: PMC4410821
PMID: 25960646  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Expert Opin Pharmacother. 2015;16(10):1539-41. doi:
10.1517/14656566.2015.1043888. Epub 2015 May 4.

Efficacy of indacaterol as a single therapy versus salmeterol/fluticasone therapy
in patients with milder chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Ruxandra U(1), Antoniu SA, Mihaltan F, Boisteanu D.

Author information: 
(1)University of Oradea , Oradea , Romania.

Comment on
    Eur Respir J. 2014 Dec;44(6):1548-56.

INTRODUCTION: In non-exacerbation chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)
with mild lung function impairment, single bronchodilator therapy might be as
effective as combined inhaled corticosteroid/bronchodilator therapy, whereas the 
risk of pneumonia associated with the latter would be practically absent.
AREAS COVERED: We performed an analysis of a recent study evaluating the efficacy
and safety of inhaled indacaterol versus inhaled salmeterol/fluticasone in COPD
patients.
EXPERT OPINION: Both therapies were found to exert comparable effects on lung
function, symptom severity and health status.

DOI: 10.1517/14656566.2015.1043888 
PMID: 25936440  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Drug Ther Bull. 2015 Apr;53(4):42-5. doi: 10.1136/dtb.2015.4.0319.

▼Olodaterol--another LABA for COPD.

[No authors listed]

▼Olodaterol solution for inhalation (Striverdi Respimat-Boehringer Ingelheim) is 
a long-acting beta2 agonist (LABA) licensed for once-daily use as maintenance
bronchodilator therapy for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). This is 
the third LABA to be licensed in the UK for once-daily use for patients with
COPD. DTB has previously reviewed the use of indacaterol and vilanterol in
combination with fluticasone furoate (▼Relvar Ellipta).1,2 In this article we
consider the evidence for olodaterol and whether it offers any advantages in the 
management of COPD.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

DOI: 10.1136/dtb.2015.4.0319 
PMID: 25858815  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Expert Opin Pharmacother. 2015 May;16(7):1079-90. doi:
10.1517/14656566.2015.1032247. Epub 2015 Apr 5.

QVA149 (indacaterol/glycopyrronium) for the treatment of chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease.

Matera MG(1), Rogliani P, Cazzola M.

Author information: 
(1)Second University of Naples, Department of Experimental Medicine , Naples ,
Italy mariagabriella.matera@unina2.it.

INTRODUCTION: The combination of two bronchodilators with different mechanisms of
action to treat patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is an 
established medical practice, but the dissimilarities in the onset and duration
of action of long-acting β2-agonists (LABA) and long-acting muscarinic agents
(LAMA) and differences in the devices used for the delivery of these drugs make
free combinations uncomfortable and unpredictable, especially if focused on
adherence to prescribed treatment. Therefore, there is the need for fixed-dose
combinations (FDCs) of bronchodilators in a single inhaler.
AREAS COVERED: The results of the pivotal Phase III IGNITE and EXPEDITION
programs show that QVA149 (indacaterol/glycopyrronium FDC) is able to elicit a
significant improvement in lung function and patient-reported outcomes, including
breathlessness and rescue medication use, reduced rates of COPD exacerbations and
health-related quality of life when compared with current standard of care.
Moreover, QVA149 is generally well tolerated, with most adverse events being of
mild-to-moderate severity.
EXPERT OPINION: Given that the LABA/LAMA coformulation is the most powerful
bronchodilator available, QVA149, which has been the first LABA/LAMA FDC to be
developed, should be considered central in the maintenance treatment of COPD, and
could be a potential option for improving lung function and health status in
maintenance-naïve patients.

DOI: 10.1517/14656566.2015.1032247 
PMID: 25843089  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2015 Feb 27;10:439-44. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S76836.
eCollection 2015.

Influence of indacaterol on daily physical activity in patients with untreated
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Nishijima Y(1), Minami S(1), Yamamoto S(1), Ogata Y(1), Koba T(2), Futami S(1),
Komuta K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Osaka Police Hospital, Tennoji-ku, Osaka, 
Japan. (2)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Osaka Police Hospital, Tennoji-ku, 
Osaka, Japan ; Department of Internal Medicine, National Hospital Organization,
Kinki-Chuo Chest Medical Center, Kita-ku, Sakai, Osaka, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Indacaterol, a once-daily, long-acting β2-agonist, may improve not
only respiratory function, dyspnea symptoms, and quality of life, but also
physical activity for patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
This study aimed to evaluate the effect of 12-week indacaterol therapy on daytime
physical activity in patients with untreated COPD.
METHODS: The subjects were stable and untreated COPD outpatients with a percent
predicted forced expiratory volume in 1 second (%FEV1) below 80%. Baseline
assessments included clinical assessment, respiratory function testing, arterial 
blood gas analysis, the COPD assessment test (CAT™), and the Medical Outcomes
Study 36-Item Short-Form Health Survey, Japanese version 2 (SF-36v2(®)). Patients
underwent monitoring by uniaxial accelerometer before and after 12 weeks
once-daily inhalation of indacaterol 150 μg/day.
RESULTS: Eighteen patients were evaluable. Patient characteristics included a
mean age of 74.2 years, and three patients were current smokers. Indacaterol
improved mean (± standard deviation [SD]) %FEV1 from 55.2% (±17.9%) to 61.0%
(±17.3%) (P=0.003), CAT scores from 16.4 (±10.2) points to 12.4 (±8.2) points
(P=0.04), some scales of the SF-36v2 (physical component summary, 41.6±9.7 points
to 45.1±7.9 points, P=0.03), and number of daily steps (3,311.5±2,103.3 steps/day
to 3,841.8±2,096.8 steps/day, P=0.02), but did not affect daily energy
expenditure (85.0±77.2 kcal change to 90.9±56.8 kcal, P=0.29) or exercise
duration of an intensity of level 1 or more (36.4±23.9 minutes increase to
40.8±21.6 minutes, P=0.12).
CONCLUSION: Twelve weeks of indacaterol improved respiratory function and quality
of life, but did not significantly affect physical activity in patients with
moderate-to-severe COPD.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S76836 
PMCID: PMC4354394
PMID: 25767381  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Ther Adv Respir Dis. 2015 Apr;9(2):56-68. doi: 10.1177/1753465815575254. Epub
2015 Mar 9.

Clinicopharmacological profile of the fixed-dose combination of aclidinium
bromide and formoterol fumarate in the management of chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease.

Babu KS(1), Morjaria JB(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Queen Alexandra Hospital, Portsmouth, UK. 
(2)Department of Academic Respiratory Medicine, Hull York Medical School,
University of Hull, Castle Hill Hospital, Castle Road,Cottingham HU16 5JQ, UK
jaymin.morjaria@hey.nhs.uk.

The recent Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease (GOLD) chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) guidelines consider symptoms and
exacerbation history in addition to the degree of airflow obstruction for
classifying patients. The improvement of symptoms is principally provided by
bronchodilators, using β2 agonists and antimuscarinic agents. Aclidinium bromide 
is a novel long-acting antimuscarinic agent licensed for use in patients with
COPD. Novel fixed-dose combinations that are either licensed or in their late
phase of development include vilanterol/umeclidinium, indacaterol/glycopyrronium,
olodaterol/tiotropium and formoterol/aclidinium. Fixed-dose combinations of
aclidinium/formoterol have been evaluated in COPD patients and evidence suggests 
that this is efficacious, safe, has a quick onset of action and is well
tolerated. This review provides a clinico-pharmacological profile of this
compound.

© The Author(s), 2015.

DOI: 10.1177/1753465815575254 
PMID: 25754881  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Pulm Pharmacol Ther. 2015 Jun;32:101-8. doi: 10.1016/j.pupt.2015.02.008. Epub
2015 Mar 3.

The impact of treatment with indacaterol in patients with COPD: A post-hoc
analysis according to GOLD 2011 categories A to D.

Kerstjens HA(1), Deslée G(2), Dahl R(3), Donohue JF(4), Young D(5), Lawrence
D(6), Kornmann O(7).

Author information: 
(1)University of Groningen, University Medical Center, and Groningen Research
Institute for Asthma and COPD GRIAC, Groningen, the Netherlands. Electronic
address: h.a.m.kerstjens@umcg.nl. (2)Service de Pneumologie, Hôpital Maison
Blanche, INSERM U903, CHU de Reims, France. Electronic address:
gdeslee@chu-reims.fr. (3)Allergy Centre, Odense University Hospital, Odense,
Denmark. Electronic address: Ronald.Dahl2@rsyd.dk. (4)Department of Medicine,
University of North Carolina, NC, USA. Electronic address:
james_donohue@med.unc.edu. (5)Novartis Horsham Research Centre, Horsham, West
Sussex, UK. Electronic address: david.young@young-communications.com. (6)Novartis
Pharmaceuticals Corporation, East Hanover, NJ, USA. Electronic address:
david-1.lawrence@novartis.com. (7)IKF Pneumologie Frankfurt, Clinical Research
Centre Respiratory Diseases, Frankfurt, Germany. Electronic address:
kornmann@ikf-pneumologie.de.

BACKGROUND: Indacaterol is an inhaled, once-daily, ultra-long-acting β2-agonist
for the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). We report on
the effectiveness of indacaterol and other bronchodilators compared with placebo 
in patients across the Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease
(GOLD) 2011 categories A to D.
METHODS: A post-hoc, subgroup pooled analysis of 6-month efficacy data from three
randomized, placebo-controlled, parallel-group studies involving 3862 patients
was performed across GOLD 2011 categories A to D, according to baseline forced
expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1) % predicted, modified Medical Research Council
(mMRC) dyspnea scale, and exacerbation history in the 12 months prior to entry.
Efficacy of once-daily indacaterol 150 and 300 μg, open-label tiotropium 18 μg,
twice-daily salmeterol 50 μg, and formoterol 12 μg was compared with placebo. End
points analysed were trough FEV1, transition dyspnea index (TDI), and St George's
Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ) total score, all at Week 26, and mean rescue
medication use over 26 weeks.
RESULTS: Indacaterol 150 and 300 μg significantly improved FEV1, compared with
placebo across all GOLD groups. Indacaterol 150 and 300 μg also significantly
improved TDI, SGRQ total score, and mean rescue medication use compared with
placebo across most GOLD subgroups.
CONCLUSIONS: Treatment selection according to patient's symptoms as well as lung 
function is an important consideration in maintenance treatment of COPD.
Indacaterol 150 and 300 μg effectively improved lung function and symptoms in
patients across all GOLD 2011 categories.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pupt.2015.02.008 
PMID: 25743376  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Multidiscip Respir Med. 2014 Dec 8;9(1):64. doi: 10.1186/2049-6958-9-64.
eCollection 2014.

Pharmacologic rationale, efficacy and safety of the fixed-dose co-formulation of 
indacaterol and glycopyrronium.

Pelaia G(1), Maselli R(1), Gallelli L(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences, Section of Respiratory Diseases, 
University "Magna Graecia" of Catanzaro, Campus Universitario "S. Venuta", Viale 
Europa, Località, Germaneto, 88100 Catanzaro, Italy. (2)Department of Health
Science, Section of Pharmacology, University "Magna Graecia" of Catanzaro,
Catanzaro, Italy.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a widespread respiratory
disorder, usually characterized by progressive and poorly reversible airflow
limitation. Inhaled long-acting bronchodilators, namely LABA (long-acting
β2-adrenergic agonists) and LAMA (long-acting muscarinic receptor antagonists)
are the mainstay of COPD treatment. Because the symptoms of many patients with
COPD do not satisfactorily improve by using a single, either LABA or LAMA
bronchodilator, the synergism of action resulting from the combination of the
different bronchodilating mechanisms activated by LABA and LAMA, respectively,
can significantly contribute to a better disease control. Based on these clinical
and pharmacological considerations, several LABA/LAMA fixed-dose combinations
have been developed and experimentally evaluated. Within such a context, the drug
co-formulation containing indacaterol and glycopyrronium is probably the
LABA/LAMA association which has been most extensively studied during the last few
years.

DOI: 10.1186/2049-6958-9-64 
PMCID: PMC4333835
PMID: 25699181  [PubMed]


52. Ther Adv Respir Dis. 2015 Apr;9(2):49-55. doi: 10.1177/1753465815572065. Epub
2015 Feb 17.

Combination therapy with indacaterol and glycopyrronium bromide in the management
of COPD: an update on the evidence for efficacy and safety.

Ridolo E(1), Montagni M(1), Riario-Sforza GG(2), Baroni M(2), Incorvaia C(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of Parma, Parma, 
Italy. (2)Pulmonary Rehabilitation, ICP Hospital, Milan, Italy. (3)Pulmonary
Rehabilitation, ICP Hospital, Milan, Italy cristoforo.incorvaia@gmail.com.

The international guidelines on chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)
recommend inhaled bronchodilators for maintenance treatment of the disease. These
drugs include β2-agonists and muscarinic antagonists, which are both available as
short-acting agents (to be used as needed for dyspnea) and long-acting agents. To
the latter belong salmeterol and formoterol (long-acting β2-agonists) and
indacaterol, vilanterol and olodaterol (very long-acting β2-agonist) as
β2-agonists, and tiotropium, aclidinium and glycopyrronium bromide as long-acting
muscarinic antagonists. The efficacy and safety of indacaterol and glycopyrronium
as monotherapies has been demonstrated in several controlled trials. However, in 
some patients with moderate-to-severe COPD, symptoms are poorly controlled by
bronchodilator monotherapy; in these cases the addition of a second
bronchodilator from a different pharmacological class may be beneficial. Here we 
review the evidence from published randomized trials concerning the efficacy and 
safety of the once-daily fixed-dose dual bronchodilator combining indacaterol and
glycopyrronium.

© The Author(s), 2015.

DOI: 10.1177/1753465815572065 
PMID: 25691493  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2015 Jan 7;10:111-23. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S67758. 
eCollection 2015.

Profile of inhaled glycopyrronium bromide as monotherapy and in fixed-dose
combination with indacaterol maleate for the treatment of COPD.

Prakash A(1), Babu KS(2), Morjaria JB(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Castle Hill Hospital, Cottingham, UK.
(2)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Queen Alexandra Hospital, Cosham,
Portsmouth, UK. (3)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Castle Hill Hospital,
Cottingham, UK ; Department of Academic Respiratory Medicine, Hull York Medical
School, University of Hull, Castle Hill Hospital, Cottingham, UK.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a major cause of morbidity and
mortality. The cornerstone of pharmacological treatment for COPD is
bronchodilation. Inhaled glycopyrronium bromide is a long-acting muscarinic
antagonist developed as a maintenance treatment for patients with COPD. Phase III
trials have shown that glycopyrronium produces rapid and sustained
bronchodilation with an efficacy similar to tiotropium and is well tolerated,
with a low incidence of muscarinic side effects in patients with moderate to
severe COPD. A combination of glycopyrronium bromide with indacaterol maleate
(QVA149) has recently been approved as a once-daily maintenance therapy in adult 
patients with COPD. Phase III trials (the IGNITE program) with QVA149 have
demonstrated significant improvements in lung function versus placebo,
glycopyrronium, and tiotropium in patients with moderate to severe COPD, with no 
safety concerns of note. Hence QVA149 is a safe treatment option for moderate to 
severe COPD patients in whom long-acting muscarinic antagonist monotherapy is
inadequate.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S67758 
PMCID: PMC4293295
PMID: 25609944  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. J Med Chem. 2015 May 28;58(10):4131-64. doi: 10.1021/jm5013227. Epub 2015 Feb 9.

Bronchodilating drugs for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: current status
and future trends.

Montuschi P(1), Ciabattoni G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Faculty of Medicine, Catholic University of the
Sacred Heart, Largo Francesco Vito, 1, Rome, 00168, Italy.

Inhaled bronchodilators, including long-acting muscarinic receptor antagonists
(LAMA) and long-acting β2-adrenoreceptor agonists (LABA), are the mainstay of
pharmacological treatment of stable chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
Among approved LAMA, tiotropium bromide, glycopyrronium bromide, and umeclidinium
bromide are administered once daily, whereas aclidinium bromide is administered
every 12 h. New LAMA are under development for COPD. Among the approved LABA,
indacaterol has a 24 h duration of action, whereas salmeterol and formoterol
require twice-daily administration. New once-daily LABA, including vilanterol,
olodaterol, milveterol, carmoterol, and abediterol, are in development. LAMA/LABA
fixed dose combinations (FDCs) provide the convenience of two bronchodilators
with different mechanism of action in a single inhaler.
Indacaterol/glycopyrronium, umeclidinium/vilanterol, and olodaterol/tiotropium
FDCs have been approved or are under approval and are likely to become a standard
pharmacological strategy for COPD. Inhaled dual-pharmacology compounds, combining
muscarinic antagonism and β2-agonism (MABA) in a single molecule, potentially
provide additive or synergistic bronchodilation over either inhaled
antimuscarinic or β2-agonist monotherapy.

DOI: 10.1021/jm5013227 
PMID: 25587755  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2015 Jan 10;1:CD010139. doi:
10.1002/14651858.CD010139.pub2.

Indacaterol, a once-daily beta2-agonist, versus twice-daily beta₂-agonists or
placebo for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Geake JB(1), Dabscheck EJ, Wood-Baker R, Cates CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Medicine, The Prince Charles Hospital, Chermside,
Queensland, Australia, 4032.

BACKGROUND: Indacaterol is an inhaled long-acting beta2-agonist that is
administered once daily and has been investigated as a treatment for chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Four different doses have been investigated
(75 mcg, 150 mcg, 300 mcg and 600 mcg). The relative effects of different doses
of once-daily indacaterol in the management of patients with COPD are uncertain.
OBJECTIVES: To compare the efficacy and safety of indacaterol versus placebo and 
alternative twice-daily long-acting beta2-agonists for the treatment of patients 
with stable COPD.
SEARCH METHODS: We identified trials from the Cochrane Airways Group Specialised 
Register of trials (CAGR), handsearched respiratory journals and meeting
abstracts and searched the Novartis trials registry and ClinicalTrials.gov. The
date of the most recent search was 8 November 2014.
SELECTION CRITERIA: We included all randomised controlled trials comparing
indacaterol at any dose versus placebo or alternative long-acting beta2-agonists.
Trials were required to be of at least 12 weeks' duration and had to include
adults older than 18 years with a confirmed spirometric diagnosis of COPD.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Two review authors (JBG, EJD) independently
assessed for possible inclusion all citations identified as a result of the
search. Disagreements were resolved through discussion or, if required, through
resolution by a third review author (RWB). One review author (JBG) extracted data
from trials identified by the search and entered these data into Review Manager
5.1 for statistical analysis. Data entry was cross-checked by a second review
author (EJD, CJC).
MAIN RESULTS: A total of 13 trials with 9961 participants were included in the
review. Ten trials with a total of 8562 participants involved an indacaterol
versus placebo comparison. Five trials with a total of 4133 participants involved
an indacaterol versus twice-daily beta2-agonist comparison. The comparator
beta2-agonists were salmeterol, formoterol and eformoterol. One of these trials, 
with a total of 90 participants, provided no data that could be used in this
review. Two trials included both indacaterol versus placebo and indacaterol
versus twice-daily beta2-agonist comparisons. Trials were between 12 weeks and 52
weeks in duration. Overall the quality of the evidence was strong, and risk of
significant bias was minimal in most of the included studies. Enrolled
participants had stable COPD across a range of spirometric severities. Forced
expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1) was generally between 30% and 80% predicted,
and a mean FEV1 of approximately 50% was predicted in most studies. Patients with
concurrent respiratory disease, including asthma, were excluded. Concomitant use 
of inhaled corticosteroids was permitted.The primary objectives were to compare
trough FEV1 at the end of dosing, exacerbation rates and quality of life.
Significant adverse events, mortality and dyspnoea were included as secondary
outcomes. Compared with placebo, a significant and clinically relevant
improvement in trough FEV1 was noted with indacaterol (mean difference (MD)
149.11, 95% confidence interval (CI) 137.09 to 161.12). In addition, compared
with placebo, a significant improvement in mean St George Respiratory
Questionaire (SGRQ) score (MD -3.60, 95% CI -4.36 to -2.83) was reported, and the
proportion of participants experiencing clinically relevant improvement in SGRQ
score was significantly greater (odds ratio (OR) 1.63, 95% CI 1.46 to 1.84).
Compared with twice-daily beta2-agonists, a small but statistically significant
increase in trough FEV1 was seen with indacaterol (MD 61.71 mL, 95% CI 41.24 to
82.17). Differences between indacaterol and twice-daily beta2-agonists in mean
SGRQ scores (MD -0.81, 95% CI -2.28 to 0.66) and in the proportions of
participants achieving clinically relevant improvements in SGRQ scores (OR 1.07, 
95% CI 0.87 to 1.32) were not statistically significant, but the confidence
intervals are too wide to permit the conclusion that the treatments were
equivalent. Data were insufficient for analysis of differences in exacerbation
rates for both placebo and twice-daily beta2-agonist comparisons.
AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: For patients with stable COPD, use of indacaterol versus
placebo results in statistically significant and clinically meaningful
improvements in lung function and quality of life. The clinical benefit for lung 
function is at least as good as that seen with twice-daily long-acting
beta2-agonists. The comparative effect on quality of life remains uncertain, as
important differences cannot be excluded.

DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD010139.pub2 
PMID: 25575340  [PubMed - in process]


56. Basic Clin Pharmacol Toxicol. 2015 Apr;116(4):291-307. doi: 10.1111/bcpt.12366.
Epub 2015 Jan 22.

Diagnosis and pharmacotherapy of stable chronic obstructive pulmonary disease:
the finnish guidelines.

Kankaanranta H(1), Harju T, Kilpeläinen M, Mazur W, Lehto JT, Katajisto M, Peisa 
T, Meinander T, Lehtimäki L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Seinäjoki Central Hospital, Seinäjoki,
Finland; Department of Respiratory Medicine, University of Tampere, Tampere,
Finland.

The Finnish Medical Society Duodecim initiated and managed the update of the
Finnish national guideline for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). The 
Finnish COPD guideline was revised to acknowledge the progress in diagnosis and
management of COPD. This Finnish COPD guideline in English language is a part of 
the original guideline and focuses on the diagnosis, assessment and
pharmacotherapy of stable COPD. It is intended to be used mainly in primary
health care but not forgetting respiratory specialists and other healthcare
workers. The new recommendations and statements are based on the best evidence
available from the medical literature, other published national guidelines and
the GOLD (Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease) report. This
guideline introduces the diagnostic approach, differential diagnostics towards
asthma, assessment and treatment strategy to control symptoms and to prevent
exacerbations. The pharmacotherapy is based on the symptoms and a clinical
phenotype of the individual patient. The guideline defines three clinically
relevant phenotypes including the low and high exacerbation risk phenotypes and
the neglected asthma-COPD overlap syndrome (ACOS). These clinical phenotypes can 
help clinicians to identify patients that respond to specific pharmacological
interventions. For the low exacerbation risk phenotype, pharmacotherapy with
short-acting β2 -agonists (salbutamol, terbutaline) or anticholinergics
(ipratropium) or their combination (fenoterol-ipratropium) is recommended in
patients with less symptoms. If short-acting bronchodilators are not enough to
control symptoms, a long-acting β2 -agonist (formoterol, indacaterol, olodaterol 
or salmeterol) or a long-acting anticholinergic (muscarinic receptor antagonists;
aclidinium, glycopyrronium, tiotropium, umeclidinium) or their combination is
recommended. For the high exacerbation risk phenotype, pharmacotherapy with a
long-acting anticholinergic or a fixed combination of an inhaled glucocorticoid
and a long-acting β2 -agonist (budesonide-formoterol, beclomethasone
dipropionate-formoterol, fluticasone propionate-salmeterol or fluticasone
furoate-vilanterol) is recommended as a first choice. Other treatment options for
this phenotype include combination of long-acting bronchodilators given from
separate inhalers or as a fixed combination (glycopyrronium-indacaterol or
umeclidinium-vilanterol) or a triple combination of an inhaled glucocorticoid, a 
long-acting β2 -agonist and a long-acting anticholinergic. If the patient has
severe-to-very severe COPD (FEV1  < 50% predicted), chronic bronchitis and
frequent exacerbations despite long-acting bronchodilators, the pharmacotherapy
may include also roflumilast. ACOS is a phenotype of COPD in which there are
features that comply with both asthma and COPD. Patients belonging to this
phenotype have usually been excluded from studies evaluating the effects of drugs
both in asthma and in COPD. Thus, evidence-based recommendation of treatment
cannot be given. The treatment should cover both diseases. Generally, the therapy
should include at least inhaled glucocorticoids (beclomethasone dipropionate,
budesonide, ciclesonide, fluticasone furoate, fluticasone propionate or
mometasone) combined with a long-acting bronchodilator (β2 -agonist or
anticholinergic or both).

© 2014 The Authors. Basic & Clinical Pharmacology & Toxicology published by John 
Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of Nordic Association for the Publication of BCPT
(former Nordic Pharmacological Society).

DOI: 10.1111/bcpt.12366 
PMCID: PMC4409821
PMID: 25515181  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Pharmacology. 2014;94(5-6):249-58. doi: 10.1159/000368986. Epub 2014 Nov 28.

Treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease by dual bronchodilation with
coformulation of indacaterol/glycopyrronium.

Pelaia G(1), Maselli R, Matera MG.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Respiratory Diseases, Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences, 
University 'Magna Graecia' of Catanzaro, Catanzaro, Italy.

Bronchodilators are the cornerstone of the treatment of chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD). In particular, the most commonly used drugs are inhaled
long-acting agents, including long-acting β2-adrenergic agonists (LABAs) and
long-acting muscarinic receptor antagonists (LAMAs). The combination of a LABA
with a LAMA, i.e. of molecules characterized by different mechanisms of action,
results in a synergistic enhancement of their clinical and functional effects.
Therefore, this combined treatment can be implemented in a number of cases in
which disease control is not adequately achieved by a single active agent such as
a LABA or a LAMA. Several LABA/LAMA fixed-dose combinations, mainly made up of
newly developed compounds, are currently in advanced phases of experimental
evaluation. Within such a context, the aim of this review is to outline the
pharmacological basis of dual bronchodilation as well as to discuss the results
of the main trials carried out using the drug combination consisting of
indacaterol and glycopyrronium, a LABA and a LAMA recently introduced in the
treatment of COPD.

© 2014 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000368986 
PMID: 25471458  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Pulm Pharmacol Ther. 2015 Feb;30:11-5. doi: 10.1016/j.pupt.2014.10.003. Epub 2014
Oct 30.

Indacaterol and tiotropium combination therapy in patients with chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease.

Matsushima S(1), Inui N(2), Yasui H(1), Kono M(1), Nakamura Y(1), Toyoshima M(3),
Shirai T(4), Suda T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Second Division, Department of Internal Medicine, Hamamatsu University School 
of Medicine, 1-20-1 Handayama, Hamamatsu 431-3192, Japan. (2)Second Division,
Department of Internal Medicine, Hamamatsu University School of Medicine, 1-20-1 
Handayama, Hamamatsu 431-3192, Japan; Department of Clinical Pharmacology and
Therapeutics, Hamamatsu University School of Medicine, 1-20-1 Handayama,
Hamamatsu 431-3192, Japan. Electronic address: inui@hama-med.ac.jp. (3)Department
of Respiratory Medicine, Hamamatsu Rosai Hospital, 25 Shougen-cho, Hamamatsu
430-8525, Japan. (4)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Shizuoka General
Hospital, 4-27-1 Kita-ando, Shizuoka 420-0881, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Combination therapy with a long-acting antimuscarinic agent and a
long-acting β2-agonist are recommended in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD) if control is not adequate with one long-acting bronchodilator alone. We
evaluated the effects of indacaterol and tiotropium combination therapy,
including the effects of adding indacaterol to tiotropium (indacaterol add-on
group) and adding tiotropium to indacaterol (tiotropium add-on group).
METHODS: We recruited 79 patients with COPD already treated with tiotropium or
indacaterol. We undertook pulmonary function tests, the COPD assessment test
(CAT), and the multi-frequency forced oscillation technique (to measure
respiratory resistance and reactance) before and after 8 weeks of indacaterol and
tiotropium combination therapy.
RESULTS: The median age was 72.1 years and the mean forced expiratory volume in
1 s (FEV1) as a proportion of predicted was 57.2 ± 18.3%. After 8 weeks of
combination therapy, FEV1 and %predicted FEV1 had increased significantly. There 
was no change in CAT score. For respiratory impedance, combination therapy
improved resistance at 5 Hz (R5) and resistance at 20 Hz (R20) in the
whole-breath, inspiratory and expiratory phases, and resonant frequency (Fres) in
the inspiratory phase. The indacaterol add-on group (43 patients) and tiotropium 
add-on group (36 patients) showed improvements in FEV1 and %predicted FEV1 over
monotherapy, although the CAT score fell significantly in the indacaterol add-on 
group (p = 0.005).
CONCLUSIONS: Indacaterol and tiotropium combination therapy improved airflow
limitation and respiratory resistances. Adding indacaterol to tiotropium, or
tiotropium to indacaterol, had similar effects on airflow limitation.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pupt.2014.10.003 
PMID: 25445929  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Expert Opin Pharmacother. 2015 Jan;16(1):107-15. doi:
10.1517/14656566.2015.983076. Epub 2014 Nov 24.

Indacaterol for the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Matera MG(1), Rogliani P, Cazzola M.

Author information: 
(1)Second University of Naples, Department of Experimental Medicine , Naples ,
Italy.

INTRODUCTION: The need for a rapid onset of action and a long duration of the
broncholytic effect is the likely reason for the development of new long-acting
β2-agonists (LABAs) that are fast acting and have true 24 h duration of action.
Indacaterol is the archetype of once-daily LABAs and already marketed as a
maintenance therapy in patients with moderate to severe chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD).
AREAS COVERED: Meta-analyses of published data or pooled analyses of primary data
provide good insight into the clinical role of indacaterol in COPD.
EXPERT OPINION: The choice of the once-daily bronchodilator to start treatment in
a patient with COPD mainly depends on the outcome of interest. Indacaterol is
more effective than tiotropium if we consider symptoms or health-related quality 
of life as the primary outcome. Moreover, in symptomatic patient indacaterol
should be preferred to tiotropium because of its rapid onset of action. By
contrast, tiotropium appears to be more effective than indacaterol if
exacerbations are the expected primary outcome. However, as
indacaterol/glycopyrronium fixed-dose combination (QVA149) shows superior
efficacy compared to glycopyrronium and tiotropium in patients with moderate to
severe COPD, a fundamental question regarding the use of indacaterol that
requires clarification is whether it is preferable to start immediately with
QVA149 rather than using indacaterol alone.

DOI: 10.1517/14656566.2015.983076 
PMID: 25418284  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Eur Respir J. 2014 Dec;44(6):1548-56. doi: 10.1183/09031936.00126814. Epub 2014
Oct 30.

INSTEAD: a randomised switch trial of indacaterol versus salmeterol/fluticasone
in moderate COPD.

Rossi A(1), van der Molen T(2), del Olmo R(3), Papi A(4), Wehbe L(5), Quinn M(6),
Lu C(6), Young D(7), Cameron R(7), Bucchioni E(8), Altman P(6).

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary Unit, University of Verona, Verona, Italy andrea.rossi_03@univr.it. 
(2)University Medical Center Groningen, University of Groningen, Groningen, the
Netherlands. (3)Fundación CIDEA and Hospital Maria Ferrer, Buenos Aires,
Argentina. (4)University of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy. (5)Fundacion Enfisema,
Buenos Aires, Argentina. (6)Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corporation, East Hanover,
NJ, USA. (7)Novartis Horsham Research Centre, Horsham, UK. (8)Novartis Farma,
Origgio, Italy.

Comment in
    Eur Respir J. 2014 Dec;44(6):1391-3.
    Eur Respir J. 2015 Apr;45(4):1188-9.
    Eur Respir J. 2015 Apr;45(4):1187-8.
    Expert Opin Pharmacother. 2015;16(10):1539-41.

The Indacaterol: Switching Non-exacerbating Patients with Moderate COPD From
Salmeterol/Fluticasone to Indacaterol (INSTEAD) study investigated the effect of 
switching patients at low risk of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)
exacerbations from salmeterol/fluticasone (SFC; inhaled corticosteroid (ICS)
regimen) to indacaterol monotherapy (non-ICS regimen). This 26-week,
double-blind, double-dummy, parallel-group, phase IV study, randomised 581
patients with moderate COPD to indacaterol 150 μg once daily or SFC 50/500 μg
twice daily. Patients had been receiving SFC 50/500 μg for ≥3 months, with no
COPD exacerbations for more than a year before the study (patients for whom ICS
is not recommended). The primary objective was to demonstrate non-inferiority of 
indacaterol to SFC, measured by trough forced expiratory volume in 1 second
(FEV₁) after 12 weeks (non-inferiority margin of 0.06 L). The primary objective
was met, with a mean treatment difference of 9 mL (95% CI -45-26 mL). There were 
no significant differences between treatments in terms of breathlessness
(transition dyspnoea index) or health status (Saint George's Respiratory
Questionnaire) at weeks 12 or 26, or rescue medication use or COPD exacerbation
rates over 26 weeks. Safety profiles of both treatments were as expected. This
study demonstrated that patients with moderate COPD and no exacerbations in the
previous year can be switched from SFC to indacaterol 150 μg with no efficacy
loss.

©ERS 2014.

DOI: 10.1183/09031936.00126814 
PMID: 25359348  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Value Health. 2014 Nov;17(7):A598. doi: 10.1016/j.jval.2014.08.2066. Epub 2014
Oct 26.

Cost-Effectiveness Analysis of Indacaterol/Glycopirronium (QVA149) as a
Maintenance Bronchodilator Treatment in Adult Patients With Chronic Obstructive
Pulmonary Disease in Spain.

Granell M(1), Giovanna M(2), Paz S(3), Betoret I(1).

Author information: 
(1)Novartis Farmaceutica, Barcelona, Spain. (2)Outcomes 10, Castellon, Spain.
(3)Outcomes'10, Castellon, Spain.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jval.2014.08.2066 
PMID: 27202059  [PubMed]


62. Value Health. 2014 Nov;17(7):A588. doi: 10.1016/j.jval.2014.08.2011. Epub 2014
Oct 26.

Clinical Trial-Based Cost-Effectiveness Analysis of Indacaterol (ONBREZ® 150 MCG)
Versus Tiotropium (SPIRIVA®) in the Treatment of Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary
Disease (COPD) IN TURKEY.

Saylan M(1), Beykoz V(1), Keskinaslan A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Novartis Pharma, Istanbul, Turkey.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jval.2014.08.2011 
PMID: 27202003  [PubMed]


63. Respir Med. 2014 Dec;108(12):1786-93. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2014.09.015. Epub 2014 
Oct 2.

Cost-effectiveness of the LABA/LAMA dual bronchodilator
indacaterol/glycopyrronium in a Swedish healthcare setting.

Price D(1), Keininger D(2), Costa-Scharplatz M(3), Mezzi K(2), Dimova M(4),
Asukai Y(4), Ställberg B(5).

Author information: 
(1)Academic Primary Care, Division of Applied Health Sciences, University of
Aberdeen, Polwarth Building, Aberdeen AB25 2ZD, UK. (2)Primary Care Franchise,
Novartis Pharma AG, Postfach, CH-4002 Basel, Switzerland. (3)Novartis Pharma AB, 
Box 1150, TÄBY, Stockholm S-183 79, Sweden. Electronic address:
madlaina.costa-scharplatz@novartis.com. (4)IMS Health Economics and Outcomes
Research, 210 Pentonville Road, London N1 9JY, UK. (5)Department of Public Health
and Caring Sciences, Family Medicine and Preventive Medicine, Uppsala University,
Uppsala, Sweden.

BACKGROUND: Indacaterol/glycopyrronium (IND/GLY) is a once-daily inhaled
fixed-dose combination of indacaterol (IND), a long-acting β2-adrenergic agonist 
(LABA), and glycopyrronium (GLY), a long-acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA) for 
use as maintenance treatment to relieve symptoms of chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD) in adults.
OBJECTIVE: To determine the economic benefits of IND/GLY compared with the free
combination of indacaterol and glycopyrronium (IND + GLY), and with the
fixed-dose combination of salmeterol/fluticasone (SFC), in a moderate-to-severe
COPD population with low-exacerbation risk. The model-based analysis extrapolated
results up to lifetime time horizon and calculated costs per quality-adjusted
life year.
METHODS: Assuming equal efficacy, a cost-minimisation analysis compared IND/GLY
vs IND + GLY using model inputs from the double-blind, randomised SHINE trial.
The double-blind, randomised ILLUMINATE and TORCH trials were used to analyse
cost-effectiveness versus SFC. To consider ICS-related pneumonia events,
published odds ratio comparing an ICS-exposed group to a control group of COPD
patients was used. Direct and indirect drug costs as well as drug acquisition
costs (in Swedish Krona [SEK]) were derived from published Swedish sources. Cost 
and effects were discounted with 3%. Uncertainty was assessed by one-way and
probabilistic sensitivity analyses (PSA).
RESULTS: IND/GLY was cost-saving vs IND + GLY with incremental savings of SEK
(EUR) 768 (85), and 3309 (368) per patient over one and five years. IND/GLY was
found to be less costly and more effective compared to SFC with cost savings of
SEK (EUR) 2744 (303), 8854 (976), 13,938 (1536), 27,495 (3031) and 43,033 (4744) 
over one, three, five, ten years and lifetime. The PSA indicated that all
iterations produced dominant results for IND/GLY.
CONCLUSION: IND/GLY is cost-minimising vs IND + GLY and dominates SFC in the
maintenance treatment of COPD patients in Sweden. Encouraging dual bronchodilator
therapy over an ICS-containing combination results in lower total costs and
better outcomes compared to combination therapy including fluticasone in
moderate-to-severe COPD patients with low exacerbation risk.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2014.09.015 
PMID: 25307414  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Ugeskr Laeger. 2014 Sep 15;176(38). pii: V02140088.

[The combination of indacaterol and glycopyrronium has effects on symptoms, lung 
function, and rate of exacerbations in COPD patients].

[Article in Danish]

Ulrik CS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Lungemedicinsk Afdeling, Hvidovre -Hospital, Kettegård Allé 30, 2650 Hvidovre.
E-mail: csulrik@dadlnet.dk.

Long-acting bronchodilators are the mainstay of pharmacological therapy for
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). This paper reviews the efficacy of 
the once-daily fixed-dose dual bronchodilator combination of indacaterol and
glycopyrronium in COPD patients. Compared with single therapy with indacaterol,
glycopyrronium and tiotropium and fixed combination salmeterol/fluticasone,
fixed-dose indacaterol/glycopyrronium has clinically relevant effects on
symptoms, health status, lung function, and rate of exacerbations and by that
suggests a potential for dual bronchodilation as an important maintenance
therapeutic option for some patients with COPD.


PMID: 25294211  [PubMed - in process]


65. BMC Pulm Med. 2014 Oct 4;14:158. doi: 10.1186/1471-2466-14-158.

Indacaterol improves lung hyperinflation and physical activity in patients with
moderate chronic obstructive pulmonary disease--a randomized, multicenter,
double-blind, placebo-controlled study.

Watz H(1), Krippner F, Kirsten A, Magnussen H, Vogelmeier C.

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary Research Institute at LungClinic Grosshansdorf, Airway Research
Center North, Member of the German Center for Lung Research, Woehrendamm 80,
D-22927 Grosshansdorf, Germany. h.watz@pulmoresearch.de.

BACKGROUND: Indacaterol is a long-acting beta-2 agonist for once-daily treatment 
of COPD. We evaluated the effects of indacaterol 150 μg on lung hyperinflation
compared with placebo and open-label tiotropium 18 μg. We measured physical
activity during treatment with indacaterol 150 μg and matched placebo.
METHODS: We performed a randomized, three-period, cross-over study (21 days of
treatment separated by two wash-out periods of 13 days) with indacaterol 150 μg
or matching placebo and tiotropium 18 μg. Lung function was assessed by body
plethysmography and spirometry. Physical activity was measured for one week by a 
multisensory armband at the end of both treatment periods with
indacaterol/matched placebo. The primary endpoint was peak inspiratory capacity
at the end of each treatment period.
RESULTS: 129 patients (mean age, 61 years; mean post-bronchodilator FEV1, 64%),
were randomized and 110 patients completed the study. Peak inspiratory capacity
was 0.22 L greater with Indacaterol at day 21 compared to placebo (p < 0.001).
Similar results were observed for tiotropium. Both bronchodilators also
significantly improved other parameters of lung hyperinflation compared with
placebo. All parameters of physical activity were significantly increased during 
treatment with indacaterol versus placebo.
CONCLUSIONS: Indacaterol 150 μg improved lung hyperinflation in patients with
moderate COPD, which was associated with an increase of physical activity.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov registration number: NCT01012765.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2466-14-158 
PMCID: PMC4197315
PMID: 25280934  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. NPJ Prim Care Respir Med. 2014 Oct 2;24:14069. doi: 10.1038/npjpcrm.2014.69.

Impact of multiple-dose versus single-dose inhaler devices on COPD patients'
persistence with long-acting β₂-agonists: a dispensing database analysis.

van Boven JF(1), van Raaij JJ(1), van der Galiën R(1), Postma MJ(1), van der
Molen T(2), Dekhuijzen PN(3), Vegter S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Unit of PharmacoEpidemiology and PharmacoEconomics, Department of Pharmacy,
University of Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands. (2)Department of Primary
Care, University Medical Centre Groningen, University of Groningen, Groningen,
The Netherlands. (3)Department of Pulmonary Diseases, Radboud University Medical 
Centre, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: With a growing availability of different devices and types of
medication, additional evidence is required to assist clinicians in prescribing
the optimal medication in relation to chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD) patients' persistence with long-acting β2-agonists (LABAs).
AIMS: To assess the impact of the type of inhaler device (multiple-dose versus
single-dose inhalers) on 1-year persistence and switching patterns with LABAs.
METHODS: A retrospective observational cohort study was performed comparing a
cohort of patients initiating multiple-dose inhalers and a cohort initiating
single-dose inhalers. The study population consisted of long-acting
bronchodilator naive COPD patients, initiating inhalation therapy with mono-LABAs
(formoterol, indacaterol or salmeterol). Analyses were performed using pharmacy
dispensing data from 1994 to 2012, obtained from the IADB.nl database. Study
outcomes were 1-year persistence and switching patterns. RESULTS were adjusted
for initial prescriber, initial medication, dosing regimen and relevant
comorbidities.
RESULTS: In all, 575 patients initiating LABAs were included in the final study
cohort. Among them, 475 (83%) initiated a multiple-dose inhaler and 100 (17%) a
single-dose inhaler. Further, 269 (47%) initiated formoterol, 9 (2%) indacaterol 
and 297 (52%) salmeterol. There was no significant difference in persistence
between users of multiple-dose or single-dose inhalers (hazard ratio: 0.98, 95%
confidence interval: 0.76-1.26, P=0.99). Over 80% re-started or switched
medication.
CONCLUSIONS: There seems no impact of inhaler device (multiple-dose versus
single-dose inhalers) on COPD patients' persistence with LABAs. Over 80% of
patients who initially seemed to discontinue LABAs, re-started their initial
medication or switched inhalers or medication within 1 year.

DOI: 10.1038/npjpcrm.2014.69 
PMCID: PMC4373462
PMID: 25274453  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2014 Sep 1;9:919-25. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S67356.
eCollection 2014.

Once-daily indacaterol 75 μg in moderate- to-severe COPD: results of a Phase IV
study assessing time until patients' perceived onset of effect.

Siler TM(1), LaForce CF(2), Kianifard F(3), Williams J(3), Spangenthal S(4).

Author information: 
(1)Midwest Chest Consultants, St Charles, MO, USA. (2)North Carolina Clinical
Research, Raleigh, NC, USA. (3)Novartis Pharmaceuticals, East Hanover, NJ, USA.
(4)Charlotte Lung and Health Center, Charlotte, NC, USA.

BACKGROUND: Indacaterol 75 μg once daily is a long-acting β2 agonist approved for
maintenance bronchodilator treatment in patients with chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD). The purpose of this study was to evaluate patients'
perception of onset of effect with a single dose.
METHODS: In this double-blind, crossover, Phase IV study, 40 patients were
randomized to receive a single dose of indacaterol 75 μg or placebo via a dry
powder inhaler device. The primary variable was time until patient's perception
of onset of effect, using a simple self-administered (nonvalidated) questionnaire
that patients answered at nine protocol-specified time points. Exploratory
variables included change in forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1) and
change in percent predicted FEV1 from predose to postdose (determined 60-75
minutes postdose).
RESULTS: The least-squares mean time to patient's perception of onset of effect
was 25.4 minutes and 23.9 minutes for indacaterol and placebo, respectively.
There was no significant effect for treatment, period, or sequence on the time to
patient's perception. In addition, no statistically significant differences
between treatments were observed for patient's global satisfaction with onset of 
effect and global expectation of treatment adherence. For the exploratory
variable change in FEV1 from predose to postdose, indacaterol showed superiority 
over placebo with a clinically relevant least-squares mean treatment difference
of 0.12 L (P<0.0001). There was little or no association between patient's
perception of time to onset of effect and change in FEV1, or change in percent
predicted FEV1. Both treatments were well tolerated.
CONCLUSION: A single dose of indacaterol 75 μg did not separate from placebo in
terms of patient perception of onset, although there was an improvement in FEV1
for indacaterol compared with placebo. Development and use of a validated
questionnaire may be needed to address the inconsistency in evaluating this
patient-related outcome.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S67356 
PMCID: PMC4159068
PMID: 25214778  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Drugs. 2014 Sep;74(14):1635-57. doi: 10.1007/s40265-014-0284-7.

Turning a molecule into a medicine: the development of indacaterol as a novel
once-daily bronchodilator treatment for patients with COPD.

Murphy L(1), Rennard S, Donohue J, Molimard M, Dahl R, Beeh KM, Dederichs J,
Fülle HJ, Higgins M, Young D.

Author information: 
(1)Novartis Horsham Research Centre, Novartis Pharmaceuticals UK Limited,
Wimblehurst Road, Horsham, West Sussex, RH12 5AB, UK,
lorraine.murphy@novartis.com.

Indacaterol is the first once-daily, long-acting β2-adrenergic agonist (LABA)
approved for the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
Indacaterol was developed using a combination of informed drug design and
molecular chemistry to generate a β2-adrenergic agonist with a fast onset and
long duration of action, enabling once-daily dosing with an acceptable safety
profile. Early preclinical studies with indacaterol demonstrated these
characteristics, and this promising molecule was taken into clinical development,
originally for asthma treatment. Subsequent safety concerns over LABA monotherapy
in patients with asthma redirected indacaterol's development to centre on COPD,
where a good evidence base and guideline recommendations for bronchodilator
monotherapy existed. Clinical development was initially complicated by different 
inhaler devices and differing doses of indacaterol. Using a phase III innovative 
adaptive-design clinical trial (INHANCE), indacaterol 150 and 300 μg once-daily
doses were selected to be taken forward into the phase III INERGIZE programme.
This programme delivered placebo-controlled and active-comparator data, including
comparisons with formoterol, tiotropium and salmeterol/fluticasone, as well as
the use of indacaterol in combination with tiotropium. Together, these studies
provided a comprehensive assessment of the benefit-risk profile of indacaterol,
allowing for regulatory submission. Indacaterol was first approved at once-daily 
doses of 150 and 300 μg in the European Union in 2009, followed by 150 µg in
Japan (2011) and China (2012), and 75 μg in the United States (2011). To date,
indacaterol is approved and marketed in more than 100 countries worldwide for
once-daily maintenance treatment of COPD.

DOI: 10.1007/s40265-014-0284-7 
PMID: 25212789  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Pulm Pharmacol Ther. 2015 Feb;30:128-33. doi: 10.1016/j.pupt.2014.08.002. Epub
2014 Aug 23.

Comparison of airway dimensions with once daily tiotropium plus indacaterol
versus twice daily Advair(®) in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Hoshino M(1), Ohtawa J(2), Akitsu K(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Atami Hospital, International University
of Health and Welfare, Atami, Japan. Electronic address: hoshino@iuhw.ac.jp.
(2)Department of Radiology, Atami Hospital, International University of Health
and Welfare, Atami, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Current guidelines recommend combining long-acting bronchodilators
with different modes of action in patients with moderate-to-severe chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). We evaluated the effects of airway
dimensions and pulmonary function with tiotropium plus indacaterol versus
Advair(®).
METHODS: Subjects (n = 46) were randomized to receive tiotropium (18 μg once
daily) plus indacaterol (150 μg once daily) or Advair(®) (50/250 μg twice daily) 
for 16 weeks. Airway geometry was determined by quantitative computed tomography 
(luminal area, Ai; total area of the airway, Ao; wall area, WA; and percentage
wall area, WA/Ao and wall thickness, T). Spirometry (forced expiratory volume in 
1 s, FEV1; forced vital capacity, FVC and inspiratory capacity, IC) and St.
George's Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ) were evaluated.
RESULTS: Tiotropium plus indacaterol significantly increased CT-indices including
Ai corrected for body surface area (Ai/BSA), and decreased WA/BSA, WA/Ao and
T/√BSA compared with Advair(®) (p < 0.05, respectively). In physiological
parameters, mean difference in IC was significantly higher under treatment with
tiotropium plus indacaterol than Advair(®) (p < 0.05). The changes in Ai/BSA,
WA/BSA, WA/Ao and T/√BSA were significantly correlated with changes in IC
(r = 0.535, p = 0.011; r = -0.688, p < 0.001; r = -0.555, p = 0.002 and
r = -0.542, p = 0.007; respectively). There were more significant improvements in
SGRQ scores after treatment with tiotropium plus indacaterol than Advair(®).
CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest that dual bronchodilation with tiotropium
plus indacaterol is superior in airway geometry and lung function compared with
Advair(®) in COPD.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pupt.2014.08.002 
PMID: 25183687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Eur Respir Rev. 2014 Sep;23(133):333-44. doi: 10.1183/09059180.00004014.

Addressing unmet needs in the treatment of COPD.

Patalano F(1), Banerji D(2), D'Andrea P(2), Fogel R(2), Altman P(2), Colthorpe
P(2).

Author information: 
(1)Novartis Pharma AG, Basel, Switzerland. Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corporation, 
East Hanover, NJ, USA. francesco.patalano@novartis.com. (2)Novartis Pharma AG,
Basel, Switzerland. Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corporation, East Hanover, NJ, USA.

The burden of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is considerable, both 
socially and economically. Central to COPD management is the use of long-acting
bronchodilators, which provide patients with optimal bronchodilation and
improvements in symptoms. The once-daily, long-acting β2-agonist indacaterol, the
long-acting muscarinic antagonist glycopyrronium, and the
indacaterol/glycopyrronium fixed-dose combination QVA149 have all been shown to
significantly improve lung function and patient-reported outcomes. The ability to
take medication appropriately is important. Easy to use, low resistance devices
may help patients take their medication and achieve good drug deposition. There
is a need to optimise COPD management by treating the right patients with the
right therapy at the right time during the course of their disease. Herein, we
present a view on the current COPD management landscape and current unmet needs, 
and look to the future of COPD treatment and how patient care can be optimised.

©ERS 2014.

DOI: 10.1183/09059180.00004014 
PMID: 25176969  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Expert Opin Investig Drugs. 2014 Dec;23(12):1687-701. doi:
10.1517/13543784.2014.942730. Epub 2014 Aug 19.

Update on ultra-long-acting β agonists in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Zafar MA(1), Droege C, Foertsch M, Panos RJ.

Author information: 
(1)University of Cincinnati Medical Center, Division of Pulmonary and Critical
Care Medicine , 1 Albert Sabin Way, MSB Room 6053, Mail Location 0564,
Cincinnati, OH 45267 , USA.

INTRODUCTION: For the last two decades, long-acting β agonists (LABAs) have been 
a cornerstone in the management of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). 
They relax airway smooth muscle and augment expiratory airflow, which reduces
hyperinflation and improves dyspnea, functional capacity and quality of life. In 
recent years, Indacaterol, a LABA with an ultra-long duration of action
(ultra-LABA), which only requires once-daily dosing, was approved by the FDA. The
clinical efficacy of indacaterol is comparable, and, in some aspects better, than
the currently available LABAs.
AREAS COVERED: This article reviews the pharmacological properties, clinical
efficacy, safety and potential role of the ultra-LABAs in COPD management.
EXPERT OPINION: Ultra-LABAs are effective bronchodilators with a prolonged
duration of action. By decreasing dosing frequency, ultra-LABAs potentially may
improve respiratory medication adherence, which is associated with better
survival and less healthcare utilization. In addition to their salubrious
benefits, β agonists may produce untoward effects. Increased mortality and
hospitalizations among patients with left ventricular heart failure, who were
treated with β agonists, has caused concern about their use in patients with COPD
and heart disease. Further experience and testing will determine the optimal role
of ultra-LABAs in the management of COPD.

DOI: 10.1517/13543784.2014.942730 
PMID: 25139313  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Respir Med. 2014 Oct;108(10):1498-507. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2014.07.011. Epub 2014
Aug 4.

Pooled safety analysis of the fixed-dose combination of indacaterol and
glycopyrronium (QVA149), its monocomponents, and tiotropium versus placebo in
COPD patients.

Wedzicha JA(1), Dahl R(2), Buhl R(3), Schubert-Tennigkeit A(4), Chen H(5),
D'Andrea P(5), Fogel R(5), Banerji D(5).

Author information: 
(1)Airway Disease Section, National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College
London, London, UK. Electronic address: j.wedzicha@imperial.ac.uk. (2)Allergy
Department, Odense University Hospital, Odense, Denmark. (3)Pulmonary Department,
Mainz University Hospital, Mainz, Germany. (4)Novartis Pharma AG, Basel,
Switzerland. (5)Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corporation, East Hanover, NJ, USA.

BACKGROUND: To further assess the safety profile of the fixed-dose combination of
indacaterol and glycopyrronium (QVA149) and its monocomponents; we investigated
the impact of individual patient-level factors and time by integrating the
patient-level safety data from the QVA149 clinical programme with relevant
information from the independent indacaterol and glycopyrronium safety databases.
METHODS: Data from 11,404 patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD) were pooled from 14 clinical studies of QVA149, indacaterol and
glycopyrronium of ≥3 month's duration with at least two of the treatment groups: 
QVA149 110/50 μg, glycopyrronium 50 μg, indacaterol 150 μg, placebo or tiotropium
18 μg. Overall hazard ratio (HR) was assessed between the active treatments and
placebo and in various subgroups related to severity of airways obstruction,
inhaled corticosteroid use, cardiovascular risk factors, sex, age and body mass
index for death, serious cases of cardio- and cerebrovascular (CCV) events, major
adverse cardiovascular events (MACEs), pneumonia, COPD exacerbations requiring
hospitalisation or atrial flutter/fibrillation (AF/F).
RESULTS: The HR for QVA149 versus placebo showed no significant increase in the
overall risk for death (HR [95% confidence interval]: 0.93 [0.34-2.54]); CCV
events (0.60 [0.29-1.24]); MACE (1.04 [0.45-2.42]); pneumonia (1.10 [0.54-2.25]);
COPD exacerbations (0.60 [0.40-0.91]); and AF/F (1.03 [0.49-2.18]). Similar
results were observed for indacaterol, glycopyrronium and tiotropium versus
placebo for overall risk and in analysed subgroups.
CONCLUSIONS: There was no increase in the risk for the investigated safety
endpoints for the fixed-dose combination QVA149, and it had a comparable safety
profile as its monocomponents and tiotropium versus placebo.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2014.07.011 
PMID: 25135743  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2014 Jul 31;9:813-24. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S59673. 
eCollection 2014.

Once-daily long-acting beta-agonists for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease:
an indirect comparison of olodaterol and indacaterol.

Roskell NS(1), Anzueto A(2), Hamilton A(3), Disse B(4), Becker K(5).

Author information: 
(1)Statistics, Bresmed Health Solutions Ltd, Sheffield, UK. (2)School of
Medicine, University of Texas Health Science Center, San Antonio, TX, USA.
(3)Medical Department, Boehringer Ingelheim (Canada) Ltd, Burlington, ON, Canada.
(4)Medical Department, Boehringer Ingelheim GmbH, Ingelheim am Rhein, Germany.
(5)Global Health Economics and Outcomes Research, Boehringer Ingelheim GmbH,
Ingelheim am Rhein, Germany.

Comment in
    Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2014;9:1331-3.
    Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2014;9:1334-5.

PURPOSE: In the absence of head-to-head clinical trials comparing the once-daily,
long-acting beta2-agonists olodaterol and indacaterol for the treatment of
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), an indirect treatment comparison by
systematic review and synthesis of the available clinical evidence was conducted.
METHODS: A systematic literature review of randomized, controlled clinical trials
in patients with COPD was performed to evaluate the efficacy and safety of
olodaterol and indacaterol. Network meta-analysis and adjusted indirect
comparison methods were employed to evaluate treatment efficacy, using outcomes
based on trough forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1), Transition Dyspnea
Index, St George's Respiratory Questionnaire total score and response, rescue
medication use, and proportion of patients with exacerbations.
RESULTS: Eighteen trials were identified for meta-analysis (eight, olodaterol;
ten, indacaterol). Olodaterol trials included patients of all severities, whilst 
indacaterol trials excluded patients with very severe COPD. Concomitant
maintenance bronchodilator use was allowed in most olodaterol trials, but not in 
indacaterol trials. When similarly designed trials/data were analyzed for change 
from baseline in trough FEV1 (liters), the following mean differences (95%
confidence interval) were observed: trials excluding concomitant bronchodilator: 
indacaterol 75 mcg versus olodaterol 5 mcg, -0.005 (-0.077 to 0.067), and
indacaterol 150 mcg versus olodaterol 5 mcg, 0.020 (-0.036 to 0.077); trials with
concomitant tiotropium: indacaterol 150 mcg versus olodaterol 5 mcg, 0.000
(-0.043 to 0.042). In sensitivity analyses of the full network, results for
change from baseline in trough FEV1 favored indacaterol, but this dataset
suffered from trial design heterogeneity. For the other endpoints investigated,
no statistically significant differences were found when analyzed in the full
network.
CONCLUSION: When compared under similar trial conditions, olodaterol and
indacaterol have similar efficacy in patients with COPD. This research highlights
the importance of considering the concomitant COPD medication when evaluating
treatment effects in COPD.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S59673 
PMCID: PMC4124050
PMID: 25114521  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2014 Sep 1;24(17):4341-7. doi: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2014.06.014. 
Epub 2014 Jun 26.

The identification of
7-[(R)-2-((1S,2S)-2-benzyloxycyclopentylamino)-1-hydroxyethyl]-4-hydroxybenzothia
zolone as an inhaled long-acting β2-adrenoceptor agonist.

Arnold N(1), Beattie D(1), Bradley M(1), Brearley A(1), Brown L(1), Charlton
SJ(1), Fairhurst RA(2), Farr D(1), Fozard J(1), Fullerton J(1), Gosling M(1),
Hatto J(1), Janus D(1), Jones D(1), Jordan L(1), Lewis C(1), Maas J(1), McCarthy 
C(1), Mercer M(1), Oakman H(1), Press N(1), Profit R(1), Schuerch F(1), Sykes
D(1), Taylor RJ(1), Trifilieff A(1), Tuffnell A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Novartis Institutes for BioMedical Research, Respiratory Diseases Area,
Horsham, United Kingdom; Novartis Institutes for BioMedical Research, Respiratory
Diseases Area, Basel, Switzerland. (2)Novartis Institutes for BioMedical
Research, Respiratory Diseases Area, Horsham, United Kingdom; Novartis Institutes
for BioMedical Research, Respiratory Diseases Area, Basel, Switzerland.
Electronic address: robin.fairhurst@novartis.com.

The optimisation of two series of 4-hydroxybenzothiazolone derived
β2-adrenoceptor agonists, bearing α-substituted cyclopentyl and β-phenethyl
amino-substituents, as inhaled long-acting bronchodilators is described.
Analogues were selected for synthesis using a lipophilicity based hypothesis to
achieve the targeted rapid onset of action in combination with a long duration of
action. The profiling of the two series led to identification of the
α-substituted cyclopentyl analogue 2 as the optimal compound with a comparable
profile to the inhaled once-daily long-acting β2-adrenoceptor agonist
indacaterol. On the basis of these data 2 was promoted as the backup development 
candidate to indacaterol from the Novartis LABA project.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2014.06.014 
PMID: 25065493  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2014 Jun 27;9:687-95. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S47792. 
eCollection 2014.

Differential pharmacology and clinical utility of emerging combination treatments
in the management of COPD--role of umeclidinium/vilanterol.

Malerba M(1), Morjaria JB(2), Radaeli A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Brescia, Brescia, Italy.
(2)Department of Academic Respiratory Medicine, Hull York Medical School,
University of Hull, Castle Hill Hospital, Cottingham, United Kingdom.
(3)Department of Emergency, Spedali Civili di Brescia, Brescia, Italy.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a preventable and treatable
disease characterized by airflow limitation that is not fully reversible.
Bronchodilator therapy is the cornerstone in COPD treatment. Bronchodilation in
COPD is mainly achieved via administration of long- and ultralong-acting
β2-agonists and with long-acting muscarinic antagonists. New combinations of
bronchodilators with dual-acting muscarinic antagonist and β2-agonist properties 
have been licensed, and others are currently being developed with the aim of
achieving once-daily dosing, and therefore may improve the likelihood of
treatment compliance. These combination bronchodilators include glycopyrronium
bromide/indacaterol maleate, umeclidinium (UMEC) bromide/vilanterol trifenatate
(VI), aclidinium bromide/formoterol and tiotropium bromide/olodaterol (Boehringer
Ingelheim, Germany). This review will focus mainly on studies and clinical trials
involving the novel fixed-dose combination of UMEC/VI at doses of 125/25 μg and
62.5/25 μg in patients with COPD. Data from large clinical trials involving more 
than 4,500 COPD patients indicate that UMEC/VI is an effective once-daily
treatment in COPD with improved pulmonary function. Future studies assessing the 
impact of this combination on exacerbations, delay in disease progression, and
health status in patients with COPD are warranted.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S47792 
PMCID: PMC4085305
PMID: 25061288  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Rev Recent Clin Trials. 2014;9(2):96-101.

Indacaterol in the Treatment of Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease: From
Clinical Trials to Daily Practice.

Incorvaia C(1), Ridolo E, Riario-Sforza E, Montagni M, Riario-Sforza GG.

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary Rehabilitation Unit, ICP Hospital, Via Bignami 1, Milan, Italy.
cristoforo.incorvaia@gmail.com.

Indacaterol was introduced as an agent of the new generation of very long acting 
beta2-agonists (VLABA) that provides a 24-hour activity of bronchodilation and
allows a once-daily OD dosing. The first trial showed a significantly higher
efficacy of indacaterol vs. placebo in patients with chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD). The following trials were aimed at evaluating its
performance compared with other bronchodilators. The results can be summarized in
a comparable efficacy of indacaterol, mainly assessed by the increase in FEV1
value but also by quality of life and other patient- reported outcomes (PROs),
compared with the OD antimuscarinic tiotropium bromide, and in a slightly higher 
efficacy compared with the LABA formoterol and salmeterol administered
twice-daily. No problems of safety and tolerability were reported in the trials
as well as in specific studies, every kind of adverse event, including
cardiovascular effects, being similarly frequent with indacaterol and with
placebo. Concerning the real-life management, in respect to LABA, the OD dosing
makes indacaterol more convenient for COPD patients and is likely to positively
influence the patient's adherence. Since adherence to medical treatment of
chronic diseases, and particularly COPD is a crucial issue in medicine, such
aspect should confer to indacaterol a valuable role in clinical practice. The
recently approved combination of indacaterol with the antimuscarinic
glycopyrronium [QVA149], based on the demonstration of positive effects on both
lung function and PROs, is likely to be a further option for patients with severe
COPD.


PMID: 24882396  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Expert Rev Respir Med. 2014 Jun;8(3):357-79. doi: 10.1586/17476348.2014.910457.
Epub 2014 May 7.

Recent advances in COPD disease management with fixed-dose long-acting
combination therapies.

Bateman ED(1), Mahler DA, Vogelmeier CF, Wedzicha JA, Patalano F, Banerji D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Pulmonology, University of Cape Town,
George Street, Mowbray 7700, Cape Town, South Africa.

Combinations of two long-acting bronchodilators and long-acting bronchodilators
with inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) are recommended therapies in the management of
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Three fixed-dose combination
products have recently been approved for the treatment of COPD (the long-acting
β2-agonist plus long-acting muscarinic antagonist [LABA/LAMA] combinations
glycopyrronium/indacaterol [QVA149] and umeclidinium/vilanterol, and the LABA/ICS
fluticasone furoate/vilanterol), with others currently in late-stage development.
LABA/LAMA and LABA/ICS combination therapies demonstrate positive effects on both
lung function and patient-reported outcomes, with significant improvements
observed with LABA/LAMA combinations compared with placebo, each component alone 
and other comparators in current use. No new safety concerns have been observed
with combinations of long-acting bronchodilators. Combinations of two long-acting
bronchodilators represent a new and convenient treatment option in COPD. This
review summarizes published efficacy and safety data from clinical trials of both
LABA/LAMA and novel LABA/ICS combinations in patients with COPD.

DOI: 10.1586/17476348.2014.910457 
PMID: 24802656  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2014 Apr 1;9:331-8. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S60362.
eCollection 2014.

Clinical benefit of fixed-dose dual bronchodilation with glycopyrronium and
indacaterol once daily in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: a 
systematic review.

Ulrik CS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Hvidovre Hospital and University of
Copenhagen, Hvidovre, Denmark.

BACKGROUND AND AIM: Long-acting bronchodilators are the preferred option for
maintenance therapy of patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD). The aim of this review is to provide an overview of the clinical studies 
evaluating the clinical efficacy of the once-daily fixed-dose dual bronchodilator
combination of indacaterol and glycopyrronium bromide in patients suffering from 
COPD.
METHODS: This study comprised a systematic review of randomized controlled trials
identified through systematic searches of different databases of published
trials.
RESULTS: Nine trials (6,166 participants) were included. Fixed-dose once-daily
indacaterol/glycopyrronium seems to be safe and well tolerated in patients with
COPD. Compared with single therapy with other long-acting bronchodilators
(indacaterol, glycopyrronium, and tiotropium) and fixed-combination long-acting
β2-agonist/inhaled corticosteroid (salmeterol/fluticasone twice daily),
once-daily fixed-dose indacaterol/glycopyrronium has clinically important effects
on symptoms, including dyspnea score, health status, level of lung function, and 
rate of moderate or severe exacerbations in patients with moderate-to-very severe
COPD (Global initiative for chronic Obstructive Lung Disease [GOLD] spirometric
criteria). Furthermore, a very recent study has shown that fixed-dose
indacaterol/glycopyrronium improves exercise endurance time compared with
placebo, although no significant difference was observed between fixed-dose
indacaterol/glycopyrronium and tiotropium.
CONCLUSION: Fixed-dose indacaterol/glycopyrronium has clinically relevant effects
on important COPD outcome measures and is, in general, superior to therapy with a
single long-acting bronchodilator (with or without inhaled corticosteroid)
indicating long-acting dual bronchodilation as a potential important maintenance 
therapeutic option for patients with symptomatic COPD, possibly also for the
treatment of naïve patients.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S60362 
PMCID: PMC3979690
PMID: 24729699  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Respirology. 2014 Apr;19(3):403-10. doi: 10.1111/resp.12256. Epub 2014 Feb 21.

Computed tomography assessment of airway dimensions with combined tiotropium and 
indacaterol therapy in COPD patients.

Hoshino M(1), Ohtawa J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Atami Hospital, International University
of Health and Welfare, Atami, Japan.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Combining a long-acting muscarinic antagonist with a
long-acting β₂-agonist has been shown to be pharmacologically useful in patients 
with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). The aim of the present study
was to evaluate the effectiveness of the dual bronchodilator therapy on airway
dimensions in COPD.
METHODS: Patients (n = 54) were randomly assigned to receive tiotropium (18 μg
once daily), indacaterol (150 μg once daily) or tiotropium plus indacaterol for
16 weeks. Quantitative computed tomography (CT), pulmonary function and health
status (St. George's Respiratory Questionnaire) were measured.
RESULTS: Compared with tiotropium or indacaterol alone, combination therapy
resulted in a significant decrease in percentage wall area (WA%) and wall
thickness, corrected for body surface area, and an increase in luminal area
(Ai/BSA). Concurrent treatment was superior to monotherapy in physiological
indices, including forced vital capacity, forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV₁) 
and inspiratory capacity. The changes in WA% and Ai/BSA were significantly
correlated with changes in FEV₁ (r = -0.44, P < 0.01 and r = 0.37, P < 0.01).
There were more significant improvements in SGRQ scores after treatment with
combined therapy than with either treatment alone.
CONCLUSIONS: Concurrent therapy with tiotropium and indacaterol is effective for 
COPD patients to promote reduction in airway wall thickness, bronchodilation, and
improvements in lung function compared with a single inhaler.

© 2014 The Authors. Respirology © 2014 Asian Pacific Society of Respirology.

DOI: 10.1111/resp.12256 
PMID: 24708031  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2014 Mar 26;(3):CD010844. doi:
10.1002/14651858.CD010844.pub2.

Long-acting inhaled therapy (beta-agonists, anticholinergics and steroids) for
COPD: a network meta-analysis.

Kew KM(1), Dias S, Cates CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Population Health Research Institute, St George's, University of London,
Cranmer Terrace, London, UK, SW17 0RE.

BACKGROUND: Pharmacological therapy for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD) is aimed at relieving symptoms, improving quality of life and preventing
or treating exacerbations.Treatment tends to begin with one inhaler, and
additional therapies are introduced as necessary. For persistent or worsening
symptoms, long-acting inhaled therapies taken once or twice daily are preferred
over short-acting inhalers. Several Cochrane reviews have looked at the risks and
benefits of specific long-acting inhaled therapies compared with placebo or other
treatments. However for patients and clinicians, it is important to understand
the merits of these treatments relative to each other, and whether a particular
class of inhaled therapies is more beneficial than the others.
OBJECTIVES: To assess the efficacy of treatment options for patients whose
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease cannot be controlled by short-acting
therapies alone. The review will not look at combination therapies usually
considered later in the course of the disease.As part of this network
meta-analysis, we will address the following issues.1. How does long-term
efficacy compare between different pharmacological treatments for COPD?2. Are
there limitations in the current evidence base that may compromise the
conclusions drawn by this network meta-analysis? If so, what are the implications
for future research?
SEARCH METHODS: We identified randomised controlled trials (RCTs) in existing
Cochrane reviews by searching the Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews (CDSR).
In addition, we ran a comprehensive citation search on the Cochrane Airways Group
Register of trials (CAGR) and checked manufacturer websites and reference lists
of other reviews. The most recent searches were conducted in September 2013.
SELECTION CRITERIA: We included parallel-group RCTs of at least 6 months'
duration recruiting people with COPD. Studies were included if they compared any 
of the following treatments versus any other: long-acting beta2-agonists (LABAs; 
formoterol, indacaterol, salmeterol); long-acting muscarinic antagonists (LAMAs; 
aclidinium, glycopyrronium, tiotropium); inhaled corticosteroids (ICSs;
budesonide, fluticasone, mometasone); combination long-acting beta2-agonist
(LABA) and inhaled corticosteroid (LABA/ICS) (formoterol/budesonide,
formoterol/mometasone, salmeterol/fluticasone); and placebo.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: We conducted a network meta-analysis using Markov
chain Monte Carlo methods for two efficacy outcomes: St George's Respiratory
Questionnaire (SGRQ) total score and trough forced expiratory volume in one
second (FEV1). We modelled the relative effectiveness of any two treatments as a 
function of each treatment relative to the reference treatment (placebo). We
assumed that treatment effects were similar within treatment classes (LAMA, LABA,
ICS, LABA/ICS). We present estimates of class effects, variability between
treatments within each class and individual treatment effects compared with every
other.To justify the analyses, we assessed the trials for clinical and
methodological transitivity across comparisons. We tested the robustness of our
analyses by performing sensitivity analyses for lack of blinding and by
considering six- and 12-month data separately.
MAIN RESULTS: We identified 71 RCTs randomly assigning 73,062 people with COPD to
184 treatment arms of interest. Trials were similar with regards to methodology, 
inclusion and exclusion criteria and key baseline characteristics. Participants
were more often male, aged in their mid sixties, with FEV1 predicted normal
between 40% and 50% and with substantial smoking histories (40+ pack-years). The 
risk of bias was generally low, although missing information made it hard to
judge risk of selection bias and selective outcome reporting. Fixed effects were 
used for SGRQ analyses, and random effects for Trough FEV1 analyses, based on
model fit statistics and deviance information criteria (DIC). SGRQ SGRQ data were
available in 42 studies (n = 54,613). At six months, 39 pairwise comparisons were
made between 18 treatments in 25 studies (n = 27,024). Combination LABA/ICS was
the highest ranked intervention, with a mean improvement over placebo of -3.89
units at six months (95% credible interval (CrI) -4.70 to -2.97) and -3.60 at 12 
months (95% CrI -4.63 to -2.34). LAMAs and LABAs were ranked second and third at 
six months, with mean differences of -2.63 (95% CrI -3.53 to -1.97) and -2.29
(95% CrI -3.18 to -1.53), respectively. Inhaled corticosteroids were ranked
fourth (MD -2.00, 95% CrI -3.06 to -0.87). Class differences between LABA, LAMA
and ICS were less prominent at 12 months. Indacaterol and aclidinium were ranked 
somewhat higher than other members of their classes, and formoterol 12 mcg,
budesonide 400 mcg and formoterol/mometasone combination were ranked lower within
their classes. There was considerable overlap in credible intervals and rankings 
for both classes and individual treatments. Trough FEV1 Trough FEV1 data were
available in 46 studies (n = 47,409). At six months, 41 pairwise comparisons were
made between 20 treatments in 31 studies (n = 29,271). As for SGRQ, combination
LABA/ICS was the highest ranked class, with a mean improvement over placebo of
133.3 mL at six months (95% CrI 100.6 to 164.0) and slightly less at 12 months
(mean difference (MD) 100, 95% CrI 55.5 to 140.1). LAMAs (MD 103.5, 95% CrI 81.8 
to 124.9) and LABAs (MD 99.4, 95% CrI 72.0 to 127.8) showed roughly equivalent
results at six months, and ICSs were the fourth ranked class (MD 65.4, 95% CrI
33.1 to 96.9). As with SGRQ, initial differences between classes were not so
prominent at 12 months. Indacaterol and salmeterol/fluticasone were ranked
slightly better than others in their class, and formoterol 12, aclidinium,
budesonide and formoterol/budesonide combination were ranked lower within their
classes. All credible intervals for individual rankings were wide.
AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: This network meta-analysis compares four different classes 
of long-acting inhalers for people with COPD who need more than short-acting
bronchodilators. Quality of life and lung function were improved most on
combination inhalers (LABA and ICS) and least on ICS alone at 6 and at 12 months.
Overall LAMA and LABA inhalers had similar effects, particularly at 12 months.
The network has demonstrated the benefit of ICS when added to LABA for these
outcomes in participants who largely had an FEV1 that was less than 50%
predicted, but the additional expense of combination inhalers and any potential
for increased adverse events (which has been established by other reviews)
require consideration. Our findings are in keeping with current National
Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) guidelines.

DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD010844.pub2 
PMID: 24671923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Drugs. 2014 Mar;74(4):465-88. doi: 10.1007/s40265-014-0194-8.

QVA149 (indacaterol/glycopyrronium fixed-dose combination): a review of its use
in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Frampton JE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Adis, 41 Centorian Drive, Private Bag 65901, Mairangi Bay, North Shore, 0754, 
Auckland, New Zealand, demail@springer.com.

QVA149 (indacaterol/glycopyrronium) [Xoterna(®) Breezhaler(®), Ultibro(®)
Breezhaler(®)] is an inhaled fixed-dose combination of indacaterol (a long-acting
selective β2-adrenergic receptor agonist [LABA]) and glycopyrronium (a
long-acting muscarinic receptor antagonist [LAMA]) that has been approved in the 
EU and Japan for the symptomatic control of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD) in adults. In phase III studies, QVA149 significantly improved
bronchodilation versus indacaterol, glycopyrronium or tiotropium alone and the
LABA/inhaled corticosteroid fixed-dose combination salmeterol/fluticasone. These 
improvements in lung function, which were rapid in onset and maintained during
long-term treatment, were generally associated with significant improvements in
dyspnoea, health status, COPD exacerbation risk, patient symptoms, and rescue
medication use. The SHINE and ILLUMINATE studies in low (exacerbation) risk
patients with moderate to severe disease suggest that QVA149 may offer more
symptomatic relief than tiotropium and salmeterol/fluticasone. Similarly, the
SPARK study in high (exacerbation) risk patients with severe or very severe
disease showed that QVA149 was more effective than glycopyrronium in preventing
moderate to severe exacerbations, and suggests that QVA149 may offer more
symptomatic relief than LAMA monotherapy. Another phase III study comparing
QVA149 with salmeterol/fluticasone in high-risk patients with moderate to very
severe disease (FLAME) is ongoing. QVA149 is generally well tolerated, with no
new safety signals identified compared with its monocomponents. Bronchodilators
remain central to the symptomatic management of COPD. When dual bronchodilation
is indicated, QVA149 offers the convenience of two bronchodilators in a single
inhaler coupled with a simple, once-daily dosing regimen that may encourage
better treatment adherence. Therefore, it is a valuable option in the treatment
of COPD.

DOI: 10.1007/s40265-014-0194-8 
PMID: 24604791  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2014 Feb 24;9:215-28. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S51592. 
eCollection 2014.

Efficacy and safety of coadministration of once-daily indacaterol and
glycopyrronium versus indacaterol alone in COPD patients: the GLOW6 study.

Vincken W(1), Aumann J(2), Chen H(3), Henley M(3), McBryan D(4), Goyal P(4).

Author information: 
(1)Respiratory Division, University Hospital, UZ Brussel, Free University of
Brussels, Brussels, Belgium. (2)Longartsenpraktijk, Prins Bisschopssingel,
Hasselt, Belgium. (3)Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corporation, East Hanover, NJ, USA.
(4)Novartis Pharma AG, Basel, Switzerland.

BACKGROUND: Addition of a second bronchodilator from a different pharmacological 
class may benefit patients with moderate-to-severe chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD) whose symptoms are insufficiently controlled by bronchodilator
monotherapy. GLOW6 evaluated the efficacy and safety of once-daily
coadministration of the long-acting β2-agonist indacaterol (IND) and the
long-acting muscarinic antagonist glycopyrronium (GLY) versus IND alone in
patients with moderate-to-severe COPD.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: In this randomized, double-blind, parallel group,
placebo-controlled, 12-week study, patients were randomized 1:1 to IND 150 μg and
GLY 50 μg daily (IND + GLY) or IND 150 μg daily and placebo (IND + PBO) (all
delivered via separate Breezhaler® devices). The primary objective was to
demonstrate the superiority of IND + GLY versus IND + PBO for trough forced
expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1) at week 12. Other end points included trough
FEV1 at day 1, FEV1 area under the curve from 30 minutes to 4 hours
(AUC30min-4h), peak FEV1, inspiratory capacity and trough forced vital capacity
(FVC) at day 1 and week 12, and transition dyspnea index (TDI) focal score, COPD 
symptoms, and rescue medication use over 12 weeks.
RESULTS: A total of 449 patients were randomized (IND + GLY, 226; IND + PBO,
223); 94% completed the study. On day 1 and at week 12, IND + GLY significantly
improved trough FEV1 versus IND + PBO, with treatment differences of 74 mL (95%
CI 46-101 mL) and 64 mL (95% CI 28-99 mL), respectively (both P<0.001). IND + GLY
significantly improved postdose peak FEV1, FEV1 AUC30min-4h, and trough FVC at
day 1 and week 12 versus IND + PBO (all P<0.01). TDI focal score and COPD
symptoms (percentage of days able to perform usual daily activities and change
from baseline in mean daytime respiratory score) were significantly improved with
IND + GLY versus IND + PBO (P<0.05). The incidence of adverse events was similar 
for the two treatment groups.
CONCLUSION: In patients with moderate-to-severe COPD, once-daily coadministration
of IND and GLY provides significant and sustained improvement in bronchodilation 
versus IND alone from day 1, with significant improvements in patient-centered
outcomes.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S51592 
PMCID: PMC3940646
PMID: 24596459  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Int J Clin Pharmacol Ther. 2014 May;52(5):369-80. doi: 10.5414/CP202034.

Effect of dual bronchodilation with QVA149 on cardiac safety in healthy
volunteers.

Drollmann A, Brown M, Sechaud R, Perry S, Hara H, Jones I, Febbraro S.

OBJECTIVES: QVA149 is a dual bronchodilator, containing a fixed-dose combination 
of the long-acting β2-agonist indacaterol and long-acting muscarinic antagonist
glycopyrronium, for the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD). Here we assess the potential of QVA149 (440/200 μg) at 4-fold the
therapeutic dose for causing cardiac pharmacodynamic (PD) effects.
METHODS: This double-blind, randomized study estimated the time-matched largest
heart rate (HR) change and average HR change (over 24 hours) from baseline for
QVA149 vs. placebo in healthy subjects. Similar analyses were done for QVA149 vs.
indacaterol 600 μg, glycopyrronium 200 μg, and salmeterol 200 μg. The
time-matched and average change from baseline in QT interval corrected for HR
using Fridericia's formula (QTcF), effects on serum potassium and blood glucose, 
pharmacokinetic (PK) parameters, and safety were also assessed.
RESULTS: Of 50 subjects randomized, 43 completed the study. QVA149, when compared
with placebo, showed the time-matched largest mean increase and decrease in HR of
5.69 bpm and -2.51 bpm, respectively, and average HR change from baseline of 0.62
bpm. QVA149 showed no tachycardic potential compared with indacaterol and no
relevant tachycardic effect compared with glycopyrronium. No consistent
differences were seen in the time-matched largest mean change and average change 
from baseline in QTcF for QVA149 vs. other treatments. There were no relevant
effects of QVA149 on serum potassium and blood glucose. There was no apparent
PK/PD relationship between the observed exposures to indacaterol and
glycopyrronium in QVA149 on HR and QTcF. There were no deaths or serious adverse 
events.
CONCLUSION: Overall, short-term administration of QVA149 showed a good
cardiovascular safety and tolerability profile in healthy subjects.

DOI: 10.5414/CP202034 
PMID: 24569129  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Respir Med. 2014 Apr;108(4):584-92. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2014.01.006. Epub 2014
Jan 21.

Effect of QVA149 on lung volumes and exercise tolerance in COPD patients: the
BRIGHT study.

Beeh KM(1), Korn S(2), Beier J(3), Jadayel D(4), Henley M(4), D'Andrea P(5),
Banerji D(5).

Author information: 
(1)insaf Respiratory Research Institute, Wiesbaden, Germany. Electronic address: 
k.beeh@insaf-wi.de. (2)Pulmonary Department, Mainz University Hospital, Mainz,
Germany. (3)insaf Respiratory Research Institute, Wiesbaden, Germany. (4)Novartis
Horsham Research Center, Horsham, UK. (5)Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corporation,
East Hanover, NJ, USA.

INTRODUCTION: QVA149 is a novel, inhaled, once-daily dual bronchodilator
containing a fixed-dose combination of the long-acting β2-agonist indacaterol and
the long-acting muscarinic antagonist glycopyrronium (NVA237), for the treatment 
of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). This study evaluated the effects
of QVA149 on exercise tolerance, hyperinflation, lung function and lung volumes
versus placebo and tiotropium.
METHODS: Patients with moderate-to-severe COPD were randomized to QVA149 110/50
μg, placebo or tiotropium 18 μg once daily in a blinded, 3-period crossover study
for 3 weeks. The primary endpoint was exercise endurance time at Day 21 for
QVA149 versus placebo.
RESULTS: Eighty-five patients were randomized; 86% completed the study. QVA149
significantly improved exercise endurance time at Day 21 compared with placebo
(least squares mean treatment difference 60 s [p = 0.006]). No significant
improvements in exercise endurance time at Day 21 between QVA149 and tiotropium
were found. Dynamic inspiratory capacity (IC) at exercise isotime, trough forced 
expiratory volume in 1 s, residual volume and functional residual capacity showed
significant improvements with QVA149 from Day 1 of treatment that were maintained
throughout the study. The safety profiles were similar across groups.
CONCLUSIONS: In patients with moderate-to-severe COPD, once-daily QVA149
significantly improved exercise endurance time compared with placebo which was
associated with sustained reductions of lung hyperinflation as indicated by
significant improvement in IC at rest and during exercise.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov NCT01294787.
TAKE HOME MESSAGE: Dual bronchodilation with QVA149 decreases lung hyperinflation
and improves exercise tolerance and lung function in patients with
moderate-to-severe COPD.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2014.01.006 
PMID: 24534204  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2014 Jan 21;9:107-14. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S56777. 
eCollection 2014.

Efficacy of indacaterol on quality of life and pulmonary function in patients
with COPD and inhaler device preferences.

Ohno T(1), Wada S(1), Hanada S(1), Sawaguchi H(1), Muraki M(1), Tohda Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine and Allergology, Nara Hospital, Kinki
University Faculty of Medicine, Ikoma, Japan. (2)Department of Respiratory
Medicine and Allergology, Kinki University School of Medicine, Osakasayama,
Japan.

BACKGROUND: Indacaterol is a novel, once-daily, inhaled, long-acting b2-agonist
for patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). The study
objective was to evaluate the efficacy of indacaterol on quality of life and
pulmonary function in patients with COPD in a real-world setting, and also to
evaluate its inhaler device (Breezhaler®), which is important for both adherence 
and management.
METHODS: Twenty-eight outpatients with COPD were treated with indacaterol (150 μg
once daily for 8 weeks), and the effects on pulmonary function were evaluated
using a questionnaire survey with the modified Medical Research Council (mMRC)
dyspnea scale and COPD assessment test (CAT) before and after treatment. Similar 
investigations were also performed separately among different baseline
medications. Moreover, original questionnaire surveys for indacaterol and its
device were performed.
RESULTS: Overall, mMRC dyspnea scale and CAT scores significantly improved
(1.96±1.04 to 1.57±1.07 and 17.39±8.23 to 12.82±8.42, respectively; P<0.05).
Significant improvements in forced vital capacity (FVC) and forced expiratory
volume in 1 second (FEV1) were also observed on pulmonary function tests
(2.91±0.66 L to 3.07±0.65 L and 1.46±0.60 L to 1.58±0.59 L, respectively;
P<0.05). Replacement therapy from salmeterol to indacaterol significantly
improved mMRC and FVC values, but did not significantly improve CAT scores or
other pulmonary functions. Add-on therapy with indacaterol significantly improved
mMRC score, CAT score, FVC, and FEV1, regardless of whether tiotropium was used
as a baseline treatment. All subjects in a questionnaire survey found the inhaler
device easy to use. There were no serious adverse events leading to treatment
discontinuation.
CONCLUSION: Indacaterol is thought to be effective and well tolerated as a
bronchodilator for the management of COPD. Treatment with indacaterol in addition
to a long-acting muscarinic antagonist was also useful.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S56777 
PMCID: PMC3904808
PMID: 24489464  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Lancet Respir Med. 2013 Sep;1(7):524-33. doi: 10.1016/S2213-2600(13)70158-9. Epub
2013 Aug 21.

Once-daily indacaterol versus tiotropium for patients with severe chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (INVIGORATE): a randomised, blinded, parallel-group
study.

Decramer ML(1), Chapman KR(2), Dahl R(3), Frith P(4), Devouassoux G(5), Fritscher
C(6), Cameron R(7), Shoaib M(7), Lawrence D(8), Young D(7), McBryan D(9);
INVIGORATE investigators.

Author information: 
(1)Respiratory Division, University Hospital Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. Electronic 
address: marc.decramer@uzleuven.be. (2)University Health Network, Toronto Western
Hospital, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. (3)Department of Respiratory Diseases, Århus 
University Hospital, Århus C, Denmark. (4)Department of Respiratory Medicine,
Flinders University, Adelaide, Australia. (5)Service de Pneumologie, Hôpital de
la Croix-Rousse, Hospices civils de Lyon, UCB Lyon 1, France. (6)Pontifícia
Universidade Católica do Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil. (7)Novartis Horsham Research 
Centre, West Sussex, UK. (8)Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corporation, East Hanover,
NJ, USA. (9)Novartis Pharma AG, Basel, Switzerland.

Comment in
    Lancet Respir Med. 2013 Sep;1(7):499-501.

BACKGROUND: We compared the efficacy and safety of indacaterol and tiotropium in 
patients with severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and a history
of at least one moderate to severe exacerbation in the previous 12 months.
METHODS: In this multicentre, randomised, blinded, double-dummy, parallel group
study, we enrolled patients aged 40 years or older with severe COPD and at least 
one exacerbation within the previous year. We used a computer-generated sequence 
to randomly allocate patients (1:1; stratified by baseline inhaled corticosteroid
use, with the balance of treatments maintained at country level) to receive
either indacaterol (150 μg) or tiotropium (18 μg) once-daily for 52 weeks. Our
primary and key secondary objectives were to investigate whether indacaterol was 
non-inferior to tiotropium for trough forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1) at
week 12 (primary endpoint), and for rate of exacerbations at week 52 (secondary
endpoint). Analysis populations for the primary and key secondary endpoints were 
per-protocol sets. The safety set included all patients who received at least one
dose of study drug. This study is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, number
NCT00845728.
FINDINGS: Between March 16, 2009, and July 5, 2012, we enrolled and randomly
allocated 3444 patients: 1723 to indacaterol and 1721 to tiotropium. At week 12, 
the estimated least squares mean trough FEV1 difference between the groups was
-0.011 L (least squares mean with indacaterol [n=1450] 1.134 L [SE 0.008] vs
tiotropium [n=1467] 1.145 L [0.008]; one-sided 97.5% CI lower limit -0.026 L;
p<0.0001). The lower limit of the 97.5% CI was above the prespecified
non-inferiority margin of -0.055 L, suggesting that indacaterol was non-inferior 
to tiotropium. Indacaterol did not show non-inferiority in terms of annualised
exacerbation rates: 0.79 (indacaterol, n=1529) versus 0.61 (tiotropium, n=1543); 
ratio 1.29 (one-sided 97.5% CI upper limit 1.44). In the safety set, we recorded 
no between-group difference in the number of patients who had adverse events
(indacaterol 1119 [65%] of 1721 patients vs tiotropium 1065 [62%] of 1718
patients) or serious adverse events (indacaterol, 263 [15%] of 1721 patients vs
tiotropium, 255 [15%] of 1718 patients). Respiratory disorders, particularly
worsening of COPD, were the most common adverse events (COPD: indacaterol, 747
[43%] of 1721 patients and tiotropium, 665 [39%] of 1718 patients) and serious
adverse events (COPD: indacaterol, 147 [9%] of 1721 patients and tiotropium, 121 
[7%] of 1718 patients).
INTERPRETATION: Indacaterol and tiotropium provided clinically relevant
improvements in lung function with comparable safety profiles. Tiotropium
afforded greater protection from exacerbations, although the absolute number of
events was small and the difference between treatments is of uncertain clinical
importance. The present data offer evidence consistent with current guidelines.
FUNDING: Novartis Pharma AG.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S2213-2600(13)70158-9 
PMID: 24461613  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Lancet Respir Med. 2013 May;1(3):199-209. doi: 10.1016/S2213-2600(13)70052-3.
Epub 2013 Apr 23.

Analysis of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease exacerbations with the dual
bronchodilator QVA149 compared with glycopyrronium and tiotropium (SPARK): a
randomised, double-blind, parallel-group study.

Wedzicha JA(1), Decramer M(2), Ficker JH(3), Niewoehner DE(4), Sandström T(5),
Taylor AF(6), D'Andrea P(6), Arrasate C(6), Chen H(6), Banerji D(6).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Respiratory Medicine, University College London, Royal Free Campus,
London, UK. Electronic address: w.wedzicha@ucl.ac.uk. (2)Respiratory Division,
University Hospitals, Leuven, Belgium. (3)Paracelsus Medical University
Nuremberg, Nuremberg, Germany; Klinikum Nuremberg, Department of Respiratory
Medicine, Allergology, and Sleep Medicine, Nuremberg, Germany. (4)University of
Minnesota, Minneapolis VA Health Care Center, Pulmonary Section, Minneapolis, MN,
USA. (5)Umeå University, Department of Public Health and Clinical Medicine, Umeå,
Sweden. (6)Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corporation, East Hanover, NJ, USA.

Comment in
    Lancet Respir Med. 2013 May;1(3):176-7.
    Lancet Respir Med. 2013 Jul;1(5):e22-3.
    Lancet Respir Med. 2013 Jul;1(5):e23.

BACKGROUND: We evaluated the effect of dual, longacting inhaled bronchodilator
treatment on exacerbations in patients with severe and very severe chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
METHODS: In this parallel-group study, 2224 patients (aged ≥40 years, Global
Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease stages III-IV, and one or more
moderate COPD exacerbation in the past year) were randomly assigned (1:1:1; via
interactive voice response or web system; stratified for smoking status) to
once-daily QVA149 (fixed-dose combination of indacaterol 110 μg and
glycopyrronium 50 μg), glycopyrronium 50 μg, or tiotropium 18 μg for 64 weeks.
Assignment to QVA149 and glycopyrronium was double-blind; tiotropium was
open-label. Efficacy was assessed in all patients randomly assigned to treatment 
groups who received at least one dose of study drug; safety was assessed in all
patients who received at least one dose whether or not they were assigned to a
group. The primary objective was to show superiority of QVA149 versus
glycopyrronium for rate of moderate to severe COPD exacerbations (defined by
worsening symptoms and categorised by treatment requirements) during treatment.
This completed trial is registered at ClinicalTrials.gov, NCT01120691.
FINDINGS: Between April 27, 2010, and July 11, 2012, 741 patients were randomly
assigned to receive QVA149, 741 to receive glycopyrronium, and 742 to receive
tiotropium (729, 739, and 737 patients, respectively, analysed for efficacy).
QVA149 significantly reduced the rate of moderate to severe exacerbations versus 
glycopyrronium by 12% (annualised rate of exacerbations 0·84 [95% CI 0·75-0·94]
vs 0·95 [0·85-1·06]; rate ratio 0·88, 95% CI 0·77-0·99, p=0·038). Adverse events 
(including exacerbations) were reported for 678 (93%) of 729 patients on QVA149, 
694 (94%) of 740 on glycopyrronium, and 686 (93%) of 737 on tiotropium. Incidence
of serious adverse events was similar between groups (167 [23%] patients on
QVA149, 179 [24%] on glycopyrronium, and 165 [22%] on tiotropium); COPD worsening
was the most frequent serious adverse event (107 [15%] patients on QVA149, 116
[16%] on glycopyrronium, 87 [12%] on tiotropium).
INTERPRETATIONS: The dual bronchodilator QVA149 was superior in preventing
moderate to severe COPD exacerbations compared with the single longacting
antimuscarinic bronchodilator glycopyrronium, with concomitant improvements in
lung function and health status. These results indicate the potential of dual
bronchodilation as a treatment option for patients with severe and very severe
COPD.
FUNDING: Novartis Pharma AG.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S2213-2600(13)70052-3 
PMID: 24429126  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. J Thorac Dis. 2013 Dec;5(6):806-14. doi: 10.3978/j.issn.2072-1439.2013.10.11.

Role of indacaterol, a once-daily bronchodilator, in chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease.

Seth HD(1), Sultan S(1), Gotfried MH(2).

Author information: 
(1)Banner Good Samaritan Medical Center, Phoenix, AZ, USA. (2)Pulmonary
Associates PA, Phoenix, AZ, USA ; University of Arizona, Phoenix, AZ, USA.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is characterized by progressive
airflow obstruction that can lead to lung destruction and dyspnea. Although there
has been a slight reduction in mortality in recent decades, COPD is still a
serious health problem that has enormous costs and utilizes significant medical
resources. There have been a number of pharmacologic interventions that have been
developed for the treatment of COPD. Current guidelines recommend the use of
long-acting bronchodilators for the treatment of moderate and severe stage COPD, 
since they have been shown to improve lung function, respiratory symptoms, and
quality of life. Indacaterol is a once-daily beta2-agonist (β2-agonist) delivered
by a single-dose dry powder inhaler used for the treatment of COPD. It is
currently approved at a dose of 75 μg in the United States and a dose of 150 μg
with a maximal dose of 300 μg in Europe and other countries. Several studies show
that indacaterol was statistically superior to both long-acting β2-agonist,
formoterol and salmeterol, as well as, noninferior to tiotropium. Indacaterol is 
generally well tolerated and has a good safety profile. Other studies show that
there is an additive bronchodilator response with the addition of indacaterol to 
tiotropium, which would provide a once-daily treatment option for patient with
moderate to severe COPD. This review discusses the pharmacokinetic, comparative
efficacy and safety data for indacaterol.

DOI: 10.3978/j.issn.2072-1439.2013.10.11 
PMCID: PMC3886694
PMID: 24409359  [PubMed]


89. Respirology. 2014 Feb;19(2):231-8. doi: 10.1111/resp.12211. Epub 2014 Jan 3.

Effect of once-daily indacaterol in a predominantly Chinese population with
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: a 26-week Asia-Pacific study.

Yao W(1), Wang C, Zhong N, Han X, Wu C, Yan X, Chen P, Yang W, Henley M, Kramer
B.

Author information: 
(1)Peking University Third Hospital, Beijing, China.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: This study, in a predominantly Chinese population,
investigated the efficacy and safety of a once-daily (o.d.) inhaled
ultra-long-acting β2 -agonist indacaterol for the treatment of moderate-to-severe
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
METHODS: This is a 26-week, double-blind study on randomized patients who
received indacaterol 150 μg or 300 μg or placebo o.d. The primary variable was
trough forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1 , average of 23 h 10 min and 23 h
45 min post-dose values) at Week 12. Health status (St George's Respiratory
Questionnaire, SGRQ), dyspnoea (transition dyspnoea index, TDI) and safety were
evaluated over 26 weeks.
RESULTS: Of the 563 patients randomized, 561 (89.8% Chinese) received treatment
and 482 completed. At Week 12, trough FEV1 improved significantly for indacaterol
150 and 300 μg versus placebo (1.32, 1.29 vs 1.17; P < 0.001 for both
comparisons), with differences exceeding the pre-specified minimal clinically
important difference of 0.12 L. At Week 26, TDI score was superior to placebo for
indacaterol 150 and 300 μg (0.82, 1.15; P < 0.01), as was the percentage of
patients with a clinically relevant improvement (≥1 point) (74.1%, 78.6% vs
55.5%; P < 0.05). Both doses provided ≥4-point improvements from baseline in SGRQ
score at Week 26 that were numerically greater than placebo (unadjusted means:
-9.6, -8.8 vs -7.0), with a similar pattern in percentage of patients with
clinically relevant improvements in SGRQ score (65.0%, 61.5% vs 60.6%).
Incidences of adverse events were comparable across treatment groups.
CONCLUSIONS: Indacaterol delivered effective bronchodilation with significant
improvements in breathlessness and health status in this predominantly Chinese
population.

© 2014 The Authors. Respirology © 2014 Asian Pacific Society of Respirology.

DOI: 10.1111/resp.12211 
PMID: 24383720  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2014;9:1-7. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S24940. Epub 2013 
Dec 6.

New developments in the management of COPD: clinical utility of indacaterol 75
μg.

Steiropoulos P(1), Archontogeorgis K(1), Nena E(2), Bouros D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pneumonology, Medical School, Democritus University of Thrace,
Alexandroupolis, Greece. (2)Laboratory of Hygiene and Environmental Protection,
Medical School, Democritus University of Thrace, Alexandroupolis, Greece.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a global health challenge and a
major cause of mortality worldwide. Bronchodilators, particularly long-acting
β2-agonists and long-acting antimuscarinic agents, used singly or in combination,
aim to improve lung function, reduce symptoms, prevent exacerbations, and enhance
quality of life of COPD patients. Indacaterol is a novel, inhaled, long-acting
β2-agonist, with rapid onset of action and once-daily dosing providing 24-hour
bronchodilation. Currently, the recommended dose differs between Europe (150 μg; 
maximum 300 μg) and USA (75 μg), the latter is lower than that assessed in the
majority of the conducted studies. This review summarises published evidence
regarding the efficacy, tolerability, and safety of indacaterol at a dose of 75
μg. Indacaterol 75 μg was found to be superior than placebo regarding lung
function, dyspnea, health status, use of rescue medication, and rate of
exacerbations. Furthermore, indacaterol 75 μg was well tolerated, while the most 
frequent adverse effect was deterioration of COPD occurring at a frequency
similar to placebo, without major cardiovascular adverse effects. In conclusion, 
indacaterol 75 μg, administered once daily, is efficacious and has an excellent
tolerability and safety profile, and is therefore a valid alternative in the
treatment of COPD patients.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S24940 
PMCID: PMC3862584
PMID: 24353414  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2013;8:613-9. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S53707. Epub
2013 Dec 9.

Indacaterol therapy in moderate-to-severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: 
findings from a single-center primary care cohort.

Singh MP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Horsefair Practice Group, Sandy Lane Health Centre, Rugeley, UK.

BACKGROUND: Once-daily long-acting β2-agonists (LABAs) are an important treatment
option, either alone or in combination with other inhaled long-acting
bronchodilators in the management of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD).
AIMS/OBJECTIVES: To audit the effectiveness of indacaterol as maintenance therapy
in patients with moderate-to-severe COPD (Global initiative for chronic
Obstructive Lung Disease [GOLD] stage II/III).
METHODS: This was a single-center audit of a primary care COPD cohort comprising 
all patients treated with indacaterol following treatment escalation (as per
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence guidelines) or failure with
other therapies. The sample was restricted to patients treated for a minimum of
12 months with indacaterol, for whom preswitching and follow-up spirometry as
well as exacerbation frequency data were available (GOLD spirometry guidelines). 
Pulmonary function was assessed by spirometry (recorded as forced expiratory
volume in 1 second [FEV1] expressed as percentage predicted). Relevant
self-reported qualitative information was recorded in descriptive terms for
quality of life (QoL) assessment.
RESULTS: A total of 15 patients met the audit inclusion criteria (66.6% male,
mean age 64.9±7.7 years). COPD disease duration ranged from 1 to 22 years; 93%
had GOLD stage II or III COPD. Follow-up ranged in duration from 12 to 27 months.
Indacaterol was associated with a significant reduction in exacerbation frequency
compared with the 12 months prior to initiation (P=0.02). In those patients who
experienced three or more exacerbations/year, mean exacerbation rate fell from
5.43±1.07 to 2.43±0.2 after 12 months treatment with indacaterol (P=0.02). A
reduction in dyspnea was noted in 53% of patients. Similarly, improvements in
exercise tolerance and well-being were self-reported in 67% and 93%,
respectively.
CONCLUSION: Indacaterol was found to be an effective LABA as an escalation or
switch medication in patients with moderate-to-severe COPD. Indacaterol was
effective both as monotherapy and in combination with a long-acting muscarinic
antagonist. Switching to indacaterol from a LABA/inhaled corticosteroid
fixed-combination inhaler significantly reduced the number of acute exacerbations
and also improved self-reported QoL.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S53707 
PMCID: PMC3862397
PMID: 24353411  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Lancet Respir Med. 2013 Mar;1(1):51-60. doi: 10.1016/S2213-2600(12)70052-8. Epub 
2012 Dec 6.

Efficacy and safety of once-daily QVA149 compared with twice-daily
salmeterol-fluticasone in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(ILLUMINATE): a randomised, double-blind, parallel group study.

Vogelmeier CF(1), Bateman ED, Pallante J, Alagappan VK, D'Andrea P, Chen H,
Banerji D.

Author information: 
(1)Universitätsklinikum Gießen und Marburg, Marburg, Germany. Electronic address:
claus.vogelmeier@med.uni-marburg.de.

Erratum in
    Lancet Respir Med. 2013 Apr;1(2):101.

Comment in
    Lancet Respir Med. 2013 Mar;1(1):6-7.

BACKGROUND: QVA149 is an inhaled fixed-dose combination therapy under development
for the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). It combines
indacaterol (a longacting β2-agonist) with glycopyrronium (a longacting
muscarinic antagonist) as a dual bronchodilator. We aimed to compare the
efficacy, safety, and tolerability of QVA149 versus salmeterol-fluticasone (SFC) 
over 26 weeks in patients with moderate-to-severe COPD.
METHODS: In this multicentre double-blind, double-dummy, parallel-group study,
523 patients (age 40 years or older, Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive
Lung Disease [GOLD] stages II-III, without exacerbations in the previous year)
were randomly assigned (1:1; via automated, interactive response technology and
stratified for smoking status) to once-daily QVA149 110/50 μg or twice-daily SFC 
50/500 μg for 26 weeks. Efficacy was assessed in the full analysis set
(randomised patients who received at least one dose of study drug); safety was
assessed in all patients who received at least one dose of study drug. The
primary endpoint was to demonstrate the superiority of QVA149 compared with SFC
for the standardised area under the curve from 0 to 12 h post dose for forced
expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1 AUC0-12h) after 26 weeks of treatment. This
trial was registered at ClinicalTrial.gov, NCT01315249.
FINDINGS: Between March 25, 2011, and March 12, 2012, 259 patients were randomly 
assigned to receive QVA149 and 264 to receive SFC. At week 26, FEV1 AUC0-12h was 
significantly higher with QVA149 than with SFC (treatment difference 0·138 L; 95%
CI 0·100-0·176; p<0·0001). Overall incidence of adverse events (including COPD
exacerbations) was 55·4% (143 of 258) for the QVA149 group and 60·2% (159 of 264)
for the SFC group. Incidence of serious adverse events was similar between
treatment groups (QVA149, 13 of 258 [5·0%]; SFC 14 of 264 [5·3%]); COPD worsening
was the most frequent serious adverse event (one of 13 [0·4%] and three of 14
[1·1%], respectively).
INTERPRETATION: Once-daily QVA149 provides significant, sustained, and clinically
meaningful improvements in lung function versus twice-daily SFC, with significant
symptomatic benefit. These results indicate the potential of dual bronchodilation
as a treatment option for non-exacerbating symptomatic COPD patients.
FUNDING: Novartis Pharma AG.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S2213-2600(12)70052-8 
PMID: 24321804  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Expert Opin Drug Metab Toxicol. 2014 Jan;10(1):129-37. doi:
10.1517/17425255.2014.865723. Epub 2013 Dec 3.

Use of indacaterol for the treatment of COPD: a pharmacokinetic evaluation.

Cazzola M(1), Calzetta L, Page CP, Matera MG.

Author information: 
(1)Unità di Farmacologia Clinica Respiratoria, Dipartimento di Medicina dei
Sistemi, Università di Roma Tor Vergata , Via Montpellier 1, 00133 Roma , Italy
mario.cazzola@uniroma2.it.

INTRODUCTION: Indacaterol is a β2-agonist with a rapid onset of action and a
bronchodilating effect that lasts for 24 h.
AREAS COVERED: This review considers indacaterol in chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease patients, in whom it is rapidly absorbed into the systemic circulation
with serum levels measurable after 5 min and Cmax being reached approximately 15 
min post-dose. Its disposition kinetics are characterized by at least two phases,
a relatively fast decline of the concentrations within the first 12 h, followed
by a terminal elimination phase. The increase in systemic exposure is
dose-proportional, but systemic concentrations are low at the recommended doses. 
Indacaterol is relatively highly bound to plasma proteins regardless of
concentration. Metabolic clearance and/or biliary clearance account for the
majority of its systemic excretion. Weight, age, gender and ethnicity
significantly influence its pharmacokinetic profile, but it is not necessary to
adjust the dose based on these covariates. Substrates, inhibitors or inducers of 
UGT1A1 and CYP3A may also affect the pharmacokinetic profile of indacaterol.
EXPERT OPINION: Blood concentrations of indacaterol are unable to predict its
bronchodilator effects. Furthermore, at the recommended doses, systemic
concentrations of indacaterol are low and this is the likely reason for its safe 
profile.

DOI: 10.1517/17425255.2014.865723 
PMID: 24295085  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Curr Opin Pulm Med. 2014 Jan;20(1):73-86. doi: 10.1097/MCP.0000000000000012.

Current and novel bronchodilators in respiratory disease.

Spina D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Sackler Institute of Pulmonary Pharmacology, Institute of Pharmaceutical
Science, School of Biomedical Science, King's College London, London, UK.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: β2-Agonists and muscarinic antagonists are widely used to
treat asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), and a number of
novel drug targets are being investigated for potential clinical utility. This
review will summarize current developments in the field.
RECENT FINDINGS: The clinical effectiveness of a number of once a day inhaled
β2-agonists and muscarinic antagonists is a major advance providing sustained
bronchodilation in asthma and COPD. The identification of novel targets (e.g.
bitter taste receptor TASR2), the demonstration of clinical effectiveness of
others [e.g. phosphodiesterase (PDE)3/4] and exploring the potential of inverse
agonists/biased agonists are evidence of continuing interest in the development
of novel bronchodilators.
SUMMARY: Novel long-acting β2-agonists (e.g. indacaterol, vilanterol, olodaterol 
and carmoterol) and muscarinic antagonists (e.g. tiotropium, aclidinium,
glycopyrronium and umeclidinium bromide) document sustained bronchodilation and
their combination provides additional benefits over monotherapy. Not
surprisingly, inhaled long-acting β2-agonist and long-acting muscarinic
antagonists remain the drugs of choice for maintenance bronchodilation. However, 
there is a continued interest in developing novel bronchodilators illustrated by 
the clinical effectiveness of long acting mixed PDE3/4 inhibitors, vasointestinal
peptide adenylyl cyclase agonists and inverse agonists/biased agonists for the
β2-adrenoceptor, and the identification of intracellular (e.g. Rho kinase,
exchange proteins activated by cyclic AMP) and cell surface (e.g. TAS2R,
natriuretic peptide receptor) targets.

DOI: 10.1097/MCP.0000000000000012 
PMID: 24247039  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. J Am Pharm Assoc (2003). 2013 Nov-Dec;53(6):e219-29; quiz e230-1. doi:
10.1331/JAPhA.2013.13535.

COPD 2013: an update on treatment and newly approved medications for pharmacists.

Meyer KC.

OBJECTIVES: To educate pharmacists about the Global Strategy for the Diagnosis,
Management, and Prevention of Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (GOLD)
guidelines for treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), newly
approved medications, and recent developments since the guidelines were
published.
SUMMARY: The evidence-based GOLD guidelines provide recommendations for
clinicians managing patients with COPD. These guidelines were revised most
recently in 2013. Three new medications (indacaterol maleate, aclidinium bromide,
and fluticasone furoate/vilanterol) have been approved in the previous 2 years.
Adding to the armamentarium of medications for treating COPD is useful. Studies
also have been conducted to determine which inhaled agents are preferred for use 
when long-acting bronchodilators are needed as mono- and combination therapy. In 
addition, 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme A reductase inhibitors and
macrolides are being studied for use in COPD. An extensive COPD pipeline consists
of many oral and inhaled medications, including olodaterol and glycopyrronium
maleate, which are in Phase III clinical trials. Medication adherence is a very
important piece of COPD management. Pharmacists play an integral role in drug
selection and patient education to ensure the best possible outcomes.
CONCLUSION: The GOLD guidelines represent the standard of care for COPD
management. New drug approvals and recent research may affect practitioner
choices in managing the disease. Pharmacists can improve medication adherence and
selection in order to maximize therapeutic effectiveness and ensure that patients
are using inhalation delivery devices optimally.

DOI: 10.1331/JAPhA.2013.13535 
PMID: 24185438  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Eur Respir J. 2014 Jun;43(6):1599-609. doi: 10.1183/09031936.00124013. Epub 2013 
Oct 31.

Dual bronchodilation with QVA149 reduces patient-reported dyspnoea in COPD: the
BLAZE study.

Mahler DA(1), Decramer M(2), D'Urzo A(3), Worth H(4), White T(5), Alagappan
VK(5), Chen H(5), Gallagher N(6), Kulich K(7), Banerji D(5).

Author information: 
(1)Section of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Geisel School of Medicine at 
Dartmouth, Hanover, NH, USA Donald.A.Mahler@hitchcock.org. (2)Division of
Respiratory Medicine, University Hospital, Katholieke Universiteit, Leuven,
Belgium. (3)Dept of Family and Community Medicine, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada. (4)Dept of Pneumology and Cardiology,
Hospital Fürth, University Erlangen-Nürnberg, Fürth, Germany. (5)Novartis
Pharmaceuticals Corporation, East Hanover, NJ, USA. (6)Novartis Horsham Research 
Centre, Horsham, UK. (7)Novartis Pharma AG, Basel, Switzerland.

We evaluated the effect of QVA149, a dual bronchodilator combining indacaterol
and glycopyrronium, on direct patient-reported dyspnoea in patients with
moderate-to-severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. In this multicentre,
blinded, double-dummy, three-period crossover study, 247 patients were randomised
to once-daily QVA149 110/50 μg, placebo or tiotropium 18 μg. Superiority of
QVA149 versus placebo (primary objective) and tiotropium (secondary objective)
was assessed for improvement in dyspnoea via the self-administered computerised
(SAC) version of the Baseline and Transition Dyspnoea Index after 6 weeks.
Secondary end-points included lung function, rescue medication use and safety.
After 6 weeks, the SAC Transition Dyspnoea Index total score was significantly
higher with QVA149 versus placebo (least squares mean (LSM) treatment difference 
1.37, p<0.001) and tiotropium (LSM treatment difference 0.49, p=0.021). QVA149
provided significant improvements in lung function, with higher forced expiratory
volume in 1 s area under the curve from 0-4 h post-dose versus placebo and
tiotropium at day 1 and week 6 (all p<0.001). Rescue medication use was
significantly lower with QVA149 versus placebo (p<0.001) and tiotropium
(p=0.002). All treatments were well tolerated. Once-daily QVA149 provided
superior improvements in patient-reported dyspnoea and lung function versus
placebo and tiotropium. These benefits were associated with improvements in other
symptoms and reduced use of rescue medication.

©ERS 2014.

DOI: 10.1183/09031936.00124013 
PMID: 24176997  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2013;8:501-8. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S49615. Epub
2013 Oct 17.

Efficacy and safety of QVA149 compared to the concurrent administration of its
monocomponents indacaterol and glycopyrronium: the BEACON study.

Dahl R(1), Jadayel D, Alagappan VK, Chen H, Banerji D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Allergy Centre, Odense University Hospital, Odense,
Denmark.

Erratum in
    Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2014;9:85. Dosage error in published abstract;
MEDLINE/PubMed abstract corrected; Dosage error in article text.

INTRODUCTION: The BEACON study evaluated the efficacy and safety of QVA149, a
once-daily dual bronchodilator containing a fixed-dose combination of the
long-acting β2-agonist (LABA) indacaterol and long-acting muscarinic antagonist
(LAMA) glycopyrronium (NVA237), in development for the treatment of patients with
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), compared with the free-dose
concurrent administration of indacaterol plus glycopyrronium (IND+GLY).
METHODS: In this multicenter, double-blind, parallel group study, patients with
stage II or stage III COPD (Global initiative for chronic Obstructive Lung
Disease [GOLD] 2010) were randomized (1:1) to once-daily QVA149 (110 μg
indacaterol/50 μg glycopyrronium) or concurrent administration of indacaterol
(150 μg) and glycopyrronium (50 μg) via the Breezhaler® device (Novartis AG,
Basel, Switzerland) for 4 weeks. The primary endpoint was to evaluate the
noninferiority of QVA149 as compared with concurrent administration of IND+GLY,
for trough forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1) after 4 weeks of
treatment. The other assessments included FEV1 area under the curve from 0 to 4
hours (AUC0-4 hours) at day 1 and week 4, symptom scores, rescue medication use, 
safety, and tolerability over the 4-week study period.
RESULTS: Of 193 patients randomized, 187 (96.9%) completed the study.Trough FEV1 
at week 4 for QVA149 and IND+GLY was 1.5 L ± 0.02 [DOSAGE ERROR CORRECTED] and
1.46 L ± 0.18, respectively. The FEV1 AUC0-4 hours at day 1 and week 4 were
similar between the two treatment groups. Both treatment groups had a similar
reduction in symptom scores and rescue medication use for the 4-week treatment
period. Overall, 25.6% of patients in QVA149 group and 25.2% in the IND+GLY group
experienced an adverse event, with the majority being mild-to-moderate in
severity. No deaths were reported during the study or during the 30 days
follow-up period.
CONCLUSION: The BEACON study demonstrated that once-daily QVA149 provides an
efficacy and safety profile similar to the concurrent administration of its
monocomponents indacaterol and glycopyrronium.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S49615 
PMCID: PMC3805248
PMID: 24159259  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Respir Res. 2013 Oct 7;14:100. doi: 10.1186/1465-9921-14-100.

Comparative efficacy of long-acting bronchodilators for COPD: a network
meta-analysis.

Cope S(1), Donohue JF, Jansen JP, Kraemer M, Capkun-Niggli G, Baldwin M, Buckley 
F, Ellis A, Jones P.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical Science, St George's University of London, London SW17
0RE, UK. pjones@sgul.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: Clinicians are faced with an increasingly difficult choice regarding 
the optimal bronchodilator for patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD) given the number of new treatments. The objective of this study is
to evaluate the comparative efficacy of indacaterol 75/150/300 μg once daily
(OD), glycopyrronium bromide 50 μg OD, tiotropium bromide 18 μg/5 μg OD,
salmeterol 50 μg twice daily (BID), formoterol 12 μg BID, and placebo for
moderate to severe COPD.
METHODS: Forty randomized controlled trials were combined in a Bayesian network
meta-analysis. Outcomes of interest were trough and post-dose forced expiratory
volume in 1 second (FEV1), St. George's Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ) score
and responders (≥4 points), and Transition Dyspnea Index (TDI) score and
responders (≥1 point) at 6 months.
RESULTS: Indacaterol was associated with a higher trough FEV1 than other active
treatments (difference for indacaterol 150 μg and 300 μg versus placebo: 152 mL
(95% credible interval (CrI): 126, 179); 160 mL (95% CrI: 133, 187)) and the
greatest improvement in SGRQ score (difference for indacaterol 150 μg and 300 μg 
versus placebo: -3.9 (95% CrI -5.2, -2.6); -3.6 (95% CrI -4.8, -2.3)).
Glycopyrronium and tiotropium 18 μg resulted in the next best estimates for both 
outcomes with minor differences (difference for glycopyrronium versus tiotropium 
for trough FEV1 and SGRQ: 18 mL (95% CrI: -16, 51); -0.55 (95% CrI: -2.04, 0.92).
CONCLUSION: In terms of trough FEV1 and SGRQ score indacaterol, glycopyrronium,
and tiotropium are expected to be the most effective bronchodilators.

DOI: 10.1186/1465-9921-14-100 
PMCID: PMC4014806
PMID: 24093477  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2013;8:425-32. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S49179. Epub
2013 Sep 18.

Role of indacaterol and the newer very long-acting β2-agonists in patients with
stable COPD: a review.

Ridolo E(1), Montagni M, Olivieri E, Riario-Sforza GG, Incorvaia C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of Parma, Parma. 
erminia.ridolo@unipr.it

Bronchodilators are central drugs in the management of patients with chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Indacaterol was the first agent of the
novel family of very long-acting β2-agonists to be used as an inhaled
bronchodilator for COPD and provides 24-hour therapeutic action, thus allowing
once-daily administration. Data from clinical trials show that indacaterol has a 
bronchodilator effect similar to that of the anticholinergic tiotropium bromide
and slightly higher efficacy compared with the long-acting β2-agonists,
salmeterol and formoterol. Moreover, the safety profile is excellent and
comparable with that of placebo. Concerning adherence with drug treatment and
real-life management in respect to long-acting β2-agonists, once-daily dosing
makes indacaterol more convenient for COPD patients and is likely to enhance
patient adherence. Other very long-acting β2-agonists currently in development
include vilanterol, olodaterol, and carmoterol, and these have shown good
characteristics for clinical use in the studies reported thus far.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S49179 
PMCID: PMC3785397
PMID: 24082783  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Ther Adv Respir Dis. 2013 Dec;7(6):311-9. doi: 10.1177/1753465813499789. Epub
2013 Sep 3.

The combination of umeclidinium bromide and vilanterol in the management of
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: current evidence and future prospects.

Feldman GJ(1), Edin A.

Author information: 
(1)South Carolina Pharmaceutical Research, Alliance Biomedical Group
International, 141 Harold Fleming Court, Spartanburg, SC 29303, USA.

The defining feature of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is
progressive airflow limitation that causes air trapping and hyperinflation. The
increasing hyperinflation results in dyspnea along with associated inability to
engage in the activities of daily living. The American Thoracic Society (ATS),
European Respiratory Society (ERS) and Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive 
Lung Disease (GOLD) treatment guidelines all place bronchodilators as the
foundation of pharmacological management of COPD. In patients with
moderate-to-very-severe respiratory impairment, adding regular treatment with one
or more long-acting bronchodilators is recommended [long-acting β2-agonists
(LABAs) or long-acting muscarinic antagonists (LAMAs)]. A growing body of
evidence shows that LAMA and LABA co-administration is more effective than either
drug class alone in managing stable COPD to improve lung function, symptoms and
health status. Recently, new drug applications (NDAs) for a fixed-dose
combination (FDC) of umeclidinium (UMEC), a LAMA, and vilanterol (VI), a LABA, at
UMEC/VI doses of 125/25 and 62.5/25 µg have been submitted by sponsors to the US 
Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and to the European Medicines Agency (EMA).
Thus, UMEC/VI has become the first FDC LAMA/LABA product that has reached a
regulatory approval stage. Other LAMA/LABA once-daily combinations coming through
development include FDCs of tiotropium and olodaterol, glycopyrronium and
indacaterol, and twice-daily aclidinium and formoterol. The aim of this review is
to explore currently available data for once-daily UMEC/VI in the context of the 
evolving standards of COPD management.

DOI: 10.1177/1753465813499789 
PMID: 24004659  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. J Thorac Dis. 2013 Aug;5(4):559-66. doi: 10.3978/j.issn.2072-1439.2013.07.35.

The role of indacaterol for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).

Cazzola M(1), Bardaro F, Stirpe E.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Respiratory Clinical Pharmacology, Department of System Medicine,
University of Rome "Tor Vergata", Rome, Italy.

Indacaterol is the first long-acting β2-agonist (LABAs) approved for the
treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) that allows for
once-daily (OD) administration. It is rapidly acting, with an onset of action in 
5 minutes, like salbutamol and formoterol but with a sustained bronchodilator
effect, that last for 24 hours, like tiotropium. In long-term clinical studies
(12 weeks to 1 year) in patients with moderate to severe COPD, OD indacaterol 150
or 300 μg improved lung function (primary endpoint) significantly more than
placebo, and improvements were significantly greater than twice-daily formoterol 
12 μg or salmeterol 50 μg, and noninferior to OD tiotropium bromide 18 μg.
Indacaterol was well tolerated at all doses and with a good overall safety
profile. Cost-utility analyses show that indacaterol 150 μg has lower total costs
and better outcomes than tiotropium and salmeterol. These findings suggest that
indacaterol can be considered a first choice drug in the treatment of the patient
with mild/moderate stable COPD. However, in people with COPD who remain
symptomatic on treatment with indacaterol, adding a long-acting muscarinic
antagonist (LAMA) is the preferable option. In any case, it is advisable to
combine indacaterol with a OD inhaled corticosteroid (ICS), such as mometasone
furoate or ciclesonide, in patients with low FEV1, and, in those patients who
have many symptoms and a high risk of exacerbations, to combine it with a LAMA
and a OD ICS.

DOI: 10.3978/j.issn.2072-1439.2013.07.35 
PMCID: PMC3755680
PMID: 23991316  [PubMed]


102. J Thorac Dis. 2013 Aug;5(4):549-58. doi: 10.3978/j.issn.2072-1439.2013.08.04.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease in China: the potential role of
indacaterol.

Gao J(1), Prasad N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Diseases, Peking Union Medical College Hospital,
Peking Union Medical College and Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing,
China;

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is becoming a leading cause of
morbidity and mortality in China, with tobacco smoking, biomass fuel use and
genetic susceptibility being the major risk factors. COPD poses a high economic
burden with the total expenditure per patient costing 40% and nearly one-third of
an average family income in urban and rural areas of China, respectively. Despite
the use of the Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease strategy
document being recommended for the diagnosis and management of COPD, the majority
of patients with COPD go undiagnosed or are not managed appropriately by
physicians. Long-acting β2-agonists (LABAs) have long been used for symptomatic
management of COPD, with salmeterol and formoterol being the commonly used
twice-daily treatments. Indacaterol is the first once-daily LABA, approved at a
dose of 150 µg once daily in China. Several phase III studies have shown that
indacaterol 150 µg improves lung function, breathlessness, health status,
exacerbations, rescue medication use and symptoms, as compared with placebo and
other bronchodilators, in patients with COPD, with a rapid onset of action
following first dose and a good safety and tolerability profile. In this review
we elaborate on the efficacy and safety results from several such studies.

DOI: 10.3978/j.issn.2072-1439.2013.08.04 
PMCID: PMC3755687
PMID: 23991315  [PubMed]


103. J Thorac Dis. 2013 Aug;5(4):378-80. doi: 10.3978/j.issn.2072-1439.2013.07.24.

A role of indacaterol in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease management: a
turning point or crossroads?

Feldman GJ(1), Edin A.

Author information: 
(1)S. Carolina Pharmaceutical Research, Alliance Biomedical Group International, 
Spartanburg, South Carolina, USA;

DOI: 10.3978/j.issn.2072-1439.2013.07.24 
PMCID: PMC3755696
PMID: 23991289  [PubMed]


104. Ther Clin Risk Manag. 2013;9:341-53. doi: 10.2147/TCRM.S30317. Epub 2013 Aug 19.

Role of once-daily glycopyrronium bromide (NVA237) in the management of COPD.

D'Urzo A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Family and Community Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto,
ON, Canada.

Progressive airflow limitation is a hallmark feature of chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD) that ultimately leads to breathlessness, impaired
quality of life, and reduced exercise capacity. Pharmacotherapy is used in
patients with COPD to prevent and control symptoms, reduce both the frequency and
severity of exacerbations, improve health status, and increase exercise
tolerance. These strategies are intended to address management issues which
promote both current disease control and a reduction in the risk of disease
deterioration in the future. At the present time, long-acting β2-agonists (LABAs)
and long-acting muscarinic antagonists (LAMAs) are available for maintenance
therapy in patients with persistent symptoms. Tiotropium was the first LAMA to be
approved for management of COPD, and many studies have described its beneficial
effects on multiple clinically relevant outcomes. Glycopyrronium bromide
(NVA237), a new LAMA, has been developed and received regulatory approval for
management of COPD in a number of countries around the world. Results from
pivotal Phase III trials suggest that NVA237 is safe and well tolerated in
patients with moderate to severe COPD, and provides rapid and sustained
improvements in lung function. Further, these changes are associated with
statistically and clinically meaningful improvements in dyspnea, health-related
quality of life, and exercise tolerance. Treatment with NVA237 also results in a 
significant reduction in risk of exacerbations and the need for rescue
medication, and has been comparable with tiotropium with respect to safety and
efficacy outcomes. Finally, emerging data indicate that NVA237 is efficacious
both as monotherapy and in combination with indacaterol.

DOI: 10.2147/TCRM.S30317 
PMCID: PMC3753168
PMID: 23990727  [PubMed]


105. Expert Rev Clin Pharmacol. 2013 Sep;6(5):503-17. doi:
10.1586/17512433.2013.828419. Epub 2013 Aug 24.

Once-daily glycopyrronium via the Breezhaler® device for the treatment of COPD:
pharmacological and clinical profile.

Molimard M(1), D'Andrea P.

Author information: 
(1)Département de Pharmacologie, CHU de Bordeaux-Univ. Bordeaux Ségalen-INSERM,
U657, 33076 Bordeaux Cedex, France.

In the management of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), there is an
unmet medical need for effective bronchodilator treatments that not only have a
fast onset of action, but also a long duration of action and are delivered using 
a simple, easy-to-use device. Long-acting muscarinic antagonists such as
glycopyrronium and tiotropium, along with long-acting beta-2 agonists such as
indacaterol, formoterol and salmeterol are the pillars of pharmacological therapy
for the long-term management of patients with COPD. Glycopyrronium, the
quaternary ammonium ion of glycopyrronium bromide, acts as a competitive
antagonist by selectively binding to the muscarinic receptors in the bronchial
smooth musculature, thus inhibiting acetylcholine-mediated bronchoconstriction.
Glycopyrronium is an inhaled once-daily long-acting muscarinic antagonist
recently approved for the maintenance treatment of patients with COPD.
Glycopyrronium is administered by a single-dose, dry-powder inhaler, the
Breezhaler® device, designed specifically to have a low internal resistance, be
easy to use and confirm efficient drug delivery in patients with a wide range of 
COPD severities, irrespective of the age. Glycopyrronium has been shown to
provide rapid and sustained improvements in lung function, dyspnea, health
status, exercise endurance and exacerbation risk and an acceptable safety and
tolerability profile.

DOI: 10.1586/17512433.2013.828419 
PMID: 23971870  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. PLoS One. 2013 Aug 14;8(8):e70784. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0070784. eCollection
2013.

Indacaterol for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: systematic review and
meta-analysis.

Chung VC(1), Ma PH, Hui DS, Tam WW, Tang JL.

Author information: 
(1)Jockey Club School of Public Health and Primary Care, The Chinese University
of Hong Kong, Hong Kong.

BACKGROUND: Inhaled bronchodilators are the first-line therapy for COPD.
Indacaterol is a novel addition to existing long-acting bronchodilators.
OBJECTIVES: Systematic review of randomized controlled trials (RCT) ON efficacy
and safety of indacaterol as compared: 1) with placebo at different dosages, 2)
with existing bronchodilators; (3) as add-on treatment to tiotropium.
METHODS: We searched 13 electronic databases, including MEDLINE, EMBASE and
CENTRAL, and contacted the manufacturer for unpublished data. Primary outcome was
mean FEV1 change at 12(th) week, secondary outcomes included changes in SGRQ, TDI
and BODE index at 6 months, exacerbation at 1 year, and worsening of symptoms.
RESULTS: Twelve eligible RCTs of moderate risk of bias included data from 10,977 
patients. Compared to placebo, indacaterol improved FEV1 by a weighted mean
difference (WMD) of 0.16 L (95%CI: 0.15, 0.18 L, p<0.001), homogeneously above
the minimally important difference of 0.10 L. It offered clinically relevant
improvement in all secondary outcomes except exacerbation. Magnitude of benefit
did not differ significantly by dosage, but one treatment related death was
reported at 300 ug. Efficacy of Indacaterol was similar to formoterol and
salmeterol (FEV1 WMD = 0.04 L, 95%CI: 0.01 L, 0.07 L, p = 0.02); and tiotropium
(FEV1 WMD = 0.01 L, 95%CI: -0.01, 0.03 L, p = 0.61). The use of indacaterol on
top of tiotropium yielded additional improvement on FEV1 (WMD = 0.07 L, 95%CI:
0.05 L, 0.10 L, p<0.001).
CONCLUSION: Indacaterol is safe and beneficial for patients with COPD at dosage
≤150 ug. It may serve as a good alternative to existing bronchodilators, or as an
add-on to tiotropium for unresponsive patients. Use of higher dosage requires
further justification.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0070784 
PMCID: PMC3743831
PMID: 23967106  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2013;8:353-63. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S21625. Epub
2013 Jul 25.

Indacaterol: a comprehensive review.

Rossi A(1), Polese G.

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary Unit, Cardiovascular and Thoracic Department, University and General
Hospital, Verona, Italy. andrea.rossi2@ospedaleuniverona.it

At present there is no cure for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
However, some nonpharmacologic treatments, such as rehabilitation and lung volume
reduction surgery, as well as pharmacologic intervention, can relieve some of the
patient's symptoms and improve quality of life, while also reducing the rate of
exacerbations and hospitalizations. There needs to be a paradigm shift away from 
the unjustified nihilistic approach to COPD towards considering it a preventable 
and treatable disease. After patients quit smoking and start to lead healthier
lifestyles, long-acting bronchodilators, such as long-acting beta-adrenergic
agents (LABA) and long-acting antimuscarinic agents (LAMA), are recommended as
the cornerstone of treatment for COPD, either as monotherapy or in combination.
COPD is characterized by a reduced maximum expiratory flow and slow forced
emptying of the lungs, which progress over time and are not completely
reversible. In this condition, gas gets trapped in the lungs and pulmonary
hyperinflation occurs. LABA and LAMA improve airway patency and deflate the
lungs. Indacaterol is the first once-daily LABA approved for treatment of COPD,
and is administered by inhalation through the Breezhaler® device. The speed of
bronchodilation is similar to that with salbutamol (ie, about five minutes) and
longer (ie, 24 hours) than that with traditional LABA, with the same 12-hour
effect as salmeterol and formoterol, both of which require twice-daily
administration. This is why indacaterol has been called the "ultra-LABA". On the 
one hand, the fast onset of action provides immediate relief of symptoms, and on 
the other, its constant 24-hour bronchodilation provides "pharmacologic stenting"
which facilitates lung emptying, thereby decreasing trapped gas and pulmonary
hyperinflation. Once-daily administration of a fast and long-acting
bronchodilator can improve patient adherence with therapy, which is known to be a
major problem for many medical treatments. Dose-finding trials have shown that 75
μg is the minimum dose needed to achieve clinically important improvement.
However, indacaterol 150 μg and 300 μg achieve an even greater improvement in
lung function and patient-oriented outcomes. Further, these two doses of
indacaterol significantly reduce pulmonary hyperinflation, thereby improving
exercise tolerance and ability to perform day-to-day activities. It is more
effective on lung volumes at the 300 μg dose than formoterol, and better than
salmeterol and tiotropium at the 150 μg dose, at least in the acute setting. It
is noteworthy that few studies document these results in patients with COPD and
moderate airflow obstruction. These are exactly the kind of patients our research
should be concentrating on, in view of the accelerated decay in forced expiratory
volume in one second at this stage of the disease. Finally, all the relevant
studies show that indacaterol is consistently well tolerated by patients with
COPD at every stage, and that it has a high safety profile.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S21625 
PMCID: PMC3728154
PMID: 23922496  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Drugs Today (Barc). 2013 Jul;49(7):437-46. doi: 10.1358/dot.2013.49.7.1980496.

Indacaterol/glycopyrronium bromide fixed-dose combination for the treatment of
COPD.

Schachter EN(1).

Author information: 
(1)Mount Sinai Medical School of Medicine, New York, NY, USA.
neil.schachter@mssm.edu

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a worldwide problem causing
prolonged and progressive morbidity as well as premature mortality. Pharmacologic
treatment consists primarily in the relief of symptoms and preventing or
minimizing the consequences of exacerbations. Central to the pharmacologic
management of COPD is the use of bronchodilator therapy. Two major classes of
agents are frequently used: β-adrenoceptor agonists and antimuscarinic agents.
These drugs are used mainly in the inhalational form, primarily as rescue
medication, but occasionally for maintenance in combination therapy. The
availability of "ultra-long"-acting β-adrenoceptor agonists and long-acting
antimuscarinic agents opens the way for combinations of these agents to be used
in maintenance therapy. Such a combination offers the potential of enhanced
efficacy due to additive effects and better compliance as the result of
once-daily treatment. This article reviews the rationale for current
bronchodilator therapy of COPD as well as the current status of a fixed-dose
combined inhaler using two novel long-acting agents: glycopyrronium bromide and
indacaterol maleate.

Copyright 2013 Prous Science, S.A.U. or its licensors. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1358/dot.2013.49.7.1980496 
PMID: 23914352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Respir Med. 2013 Oct;107(10):1558-67. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2013.05.016. Epub 2013 
Jul 16.

Safety and efficacy of dual bronchodilation with QVA149 in COPD patients: the
ENLIGHTEN study.

Dahl R(1), Chapman KR, Rudolf M, Mehta R, Kho P, Alagappan VK, Chen H, Banerji D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Medicine, Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark.
Electronic address: ronadahl@rm.dk.

BACKGROUND: QVA149 is an inhaled, once-daily fixed-dose dual bronchodilator
combination of the long-acting β2-agonist indacaterol and long-acting muscarinic 
antagonist glycopyrronium (NVA237) for the treatment of chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD). We investigated the safety and efficacy of QVA149 over 
52 weeks.
METHODS: This 52-week, multicenter, double-blind, parallel-group,
placebo-controlled study randomized (2:1) patients with moderate-to-severe COPD
to once-daily QVA149 (110 μg indacaterol/50 μg glycopyrronium) or placebo
delivered via the Breezhaler device. Primary endpoint was safety and tolerability
for treatment-emergent adverse events (AEs). Secondary endpoints included safety 
based on vital signs, electrocardiograms (ECGs), laboratory evaluations, and
pre-dose forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1).
RESULTS: Of 339 patients randomized, QVA149 [n = 226], placebo [n = 113]; 76.9%
male, mean age: 62.6 years, post-bronchodilator FEV1: 57.4% predicted, 83.5%
completed study. A smaller percentage of patients discontinued in the QVA149
group (14.2%) compared with placebo (21.2%). Overall incidence of AEs was similar
in the QVA149 (57.8%) and placebo (56.6%) groups, with most AEs being mild to
moderate in severity. The numerical differences in some AEs observed could be at 
least in part explained by differences in baseline patient characteristics. No
clinically relevant differences were observed between treatment groups for vital 
signs or ECG parameters. The five deaths reported were unrelated to study
medication (QVA149, n = 4 [1.8%]; placebo, n = 1 [0.9%]). QVA149 demonstrated
rapid and clinically meaningful bronchodilation sustained over 52 weeks versus
placebo.
CONCLUSION: QVA149 demonstrated a good safety and tolerability profile, providing
rapid and sustained bronchodilation over 52 weeks in patients with
moderate-to-severe COPD. ClinicalTrials.gov identifier: NCT01120717.

Copyright © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2013.05.016 
PMID: 23867808  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Eur Respir J. 2013 Dec;42(6):1484-94. doi: 10.1183/09031936.00200212. Epub 2013
May 30.

Dual bronchodilation with QVA149 versus single bronchodilator therapy: the SHINE 
study.

Bateman ED(1), Ferguson GT, Barnes N, Gallagher N, Green Y, Henley M, Banerji D.

Author information: 
(1)University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa.

Comment in
    Eur Respir J. 2014 Apr;43(4):1204.
    Eur Respir J. 2014 Apr;43(4):1204-5.
    Eur Respir J. 2013 Dec;42(6):1441-5.

We investigated the efficacy and safety of dual bronchodilation with QVA149
versus its monocomponents indacaterol and glycopyrronium, tiotropium and placebo 
in patients with moderate-to-severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
This was a multicentre, randomised, double-blind, placebo- and active-controlled,
26-week trial. Patients (n = 2144) were randomised (2:2:2:2:1) to receive
once-daily QVA149 (indacaterol 110 μg/glycopyrronium 50 μg), indacaterol 150 μg, 
glycopyrronium 50 μg, open-label tiotropium 18 μg or placebo. The primary
end-point was trough forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1) at week 26 for QVA149
versus its monocomponents. Secondary end-points included dyspnoea, health status,
rescue medication use and safety. Trough FEV1 at week 26 was significantly
improved (p<0.001) with QVA149 compared with indacaterol and glycopyrronium
(least squares mean (LSM) differences 0.07 L and 0.09 L, respectively),
tiotropium and placebo (LSM differences 0.08 L and 0.20 L, respectively); these
beneficial effects were sustained throughout the 26-week study. QVA149
significantly improved dyspnoea and health status versus placebo (p<0.001 and p =
0.002, respectively) and tiotropium (p = 0.007 and p = 0.009, respectively) at
week 26. All treatments were well tolerated. Dual bronchodilation with once-daily
QVA149 demonstrated superior and clinically meaningful outcomes versus placebo
and superiority versus treatment with a single bronchodilator, with a safety and 
tolerability profile similar to placebo, supporting the concept of fixed-dose
long-acting muscarinic antagonist/long-acting β2-agonist combinations for the
treatment of COPD.

DOI: 10.1183/09031936.00200212 
PMCID: PMC3844137
PMID: 23722616  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2013;8:231-8. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S42866. Epub
2013 May 7.

Symptom variability in COPD: a narrative review.

Lopez-Campos JL(1), Calero C, Quintana-Gallego E.

Author information: 
(1)Unidad Medico-Quirúrgica de Enfermedades Respiratorias, Instituto de
Biomedicina de Sevilla (IBiS), Hospital Universitario Virgen del Rocio, Seville, 
Spain. lcampos@separ.es

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) has traditionally been considered an
inexorably progressive disease, associated with a constant increase of symptoms
that occur as the forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1) worsens, only
intermittently interrupted by exacerbations. However, this paradigm has been
challenged in recent decades by the available evidence. Recent studies have
pointed out that COPD-related symptoms are not consistently perceived by patients
in the same way, showing not only seasonal variation, but also changes in symptom
perception during a week or even within a single day. According to the available 
data, patients experience the biggest increase in respiratory symptoms during the
first hours of the early morning, followed by the nighttime. This variation over 
time is of considerable importance, since it impacts on daily life activities and
health-related quality of life, as measured by a recently developed ad hoc
questionnaire. Additionally, recent clinical trials have suggested that the use
of rapid-onset long-acting bronchodilators may have an impact on morning
symptoms, despite their current use as maintenance treatment for a determined
period. Although this hypothesis is to be validated in future long-term clinical 
trials comparing fast-onset versus slow-onset inhaled drugs in COPD, it may bring
forward a new concept of long-term bronchodilator therapy. At the present time,
the two available long-acting, fast-onset bronchodilators used in the treatment
of COPD are formoterol and the recently marketed indacaterol. Newer drugs have
also been shown to have a rapid onset of action in preclinical studies. Health
care professionals caring for COPD patients should consider this variation in the
perception of symptoms during their clinical interview as a potential new target 
in the long-term treatment plan.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S42866 
PMCID: PMC3653762
PMID: 23687444  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. BMJ Case Rep. 2013 May 9;2013. pii: bcr2013009568. doi: 10.1136/bcr-2013-009568.

Indacaterol-induced severe constipation and abdominal pain: is there a role for
colonic β3-adrenoceptors?

Carrascosa MF(1), Lucena MI, Bellido I, Salcines-Caviedes JR.

Author information: 
(1)Internal Medicine Department, Hospital of Laredo, Laredo, Cantabria, Spain.
miguel.carrascosa@scsalud.es

Indacaterol is an ultra-long-acting β2-adrenoceptor agonist that is indicated for
the maintenance treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. We present a 
patient with severe chronic constipation and abdominal pain most probably induced
by this medicament. Symptoms rapidly disappeared within 2 days after the drug
withdrawal. As far as we know, no reports describing severe chronic constipation 
associated with indacaterol have been published. The Naranjo algorithm score and 
the Edwards and Aronson scale for causality assessment of suspected adverse drug 
reactions indicated a probable relationship between indacaterol use and
constipation. Indacaterol-induced constipation is an unusual event that could be 
accounted for the high intrinsic activity of the drug on colonic
β3-adrenoreceptors, resulting in an inhibitory control of smooth muscle function 
and intestinal secretion. Clinicians should monitor such a possibility when
prescribing this drug and maybe avoid its use in patients with a history of
difficult bowel evacuation.

DOI: 10.1136/bcr-2013-009568 
PMCID: PMC3669958
PMID: 23667224  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Clin Med Insights Circ Respir Pulm Med. 2013 Apr 9;7:7-15. doi:
10.4137/CCRPM.S8140. Print 2013.

Emerging Therapeutic Options for the Management of COPD.

Reid DJ(1), Pham NT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy Practice, School of Pharmacy, Northeastern University, 
Boston, MA, USA.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is the fourth leading cause of death
worldwide and is projected to be the third by 2020. COPD is characterized by
chronic airflow limitation caused by airway inflammation and parenchymal
destruction that is usually progressive. Inhaled bronchodilators continue to be
the mainstay of the current management of COPD. Safety and efficacy data of the
recently approved medications including aclidinium, glycopyrronium, roflumilast, 
and indacaterol are reviewed here.

DOI: 10.4137/CCRPM.S8140 
PMCID: PMC3629926
PMID: 23641160  [PubMed]


114. BMC Pulm Med. 2013 Apr 25;13:26. doi: 10.1186/1471-2466-13-26.

Indacaterol on dyspnea in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: a systematic
review and meta-analysis of randomized placebo-controlled trials.

Han J(1), Dai L, Zhong N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pneumology, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Peking Union 
Medical College, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing, China.
Janet_Han2000@hotmail.com

BACKGROUND: Indacaterol is a novel, once-daily (od), inhaled, long-acting
β(2)-agonist bronchodilator for maintenance treatment of airflow limitation in
patients with COPD. The aim of this study was to evaluate the efficacy of
indacaterol on dyspnea, using available randomized placebo-controlled trials.
METHODS: A systematic search was made of MEDLINE, EMBASE, the Cochrane trials
databases, and a manual search of journals. Randomized placebo-controlled trials 
of 12 weeks or more comparing indacaterol with placebo were reviewed, and
eligible studies were included in a meta-analysis. The odds ratio (OR) for
likelihood of achieving TDI score ≥ 1 after 12 weeks of treatment was used as an 
outcome measure to compare indacaterol to placebo.
RESULTS: Six trials were included in the analysis. Relative to placebo, the
overall ORs for response were: indacaterol 75 μg od 1.784 (95% CI 1.282 to
2.482); indacaterol 150 μg od 2.149 (95% CI 1.746 to 2.645); and indacaterol 300 
μg od 2.458 (95% CI 2.010 to 3.006). Overall OR for response in TDI tended to
increase with higher indacaterol doses.
CONCLUSIONS: Patients receiving indacaterol had clinically significant
improvements in symptoms of dyspnea compared to placebo. Incremental benefits in 
TDI were observed with increasing doses. Indacaterol may provide patients and
physicians with a useful treatment option in symptomatic patients with dyspnea.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2466-13-26 
PMCID: PMC3651265
PMID: 23617268  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Pulm Pharmacol Ther. 2013 Dec;26(6):630-4. doi: 10.1016/j.pupt.2013.03.020. Epub 
2013 Apr 8.

The effect of indacaterol during an acute exacerbation of COPD.

Segreti A(1), Fiori E, Calzetta L, Sabatini M, Segreti V, Rogliani P, Cazzola M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of System Medicine, University of Rome Tor Vergata, Rome, Italy.

Some clinical trials have suggested that the inhaled long-acting β2-agonists
(LABAs) may be effective in the treatment of acute exacerbations of chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (AECOPD). Since indacaterol, the first once-daily
LABA to be developed for the regular treatment of COPD, exhibits fast onset of
action and 24-h duration of bronchodilation, we have investigated its effects in 
patients with AECOPD managed in the emergency department. In a randomised
controlled pilot trial, we have enrolled 29 consecutive patients with a recent
(i.e., within ≤ 4 d) history of AECOPD and requiring hospitalization. All
patients received a standard protocol consisting of ipratropium bromide aerosol
500 μg three times a day, intravenous methylprednisolone 20 mg twice-daily and,
if indicated, oral levofloxacin 500 mg once-daily. Moreover, they were randomly
allocated to one of the two 5-day treatment groups (indacaterol maleate 300 μg
once-daily or salbutamol nebulizer 1250 μg three times a day). The administration
of indacaterol 300 μg to patients admitted to emergency department for an AECOPD 
resulted in a greater improvement of pulmonary function compared with traditional
therapy, without cardiovascular side effects. Our results suggest that
indacaterol could be a useful option in the treatment of AECOPD. However, further
larger double-blinded randomized clinical trials are needed to validate the
intriguing results obtained in this setting.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pupt.2013.03.020 
PMID: 23578980  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Appl Health Econ Health Policy. 2013 Jun;11(3):259-74. doi:
10.1007/s40258-013-0021-5.

A UK-based cost-utility analysis of indacaterol, a once-daily maintenance
bronchodilator for patients with COPD, using real world evidence on resource use.

Price D(1), Asukai Y, Ananthapavan J, Malcolm B, Radwan A, Keyzor I.

Author information: 
(1)Centre of Academic Primary Care, University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen, UK.

INTRODUCTION: Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD) is a chronic,
progressive disease that is not curable. However, there are effective treatments 
available. In the UK, long-acting bronchodilators are first-line treatments for
COPD patients requiring maintenance therapy, and there are several options
available. The aim of this study is to establish, from the UK National Health
Service (NHS) perspective, the cost-effectiveness profile of indacaterol, the
first once-daily long-acting beta2-agonist (LABA), compared with tiotropium and
salmeterol, in patients with moderate to severe COPD. In assessing the
cost-effectiveness of COPD therapies, this study has the advantage of using real 
world evidence on the resource use associated with COPD management across the
spectrum of the disease.
METHODS: A Markov model was developed with four health states following the GOLD 
classification for severity of airflow limitation. The model time horizon was 3
years, and the cycle length was 3 months. From each state, patients could
experience a severe or non-severe exacerbation, move to a different COPD state,
remain in the current state or die. Transition probabilities were based on data
from the indacaterol clinical trials. The majority of the resource use data was
taken from the Optimum Patient Care Research Database (OPCRD), which contains
data from over 20,000 COPD patients in England and Scotland. Cost data were taken
from UK-based sources and published literature and presented for the cost year
2011. Health-related quality of life was the main outcome of interest and utility
data for the COPD states were based on data from the indacaterol clinical trials 
and disutility due to exacerbations were taken from the literature. Both one way 
and probabilistic sensitivity analyses were performed to test the robustness of
the results.
RESULTS: Indacaterol dominated in the comparison with salmeterol producing an
incremental QALY gain of 0.008 and cost savings of £110 per patient over a 3-year
time horizon. In the comparison with tiotropium over the same time horizon,
indacaterol remained the dominant strategy, producing an incremental QALY gain of
0.008 and cost savings of £248 per patient. The one-way sensitivity analysis
indicates that the proportion of patients in each of the COPD stages and the
mortality rate associated with Very Severe COPD are the variables with the
largest impact on the results. The probabilistic sensitivity analyses showed that
over 72 % and 89 % of the iterations when compared with salmeterol and
tiotropium, respectively, produced dominant results for indacaterol.
CONCLUSION: The analyses demonstrate that indacaterol dominates both tiotropium
and salmeterol in the base case and is likely to remain cost-effective under a
range of assumptions.

DOI: 10.1007/s40258-013-0021-5 
PMCID: PMC3663982
PMID: 23529714  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2013;8:117-25. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S28576. Epub
2013 Mar 15.

Ten years of tiotropium: clinical impact and patient perspectives.

Yohannes AM(1), Connolly MJ, Hanania NA.

Author information: 
(1)Manchester Metropolitan University, Department of Health Professions, UK.
a.yohannes@mmu.ac.uk

Tiotropium bromide is an anticholinergic agent that has gained worldwide
acceptance as a first-line, once daily maintenance therapy for patients with
moderate-to-severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. The purpose of this
review is to synthesize the evidence base in the past 10 years on the development
of tiotropium and its efficacy compared to other able interventions such as
long-acting beta agonists (LABAs), as well as to assess its safety profile and
its effects on health-related outcomes in patients with COPD. Treatment with
tiotropium bromide has generally improved patients' health-related quality of
life, reduced the number of patients suffering from acute exacerbations,
decreased the number of hospitalizations, improved dyspnea, and reduced adverse
events compared to placebo. In the past decade, several studies have examined the
safety and efficacy of tiotropium in comparison to placebo and to LABAs
(salmeterol, formoterol, and indacaterol) over periods ranging from 3 months to
48 months of follow-up. Head-to-head comparisons of tiotropium 18μg (once daily) 
with salmeterol 50μg (twice daily) in well-controlled trials demonstrated that
tiotropium was superior in reducing acute exacerbation events and in improving
quality of life. In a few short-term studies, indacaterol was comparable to
tiotropium in its efficacy in improving health-related outcomes. Although the
safety record of tiotropium has been exemplary in comparison to placebo,
anticholinergic events such as dry mouth can be encountered in some patients.
While the long-term safety of tiotropium when delivered in the HandiHaler® has
been well documented, its delivery using the Respimat® Soft Mist Inhaler™ was
associated with an elevated risk of cardiovascular complications, including
increased mortality when compared to placebo. The exact mechanism for this is not
known but is being investigated in a large multinational study that will evaluate
the long-term safety of different doses of tiotropium delivered by the Respimat® 
soft mist inhaler versus the HandiHaler®. Further studies are required to
investigate the efficacy and safety of tiotropium in comparison with novel LABAs 
such as indacaterol and vilanterol, and with other emerging novel anticholinergic
agents such as aclidinium bromide and NVA237 (glycopyrronium bromide).

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S28576 
PMCID: PMC3600941
PMID: 23515335  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Pulm Pharmacol Ther. 2013 Jun;26(3):348-55. doi: 10.1016/j.pupt.2013.02.006. Epub
2013 Feb 19.

Efficacy and safety of indacaterol and tiotropium in COPD patients according
to dyspnoea severity.

Mahler DA(1), Buhl R, Lawrence D, McBryan D.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Pulmonary & Critical Care Medicine, Geisel School of Medicine at
Dartmouth, Hanover, NH, USA. Donald.A.Mahler@hitchcock.org

BACKGROUND: Guidelines for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) recommend
that treatment choices be based partly on symptoms.
METHODS: A post-hoc analysis of pooled data from clinical studies compared the
efficacy and safety of once-daily inhaled bronchodilators indacaterol (150 and
300 μg) and open-label tiotropium (18 μg) according to baseline dyspnoea severity
on the modified Medical Research Council (mMRC) scale in patients with COPD (mMRC
scores <2 = 'less dyspnoea'; scores ≥2 = 'more dyspnoea'). Outcomes were assessed
after 26 weeks.
RESULTS: The analysis included 3177 patients. In patients with less dyspnoea:
indacaterol (both doses) improved 24-h post-dose ('trough') forced expiratory
volume in 1 s (FEV1), transition dyspnoea index (TDI) and St George's Respiratory
Questionnaire (SGRQ) total scores at week 26 and reduced the risk of COPD
exacerbations vs placebo; and open-label tiotropium improved trough FEV1 and TDI 
total score vs placebo at week 26. In patients with more dyspnoea: indacaterol
(both doses) improved trough FEV1, TDI and SGRQ total scores at week 26;
indacaterol 300 μg was the only treatment to improve the TDI total score by more 
than the minimum clinically important difference (≥1 point) vs placebo; and
open-label tiotropium improved trough FEV1, TDI total score at week 26 and
decreased the risk of COPD exacerbations vs placebo. In both subgroups, all
treatments were well tolerated.
CONCLUSIONS: In patients with less dyspnoea, all treatments had similar effects. 
Indacaterol 300 μg may be a useful treatment option for patients with COPD who
experience more severe breathlessness.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pupt.2013.02.006 
PMID: 23434446  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2013;8:89-96. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S31209. Epub
2013 Feb 14.

Improving the quality of life in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease: focus on indacaterol.

Feldman GJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)S Carolina Pharmaceutical Research, Alliance Biomedical Group International,
Spartanburg, SC 29303, USA. gfeld3232@aol.com

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a common disease in the general
population and it places a considerable burden on patients, with the disease
negatively affecting quality of life. In practice, patients with COPD generally
seek medical attention because of symptoms, particularly breathlessness, and the 
resulting physical limitations, which affect the health-related quality of life
(HR-QOL) in patients. The defining feature of COPD is airflow limitation that
causes air trapping and increased hyperinflation as the ventilation rate
increases during physical effort. Hyperinflation causes or worsens breathlessness
as breathing becomes inefficient, with the end result being an avoidance of
physical exertion and a cycle of increasing dyspnea caused by inactivity and
deconditioning, with deleterious effects on HR-QOL. Current published guidelines 
for COPD state that the goals of pharmacologic therapy should be to control
symptoms, improve health status and exercise tolerance, and reduce the frequency 
of COPD exacerbations. Effective and sustained bronchodilation has emerged as a
key strategy for improving dyspnea and ability to exercise. As there is no cure
for COPD, a major goal of treatment and of research into new therapies is to
improve HR-QOL in COPD patients.CONCLUSION: More recently, indacaterol, an
inhaled ultra-long-acting β(2)-agonist (24-hour action), has been approved in
many countries at different doses (between 75 and 300 μg once daily) for
treatment of patients with stable but symptomatic COPD. The aim of this review
was to explore once-daily indacaterol clinical data as related to improvement in 
HR-QOL in COPD. Indacaterol studies have shown significant improvements in lung
function of COPD patients, and these improvements have also translated into
clinically meaningful improvements in patient symptoms and HR-QOL.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S31209 
PMCID: PMC3575129
PMID: 23431038  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Curr Med Chem. 2013;20(12):1477-95.

Long-acting beta-agonists and their association with inhaled corticosteroids in
COPD.

Fuso L(1), Mores N, Valente S, Malerba M, Montuschi P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Geriatrics, Faculty of Medicine, Catholic 
University of the Sacred Heart, Rome, Italy.

Inhaled bronchodilators, including beta(2)-agonists and antimuscaric receptor
antagonists, are the mainstay of pharmacotherapy in chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD). The short-acting beta(2)-agonists, including salbutamol, and
fenoterol, have a rapid onset of action, a bronchodilating effect for 3-6 h and
are used on demand. The long-acting beta(2)-agonists (LABAs), including
salmeterol and formoterol, have 12-hour duration of action and are used with a
twice-daily dosing regimen for long-term COPD treatment. Unlike salmeterol,
formoterol has a rapid onset of action. Pharmacological characteristics required 
by novel inhaled LABAs include 24 h bronchodilator effect in vivo which would
make them suitable for once daily administration (ultra-LABA), high potency and
selectivity for beta(2)-adrenoceptors, rapid onset of action, low oral
bioavailability (< 5%) after inhalation, and high systemic clearance.
Indacaterol, which has been approved for long-term treatment of COPD in Europe
and in the USA, has a 24-h duration of action and a once-daily dosing regimen.
Newer ultra-LABAs, including olodaterol, vilanterol, milveterol, carmoterol, and 
abediterol, are in development. Combination with ICS (fluticasone/salmeterol,
budesonide/formoterol, beclomethasone/formoterol) appears to provide an
additional benefit over the monocomponent therapy, although the extent of this
benefit is variable and often not clinically significant in all the endpoints
assessed. In patients with COPD, treatment with ICS is associated with increased 
risk of pneumonia which should be carefully considered when assessing the
risk/benefit ratio of ICS/LABA combinations. Subphenotyping of patients with COPD
(e.g., frequent exacerbations, sputum eosinophilia, mixed asthma/COPD phenotype) 
might help identify those patients who are most likely to benefit from addition
of ICS to bronchodilating treatment. Ultra-LABA/ long-acting muscarinic receptor 
antagonist (LAMA) combination treatment is under development and is likely to
become a standard pharmacological strategy for COPD. Dual-pharmacology inhaled
muscarinic antagonist-beta(2) agonist (MABA) molecules provide a new approach to 
the treatment of COPD.


PMID: 23409722  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2013;8:53-64. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S39018. Epub
2013 Jan 25.

The safety of long-acting β2-agonists in the treatment of stable chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease.

Decramer ML(1), Hanania NA, Lötvall JO, Yawn BP.

Author information: 
(1)Respiratory Division, UZ Leuven, Campus Gasthuisberg, Herestraat 49, Leuven,
Belgium. marc.decramer@uzleuven.be

BACKGROUND: Inhaled long-acting bronchodilators are the mainstay of
pharmacotherapy for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Both the
twice-daily long-acting β(2)-adrenoceptor agonists (LABAs) salmeterol and
formoterol and the once-daily LABA indacaterol are indicated for use in COPD.
This review examines current evidence for the safety of LABAs in COPD, focusing
on their effect on exacerbations and deaths.
METHODS: We searched PubMed for placebo-controlled studies evaluating long-term
(≥24 weeks) use of formoterol, salmeterol, or indacaterol in patients with stable
COPD, published between January 1990 and September 2012. We summarized data
relating to exacerbations and adverse events, particularly events related to
COPD.
RESULTS: From 20 studies examined (8774 LABA-treated patients), there was no
evidence of an association between LABA treatment and increased exacerbations,
COPD-related adverse events, or deaths. Where analyzed as an efficacy outcome,
LABA treatment was generally associated with significant or numerical reductions 
in COPD exacerbations compared with placebo. Incidences of COPD-related adverse
events were similar for active and placebo treatments. The incidence of adverse
events typically associated with the β(2)-agonist drug class such as skeletal
muscle tremors and palpitations was low (often <1% of patients), and there were
no reports of increased incidence of cardiac arrhythmias. The systemic effects of
β(2)-adrenoceptor stimulation, such as high glucose and potassium levels, were
considered minor.
CONCLUSION: Current evidence from clinical studies of the safety and tolerability
profile of LABAs supports their long-term use in COPD.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S39018 
PMCID: PMC3558319
PMID: 23378756  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Lung. 2013 Apr;191(2):135-46. doi: 10.1007/s00408-012-9444-2. Epub 2013 Jan 10.

Safety and efficacy of 12-week or longer indacaterol treatment in
moderate-to-severe COPD patients: a systematic review.

Jiang FM(1), Liang ZA, Zheng QL, Wang RC, Luo J, Li CT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, West China Medical School and West China
Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu, 610000, Sichuan, China.

BACKGROUND: This is a meta-analysis of the safety and efficacy of indacaterol in 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) with treatment duration of
≥12 weeks.
METHODS: Randomized controlled trials (RCTs) reported in English (to September
30, 2012) were identified from PubMed, the Cochrane Library, Embase, websites,
reference lists, and manual searches. Two reviewers independently assessed the
quality of the trials and extracted information.
RESULTS: Five RCTs were eligible. Five involved indacaterol, two salmeterol, one 
formoterol, and one tiotropium. Four studies had placebos. Using trough forced
expiratory volume in 1 s as a measure of therapeutic effect, indacaterol was
superior to the other β2-agonists, tiotropium, and placebo at weeks 12, 26, and
52. Indacaterol had a greater effect on the transition dyspnoea index compared
with placebo, formoterol, and salmeterol, but not open-label tiotropium. In
reducing the as-needed use of salbutamol, indacaterol were superior to placebo,
tiotropium, and formoterol, but not salmeterol (5, 95 % confidence interval (CI),
-2.15, 12.15). Indacaterol improved St George's Respiratory Questionnaire scores 
more than placebo and open-label tiotropium, but not formoterol. Indacaterol
seemed to cause more adverse events than placebo only at a dose of 600 μg daily
and a duration of 52 weeks (risk ratio 1.15; 95 % CI, 1.04, 1.26). The total and 
serious adverse events and adverse events leading to discontinuation were
comparable with open-label tiotropium and the β2-agonists.
CONCLUSIONS: Indacaterol is effective and well-tolerated as a bronchodilator for 
the maintenance of moderate to severe COPD.

DOI: 10.1007/s00408-012-9444-2 
PMID: 23306410  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Ther Adv Respir Dis. 2013 Feb;7(1):25-37. doi: 10.1177/1753465812470018. Epub
2013 Jan 7.

Indacaterol 75 μg once daily for the treatment of patients with chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease: a North American perspective.

Kerwin EM(1), Williams J.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Research Institute of Southern Oregon, PC, 3860 Crater Lake Avenue,
Medford, OR 97504, USA. ekerwin@ allergyasthmaso.com

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a progressive disease in which
patients become increasingly disabled by their symptoms and limited in their
activities. Health-related quality of life may be profoundly impaired even in the
early stages of the disease. Treatment with long-acting inhaled bronchodilators
can improve lung function, symptoms and health status and reduce exacerbations of
COPD. This review profiles the efficacy, safety and tolerability of indacaterol, 
an inhaled β(2)-agonist bronchodilator for once-daily maintenance treatment of
patients with COPD. After 12 weeks of treatment with a once-daily dose of 75 µg
(the dose approved in the USA and Canada) in patients with moderate to severe
COPD, compared with placebo, indacaterol provided significant and clinically
relevant levels of bronchodilation [difference in trough forced expiratory volume
in 1 s: 131 ml; 95% confidence interval (CI) 104-159; p < 0.001], together with
significant reductions in symptom scores (difference in transition dyspnea index 
total score: 0.84 points; 95% CI 0.37-1.31; p < 0.001) and improvements in health
status (difference in St George's Respiratory Questionnaire total score: -3.8
units; 95% CI -5.6 to -2.0; p < 0.001). The overall safety and tolerability of
once-daily treatment with indacaterol 75 µg for 12 weeks did not differ in any
substantial aspect from placebo treatment. Indirect comparisons analyzing pooled 
clinical data and meta-analyses suggest that treatment with indacaterol 75 µg
once daily may be effective in reducing exacerbations of COPD, and that its
effects on lung function and health status will be comparable with other
currently available inhaled long-acting bronchodilators used for COPD. Treatment 
with indacaterol 75 µg once daily provides effective bronchodilation, improves
dyspnea and health status, and has a well characterized profile of safety and
tolerability.

DOI: 10.1177/1753465812470018 
PMID: 23296242  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2013;8:1-5. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S38548. Epub 2012 
Dec 28.

Indacaterol improves daily physical activity in patients with chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease.

Hataji O(1), Naito M, Ito K, Watanabe F, Gabazza EC, Taguchi O.

Author information: 
(1)Respiratory Center, Matsusaka Municipal Hospital, Tonomachi.

BACKGROUND: The current mainstay of therapy for chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD) is long-acting bronchodilators. To date, the effect of
indacaterol, a β2-agonist, on activities of daily living in COPD patients is not 
well understood. The aim of this study was to evaluate the efficacy of
indacaterol with regard to activities of daily living in patients with COPD.
METHODS: In this nonrandomized open-label study, 23 patients with COPD were
instructed to carry an accelerometer for 4 weeks without indacaterol therapy and 
then for another period of 4 weeks while receiving indacaterol therapy.
RESULTS: The number of steps, duration of moderate or greater physical activity, 
and energy expenditure were significantly increased after treatment with
indacaterol compared with baseline data in all patients with COPD; the metabolic 
equivalent of task was also significantly enhanced after treatment with
indacaterol.
CONCLUSION: This study provides early evidence that indacaterol improves daily
physical activity in patients with COPD.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S38548 
PMCID: PMC3534442
PMID: 23293514  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Open Respir Med J. 2012;6:150-4. doi: 10.2174/1874306401206010150. Epub 2012 Dec 
14.

Aclidinium Bromide: Clinical Benefit in Patients with Moderate to Severe COPD.

Suppli Ulrik C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Hvidovre Hospital & University of
Copenhagen, Denmark.

BACKGROUND AND AIM: Long-acting bronchodilators are the mainstay of
pharmacological treatment for patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD). The aim of this review is to provide an overview of the clinical studies 
evaluating the safety and efficacy of inhaled aclidinium bromide, a novel
long-acting anticholinergic bronchodilator, for the treatment of COPD.
METHOD: This systematic review explored the efficacy and safety of aclidinium
bromide in comparison with placebo and other long-acting bronchodilators for
treatment of moderate to severe COPD. Randomised controlled trials were
identified through systematic searches of different databases of published
trials.
RESULTS: Ten trials (3.922 participants) were included. Aclidinium bromide
appears to be a safe and well-tolerated long-acting anti-cholinergic
bronchodilator with a relatively fast onset of action. Compared with other
long-acting bronchodilators, including tiotropium bromide, aclidinium bromide
leads to at least similar clinically important improvements in level of FEV(1),
health status, use of rescue medication, and day-time dyspnea scores in patients 
suffering from moderate to severe COPD. With twice-daily dosing, aclidinium
bromide may have clinically important effect on night-time symptom scores in COPD
patients, but further studies are needed in order to permit valid conclusions
with regard to this point. The effect of aclidinium bromide on exercise
tolerance, as assessed by exercise endurance time, and dynamic hyperinflation in 
patients with moderate to severe COPD seems to be at least comparable to other
long-acting bronchodilators, incl. tiotropium bromide and indacaterol. Aclidinium
bromide might reduce the rate of exacerbations in COPD patients, but conclusions 
must await further long-term controlled trials.
CONCLUSION: Aclidinium bromide has effects on relevant COPD outcome measures,
including level of FEV(1), similar to other long-acting bronchodilators, and
therefore seems to have the potential for a significant role in the future
management of moderate to severe COPD.

DOI: 10.2174/1874306401206010150 
PMCID: PMC3527890
PMID: 23264836  [PubMed]


126. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2013 Jan;344(1):218-30. doi: 10.1124/jpet.112.198481. Epub 
2012 Nov 6.

In vitro pharmacological characterization of vilanterol, a novel long-acting
β2-adrenoceptor agonist with 24-hour duration of action.

Slack RJ(1), Barrett VJ, Morrison VS, Sturton RG, Emmons AJ, Ford AJ, Knowles RG.

Author information: 
(1)Respiratory TAU, GlaxoSmithKline, Gunnels Wood Road, Stevenage, Hertfordshire 
SG1 2NY, UK. Robert.X.Slack@gsk.com

Vilanterol trifenatate (vilanterol) is a novel, long-acting β(2)-adrenoceptor
(β(2)-AR) agonist with 24 h activity. In this study, we describe the preclinical 
pharmacological profile of vilanterol using radioligand binding and cAMP studies 
in recombinant assays as well as human and guinea pig tissue systems to
characterize β(2)-AR binding and functional properties. Vilanterol displayed a
subnanomolar affinity for the β(2)-AR that was comparable with that of salmeterol
but higher than olodaterol, formoterol, and indacaterol. In cAMP functional
activity studies, vilanterol demonstrated similar selectivity as salmeterol for
β(2)- over β(1)-AR and β(3)-AR, but a significantly improved selectivity profile 
than formoterol and indacaterol. Vilanterol also showed a level of intrinsic
efficacy that was comparable to indacaterol but significantly greater than that
of salmeterol. In cellular cAMP production and tissue-based studies measuring
persistence and reassertion, vilanterol had a persistence of action comparable
with indacaterol and longer than formoterol. In addition, vilanterol demonstrated
reassertion activity in both cell and tissue systems that was comparable with
salmeterol and indacaterol but longer than formoterol. In human airways,
vilanterol was shown to have a faster onset and longer duration of action than
salmeterol, exhibiting a significant level of bronchodilation 22 h after
treatment. From these investigations, the data for vilanterol are consistent,
showing that it is a novel, potent, and selective β(2)-AR receptor agonist with a
long duration of action. This pharmacological profile combined with clinical data
is consistent with once a day dosing of vilanterol in the treatment of both
asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).

DOI: 10.1124/jpet.112.198481 
PMID: 23131596  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2012;7:729-41. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S36001. Epub
2012 Oct 26.

Profile of glycopyrronium for once-daily treatment of moderate-to-severe COPD.

Buhl R(1), Banerji D.

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary Department, Mainz University Hospital, Mainz, Germany.

Erratum in
    Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2014;9:287.

Bronchodilators are central in the symptomatic management of chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD). Long-acting muscarinic antagonists (LAMAs) and
long-acting β(2)-agonists (LABAs) are the main classes of long-acting
bronchodilators. To date, tiotropium is the only once-daily LAMA available for
the treatment of COPD. Glycopyrronium is a novel LAMA, currently in development
for COPD. Phase II studies have shown that glycopyrronium 50 μg once daily
provides clinically significant 24-hour bronchodilation with a rapid onset of
action, which is faster than that of tiotropium, and a favorable safety and
tolerability profile. The Phase III GLycopyrronium bromide in COPD airWays (GLOW)
program has now confirmed the long-term efficacy and tolerability of
glycopyrronium 50 μg once daily. The three studies included in this program have 
further shown that the effect of glycopyrronium versus placebo is similar to that
of tiotropium in reducing dyspnea and the risk of exacerbations, as well as
improving lung function, exercise tolerance, and health status in patients with
COPD. The safety profile of glycopyrronium is also similar to that of tiotropium 
in terms of overall incidence of adverse events and muscarinic side effects.
Glycopyrronium could be an alternative choice to tiotropium, and like tiotropium,
has the potential to be used as a monotherapy or combination therapy. Phase II
studies have shown that a fixed-dose combination of glycopyrronium and the
24-hour LABA indacaterol, produces rapid and sustained bronchodilation compared
with indacaterol monotherapy in patients with COPD. Phase III studies are
currently ongoing to assess the long-term efficacy and safety of this
combination.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S36001 
PMCID: PMC3484531
PMID: 23118536  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. J Pharm Pract. 2012 Dec;25(6):576-82. doi: 10.1177/0897190012460828. Epub 2012
Oct 16.

A review of the advances in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease treatment.

Metzger NL(1), Lundquist LM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy Practice, Mercer University College of Pharmacy and
Health Sciences, Atlanta, GA 30341, USA.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a leading cause of morbidity and 
mortality across the globe and within the United States. Although several
medication classes are used for COPD treatment, none of these medications have
been shown to significantly improve long-term lung function or mitigate overall
disease progression. This review describes the pharmacologic treatment options
for COPD and highlights recent studies evaluating the impact of bronchodilators
and combination therapy on lung function, mortality, quality of life, and
exacerbations. Additionally, indacaterol and roflumilast, 2 new COPD treatment
agents approved by the Food and Drug Administration in 2011, are discussed.
Pharmacists play an important role in managing and educating patients with COPD
and should utilize new evidence to make recommendations.

DOI: 10.1177/0897190012460828 
PMID: 23076966  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Int J Clin Pharmacol Ther. 2012 Sep;50(9):631-7; discussion 638.

Comment on the report "limitations of model-based dose selection for indacaterol 
in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease".

Looby M(1), Renard D, Wright A, Morris D, Stanski D.

Author information: 
(1)Novartis Pharma AG, Basel, Switzerland. Michael.Looby@Novartis.com

Comment on
    Int J Clin Pharmacol Ther. 2012 Sep;50(9):622-30.


PMID: 22981144  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2012 Sep 12;(9):CD009157. doi:
10.1002/14651858.CD009157.pub2.

Tiotropium versus long-acting beta-agonists for stable chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease.

Chong J(1), Karner C, Poole P.

Author information: 
(1)University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand. jimmy_chong@xtra.co.nz

BACKGROUND: Tiotropium and long-acting beta(2)-agonists (LABAs) are both accepted
in the routine management for people with stable chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD). There are new studies which have compared tiotropium with LABAs, 
including some that have evaluated recently introduced LABAs.
OBJECTIVES: To compare the relative clinical effects of tiotropium bromide alone 
versus LABA alone, upon measures of quality of life, exacerbations, lung function
and serious adverse events, in people with stable COPD.To critically appraise and
summarise current evidence on the costs and cost-effectiveness associated with
tiotropium compared to LABA in people with COPD.
SEARCH METHODS: We identified randomised controlled trials (RCTs) from the
Cochrane Airways Group Specialised Register of trials and economic evaluations
from searching NHS EED and HEED (date of last search February 2012). We found
additional trials from web-based clinical trial registers.
SELECTION CRITERIA: We included RCTs and full economic evaluations if they
compared effects of tiotropium alone with LABAs alone in people with COPD. We
allowed co-administration of standard COPD therapy.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Two review authors independently assessed studies
for inclusion, then extracted data on study quality and outcomes. We contacted
study authors and trial sponsors for additional information. We analysed data
using the Cochrane Review Manager(RevMan 5.1) software.
MAIN RESULTS: Seven clinical studies totalling 12,223 participants with COPD were
included in the review. The studies used similar designs and were generally of
good methodological quality. Inclusion criteria for RCTs were similar across the 
included studies, although studies varied in terms of smoking history and COPD
severity of participants. They compared tiotropium (which was delivered by
HandiHaler in all studies) with salmeterol (four studies, 8936 participants),
formoterol (one study, 431 participants) and indacaterol (two studies, 2856
participants). All participants were instructed to discontinue anticholinergic or
long-acting beta(2)-agonist bronchodilators during treatment, but could receive
inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) at a stable dose. Study duration ranged from 3 to
12 months. We extracted data for 11,223 participants. In general, the treatment
groups were well matched at baseline. Overall, the risk of bias across the
included RCTs was low.In the analysis of the primary outcomes in this review, a
high level of heterogeneity amongst studies meant that we did not pool data for
St George's Respiratory Questionnaire quality of life score. Subgroup analyses
based on the type of LABA found statistically significant differences among
effects on quality of life depending on whether tiotropium was compared with
salmeterol, formoterol or indacaterol. Tiotropium reduced the number of
participants experiencing one or more exacerbations compared with LABA (odds
ratio (OR) 0.86; 95% confidence interval (CI) 0.79 to 0.93). For this outcome,
there was no difference seen among the different types of LABA. There was no
statistical difference in mortality observed between the treatment groups.For
secondary outcomes, tiotropium was associated with a reduction in the number of
COPD exacerbations leading to hospitalisation compared with LABA treatment (OR
0.87; 95% 0.77 to 0.99), but not in the overall rate of all-cause
hospitalisations. There was no statistically significant difference in forced
expiratory volume in one second (FEV(1)) or symptom score between tiotropium and 
LABA-treated participants. There was a lower rate of non-fatal serious adverse
events recorded with tiotropium compared with LABA (OR 0.88; 95% CI 0.78 to
0.99). The tiotropium group was also associated with a lower rate of study
withdrawals (OR 0.89; 95% CI 0.81 to 0.99).We identified six full economic
evaluations assessing the cost and cost-effectiveness of tiotropium and
salmeterol. The studies were based on an economic model or empirical analysis of 
clinical data from RCTs. They all looked at maintenance costs and the costs for
COPD exacerbations, including respiratory medications and hospitalisations. The
setting for the evaluations was primary and secondary care in the UK, Greece,
Netherlands, Spain and USA. All the studies estimated tiotropium to be superior
to salmeterol based on better clinical outcomes (exacerbations or quality of
life) and/or lower total costs. However, the authors of all evaluations reported 
there was substantial uncertainty around the results.
AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: In people with COPD, the evidence is equivocal as to
whether or not tiotropium offers greater benefit than LABAs in improving quality 
of life; however, this is complicated by differences in effect among the LABA
types. Tiotropium was more effective than LABAs as a group in preventing COPD
exacerbations and disease-related hospitalisations, although there were no
statistical differences between groups in overall hospitalisation rates or
mortality during the study periods. There were fewer serious adverse events and
study withdrawals recorded with tiotropium compared with LABAs. Symptom
improvement and changes in lung function were similar between the treatment
groups. Given the small number of studies to date, with high levels of
heterogeneity among them, one approach may be to give a COPD patient a
substantial trial of tiotropium, followed by a LABA (or vice versa), then to
continue prescribing the long-acting bronchodilator that the patient prefers.
Further studies are needed to compare tiotropium with different LABAs, which are 
currently ongoing. The available economic evidence indicates that tiotropium may 
be cost-effective compared with salmeterol in several specific settings, but
there is considerable uncertainty around this finding.

DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD009157.pub2 
PMID: 22972134  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2012;7:415-20. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S31526. Epub
2012 Jul 5.

Efficacy of indacaterol 75 μg versus fixed-dose combinations of
formoterol-budesonide or salmeterol-fluticasone for COPD: a network
meta-analysis.

Cope S(1), Kraemer M, Zhang J, Capkun-Niggli G, Jansen JP.

Author information: 
(1)MAPI Consultancy, Boston, MA 02114, USA.

BACKGROUND: The purpose of this study was to update our network meta-analysis in 
order to compare the efficacy of indacaterol 75 μg with that of a fixed-dose
combination of formoterol and budesonide (FOR/BUD) and a fixed-dose combination
salmeterol and fluticasone (SAL/FP) for the treatment of chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD) based on evidence identified previously in addition to
two new randomized clinical trials.
METHODS: Fifteen randomized, placebo-controlled clinical trials including COPD
patients were evaluated: indacaterol 75 μg once daily (n = 2 studies),
indacaterol 150 μg once daily (n = 5), indacaterol 300 μg once daily (n = 4),
FOR/BUD 9/160 μg twice daily (n = 2), FOR/BUD 9/320 μg twice daily (n = 2),
SAL/FP 50/500 μg twice daily (n = 4), and SAL/FP 50/250 μg twice daily (n = 1).
All trials were analyzed simultaneously using a Bayesian network meta-analysis
and relative treatment effects between all regimens were obtained.
Treatment-by-covariate interactions were included where possible to improve the
similarity of the trials. Outcomes of interest were trough forced expiratory
volume in 1 second (FEV(1)) and transitional dyspnea index at 12 weeks.
RESULTS: Based on the results without adjustment for covariates, indacaterol 75
μg resulted in a greater improvement in FEV(1) at 12 weeks compared with FOR/BUD 
9/160 μg (difference in change from baseline 0.09 L [95% credible interval
0.04-0.13]) and FOR/BUD 9/320 μg (0.07 L [0.03-0.11]) and was comparable with
SAL/FP 50/250 μg (0.00 L [-0.07-0.07]) and SAL/FP 50/500 μg (0.01 L
[-0.04-0.05]). For transitional dyspnea index, data was available only for
indacaterol 75 μg versus SAL/FP 50/500 μg (-0.49 points [-1.87-0.89]).
CONCLUSION: Based on results of a network meta-analysis with and without
covariates, indacaterol 75 μg is expected to be at least as efficacious as
FOR/BUD (9/320 μg and 9/160 μg) and comparable with SAL/FP (50/250 μg and 50/500 
μg) in terms of lung function. In terms of breathlessness (transitional dyspnea
index) at 12 weeks, the results are inconclusive given the limited data.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S31526 
PMCID: PMC3402062
PMID: 22848154  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2013;756:23-8. doi: 10.1007/978-94-007-4549-0_4.

Indacaterol add-on therapy improves lung function, exercise capacity and life
quality of COPD patients.

Mroz RM(1), Minarowski L, Chyczewska E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Lung Diseases, Medical University of Bialystok, Zurawia 14,
Bialystok, Poland. robmroz@wp.pl

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a progressive, inflammatory
condition, involving airways and lung parenchyma. The disease leads to airflow
limitation, and pulmonary hyperinflation, resulting in dyspnea, decreased
exercise tolerance, and impaired quality of life. COPD pharmacotherapy guidelines
are based on a combination of long-acting beta2-agonists (LABA), long-acting
antimuscarinic agents (LAMA) and methyloxantins. Recently, indacaterol, ultralong
acting beta2-agonist, has been introduced. The aim of our study was to assess the
impact of indacaterol add-on therapy on lung function, exercise tolerance and
quality of life of COPD patients. Thirty four COPD patients, receiving stable
bronchodilator therapy were randomly allocated into two arms of add-on treatment 
(1:1 - indacaterol:placebo) for 3 months. Indacaterol replaced LABA in all
patients receiving LABA. Spirometry, lung volumes, DLCO, St George's Respiratory 
Questionnaire (SGRQ) and 6 min Walk Distance (6MWD) were performed before and
after therapy. We found that in the indacaterol group FEV1 did not changed
significantly. However, there were significant improvements in ERV, 6MWD, and
6MWD-related dyspnea score. We also found that the degree of desaturation before 
and after 6MWD, and fatigue levels significantly improved in the indacaterol
group. The patients' quality of life also changed favorably in the indacaterol
treatment arm. We conclude that the add-on therapy with indacaterol exerts
positive effects in COPD patients.

DOI: 10.1007/978-94-007-4549-0_4 
PMID: 22836615  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. BMC Pulm Med. 2012 Jun 25;12:29. doi: 10.1186/1471-2466-12-29.

Efficacy of once-daily indacaterol 75 μg relative to alternative bronchodilators 
in COPD: a study level and a patient level network meta-analysis.

Cope S(1), Zhang J, Williams J, Jansen JP.

Author information: 
(1)Mapi Consultancy, Boston, MA, USA.

BACKGROUND: The objective of this study was to evaluate the comparative efficacy 
of indacaterol 75 μg once daily (OD), tiotropium 18 μg OD, salmeterol 50 μg twice
daily (BID), formoterol 12 μg BID, and placebo for the treatment of chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) based on individual patient data (IPD) from 
randomized controlled trials (RCTs) from the indacaterol trial program and
aggregate data (AD) identified from a systematic review of RCTs.
METHODS: 22 RCTs were included in the AD analysis that evaluated: indacaterol 75 
μg (n = 2 studies), indacaterol 150 μg n = 5 (i.e. salmeterol 50 μg) (n = 5),
indacaterol 300 μg (n = 2), tiotropium 18 μg (n = 10), salmeterol 50 μg (n = 7), 
and formoterol 12 μg (n = 4). All of the studies except for one head-to-head
comparison (tiotropium vs. salmeterol) were placebo controlled. Outcomes of
interest were trough forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1) and St. George's
Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ) total score at week 12. The AD from all trials
was analysed simultaneously using a Bayesian network meta-analysis (NMA) and
relative treatment effects between all regimens were obtained. In a separate
analysis, the IPD available from the 6 indacaterol RCTs was analysed in a NMA.
Treatment-by-covariate interactions were included in both analyses to improve
similarity of the trials.
RESULTS: All interventions compared were more efficacious than placebo regarding 
FEV1 at 12 weeks. Indacaterol 75 μg is expected to result in a comparable FEV1 at
12 weeks to tiotropium and salmeterol based on both IPD and AD analyses. In
comparison to formoterol, the IPD and AD results indicate indacaterol 75 μg is
more efficacious (IPD = 0.07 L difference; 95%Credible Interval (CrI) 0.02 to
0.11; AD = 0.05 L difference; 95%CrI 0.01; 0.09). In terms of SGRQ total score at
12 weeks, indacaterol 75 μg and formoterol were more efficacious than placebo,
whereas for tiotropium and salmeterol the credible intervals included zero for
the AD results only (tiotropium: -2.99 points improvement versus placebo; 95%CrI 
-6.48 to 0.43; salmeterol:-2.52; 95%CrI: -5.34; 0.44). Both IPD and AD results
suggest that indacaterol 75 μg is expected to be comparable to all active
treatments.
CONCLUSIONS: Based on a synthesis of currently available AD RCT evidence as well 
as an IPD network meta-analysis of six RCTs, indacaterol 75 μg is expected to be 
at least as efficacious as formoterol and comparable to tiotropium and salmeterol
regarding FEV1. Furthermore, indacaterol 75 μg shows comparable level of
improvement in health-related quality of life to tiotropium, salmeterol, and
formoterol, as measured by the SGRQ.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2466-12-29 
PMCID: PMC3512498
PMID: 22732017  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Respir Res. 2012 Jun 22;13:52. doi: 10.1186/1465-9921-13-52.

Clinical trial design in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: current
perspectives and considerations with regard to blinding of tiotropium.

Beeh KM(1), Beier J, Donohue JF.

Author information: 
(1)Insaf Respiratory Research Institute, Wiesbaden, Germany. k.beeh@insaf-wi.de

Randomised, double-blind, controlled trials are considered the gold standard for 
evaluating a pharmacological agent, as they minimise any potential bias. However,
it is not always possible to perform double-blind trials, particularly for
medications delivered via specific devices, e.g. inhalers. In such cases,
open-label studies can be employed instead. Methods used to minimise any
potential bias introduced by open-label study design include randomisation,
crossover study design, and objective measurements of primary efficacy and safety
variables. Concise reviews analysing the effect of blinding procedures of
comparator drugs on outcomes in respiratory trials are limited. Here, we compare 
data from different chronic obstructive pulmonary disease trials with once-daily 
indacaterol versus a blinded or non-blinded comparator. The clinical trial
programme for indacaterol, a once-daily, long-acting β2-agonist, used tiotropium 
as a comparator either in an open-label or blinded fashion. Data from these
studies showed that the effects of tiotropium were consistent for forced
expiratory volume in 1 second, an objective measure, across blinded and
non-blinded studies. The data were consistent with previous studies of
double-blind tiotropium, suggesting that the open-label use of tiotropium did not
introduce treatment bias. The effect of tiotropium on subjective measures (St
George's Respiratory Questionnaire; transition dyspnoea index) varied slightly
across blinded and non-blinded studies, indicating that minimal bias was
introduced by using open-label tiotropium. Importantly, the studies used
randomised, open-label tiotropium patients to treatment allocation, a method
shown to minimise bias to a greater degree than blinding. In conclusion, it is
important when reporting a clinical trial to be transparent about who was blinded
and how the blinding was performed; if the design is open-label, additional
efforts must be made to minimise risk of bias. If these recommendations are
followed, and the data are considered in the full knowledge of any potential
sources of bias, results with tiotropium suggest that data from open-label
studies can provide valuable and credible evidence of the effects of therapy.

DOI: 10.1186/1465-9921-13-52 
PMCID: PMC3462669
PMID: 22726538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Am J Geriatr Pharmacother. 2012 Aug;10(4):258-63. doi:
10.1016/j.amjopharm.2012.05.003. Epub 2012 Jun 8.

A year in review: new drugs for older adults in 2011.

Vande Griend JP(1), Marcum ZA, Linnebur SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacy, Skaggs School of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical 
Sciences, University of Colorado, Aurora, CO 80045, USA.
joseph.vandegriend@ucdenver.edu

BACKGROUND: New drugs approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) may
offer tremendous clinical advances by providing health care providers with new
treatment strategies. However, additional care must be taken for safe and
effective use of these new agents by older adults.
OBJECTIVE: Our objective was to identify FDA-approved medications in 2011 most
likely to be prescribed to older adults, and to describe medication
characteristics that may require special attention in this population.
METHODS: The FDA Web site was reviewed for new drug approvals from January
through December 2011. Approved labeling for each drug was obtained from the
manufacturer's Web site and PubMed was searched for primary literature published 
between 1967 and 2012.
RESULTS: Rivaroxaban, an oral factor Xa inhibitor, is approved for once-daily use
in treatment of nonvalvular atrial fibrillation and deep vein thrombosis
prophylaxis after replacement of a hip or knee. Drug interactions and renal
function must be considered when prescribing this drug to older adults.
Fidaxomicin is an oral anti-infective approved for the treatment of Clostridium
difficile-associated diarrhea. It has minimal oral absorption or side effects, no
relevant drug interactions, but a very high cost. It is a treatment option after 
failure of oral metronidazole and oral vancomycin. Roflumilast is a selective
inhibitor of phosphodiesterase 4 and is approved to reduce the risk of chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) exacerbations in patients with severe COPD
and a history of exacerbations. It is recommended as a second or alternative
choice combined with a long-acting bronchodilator in patients at high risk for
hospitalization. Indacaterol is an inhaled long-acting β-agonist approved for
COPD maintenance. It is administered once daily, which may improve adherence in
older adults compared with currently available twice-daily agents.
CONCLUSIONS: Four new drugs approved in 2011 applicable to the geriatric
population are presented. Clinicians must consider the available evidence, cost, 
drug-drug interactions, renal function, pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic
differences, and patient preferences when considering prescribing these agents to
older adults.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier HS Journals, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.amjopharm.2012.05.003 
PMCID: PMC4028133
PMID: 22682643  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Pharmacol Rev. 2012 Jul;64(3):450-504. doi: 10.1124/pr.111.004580. Epub 2012 May 
18.

Pharmacology and therapeutics of bronchodilators.

Cazzola M(1), Page CP, Calzetta L, Matera MG.

Author information: 
(1)Università di Roma Tor Vergata, Dipartimento di Medicina Interna, Via
Montpellier 1, 00133 Roma, Italy. mario.cazzola@uniroma2.it

Bronchodilators are central in the treatment of of airways disorders. They are
the mainstay of the current management of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD) and are critical in the symptomatic management of asthma, although
controversies around the use of these drugs remain. Bronchodilators work through 
their direct relaxation effect on airway smooth muscle cells. at present, three
major classes of bronchodilators, β(2)-adrenoceptor (AR) agonists, muscarinic
receptor antagonists, and xanthines are available and can be used individually or
in combination. The use of the inhaled route is currently preferred to minimize
systemic effects. Fast- and short-acting agents are best used for rescue of
symptoms, whereas long-acting agents are best used for maintenance therapy. It
has proven difficult to discover novel classes of bronchodilator drugs, although 
potential new targets are emerging. Consequently, the logical approach has been
to improve the existing bronchodilators, although several novel broncholytic
classes are under development. An important step in simplifying asthma and COPD
management and improving adherence with prescribed therapy is to reduce the dose 
frequency to the minimum necessary to maintain disease control. Therefore, the
incorporation of once-daily dose administration is an important strategy to
improve adherence. Several once-daily β(2)-AR agonists or ultra-long-acting
β(2)-AR-agonists (LABAs), such as indacaterol, olodaterol, and vilanterol, are
already in the market or under development for the treatment of COPD and asthma, 
but current recommendations suggest the use of LABAs only in combination with an 
inhaled corticosteroid. In addition, some new potentially long-acting
antimuscarinic agents, such as glycopyrronium bromide (NVA-237), aclidinium
bromide, and umeclidinium bromide (GSK573719), are under development, as well as 
combinations of several classes of long-acting bronchodilator drugs, in an
attempt to simplify treatment regimens as much as possible. This review will
describe the pharmacology and therapeutics of old, new, and emerging classes of
bronchodilator.

DOI: 10.1124/pr.111.004580 
PMID: 22611179  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2012 Aug;342(2):497-509. doi: 10.1124/jpet.112.193284. Epub
2012 May 15.

Pharmacological characterization of abediterol, a novel inhaled β(2)-adrenoceptor
agonist with long duration of action and a favorable safety profile in
preclinical models.

Aparici M(1), Gómez-Angelats M, Vilella D, Otal R, Carcasona C, Viñals M, Ramos
I, Gavaldà A, De Alba J, Gras J, Cortijo J, Morcillo E, Puig C, Ryder H, Beleta
J, Miralpeix M.

Author information: 
(1)Almirall R&D Center, Sant Feliu de Llobregat, Barcelona, Spain.
monica.aparici@almirall.com

Abediterol is a novel potent, long-acting inhaled β(2)-adrenoceptor agonist in
development for the treatment of asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease. Abediterol shows subnanomolar affinity for the human β(2)-adrenoceptor
and a functional selectivity over β(1)-adrenoceptors higher than that of
formoterol and indacaterol in both a cellular model with overexpressed human
receptors and isolated guinea pig tissue. Abediterol is a full agonist at the
human β(2)-adrenoceptor (E(max) = 91 ± 5% of the maximal effect of isoprenaline).
The potency and onset of action that abediterol shows in isolated human bronchi
(EC(50) = 1.9 ± 0.4 nM; t½ onset = 7-10 min) is not significantly different from 
that of formoterol, but its duration of action (t½ ∼ 690 min) is similar to that 
of indacaterol. Nebulized abediterol inhibits acetylcholine-induced
bronchoconstriction in guinea pigs in a concentration-dependent manner, with
higher potency and longer duration of action (t½ = 36 h) than salmeterol (t½ = 6 
h) and formoterol (t½ = 4 h) and similar duration of action to indacaterol up to 
48 h. In dogs, the bronchoprotective effect of abediterol is more sustained than 
that of salmeterol and indacaterol at doses without effects on heart rate, thus
showing a greater safety margin (defined as the ratio of dose increasing heart
rate by 5% and dose inhibiting bronchospasm by 50%) than salmeterol, formoterol, 
and indacaterol (5.6 versus 3.3, 2.2, and 0.3, respectively). In conclusion, our 
results suggest that abediterol has a preclinical profile for once-daily dosing
in humans together with a fast onset of action and a favorable cardiovascular
safety profile.

DOI: 10.1124/jpet.112.193284 
PMID: 22588259  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Int J Clin Pharmacol Ther. 2012 Sep;50(9):622-30. doi: 10.5414/CP201758.

Limitations of model based dose selection for indacaterol in patients with
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Wang Y(1), Lee JY, Michele T, Chowdhury BA, Gobburu JV.

Author information: 
(1)Office of Clinical Pharmacology, Silver Spring, MD, USA.
Yaning.Wang@fda.hhs.gov

Comment in
    Int J Clin Pharmacol Ther. 2012 Sep;50(9):621.
    Int J Clin Pharmacol Ther. 2012 Sep;50(9):631-7; discussion 638.

OBJECTIVE: Indacaterol is a long-acting β-agonist (LABA) approved by FDA in 2011 
at a dose of 75 μg once daily for the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD). During the review process for indacaterol approval, data were
reanalyzed by FDA to evaluate the validity of the model based conclusions
regarding dose selection.
METHODS: The same dose response model applied by the sponsor was used to analyze 
a subset of the original data. Model predictions were compared with observed data
to evaluate the model. Subgroups were created to visualize the relationship
between key model parameters and covariates. The Emax model structure was
evaluated for a meta-analysis.
RESULTS: Patient-level analyses showed that the model based claim of additional
benefit of 150 μg over 75 μg for more severe patients is not supported by the
data. Mis-specified covariate model structures for key parameters contributed to 
this inconsistency. The assumed Emax model structure is not supported by the
study-level data and the study-level analysis overestimates the incremental
difference between two adjacent doses.
CONCLUSIONS: Even though model based drug development is highly desirable,
thorough model evaluation and justification is necessary to ensure the validity
of related decisions.

DOI: 10.5414/CP201758 
PMID: 22578206  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Drug Ther Bull. 2012 May;50(5):58-60. doi: 10.1136/dtb.2012.05.0105.

▾Indacaterol for COPD.

[No authors listed]

Erratum in
    Drug Ther Bull. 2012 Jun;50(6):65.

▾Indacaterol powder for inhalation (Onbrez Breezhaler - Novartis) is a
long-acting beta(2) agonist, licensed for once-daily use as maintenance
bronchodilator therapy for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). In this 
article, we consider the evidence for indacaterol and how its use fits with
current management strategies for COPD.

DOI: 10.1136/dtb.2012.05.0105 
PMID: 22573707  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Thorax. 2012 Sep;67(9):781-8. Epub 2012 Apr 27.

Concurrent use of indacaterol plus tiotropium in patients with COPD provides
superior bronchodilation compared with tiotropium alone: a randomised,
double-blind comparison.

Mahler DA(1), D'Urzo A, Bateman ED, Ozkan SA, White T, Peckitt C, Lassen C,
Kramer B; INTRUST-1 and INTRUST-2 study investigators.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Dartmouth Medical School,
Hanover, New Hampshire, USA. donald.a.mahler@hitchcock.org

Comment in
    Praxis (Bern 1994). 2012 Oct 31;101(22):1447-8.

BACKGROUND: Current guidelines recommend treatment with one or more long-acting
bronchodilators for patients with moderate or more severe chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD). The authors investigated the approach of dual
bronchodilation using indacaterol, a once-daily long-acting β(2) agonist, and the
long-acting muscarinic antagonist tiotropium, compared with tiotropium alone.
METHODS: In two identically designed, double-blind, 12-week studies, patients
with moderate to severe COPD were randomised to indacaterol 150 μg once daily or 
matching placebo. All patients concurrently received open-label tiotropium 18 μg 
once daily. The primary outcome was standardised area under the curve of forced
expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV(1)) from 5 min to 8 h post dose at week 12. The key
secondary outcome was 24 h post-dose ('trough') FEV(1) at week 12. Resting
inspiratory capacity (IC) was measured in a subgroup.
RESULTS: 1134 and 1142 patients were randomised in studies 1 and 2; 94% and 94%
completed. Compared with monotherapy, concurrent therapy increased FEV(1) (area
under the curve by 130 and 120 ml, trough by 80 and 70 ml; all p<0.001) and
trough IC (by 130 and 100 ml, p<0.01). Cough was more common with indacaterol
plus tiotropium (10% and 9%) than with tiotropium alone (4% and 4%). Most cases
(∼90%) of cough were mild. Other adverse events were similar for the treatment
groups.
CONCLUSIONS: Compared with tiotropium monotherapy, indacaterol plus tiotropium
provided greater bronchodilation and lung deflation (reflected by increased
resting IC). Adverse events were similar between treatments apart from mild cough
being more common with indacaterol plus tiotropium. These results support COPD
guideline recommendations to combine bronchodilators with different mechanisms of
action.
TRIAL REGISTRATION NUMBERS: NCT00846586 and NCT00877383.

DOI: 10.1136/thoraxjnl-2011-201140 
PMID: 22544891  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2012 Apr 18;(4):CD008989. doi:
10.1002/14651858.CD008989.pub2.

Long-acting beta(2)-agonist in addition to tiotropium versus either tiotropium or
long-acting beta(2)-agonist alone for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Karner C(1), Cates CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Population Health Sciences and Education, St George’s, University of London,
London, UK. ckarner@sgul.ac.uk.

Update in
    Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2015;(10):CD008989.

BACKGROUND: Long-acting bronchodilators comprising long-acting beta(2)-agonists
and the anticholinergic agent tiotropium are commonly used for managing
persistent symptoms of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Combining these
treatments, which have different mechanisms of action, may be more effective than
the individual components. However, the benefits and risks of combining
tiotropium and long-acting beta(2)-agonists for the treatment of chronic
obstructive pulmonary (COPD) disease are unclear.
OBJECTIVES: To assess the relative effects of treatment with tiotropium in
addition to long-acting beta(2)-agonist compared to tiotropium or long-acting
beta(2)-agonist alone in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
SEARCH METHODS: We searched the Cochrane Airways Group Specialised Register of
trials and clinicaltrials.gov up to January 2012.
SELECTION CRITERIA: We included parallel group, randomised controlled trials of
three months or longer comparing treatment with tiotropium in addition to
long-acting beta(2)-agonist against tiotropium or long-acting beta(2)-agonist
alone for patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Two review authors independently assessed trials
for inclusion and then extracted data on trial quality and the outcome results.
We contacted study authors for additional information. We collected information
on adverse effects from the trials.
MAIN RESULTS: Five trials were included in this review, mostly recruiting
participants with moderate or severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. All
of them compared tiotropium in addition to long-acting beta(2)-agonist to
tiotropium alone, but only one trial additionally compared a combination of the
two types of bronchodilator with long-acting beta(2)-agonist (formoterol) alone. 
Two studies used the long-acting beta(2)-agonist indacaterol, two used formoterol
and one used salmeterol.Compared to tiotropium alone (3263 patients), treatment
with tiotropium plus long-acting beta(2)-agonist resulted in a slightly larger
improvement in the mean health-related quality of life (St George's Respiratory
Questionnaire (SGRQ) MD -1.61; 95% CI -2.93 to -0.29). In the control arm,
tiotropium alone, the SGRQ improved by falling 4.5 units from baseline and with
both treatments the improvement was a fall of 6.1 units from baseline (on
average). High withdrawal rates in the trials increased the uncertainty in this
result, and the GRADE assessment for this outcome was therefore moderate. There
were no significant differences in the other primary outcomes (hospital admission
or mortality).The secondary outcome of pre-bronchodilator FEV(1) showed a small
mean increase with the addition of long-acting beta(2)-agonist (MD 0.07 L; 95% CI
0.05 to 0.09) over the control arm, which showed a change from baseline ranging
from 0.03 L to 0.13 L on tiotropium alone. None of the other secondary outcomes
(exacerbations, symptom scores, serious adverse events, and withdrawals) showed
any statistically significant differences between the groups. There were wide
confidence intervals around these outcomes and moderate heterogeneity for both
exacerbations and withdrawals.The results from the one trial comparing the
combination of tiotropium and long-acting beta(2)-agonist to long-acting
beta(2)-agonist alone (417 participants) were insufficient to draw firm
conclusions for this comparison.
AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: The results from this review indicate a small mean
improvement in health-related quality of life for patients on a combination of
tiotropium and long-acting beta(2)-agonist compared to tiotropium alone, but it
is not clear how clinically important this mean difference may be. Hospital
admission and mortality have not been shown to be altered by adding long-acting
beta(2)-agonists to tiotropium. There were not enough data to determine the
relative efficacy and safety of tiotropium plus long-acting beta(2)-agonist
compared to long-acting beta(2)-agonist alone. There were insufficient data to
make comparisons between the different long-acting beta(2)-agonists when used in 
addition to tiotropium.

DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD008989.pub2 
PMCID: PMC4164463
PMID: 22513969  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Pharmacotherapy. 2012 May;32(5):456-74. doi: 10.1002/j.1875-9114.2012.01025.x.
Epub 2012 Apr 12.

Indacaterol: a novel long-acting β(2) -agonist.

Ray SM(1), McMillen JC, Treadway SA, Helmer RS, Franks AS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacy, University of Tennessee College of Pharmacy, 
Knoxville, Tennessee 37920, USA. smray@uthsc.edu

Bronchodilator drugs are the foundation for the treatment of chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease. The principal inhaled bronchodilator treatments used are β(2) 
-agonists and anticholinergics, either alone or in combination. Currently
available β(2) -agonists are of either short duration and used multiple
times/day, or of long duration, which requires twice-daily administration.
Indacaterol is considered an ultra-long-acting β(2) -agonist and was recently
approved for use in the United States. Its duration of action is approximately 24
hours, allowing for once-daily administration. Cough was the most commonly
reported adverse effect with use of indacaterol. Cough usually occurred within 15
seconds of inhalation of the drug, lasted around 6 seconds, was not associated
with bronchospasm, and did not cause discontinuation of the drug. Otherwise, the 
drug's safety profile was similar to that of other bronchodilators. Based on
similar improvement in spirometric measurements compared with other
bronchodilator drugs and the convenience of its once-daily dosing, indacaterol
may be beneficial in the management of mild-to-moderate chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease, either alone or in combination with anticholinergic drugs
administered once/day.

© 2012 Pharmacotherapy Publications, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/j.1875-9114.2012.01025.x 
PMID: 22499359  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. J Chromatogr B Analyt Technol Biomed Life Sci. 2012 May 1;895-896:1-9. doi:
10.1016/j.jchromb.2012.02.025. Epub 2012 Feb 25.

Validation of an on-line solid-phase extraction method coupled to liquid
chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry detection for the determination of
Indacaterol in human serum.

Emotte C(1), Heudi O, Deglave F, Bonvie A, Masson L, Picard F, Chaturvedi A,
Majumdar T, Agarwal A, Woessner R, Kretz O.

Author information: 
(1)Bioanalytics, Novartis Pharma AG, Basel, Switzerland.
corinne.emotte@novartis.com

Indacaterol has been recently approved in Europe for the treatment of chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). In the present study, we have developed and
validated a rapid and sensitive on-line solid phase extraction (SPE) method
coupled to liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) detection
for the determination of Indacaterol in human serum. The sample preparation
involves the serum dilution with a 0.2% acetic acid solution prior to the on-line
SPE on a mixed-mode cationic (MCX) polymer based sorbent. The samples were then
eluted on a reversed phase column with a mobile phase made of acidified water and
methanol and detection was performed by MS using electrospay ionization in
positive mode. The analysis time between 2 samples was 7.0 min. Standard curves
were linear over the range of 10.0 pg/mL (LLOQ) to 1000 pg/mL with correlation
coefficient (r(2)) greater than 0.990. The method specificity was demonstrated in
six different batches of human serum. Intra-run and inter-run precision and
accuracy within ± 20% (at the LLOQ) and ± 15% (other levels) were achieved during
a 3-run validation for quality control samples (QCs). The stability at room
temperature (38 h) was determined and reported. In addition, the comparison
between an off-line SPE procedure and our method gave equivalent results. The
results of the present work demonstrated that our on-line SPE-LC-MS/MS method is 
rapid, sensitive, specific and could be applied to the quantitative analysis of
Indacaterol in human serum samples. Our method effectively eliminated the tedious
conditioning and rinsing steps associated with conventional off-line SPE and
reduced the analysis time. The on-line SPE approach appears attractive for
supporting the analysis of several hundreds of clinical samples.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jchromb.2012.02.025 
PMID: 22483398  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Expert Opin Pharmacother. 2012 May;13(7):1015-29. doi:
10.1517/14656566.2012.674513. Epub 2012 Apr 4.

Indacaterol: a new long-acting β2-agonist in the management of chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease.

Steiropoulos P(1), Papanas N, Nena E, Bouros D.

Author information: 
(1)Democritus University of Thrace, Department of Pulmonology, Alexandroupolis,
Greece. pstirop@med.duth.gr

Erratum in
    Expert Opin Pharmacother. 2013 Jan;14(1):147. Dosage error in article text.

INTRODUCTION: Bronchodilators represent the mainstay of symptomatic treatment for
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). The principal bronchodilator agents
are β(2)-agonists, anticholinergics and methylxanthines, used singly or in
combination. Indacaterol is a novel long-acting β(2)-agonist for maintenance
bronchodilator treatment of airflow obstruction in patients with COPD, approved
in December 2009 by the European Medicines Association, and recently by the US
Food and Drug Administration. It is administered once daily and is delivered by
means of a single-dose dry powder inhaler (SDDPI). In Europe, the recommended
dose is 150 μg and the maximum dose is 300 μg, while in the US the recommended
dose is 75 μg. Indacaterol shows evidence of a rapid onset of bronchodilation,
and its bronchodilatory duration is sustained.
AREAS COVERED: Numerous clinical studies have assessed the therapeutic effects of
indacaterol in various physiologic parameters, as well as symptoms, disease
progression, exacerbation rates, quality of life, safety and tolerability. This
review summarises published evidence regarding the efficacy, tolerability and
safety of indacaterol in regard to lung function and symptoms of COPD patients.
EXPERT OPINION: Indacaterol, the novel once-daily β(2)-agonist, has rapid and
sustained bronchodilatory effect, showing excellent efficacy, tolerability and
safety, as shown by all clinical trials so far.

DOI: 10.1517/14656566.2012.674513 
PMID: 22471750  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Respir Res. 2012 Mar 27;13:28. doi: 10.1186/1465-9921-13-28.

Combination of roflumilast with a beta-2 adrenergic receptor agonist inhibits
proinflammatory and profibrotic mediator release from human lung fibroblasts.

Tannheimer SL(1), Wright CD, Salmon M.

Author information: 
(1)Respiratory Research, Gilead Sciences, 199 East Blaine St, Seattle, WA 98102, 
USA. Tannheimer@gilead.com

BACKGROUND: Small airway narrowing is an important pathology which impacts lung
function in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). The accumulation of
fibroblasts and myofibroblasts contribute to inflammation, remodeling and
fibrosis by production and release of mediators such as cytokines, profibrotic
factors and extracellular matrix proteins. This study investigated the effects of
the phosphodiesterase 4 inhibitor roflumilast, combined with the long acting β2
adrenergic agonist indacaterol, both approved therapeutics for COPD, on
fibroblast functions that contribute to inflammation and airway fibrosis.
METHODS: The effects of roflumilast and indacaterol treatment were characterized 
on transforming growth factor β1 (TGFβ1)-treated normal human lung fibroblasts
(NHLF). NHLF were evaluated for expression of the profibrotic mediators
endothelin-1 (ET-1) and connective tissue growth factor (CTGF), expression of the
myofibroblast marker alpha smooth muscle actin, and fibronectin (FN) secretion.
Tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α) was used to induce secretion of chemokine C-X-C
motif ligand 10 (CXCL10), chemokine C-C motif ligand 5 (CCL5) and granulocyte
macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) from NHLF and drug inhibition was
assessed.
RESULTS: Evaluation of roflumilast (1-10 μM) showed no significant inhibition
alone on TGFβ1-induced ET-1 and CTGF mRNA transcripts, ET-1 and FN protein
production, alpha smooth muscle expression, or TNF-α-induced secretion of CXCL10,
CCL5 and GM-CSF. A concentration-dependent inhibition of ET-1 and CTGF was shown 
with indacaterol treatment, and a submaximal concentration was chosen for
combination studies. When indacaterol (0.1 nM) was added to roflumilast,
significant inhibition was seen on all inflammatory and fibrotic mediators
evaluated, which was superior to the inhibition seen with either drug alone.
Roflumilast plus indacaterol combination treatment resulted in significantly
elevated phosphorylation of the transcription factor cAMP response
element-binding protein (CREB), an effect that was protein kinase A-dependent.
Inhibition of protein kinase A was also found to reverse the inhibition of
indacaterol and roflumilast on CTGF.
CONCLUSIONS: These results demonstrate that addition of roflumilast to a LABA
inhibits primary fibroblast/myofibroblast function and therapeutically this may
impact lung fibroblast proinflammatory and profibrotic mediator release which
contributes to small airway remodeling and airway obstruction in COPD.

DOI: 10.1186/1465-9921-13-28 
PMCID: PMC3342220
PMID: 22452977  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2012;7:145-52. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S19805. Epub
2012 Mar 5.

Comparative efficacy of indacaterol in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Ribeiro M(1), Chapman KR.

Author information: 
(1)Asthma and Airway Centre, University Health Network, Toronto Western Hospital,
University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.

Long-acting bronchodilators have been shown to improve multiple clinical outcomes
in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) including lung function,
symptoms, dyspnea, quality of life, and exacerbations. Indacaterol is a novel,
inhaled, long-acting β2-agonist providing 24-hour bronchodilation with once-daily
dosing. It is currently approved for the maintenance treatment of COPD to be
administered as 150 or 300 μg once-daily doses as licensed in many countries and 
75 μg as licensed in the US by means of a single-dose dry powder inhaler. The
data from clinical development support a favorable safety and tolerability
profile within the β2-agonist drug class, with no relevant issues identified.
Current evidence indicates that indacaterol is suitable for use as first-line
monotherapy in COPD patients with moderate disease (Global Initiative for Chronic
Obstructive Lung Disease [GOLD] stage II) and beyond that do not require an
inhaled corticosteroid (ICS) as per GOLD guidelines, or in combination with an
ICS in severe or very severe patients with repeated exacerbations. Data from
trials with the novel once-daily β2-agonist, indacaterol, indicate superior
bronchodilation and clinical efficacy over twice-daily long-acting β2-agonists
and at least equipotent bronchodilation as once-daily tiotropium. Bronchodilators
are central in the symptomatic management of COPD. It is likely that once-daily
dosing of a bronchodilator would be a significant convenience and probably a
compliance-enhancing advantage, leading to improved overall clinical outcomes in 
patients with COPD.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S19805 
PMCID: PMC3299544
PMID: 22419862  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Drugs. 2012 Mar 5;72(4):543-63. doi: 10.2165/11208490-000000000-00000.

Indacaterol: a review of its use as maintenance therapy in patients with chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease.

McKeage K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Adis, Auckland, New Zealand. demail@adis.co.nz

Indacaterol inhalation powder (Onbrez® Breezhaler®) is a long-acting, selective
β(2)-adrenoceptor agonist that is indicated for the maintenance bronchodilator
treatment of airflow obstruction in adults with chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD). This article reviews the clinical efficacy and tolerability of
indacaterol 150 and 300 μg once daily in adults with moderate to severe COPD, as 
well as reviewing indacaterol's pharmacological properties and results of a
cost-utility analysis. Indacaterol has a fast onset of action after the first
dose and is effective over 24 hours, allowing for once-daily administration. In
short-term trials (≤21 days) in patients with COPD, once-daily indacaterol 150 or
300 μg significantly improved lung function, exercise endurance and lung
hyperinflation relative to placebo. In large, longer-term clinical studies (12
weeks to 1 year) in patients with moderate to severe COPD, once-daily indacaterol
150 or 300 μg improved lung function (primary endpoint) significantly more than
placebo, and improvements were significantly greater than twice-daily formoterol 
12 μg or salmeterol 50 μg, and noninferior to once-daily tiotropium bromide 18 μg
(all agents were administered via inhalation). Overall, indacaterol improved
dyspnoea, use of rescue medication and general health status significantly more
than placebo, salmeterol or tiotropium bromide, and the degree of improvement in 
these endpoints was similar to or greater than that achieved with formoterol.
Improvements were sustained over the long term (1 year), with no evidence of
tolerance. Combination therapy with indacaterol plus tiotropium bromide improved 
lung function, dyspnoea, rescue medication use and general health status
significantly more than tiotropium bromide alone in patients with moderate to
severe COPD. Indacaterol is generally well tolerated when used alone or in
combination with tiotropium bromide in patients with COPD and has not been
associated with any safety issues. The most common adverse event in clinical
trials was COPD worsening, which occurred more commonly with placebo than
indacaterol. Indacaterol was not associated with an increased risk of
cardiovascular adverse events. In a cost-utility analysis from a German
healthcare payer perspective, once-daily indacaterol 150 μg was dominant (i.e.
more effective with lower total costs) to once-daily tiotropium bromide 18 μg and
twice-daily salmeterol 50 μg in the treatment of patients with COPD. In
conclusion, indacaterol provides a valuable option for the maintenance treatment 
of adults with COPD.

DOI: 10.2165/11208490-000000000-00000 
PMID: 22356291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Pharmacogenomics J. 2012 Dec;12(6):484-8. doi: 10.1038/tpj.2011.54. Epub 2011 Dec
13.

A pharmacogenetic study of ADRB2 polymorphisms and indacaterol response in COPD
patients.

Yelensky R(1), Li Y, Lewitzky S, Leroy E, Hurwitz C, Rodman D, Trifilieff A,
Paulding CA.

Author information: 
(1)Novartis Institutes for BioMedical Research, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.

Genetic variation in the ADRB2 gene has been hypothesized to have a role in
differential response to beta-agonist (BA) therapy in asthma. However, study
results have been inconsistent and the issue remains controversial. Furthermore, 
the impact of ADRB2 genetic variation on BA response in chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD) patients has not been thoroughly studied. We carried out
a large pharmacogenetic analysis testing for an association between common ADRB2 
polymorphisms and indacaterol response in COPD patients. A total of 648
indacaterol-treated patients enrolled in two large randomized phase III studies
were genotyped for the most commonly studied polymorphisms in the ADRB2 gene:
Gly16Arg, Gln27Glu, Thr164Ile, and a variant in the 5' untranslated region
(rs1042711). Our analysis showed little evidence for the association between
these ADRB2 variants and indacaterol response, suggesting that ADRB2 genetic
variation is unlikely to have a major role in differential response to
indacaterol treatment in COPD patients.

DOI: 10.1038/tpj.2011.54 
PMID: 22158330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Drug Discov Today. 2012 May;17(9-10):496-504. doi: 10.1016/j.drudis.2011.11.002. 
Epub 2011 Nov 18.

Therapeutic potential for novel ultra long-acting β2-agonists in the management
of COPD: biological and pharmacological aspects.

Malerba M(1), Radaeli A, Morjaria JB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Brescia, 1st Divisione di
Medicina, Az Spedali Civili, Pzza Spedali Civili 1, 25100 Brescia, Italy.
malerba@med.unibs.it

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is characterised by progressive
airflow limitation. In moderate-to-severe COPD, long-acting bronchodilators are
the basis of therapy. Inhaled long-acting β(2)-agonists (LABAs) are used for the 
treatment of COPD. LABAs have been in use since the 1990s enabling persistent
bronchodilation for 12 hours; however, sustained bronchodilation is desirable.
Compared with twice-daily LABAs, new LABAs with ultra-long duration (ultra-LABAs)
could provide improvements in efficacy and compliance with fast onset of action, 
24-hour bronchodilation and a good safety profile. Several novel ultra-LABAs
showing once-daily delivery profiles are in development. In this article, we
discuss these novel agents' properties and clinical trials of their efficacy and 
safety, including the only licensed ultra-LABA, indacaterol.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.drudis.2011.11.002 
PMID: 22119310  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Br J Pharmacol. 2012 Apr;165(8):2672-83. doi: 10.1111/j.1476-5381.2011.01639.x.

Slow receptor dissociation is not a key factor in the duration of action of
inhaled long-acting β2-adrenoceptor agonists.

Sykes DA(1), Charlton SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Novartis Institutes for Biomedical Research, West Sussex, UK.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: β(2) -Adrenoceptor agonists are important bronchodilators
used for the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and asthma.
Clinical data on β(2) -adrenoceptor agonists show a range of onset and duration
of action. We have investigated whether the receptor binding kinetics of β(2)
-adrenoceptor agonists can explain their observed onset of action and duration of
effect in the clinic.
EXPERIMENTAL APPROACH: [(3) H]-DHA was used to label β(2) -adrenoceptors
expressed in CHO-cell membranes (K(d) of 0.084 nM). Competition kinetic
experiments were performed in the presence of unlabelled β(2) agonists at 37°C in
HBSS containing GTP. To determine the kinetic parameters, three concentrations
(10, 3 and 1 ×K(i) ) of the unlabelled compound were employed against a fixed
concentration of [(3) H]-DHA (0.6 nM).
KEY RESULTS: The clinically used β(2) -adrenoceptor agonists exhibited a range of
association and dissociation rates. The kinetic K(d) and the competition K(i)
values of the eight β(2) -adrenoceptor agonists examined were strongly
correlated, suggesting that the method had produced accurate k(off) and k(on)
rates. The kinetic on-rate was highly correlated with equilibrium binding
affinity.
CONCLUSIONS AND IMPLICATIONS: Although the β(2) -adrenoceptor agonists displayed 
a range of kinetic rate parameters, simulations at relevant drug concentrations
suggest that receptor kinetics do not play an important role in determining onset
of action in the clinic. In addition, it is unlikely that receptor kinetics exert
an important influence on the duration of action of these agonists, as
indacaterol (once daily dosing) had a shorter residency time at the receptor than
salmeterol (twice daily dosing).

© 2011 The Authors. British Journal of Pharmacology © 2011 The British
Pharmacological Society.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1476-5381.2011.01639.x 
PMCID: PMC3423252
PMID: 21883146  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. J Clin Pharm Ther. 2012 Apr;37(2):204-11. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2710.2011.01285.x. 
Epub 2011 Jul 11.

Effect of long-acting beta-agonists on the frequency of COPD exacerbations: a
meta-analysis.

Wang J(1), Nie B, Xiong W, Xu Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China.
wangjianmiao2010@126.com

WHAT IS KNOWN AND OBJECTIVE:   Inhaled long-acting beta-agonists have been
licensed for the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) since 
the late 1990s, and they improve lung function and symptoms of dyspnoea. However,
the evidence that long-acting beta-agonists alone can reduce the rate of COPD
exacerbations is not conclusive. This meta-analysis was performed to evaluate
their effect on the frequency of exacerbations.
METHODS: MEDLINE, EMBASE, CINAHL and the Cochrane trials database were searched
for the review. Randomized controlled trials of greater than or equal to 24weeks'
treatment duration comparing long-acting beta-agonists (LABAs) with placebo were 
reviewed. Studies were pooled to yield odds ratios (ORs) with 95% confidence
intervals (CIs).
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION: Seventeen randomized controlled trials (11871 randomized 
subjects) met the inclusion criteria and were selected for analysis. Salmeterol, 
formoterol and indacaterol significantly reduced COPD exacerbations compared with
placebo. Salmeterol significantly reduced COPD exacerbations with both study arms
exposed or not exposed to inhaled corticosteroids (ICS). The summary ORs were
0·79 (95% CI: 0·67-0·92; P<0·01) and 0·80 (95% CI: 0·65-0·99; P=0·04),
respectively. However, when both arms were not exposed to ICS, there was no
significant reduction in exacerbations with formoterol compared with placebo. The
'summary OR was 0·93 (95% CI: 0·75-1·15; P=0·50).
WHAT IS NEW AND CONCLUSION: Long-acting beta-agonists reduce the frequency of
COPD exacerbations. Salmeterol, formoterol and indacaterol significantly reduced 
COPD exacerbations compared with placebo. Salmeterol but not formoterol decreased
exacerbations significantly in the absence of ICS.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2710.2011.01285.x 
PMID: 21740451  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]

