
1. Lancet. 2016 Oct;388 Suppl 1:S95. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(16)32022-0.

Dynamic contrast-enhanced MRI to predict response to vinorelbine-cisplatin alone 
or with rh-endostatin in patients with non-small cell lung cancer and bone
metastases: a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial.

Zhang R(1), Wang ZY(1), Li YH(2), Lu YH(3), Wang S(4), Yu WX(1), Zhao H(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Oncology, Shanghai Sixth People's Hospital Affiliated
to Shanghai Jiaotong University, Shanghai, China. (2)Department of Radiology,
Shanghai Sixth People's Hospital Affiliated to Shanghai Jiaotong University,
Shanghai, China. (3)Department of Clinical Skill Laboratory, Shanghai Sixth
People's Hospital Affiliated to Shanghai Jiaotong University, Shanghai, China.
(4)Department of Internal Oncology, Shanghai Sixth People's Hospital, Soochow
University, Shanghai, China. (5)Department of Internal Oncology, Shanghai Sixth
People's Hospital Affiliated to Shanghai Jiaotong University, Shanghai, China.
Electronic address: zhao-hui@sjtu.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: Metastatic bone disease is a frequent complication of advanced
non-small-cell lung cancer and causes skeletal-related events which result in a
poor prognosis. A standard method to assess the therapeutic response of bone
metastases does not currently exist. We used dynamic contrast-enhanced MRI to
obtain quantitative measures to assess the suitability of this technique to gauge
therapeutic response to vinorelbine-cisplatin plus rh-endostatinfor previously
untreated non-small cell lung cancer with bone metastases.
METHODS: We did a phase 4, randomised, prospective, double-blind,
placebo-controlled clinical trial in Shanghai Sixth People's Hospital, Shanghai, 
China. Inclusion criteria were non-small-cell lung cancer patients with bone
metastases confirmed by pathology or cytology; available imaging data of pelvic
metastatic lesions; aged 18 to 75 years old; expected survival at least 3 months;
not receiving taxane, bevacizumab, thalidomide, rh-endostatin, or bisphosphonate;
not having radiation therapy within 3 months of enrollment into study; normal
results of routine blood tests, liver and kidney function, and electrocardiogram;
absence of cardiovascular disease, autoimmune disease, vasculitis, severe
infection, diabetes, and other concomitant disease; and signed informed consent. 
Exclusion criteria were receiving granulocyte colony stimulating factor or
granulocyte-macrophage colony stimulating factor during chemotherapy, intolerance
to adverse reaction, and allergy to contrast agents. Patients were randomly
assigned to treatment group and control group at a ratio of 2:1 by random code
generation by an independent biostatistician in a double-blind fashion.
Participants received either vinorelbine-cisplatin plus rh-endostatin or
vinorelbine-cisplatin plus placebo. Vinorelbine (25 mg/m(2)) and cisplatin (75
mg/m(2)) were administered intravenously on the first day of a 21 day cycle.
Patients received rh-endostatin (7·5 mg/m(2)) or placebo on days 1-14 of a cycle.
The primary end points were objective response rate (complete remission+partial
remission)/total × 100) and disease control rate (complete remission+partial
remission+stable disease)/total × 100). Measurements including Ktrans, Kep, and
Ve were evaluated by dynamic contrast-enhanced MRI before treatment and after
completion of 2 treatment cycles. Blood concentrations of bone metabolites,
tumour markers, and tumour vascular growth related factors were measured before
and after treatment. Comparisons were made using paired t-test. Kaplan-Meier
survival analysis was used to indicate the correlation between some measurements 
and progression-free survival or overall survival. The difference in Ktrans
between patients who had partial remission or stable disease group and those who 
had disease progression was tested using the Chi-square test. All statistical
analyses were performed with SPSS version 21.0. This trial was approved by the
State Food and Drug Administration (No: S20050088) and China State Food and Drug 
Administration. The trial is registered with China Clinical Trials Registry,
number chictr-ctr-09000569. Written informed consent and ethical approval was
obtained.
FINDINGS: We enrolled 33 patients (aged 52-70, 15 men and 18 women) of whom 28
were evaluable (20 in treatment group and 8 in control group). Five patients were
excluded: 2 patients in treatment group and 1 patient in control group used
granulocyte-macrophage colony stimulating factor, and 2 patients in the control
group refused treatment. Objective response rate was higher (30% vs 0%;
p<0·00001), mean overall survival was longer (21·44 [SD 17·28] vs 7·71 [4·68]
months, p=0·008), and reduction in capillary permeability (measured by Ktrans)
was greater (60·0% vs 4·4%; p=0·026) in the group given rh-endostatin than in the
control group. Disease control rate was 80% in the treatment group and 75% in the
control group (p=0·07). Overall survival was longer in patients with a greater
than 50% reduction in Ktrans than in patients with a decrease of up to 50% (13·2 
[1·8] vs 9·8 [0·2] months, p=0·026).
INTERPRETATION: Addition of rh-endostatin to treatment with vinorelbine-cisplatin
increased the treatment response in patients with non-small cell lung cancer and 
bone metastases. Quantitative analysis using dynamic contrast-enhanced MRI can be
used to evaluate therapeutic response and to predict survival of bone metastases 
after anti-angiogenesis therapy. Limitations of this study include the small
number of patients and the single-centre design.
FUNDING: National Natural Science Foundation of China [grant number 81201628].

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(16)32022-0 
PMID: 27968915  [PubMed - in process]


2. Oncoimmunology. 2015 Apr 28;4(6):e1006088. eCollection 2015.

γδ T cells and epigenetic drugs: A useful merger in cancer immunotherapy?

Bhat J(1), Kabelitz D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Immunology; University of Kiel and UKSH Campus Kiel ; Kiel,
Germany.

γδ T cell-based immunotherapeutic strategies in cancer patients are as yet of
limited success. Drugs targeting epigenetic mechanisms including histone
acetylation and DNA methylation trigger cell death in tumor cells but in addition
have immunomodulatory activity. Here, we discuss the potential benefit of
combining both strategies in cancer immunotherapy.

DOI: 10.1080/2162402X.2015.1006088 
PMCID: PMC4485805
PMID: 26155411  [PubMed]


3. Front Oncol. 2014 Jun 16;4:146. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2014.00146. eCollection 2014.

Targeted treatments of bone metastases in patients with lung cancer.

Hirsh V(1).

Author information: 
(1)McGill University Health Centre, Royal Victoria Hospital , Montreal, QC ,
Canada.

Until now ~30-40% of patients with advanced lung cancer develop bone metastases, 
but as the newer therapies are extending survival, the chance of developing bone 
metastases increases. Bone metastases cause skeletal-related events (SREs) such
as pathologic fractures, spinal cord compression, radiation therapy or surgery to
bone, or hypercalcemia, which can have debilitating consequences affecting
patients' health-related quality of life (HR-QOL) and performance status (PS).
Poor PS then prevents the patients to receive further lines of treatments, which 
are available today. SREs are associated with increased economic costs. In one
clinical trial, the median time to first SRE was only 5 months. Early detection
of bone metastases can prevent SREs and avoid inappropriate implementation of
major surgery or chemoradiation therapy. With the new generation bisphosphonate
zoledronic acid (ZA) or denosumab (anti-RANKL activity), one can reduce the
number of patients who experience SREs, decrease the annual incidence of SREs and
delay the median time to first SRE. These agents are effective even after the
onset of SREs. They are well tolerated, with manageable side effects. The
biochemical markers of bone metabolism especially N-telopeptide of type I
collagen and bone specific alkaline phosphatase (BALP) can be both prognostic and
predictive markers for the patients with bone metastases from non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC). Anticancer activity of ZA and denosumab further supports their
use as soon as bone metastases are diagnosed in patients with NSCLC. Further
trials will inform us about the efficacy of these agents for prevention of bone
metastases and even about possible effects on visceral metastases.

DOI: 10.3389/fonc.2014.00146 
PMCID: PMC4058774
PMID: 24982847  [PubMed]


4. J Clin Med. 2013 Aug 28;2(3):89-102. doi: 10.3390/jcm2030089.

Where Do Bone-Targeted Agents RANK in Breast Cancer Treatment?

von Moos R(1), Haynes I(2).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Oncology/Haematology, Kantonsspital Graubünden, Chur 7000,
Switzerland. roger.vonmoos@ksgr.ch. (2)Amgen Ltd., 1 Uxbridge Business Park,
Uxbridge UB8 1DH, UK. ian.haynes@amgen.com.

Breast cancer cells preferentially metastasise to the skeleton, owing, in part,
to the fertile environment provided by bone. Increased bone turnover releases
growth factors that promote tumour cell growth. In turn, tumour cells release
factors that stimulate further bone turnover, resulting in a vicious cycle of
metastasis growth and bone destruction. The RANK-RANK ligand (RANKL) pathway
plays a key role in this cycle, and inhibition of RANKL using the fully-human
monoclonal antibody denosumab, has demonstrated efficacy in delaying skeletal
complications associated with bone metastases in three phase 3 trials.
Preclinical studies suggest that the RANKL pathway also plays a role in breast
cancer tumourigenesis and migration to bone. In a subgroup analysis of the
negative Adjuvant Zoledronic Acid to Reduce Recurrence (AZURE) trial, the
bisphosphonate zoledronic acid showed potential for improving survival in
patients who were postmenopausal; however, a prospective study in this patient
population is required to validate this observation. Ongoing trials are examining
whether adjuvant blockade of the RANKL pathway using denosumab can prevent
disease recurrence in patients with high-risk breast cancer. These are building
on analogous studies that have shown that denosumab improves bone metastasis-free
survival in prostate cancer and suggested that it confers an overall survival
benefit in non-small-cell lung cancer.

DOI: 10.3390/jcm2030089 
PMCID: PMC4470230
PMID: 26237064  [PubMed]

1. Sci Signal. 2017 Jan 3;10(460). pii: eaag1064. doi: 10.1126/scisignal.aag1064.

The receptor tyrosine kinase AXL mediates nuclear translocation of the epidermal 
growth factor receptor.

Brand TM(1), Iida M(1), Corrigan KL(1), Braverman CM(1), Coan JP(1), Flanigan
BG(1), Stein AP(1), Salgia R(2), Rolff J(3), Kimple RJ(1), Wheeler DL(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Oncology, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and
Public Health, 1111 Highland Avenue, Madison, WI 53705, USA. (2)Department of
Medical Oncology and Therapeutics Research, City of Hope Comprehensive Cancer
Center, 1500 East Duarte Road, Duarte, CA 91010, USA. (3)Experimental
Pharmacology and Oncology Berlin-Buch GmbH, Robert-Roessle-Str. 10, 13125 Berlin,
Germany. (4)Department of Human Oncology, University of Wisconsin School of
Medicine and Public Health, 1111 Highland Avenue, Madison, WI 53705, USA.
dlwheeler@wisc.edu.

The epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is a therapeutic target in patients
with various cancers. Unfortunately, resistance to EGFR-targeted therapeutics is 
common. Previous studies identified two mechanisms of resistance to the EGFR
monoclonal antibody cetuximab. Nuclear translocation of EGFR bypasses the
inhibitory effects of cetuximab, and the receptor tyrosine kinase AXL mediates
cetuximab resistance by maintaining EGFR activation and downstream signaling.
Thus, we hypothesized that AXL mediated the nuclear translocation of EGFR in the 
setting of cetuximab resistance. Cetuximab-resistant clones of non-small cell
lung cancer in culture and patient-derived xenografts in mice had increased
abundance of AXL and nuclear EGFR (nEGFR). Cellular fractionation analysis,
super-resolution microscopy, and electron microscopy revealed that genetic loss
of AXL reduced the accumulation of nEGFR. SRC family kinases (SFKs) and HER
family ligands promote the nuclear translocation of EGFR. We found that AXL
knockdown reduced the expression of the genes encoding the SFK family members YES
and LYN and the ligand neuregulin-1 (NRG1). AXL knockdown also decreased the
interaction between EGFR and the related receptor HER3 and accumulation of HER3
in the nucleus. Overexpression of LYN and NRG1 in cells depleted of AXL resulted 
in accumulation of nEGFR, rescuing the deficit induced by lack of AXL.
Collectively, these data uncover a previously unrecognized role for AXL in
regulating the nuclear translocation of EGFR and suggest that AXL-mediated SFK
and NRG1 expression promote this process.

Copyright © 2017, American Association for the Advancement of Science.

DOI: 10.1126/scisignal.aag1064 
PMID: 28049763  [PubMed - in process]


2. J Clin Oncol. 2017 Jan;35(1):56-62. Epub 2016 Oct 31.

Impact of Intensity-Modulated Radiation Therapy Technique for Locally Advanced
Non-Small-Cell Lung Cancer: A Secondary Analysis of the NRG Oncology RTOG 0617
Randomized Clinical Trial.

Chun SG(1), Hu C(1), Choy H(1), Komaki RU(1), Timmerman RD(1), Schild SE(1),
Bogart JA(1), Dobelbower MC(1), Bosch W(1), Galvin JM(1), Kavadi VS(1), Narayan
S(1), Iyengar P(1), Robinson CG(1), Wynn RB(1), Raben A(1), Augspurger ME(1),
MacRae RM(1), Paulus R(1), Bradley JD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Stephen G. Chun and Ritsuko U. Komaki, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer 
Center, Houston; Hak Choy, Robert D. Timmerman, and Puneeth Iyengar, University
of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas; Vivek S. Kavadi, Texas
Oncology-Sugar Land, Sugar Land, TX; Chen Hu and Rebecca Paulus, NRG Oncology
Statistics and Data Management Center; James M. Galvin, Imaging and Radiation
Oncology Core, Philadelphia; Raymond B. Wynn, UPMC Cancer Center, Pittsburg, PA; 
Chen Hu, Johns Hopkins Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center, Baltimore, MD; 
Steven E. Schild, Mayo Clinic, Scottsdale, AZ; Jeffrey A. Bogart, State
University of New York Upstate Medical University, Syracuse, NY; Michael C.
Dobelbower, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL; Walter Bosch,
Clifford G. Robinson, and Jeffrey D. Bradley, Washington University in Saint
Louis, St Louis, MO; Samir Narayan, Michigan Cancer Research Consortium Community
Clinical Oncology Program, Ann Arbor, MI; Adam Raben, Christiana Care Health
Services Community Clinical Oncology Program, Newark, DE; Mark E. Augspurger,
Florida Radiation Oncology Group; Baptist Health, Jacksonville, FL; and Robert M.
MacRae, The Ottawa Hospital Cancer Centre, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.

Purpose Although intensity-modulated radiation therapy (IMRT) is increasingly
used to treat locally advanced non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC), IMRT and
three-dimensional conformal external beam radiation therapy (3D-CRT) have not
been compared prospectively. This study compares 3D-CRT and IMRT outcomes for
locally advanced NSCLC in a large prospective clinical trial. Patients and
Methods A secondary analysis was performed to compare IMRT with 3D-CRT in NRG
Oncology clinical trial RTOG 0617, in which patients received concurrent
chemotherapy of carboplatin and paclitaxel with or without cetuximab, and 60-
versus 74-Gy radiation doses. Comparisons included 2-year overall survival (OS), 
progression-free survival, local failure, distant metastasis, and selected Common
Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (version 3) ≥ grade 3 toxicities. Results
The median follow-up was 21.3 months. Of 482 patients, 53% were treated with
3D-CRT and 47% with IMRT. The IMRT group had larger planning treatment volumes
(median, 427 v 486 mL; P = .005); a larger planning treatment volume/volume of
lung ratio (median, 0.13 v 0.15; P = .013); and more stage IIIB disease (30.3% v 
38.6%, P = .056). Two-year OS, progression-free survival, local failure, and
distant metastasis-free survival were not different between IMRT and 3D-CRT. IMRT
was associated with less ≥ grade 3 pneumonitis (7.9% v 3.5%, P = .039) and a
reduced risk in adjusted analyses (odds ratio, 0.41; 95% CI, 0.171 to 0.986; P = 
.046). IMRT also produced lower heart doses ( P < .05), and the volume of heart
receiving 40 Gy (V40) was significantly associated with OS on adjusted analysis (
P < .05). The lung V5 was not associated with any ≥ grade 3 toxicity, whereas the
lung V20 was associated with increased ≥ grade 3 pneumonitis risk on
multivariable analysis ( P = .026). Conclusion IMRT was associated with lower
rates of severe pneumonitis and cardiac doses in NRG Oncology clinical trial RTOG
0617, which supports routine use of IMRT for locally advanced NSCLC.

DOI: 10.1200/JCO.2016.69.1378 
PMID: 28034064  [PubMed - in process]


3. Oncol Lett. 2016 Nov;12(5):3241-3249. Epub 2016 Sep 2.

Tumor-penetration and antitumor efficacy of cetuximab are enhanced by
co-administered iRGD in a murine model of human NSCLC.

Zhang Y(1), Yang J(2), Ding M(3), Li L(2), Lu Z(2), Zhang Q(2), Zheng J(4).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Institute, Xuzhou Medical College, Xuzhou, Jiangsu 221002, P.R. China; 
Department of Oncology, Xuzhou Central Hospital, Xuzhou, Jiangsu 221009, P.R.
China. (2)Cancer Institute, Xuzhou Medical College, Xuzhou, Jiangsu 221002, P.R. 
China. (3)Department of Oncology, Xuzhou Tumor Hospital, Xuzhou, Jiangsu 221005, 
P.R. China. (4)Cancer Institute, Xuzhou Medical College, Xuzhou, Jiangsu 221002, 
P.R. China; Jiangsu Center for the Collaboration and Innovation of Cancer
Biotherapy, Cancer Institute, Xuzhou Medical College, Xuzhou, Jiangsu 221002,
P.R. China.

Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer-associated mortality, worldwide. For
this reason, novel therapies are required for the treatment of this devastating
disease. Cetuximab is a monoclonal antibody against epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR), which is overexpressed in a variety of solid tumors, including
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). The therapeutic efficacy of cetuximab for
NSCLC is limited to use as a monotherapy or in combination with chemotherapy. The
objective of the present study was to develop a novel strategy to enhance the
therapeutic efficacy of cetuximab for NSCLC by a co-administration with the
tumor-penetrating internalizing RGD peptide (iRGD). Human NSCLC subcutaneous
xenograft models established with the A549 cell line in nude mice were treated
with 30 mg/kg cetuximab, 4 mg/kg iRGD, cetuximab plus iRGD or phosphate-buffered 
saline. The tumor-penetration, in vivo therapeutic efficacy and involved
mechanism were evaluated. The present study showed that the A549 xenograft model 
is sensitive to the co-administration of cetuximab and iRGD. Treatment with
cetuximab plus iRGD resulted in a significant increase in the tumor-penetration
of cetuximab and tumor reduction compared with cetuximab monotherapy. In
conclusion, iRGD enhances the effects of co-administered cetuximab in an NSCLC
model. The combined application of cetuximab and iRGD may be a novel strategy to 
enhance the clinical therapeutic efficacy of cetuximab for the treatment of
NSCLC.

DOI: 10.3892/ol.2016.5081 
PMCID: PMC5103927
PMID: 27899989  [PubMed]


4. Hum Vaccin Immunother. 2016 Nov 10:0. [Epub ahead of print]

Targeted Therapies for the Treatment of Non-Small-Cell Lung Cancer: Monoclonal
Antibodies and Biological Inhibitors.

Silva AP(1), Coelho PV(1), Anazetti M(1,)(2), Simioni PU(1,)(3,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Biomedical Science , Faculty of Americana , Av. Joaquim Boer, 
733, 13477-360 Americana , SP , Brazil. (2)b Department of Health Science ,
Faculty DeVry Metrocamp , R. Dr. Sales de Oliveira, 1661, 13035-500 , Campinas , 
SP , Brazil. (3)c Department of Genetics , Evolution and Bioagents, Institute of 
Biology, University of Campinas (UNICAMP) , 13083-970 , Campinas , SP , Brazil.
(4)d Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology , Institute of Biosciences,
Universidade Estadual Paulista, UNESP , Av. 24 A,1515, 13506-900 - Rio Claro , SP
, Brazil.

The usual treatments for patients with non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC), such
as advanced lung adenocarcinoma, are unspecific and aggressive, and include lung 
resection, radiotherapy and chemotherapy. Recently, treatment with monoclonal
antibodies and biological inhibitors has emerged as an effective alternative,
generating effective results with few side effects. In recent years, several
clinical trials using monoclonal antibodies presented potential benefits to
NSCLC, and four of them are already approved for the treatment of NSCLC, such as 
cetuximab, bevacizumab, nivolumab and pembrolizumab. Also, biological inhibitors 
are attractive tolls for biological applications. Among the approved inhibitors
are crizotinib, erlotinib, afatinib and gefitinib, and side effects are usually
mild to intense. Nevertheless, biological molecule treatments are under
development, and several new monoclonal antibodies and biological inhibitors are 
in trial to treat NSCLC. Also under trial study are as follows: anti-epidermal
growth factor receptor (EGFR) antibodies (nimotuzumab and ficlatuzumab), anti-IGF
1 receptor (IGF-1R) monoclonal antibody (figitumumab), anti-NR-LU-10 monoclonal
antibody (nofetumomab) as well as antibodies directly affecting the cytotoxic
T-lymphocyte-associated antigen 4 (CTLA-4) molecule (ipilimumab and
tremelimumab), to receptor activator of nuclear factor-kappa B ligand (RANKL)
(denosumab) or to polymerase enzyme (veliparib and olaparib). Among new
inhibitors under investigation are poly-ADP ribose polymerase (PARP) inhibitors
(veliparib and olaparib) and phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) inhibitor
(buparlisib). However, the success of immunotherapies still requires extensive
research and additional controlled trials to evaluate the long-term benefits and 
side effects.

DOI: 10.1080/21645515.2016.1249551 
PMID: 27831000  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


5. Curr Med Res Opin. 2016 Nov;32(11):1839-1848. Epub 2016 Aug 11.

The strange connection between epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase
inhibitors and dapsone: from rash mitigation to the increase in anti-tumor
activity.

Boccellino M(1), Quagliuolo L(1), Alaia C(1), Grimaldi A(1), Addeo R(2),
Nicoletti GF(3), Kast RE(4), Caraglia M(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Biochemistry, Biophysics and General Pathology , Second
University of Naples , Naples , Italy. (2)b Oncology DH ASL Napoli 3 Nord,
Frattamaggiore Hospital , Frattamaggiore , Naples , Italy. (3)c Medical-Surgical 
and Dental Specialities, Second University of Naples , Naples , Italy. (4)d
IIAIGC Study Center , VT , USA.

The presence of an aberrantly activated epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)
in many epithelial tumors, due to its overexpression, activating mutations, gene 
amplification and/or overexpression of receptor ligands, represent the
fundamental basis underlying the use of EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors
(EGFR-TKIs). Drugs inhibiting the EGFR have different mechanisms of action; while
erlotinib and gefitinib inhibit the intracellular tyrosine kinase, monoclonal
antibodies like cetuximab and panitumumab bind the extracellular domain of the
EGFR both activating immunomediated anti-cancer effect and inhibiting receptor
function. On the other hand, interleukin-8 has tumor promoting as well as
neo-angiogenesis enhancing effects and several attempts have been made to inhibit
its activity. One of these is based on the use of the old sulfone antibiotic
dapsone that has demonstrated several interleukin-8 system inhibiting actions.
Erlotinib typically gives a rash that has recently been proven to come out via
up-regulated keratinocyte interleukin-8 synthesis with histological features
reminiscent of typical neutrophilic dermatoses. In this review, we report
experimental evidence that shows the use of dapsone to improve quality of life in
erlotinib-treated patients by ameliorating rash as well as short-circuiting a
growth-enhancing aspect of erlotinib based on increased interleukin-8 secretion.

DOI: 10.1080/03007995.2016.1211522 
PMID: 27398628  [PubMed - in process]


6. J BUON. 2016 Jul-Aug;21(4):867-873.

Cbl-b regulates the sensitivity of cetuximab through ubiquitin-proteasome system 
in human gastric cancer cells.

Yu P(1), Fan Y, Qu X, Zhang J, Song N, Liu J, Liu Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, The First Hospital of China Medical
University, Shenyang, China.

PURPOSE: Cetuximab is a monoclonal antibody against epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR) and is approved for clinical use in combination with chemotherapy
in patients affected by colorectal cancer (CRC), non small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC), and head and neck cancer. Compared with these cancers, gastric cancer is
relatively resistant to cetuximab and its regulatory mechanism is still unclear.
METHODS: In this study, we assessed whether the ubiquitin- proteasome pathway is 
involved in regulating cetuximab-induced cells apoptosis in MGC803 and BGC823
gastric cancer cell lines.
RESULTS: The casitas B lineage lymphoma-b (Cbl-b), a kind of E3 ubiquitin ligase,
was involved in this process. Specific silenced Cbl-b expression increased the
expression of EGFR.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings lead to a better understanding of the mechanism of
cetuximab action, and suggests that Cbl-b increases the sensitivity of cetuximab 
in gastric cancer cells.


PMID: 27685907  [PubMed - in process]


7. Sci Rep. 2016 Aug 17;6:30245. doi: 10.1038/srep30245.

Targeted nanoconjugate co-delivering siRNA and tyrosine kinase inhibitor to KRAS 
mutant NSCLC dissociates GAB1-SHP2 post oncogene knockdown.

Srikar R(1), Suresh D(2), Zambre A(1), Taylor K(3), Chapman S(4), Leevy M(4),
Upendran A(5,)(6), Kannan R(1,)(2,)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiology, Medical Sciences Building, University of Missouri,
Columbia, MO 65212, USA. (2)Department of Bioengineering, University of Missouri,
Columbia, MO 65212, USA. (3)Department of Pathology, Medical Sciences Building,
University of Missouri, Columbia, MO 65212, USA. (4)Notre Dame Integrated Imaging
Facility, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN 46556, USA. (5)Department of
Medical Pharmacology and Physiology, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO 65212, 
USA. (6)Institute of Clinical and Translational Science, University of Missouri, 
Columbia, MO 65212, USA. (7)International Center for Nano/Micro Systems and
Nanotechnology, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO 65212, USA.

A tri-block nanoparticle (TBN) comprising of an enzymatically cleavable porous
gelatin nanocore encapsulated with gefitinib (tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI))
and surface functionalized with cetuximab-siRNA conjugate has been synthesized.
Targeted delivery of siRNA to undruggable KRAS mutated non-small cell lung cancer
cells would sensitize the cells to TKI drugs and offers an efficient therapy for 
treating cancer; however, efficient delivery of siRNA and releasing it in
cytoplasm remains a major challenge. We have shown TBN can efficiently deliver
siRNA to cytoplasm of KRAS mutant H23 Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer (NSCLC) cells
for oncogene knockdown; subsequently, sensitizing it to TKI. In the absence of
TKI, the nanoparticle showed minimal toxicity suggesting that the cells adapt a
parallel GAB1 mediated survival pathway. In H23 cells, activated ERK results in
phosphorylation of GAB1 on serine and threonine residues to form GAB1-p85 PI3K
complex. In the absence of TKI, knocking down the oncogene dephosphorylated ERK, 
and negated the complex formation. This event led to tyrosine phosphorylation at 
Tyr627 domain of GAB1 that regulated EGFR signaling by recruiting SHP2. In the
presence of TKI, GAB1-SHP2 dissociation occurs, leading to cell death. The
outcome of this study provides a promising platform for treating NSCLC patients
harboring KRAS mutation.

DOI: 10.1038/srep30245 
PMCID: PMC4987653
PMID: 27530552  [PubMed - in process]


8. Clin Cancer Res. 2017 Feb 1;23(3):778-788. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-15-2597.
Epub 2016 Aug 5.

Progression of EGFR-Mutant Lung Adenocarcinoma is Driven By Alveolar Macrophages.

Wang DH(1), Lee HS(2), Yoon D(2), Berry G(1), Wheeler TM(2), Sugarbaker DJ(2),
Kheradmand F(2), Engleman E(1), Burt BM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, California. (2)Baylor
College of Medicine, Houston, Texas. (3)Baylor College of Medicine, Houston,
Texas. bryan.burt@bcm.edu.

PURPOSE: Lung adenocarcinomas with mutations in the EGFR have unprecedented
initial responses to targeted therapy against the EGFR. Over time, however, these
tumors invariably develop resistance to these drugs. We set out to investigate
alternative treatment approaches for these tumors.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: To investigate the immunologic underpinnings of EGFR-mutant 
lung adenocarcinoma, we utilized a bitransgenic mouse model in which a mutant
human EGFR gene is selectively expressed in the lungs.
RESULTS: EGFR oncogene-dependent progression and remission of lung adenocarcinoma
was respectively dependent upon the expansion and contraction of alveolar
macrophages, and the mechanism underlying macrophage expansion was local
proliferation. In tumor-bearing mice, alveolar macrophages downregulated surface 
expression of MHC-II and costimulatory molecules; increased production of CXCL1, 
CXCL2, IL1 receptor antagonist; and increased phagocytosis. Depletion of alveolar
macrophages in tumor-bearing mice resulted in reduction of tumor burden,
indicating a critical role for these cells in the development of EGFR-mutant
adenocarcinoma. Treatment of mice with EGFR-targeting clinical drugs (erlotinib
and cetuximab) resulted in a significant decrease in alveolar macrophages in
these mice. An activated alveolar macrophage mRNA signature was dominant in human
EGFR-mutant lung adenocarcinomas, and the presence of this alveolar macrophage
activation signature was associated with unfavorable survival among patients
undergoing resection for EGFR-mutant lung adenocarcinoma.
CONCLUSIONS: Because of the inevitability of failure of targeted therapy in
EGFR-mutant non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), these data suggest that
therapeutic strategies targeting alveolar macrophages in EGFR-mutant NSCLC have
the potential to mitigate progression and survival in this disease. Clin Cancer
Res; 23(3); 778-88. ©2016 AACR.

©2016 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-15-2597 
PMID: 27496865  [PubMed - in process]


9. Nanoscale. 2016 Aug 11;8(32):15027-32. doi: 10.1039/c6nr04439e.

Targeted imaging of EGFR overexpressed cancer cells by brightly fluorescent
nanoparticles conjugated with cetuximab.

Gao M(1), Su H(2), Lin G(1), Li S(1), Yu X(2), Qin A(1), Zhao Z(1), Zhang Z(2),
Tang BZ(3).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Luminescent Materials and Devices, South China
University of Technology, Guangzhou 510640, China. mszjzhao@scut.edu.cn. (2)Sun
Yat-sen University Cancer Center, State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South
China, Collaborative Innovation Center for Cancer Medicine, Guangzhou 510060,
China. zhangzhf@sysucc.org.cn. (3)State Key Laboratory of Luminescent Materials
and Devices, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou 510640, China.
mszjzhao@scut.edu.cn and Department of Chemistry, The Hong Kong University of
Science & Technology, Clear Water Bay, Kowloon, Hong Kong, China. tangbenz@ust.hk
and Hong Kong Branch of Chinese National Engineering Research Center for Tissue
Restoration and Reconstruction, Hong Kong, China.

To improve the treatment efficiency and reduce side effects in cancer therapy,
accurate diagnosis of cancer cell types at a molecular level is highly desirable.
Fluorescent nanoparticles (NPs) are especially suitable for detecting molecular
biomarkers of cancer with advantages of superior brightness, easy decoration and 
high resolution. However, the conventional organic fluorophores, conjugated
polymers, and inorganic quantum dots suffer from the drawbacks of
aggregation-caused quenching (ACQ), low photostability, and heavy metal toxicity,
respectively, which severely restrict their applications in NPs-based
fluorescence imaging. To overcome these limitations, herein, we have developed
fluorescent nanoparticles based on a t-BuPITBT-TPE fluorophore derived from
aggregation-induced emission (AIE)-active tetraphenylethene. Through
encapsulating t-BuPITBT-TPE within biocompatible DSPE-PEG and further decorating 
with a monoclonal antibody cetuximab (C225), the obtained t-BuPITBT-TPE-C225 NPs 
can be used for targeted imaging of non-small cell lung cancer cells with an
overexpressed epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR). The specific targeting
ability of t-BuPITBT-TPE-C225 NPs has been well verified by confocal microscopy
and flow cytometry experiments. The t-BuPITBT-TPE-C225 NPs have shown significant
advantages in terms of highly efficient red emission, good bio-compatibility, and
excellent photostability. This work provides a promising method for precise
diagnosis of cancer cells by antibody-functionalized fluorescent NPs with high
brightness.

DOI: 10.1039/c6nr04439e 
PMID: 27468980  [PubMed - in process]


10. Med Clin (Barc). 2016 Apr;146 Suppl 1:19-24. doi: 10.1016/S0025-7753(16)30259-7.

[Evidence on afatinib in patients progressing on a first-line treatment].

[Article in Spanish]

Artal Cortés Á(1), Gimeno Pelegrín J(2), Alejandro MÁ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Oncología Médica, Hospital Universitario Miguel Servet, Zaragoza, 
España. Electronic address: aartalc@salud.aragon.es. (2)Servicio de Oncología
Médica, Hospital Universitario Miguel Servet, Zaragoza, España.

After description of the importance of EGFR mutations in non-small cell lung
cancer and confirmation that tyrosine-kinase inhibitors are more beneficial than 
chemotherapy in patients with EGFR+ tumours, treatment with one of these drugs
has become the standard recommendation. Despite this advance, patients continue
to progress and consequently there is a need to search for alternative
treatments. Some studies have analysed afatinib activity after first-generation
TKI therapy, as well as its administration in combination with conventional
chemotherapy. Afatinib produces significant response rates and progression-free
survival times after the development of clinical resistance, which are
independent of the presence of the T790M resistance mutation and can be
attributed to continued pan-HER inhibition. In addition to the initial clinical
trial, LUX-LUNG-1, data are available from the use of afatinib in routine
clinical practice, within extended use programs. Overall, response rates of
between 7 and 15% can be expected with a duration of approximately 24 months and 
a median progression-free time of about 4 months. A study combining afatinib with
cetuximab has obtained a high response rate. Afatinib toxicity in second-line
treatment is similar to that appears when the drug is used as first-line therapy 
(mainly mucocutaneous and diarrhoea) and can be managed with routine measures. In
conclusion, afatinib should be considered as a treatment option in patients with 
EGFR mutations who show disease progression after a first tyrosine-kinase
inhibitor.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier España, S.L.U. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S0025-7753(16)30259-7 
PMID: 27426244  [PubMed - in process]


11. Mol Cancer Ther. 2016 Sep;15(9):2175-86. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-16-0012. Epub
2016 Jul 15.

Targeting the HER Family with Pan-HER Effectively Overcomes Resistance to
Cetuximab.

Iida M(1), Bahrar H(2), Brand TM(1), Pearson HE(1), Coan JP(1), Orbuch RA(1),
Flanigan BG(1), Swick AD(1), Prabakaran PJ(1), Lantto J(3), Horak ID(3), Kragh
M(3), Salgia R(4), Kimple RJ(1), Wheeler DL(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Oncology, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and
Public Health, Madison, Wisconsin. (2)Department of Human Oncology, University of
Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health, Madison, Wisconsin. Radboud
Department of Radiation Oncology, University Medical Centre Nijmegen, Nijmegen,
the Netherlands. (3)Symphogen A/S, Ballerup, Denmark. (4)City of Hope, Duarte,
California. (5)Department of Human Oncology, University of Wisconsin School of
Medicine and Public Health, Madison, Wisconsin. dlwheeler@wisc.edu.

Cetuximab, an antibody against the EGFR, has shown efficacy in treating head and 
neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC), metastatic colorectal cancer, and non-small
cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Despite the clinical success of cetuximab, many
patients do not respond to cetuximab. Furthermore, virtually all patients who do 
initially respond become refractory, highlighting both intrinsic and acquired
resistance to cetuximab as significant clinical problems. To understand
mechanistically how cancerous cells acquire resistance, we previously developed
models of acquired resistance using the H226 NSCLC and UM-SCC1 HNSCC cell lines. 
Cetuximab-resistant clones showed a robust upregulation and dependency on the HER
family receptors EGFR, HER2, and HER3. Here, we examined pan-HER, a mixture of
six antibodies targeting these receptors on cetuximab-resistant clones. In cells 
exhibiting acquired or intrinsic resistance to cetuximab, pan-HER treatment
decreased all three receptors' protein levels and downstream activation of AKT
and MAPK. This correlated with decreased cell proliferation in
cetuximab-resistant clones. To determine whether pan-HER had a therapeutic
benefit in vivo, we established de novo cetuximab-resistant mouse xenografts and 
treated resistant tumors with pan-HER. This regimen resulted in a superior growth
delay of cetuximab-resistant xenografts compared with mice continued on
cetuximab. Furthermore, intrinsically cetuximab-resistant HNSCC patient-derived
xenograft tumors treated with pan-HER exhibited significant growth delay compared
with vehicle/cetuximab controls. These results suggest that targeting multiple
HER family receptors simultaneously with pan-HER is a promising treatment
strategy for tumors displaying intrinsic or acquired resistance to cetuximab. Mol
Cancer Ther; 15(9); 2175-86. ©2016 AACR.

©2016 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-16-0012 
PMCID: PMC5010956 [Available on 2017-03-01]
PMID: 27422810  [PubMed - in process]


12. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2016 May 25;(5):CD010383. doi:
10.1002/14651858.CD010383.pub2.

First-line treatment of advanced epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutation
positive non-squamous non-small cell lung cancer.

Greenhalgh J(1), Dwan K, Boland A, Bates V, Vecchio F, Dundar Y, Jain P, Green
JA.

Author information: 
(1)Liverpool Reviews and Implementation Group, University of Liverpool,
Sherrington Building, Ashton Street, Liverpool, UK, L69 3GE.

BACKGROUND: Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutation positive (M+)
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is emerging as an important subtype of lung
cancer comprising 10% to 15% of non-squamous tumours. This subtype is more common
in women than men and is less associated with smoking.
OBJECTIVES: To assess the clinical effectiveness of single -agent or combination 
EGFR therapies used in the first-line treatment of people with locally advanced
or metastatic EGFR M+ NSCLC compared with other cytotoxic chemotherapy (CTX)
agents used alone or in combination, or best supportive care (BSC). The primary
outcome was overall survival. Secondary outcomes included progression-free
survival, response rate, toxicity, and quality of life.
SEARCH METHODS: We conducted electronic searches of the the Cochrane Register of 
Controlled Trials (CENTRAL) (2015, Issue 6), MEDLINE (1946 to 1 June 2015),
EMBASE (1980 to 1 June 2015), and ISI Web of Science (1899 to 1 June 2015). We
also searched the conference abstracts of the American Society for Clinical
Oncology and the European Society for Medical Oncology (1 June 2015); Evidence
Review Group submissions to the National Institute for Health and Care
Excellence; and the reference lists of retrieved articles.
SELECTION CRITERIA: Parallel randomised controlled trials comparing EGFR-targeted
agents (alone or in combination with cytotoxic agents or BSC) with cytotoxic
chemotherapy (single or doublet) or BSC in chemotherapy-naive patients with
locally advanced or metastatic (stage IIIB or IV) EGFR M+ NSCLC unsuitable for
treatment with curative intent.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Two review authors independently identified
articles, extracted data, and carried out the 'Risk of bias' assessment. We
conducted meta-analyses using a fixed-effect model unless there was substantial
heterogeneity, in which case we also performed a random-effects analysis as a
sensitivity analysis.
MAIN RESULTS: Nineteen trials met the inclusion criteria. Seven of these
exclusively recruited people with EGFR M+ NSCLC; the remainder recruited a mixed 
population and reported results for people with EGFR M+ NSCLC as subgroup
analyses. The number of participants with EGFR M+ tumours totalled 2317, of whom 
1700 were of Asian origin.Overall survival (OS) data showed inconsistent results 
between the included trials that compared EGFR-targeted treatments against
cytotoxic chemotherapy or placebo.Erlotinib was the intervention treatment used
in eight trials, gefitinib in seven trials, afatinib in two trials, and cetuximab
in two trials. The findings of one trial (FASTACT 2) did report a statistically
significant OS gain for participants treated with erlotinib plus cytotoxic
chemotherapy when compared to cytotoxic chemotherapy alone, but this result was
based on a small number of participants (n = 97). For progression-free survival
(PFS), a pooled analysis of 3 trials (n = 378) demonstrated a statistically
significant benefit for erlotinib compared with cytotoxic chemotherapy (hazard
ratio (HR) 0.30; 95% confidence interval (CI) 0.24 to 0.38).In a pooled analysis 
with 491 participants administered gefitinib, 2 trials (IPASS and NEJSG)
demonstrated a statistically significant PFS benefit of gefitinib compared with
cytotoxic chemotherapy (HR 0.39; 95% CI 0.32 to 0.48).Afatinib (n = 709) showed a
statistically significant PFS benefit when compared with chemotherapy in a pooled
analysis of 2 trials (HR 0.42; 95% CI 0.34 to 0.53).Commonly reported grade 3/4
adverse events for afatinib, erlotinib, and gefitinib monotherapy were rash and
diarrhoea. Myelosuppression was consistently worse in the chemotherapy arms,
fatigue and anorexia were also associated with some chemotherapies.No
statistically significant PFS or OS benefit for cetuximab plus cytotoxic
chemotherapy (n = 81) compared to chemotherapy alone was reported in either of
the two trials.Six trials reported on quality of life and symptom improvement
using different methodologies. For each of erlotinib, gefitinib, and afatinib, 2 
trials showed improvement in one or more indices for the tyrosine-kinase
inhibitor (TKI) compared to chemotherapy.The quality of evidence was high for the
comparisons of erlotinib and gefitinib with cytotoxic chemotherapy and for the
comparison of afatinib with cytotoxic chemotherapy.
AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: Erlotinib, gefitinib, and afatinib are all active agents in
EGFR M+ NSCLC patients, and demonstrate an increased tumour response rate and
prolonged progression-free survival compared to cytotoxic chemotherapy. We also
found a beneficial effect of the TKI compared to cytotoxic chemotherapy. However,
we found no increase in overall survival for the TKI when compared with standard 
chemotherapy. Cytotoxic chemotherapy is less effective in EGFR M+ NSCLC than
erlotinib, gefitinib, or afatinib and is associated with greater toxicity. There 
were no data supporting the use of monoclonal antibody therapy.

DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD010383.pub2 
PMID: 27223332  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Zhongguo Fei Ai Za Zhi. 2016 May 20;19(5):263-8. doi:
10.3779/j.issn.1009-3419.2016.05.03.

[Efficacy of Cetuximab in Combination with Chemotherapy in Advanced Non-small
Cell Lung Cancer].

[Article in Chinese; Abstract available in Chinese from the publisher]

Yang S(1), Wang Y(1), Hu X(1), Wang H(1), Hao X(1), Xu J(1), Wang L(1), Wang
B(1), Li J(1), Zhao L(1), Jiang P(1), Qu F(1), Zhang X(1), Shi Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Beijing Key Laboratory of Clinical Study on
Anticancer Molecular Targeted Drugs, National Cancer Center/Cancer Hospital,
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing
100021, China.

BACKGROUND: Cetuximab is a monoclonal antibody directed against epidermal growth 
factor receptor. Emerging evidence showed improved efficacy with the addition of 
cetuximab to chemotherapy in advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), but the
data in oriental population are limited. The aim of this study is to investigate 
the efficacy of cetuximab in combination with chemotherapy in Chinese patients
with advanced NSCLC.
METHODS: NSCLC patients receiving cetuximab in combination with chemotherapy in
Cancer Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences & Peking Union Medical
College were enrolled and retrospectively analyzed. Clinical characteristic,
efficacy, outcome and toxicity data were analyzed.
RESULTS: A total of 40 patients were enrolled into this study in which 29 were
male, 36 with adenocarcinoma. In the 23 patients who had received palliative
chemotherapy previously (with a median of 2 prior chemotherapy regimens), the
median progression-free survival (PFS) after the last prior chemotherapy regimen 
was 2.3 months. For the overall population, 13 (32.5%) patients achieved partial 
response after cetuximab in combination with chemotherapy. Response rate were
52.9% (9/17) and 17.4% (4/23) in chemotherapy-naive patients and
chemotherapy-treated patients, respectively (P=0.018). The median PFS was 4.8
months for the overall population. In chemotherapy-naive patients and
chemotherapy-treated patients, the median PFS was 8.4 months and 4.1 months,
respectively (P=0.062). The estimated median overall survival was 17.1 months.
Toxicities were generally manageable and no treatment-related deaths occurred.
CONCLUSIONS: Cetuximab in addition to chemotherapy appears to be associated with 
promising efficacy and acceptable toxicity profile in Chinese patients with
advanced NSCLC. Further validation is needed.

Publisher: 背景与目的
西妥昔单抗是作用于表皮生长因子受体的单克隆抗体。已有的研究表明在化疗基础上加用西妥昔单抗，可以提高晚期非小细胞肺癌患者的疗效，但来自东方人群的数据有限。本研究旨在
分析西妥昔单抗联合化疗治疗中国晚期非小细胞肺癌患者的疗效。方法
纳入接受西妥昔单抗联合化疗的晚期非小细胞肺癌患者，回顾性分析其临床数据，包括患者的临床特征、疗效和不良反应。结果
共纳入40例患者，其中29例为男性，36例为腺癌，23例既往接受过姑息性化疗（中位2个化疗方案），上一个化疗方案的中位无进展生存期（progression-fre
e survival,
PFS）为2.3个月。采用西妥昔单抗联合化疗后，全组患者的缓解率为32.5%（13/40）。既往未接受过化疗和接受过化疗的患者缓解率分别为52.9%（9/17）和
17.4%（4/23）（P=0.018）。全组患者的中位PFS为4.8个月。既往未接受过化疗的患者中位PFS为8.4个月，而接受过化疗者的PFS为4.1个月（P=
0.062）。全组患者的中位总生存期为17.1个月。不良反应可处理，未发生治疗相关死亡。结论
西妥昔单抗联合化疗有望提高中国晚期非小细胞肺癌患者的疗效，并且不良反应可耐受。.
DOI: 10.3779/j.issn.1009-3419.2016.05.03 
PMID: 27215454  [PubMed - in process]


14. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2016 May 19;108(9). pii: djw034. doi: 10.1093/jnci/djw034.
Print 2016 Sep.

Institutional Enrollment and Survival Among NSCLC Patients Receiving
Chemoradiation: NRG Oncology Radiation Therapy Oncology Group (RTOG) 0617.

Eaton BR(1), Pugh SL(2), Bradley JD(2), Masters G(2), Kavadi VS(2), Narayan S(2),
Nedzi L(2), Robinson C(2), Wynn RB(2), Koprowski C(2), Johnson DW(2), Meng J(2), 
Curran WJ Jr(2).

Author information: 
(1)Winship Cancer Institute of Emory University, Atlanta, GA (BRE, WJCJr); NRG
Oncology Statistics and Data Management Center, Philadelphia, PA (SLP);
Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO (JDB, CR); Christiana
Care/Helen Graham Medical Center, Newark, DE (GM); USON-Texas Oncology,
Sugarland, TX (VSK); Michigan Cancer Research Consortium, Ann Arbor, MI (SN);
University of Texas Southwestern Medical School, Dallas, TX (LN); University of
Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pittsburgh, PA (RBW); Christiana Care Health System,
Wilmington, DE (CK); Florida Radiation Oncology Group, Jacksonville, FL (DWJ);
The Ottawa Hospital, Ottawa, ON, Canada (JM) brupper@emory.edu. (2)Winship Cancer
Institute of Emory University, Atlanta, GA (BRE, WJCJr); NRG Oncology Statistics 
and Data Management Center, Philadelphia, PA (SLP); Washington University School 
of Medicine, St. Louis, MO (JDB, CR); Christiana Care/Helen Graham Medical
Center, Newark, DE (GM); USON-Texas Oncology, Sugarland, TX (VSK); Michigan
Cancer Research Consortium, Ann Arbor, MI (SN); University of Texas Southwestern 
Medical School, Dallas, TX (LN); University of Pittsburgh Medical Center,
Pittsburgh, PA (RBW); Christiana Care Health System, Wilmington, DE (CK); Florida
Radiation Oncology Group, Jacksonville, FL (DWJ); The Ottawa Hospital, Ottawa,
ON, Canada (JM).

BACKGROUND: The purpose of this analysis is to evaluate the effect of
institutional accrual volume on clinical outcomes among patients receiving
chemoradiation for locally advanced non-small cell lung cancer (LA-NSCLC) on a
phase III trial.
METHODS: Patients with LA-NSCLC were randomly assigned to 60 Gy or 74 Gy
radiotherapy (RT) with concurrent carboplatin/paclitaxel +/- cetuximab on NRG
Oncology RTOG 0617. Participating institutions were categorized as low-volume
centers (LVCs) or high-volume centers (HVCs) according to the number of patients 
accrued (≤3 vs > 3). All statistical tests were two-sided.
RESULTS: Range of accrual for LVCs (n = 195) vs HVCs (n = 300) was 1 to 3 vs 4 to
18 patients. Baseline characteristics were similar between the two cohorts.
Treatment at a HVC was associated with statistically significantly longer overall
survival (OS) and progression-free survival (PFS) compared with treatment at a
LVC (median OS = 26.2 vs 19.8 months; HR = 0.70, 95% CI = 0.56 to 0.88, P = .002;
median PFS: 11.4 vs 9.7 months, HR = 0.80, 95% CI = 0.65-0.99, P = .04). Patients
treated at HVCs were more often treated with intensity-modulated RT (54.0% vs
39.5%, P = .002), had a lower esophageal dose (mean = 26.1 vs 28.0 Gy, P = .03), 
and had a lower heart dose (median = V5 Gy 38.2% vs 54.1%, P = .006; V50 Gy 3.6% 
vs 7.3%, P < .001). Grade 5 adverse events (AEs) (5.3% vs 9.2%, P = .09) and RT
termination because of AEs (1.3% vs 4.1%, P = .07) were less common among
patients treated at HVCs. HVC remained independently associated with longer OS (P
= .03) when accounting for other factors.
CONCLUSION: Treatment at institutions with higher clinical trial accrual volume
is associated with longer OS among patients with LA-NSCLC participating in a
phase III trial.

© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/jnci/djw034 
PMID: 27206636  [PubMed - in process]


15. Acta Dermatovenerol Croat. 2016 Apr;24(1):70-2.

Adverse Reaction to Cetuximab, an Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor Inhibitor.

Štulhofer Buzina D(1), Martinac I, Ledić Drvar D, Čeović R, Bilić I, Marinović B.

Author information: 
(1)Daška Štulhofer Buzina, MD, PhD, University Hospital Center Zagreb, Department
of Dermatology and Venereology, School of Medicine University of Zagreb, Šalata
4, 10000 Zagreb, Croatia; daska.stulhofer-buzina@zg.htnet.hr.

Dear Editor, Inhibition of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is a new
strategy in treatment of a variety of solid tumors, such as colorectal carcinoma,
non-small cell lung cancer, squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck, and
pancreatic cancer (1). Cetuximab is a chimeric human-murine monoclonal antibody
against EGFR. Cutaneous side effects are the most common adverse reactions
occurring during epidermal growth factor receptor inhibitors (EGFRI) therapy.
Papulopustular rash (acne like rash) develop with 80-86% patients receiving
cetuximab, while xerosis, eczema, fissures, teleangiectasiae, hyperpigmentations,
and nail and hair changes occur less frequently (2). The mechanism underlying
these skin changes has not been established and understood. It seems EGFRI alter 
cell growth and differentiation, leading to impaired stratum corneum and cell
apoptosis (3-5). An abdominoperineal resection of the rectal adenocarcinoma
(Dukes C) was performed on a 43-year-old female patient. Following surgery,
adjuvant chemo-radiotherapy was applied. After two years, the patient suffered a 
metastatic relapse. Abdominal lymphadenopathy was detected on multi-slice
computer tomography (MSCT) images, with an increased value of the
carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) tumor marker (maximal value 57 ng/mL).
Hematological and biochemical tests were within normal limits, so first-line
chemotherapy with oxaliplatin and a 5-fluorouracil (FOLFOX4) protocol was
introduced. A wild type of the KRAS gene was confirmed in tumor tissue
(diagnostic prerequisite for the introduction of EGFRI) and cetuximab (250 mg per
m2 of body surface) was added to the treatment protocol. The patient responded
well to the treatment with confirmed partial regression of the tumor formations. 
Three months after the patient started using cetuximab, an anti-EGFR monoclonal
antibody, the patient presented with a papulopustular eruption in the seborrhoeic
areas (Figure 1) and eczematoid reactions on the extremities with dry, scaly,
itchy skin (Figure 2). Furthermore, hair and nail changes gradually developed,
culminating with trichomegaly (Figure 3) and paronychia (Figure 4). The patient
was treated with oral antibiotics (tetracycline) and a combination of topical
steroids with moisturizing emollients due to xerosis, without reduction of EGFRI 
therapy and with a very good response. Trichomegaly was regularly sniped with
scissors. Nail fungal infection was ruled out by native examination and
cultivation, so antiseptics and corticosteroid ointments were introduced for
paronychia treatment. During the above-mentioned therapy, apart from skin
manifestations, iatrogenic neutropenia grade IV occurred, with one febrile
episode, and because of this, the dose of cytostatic drugs was reduced. After 10 
months of therapy, progression of the disease occurred with lung metastases, so
EGFRI therapy was discontinued and the patient was given second-line chemotherapy
for metastatic colorectal carcinoma. This led to gradual resolution of all
aforementioned cutaneous manifestations. Since the pathogenesis of skin
side-effects due to EGFRI is not yet fully understood, there are no strict
therapy protocols. Therapy is mainly based on clinical experience and follows the
standard treatments for acne, rosacea, xerosis, paronychia, and effluvium. The
therapeutic approach for papulopustular exanthema includes topical and systemic
antibiotics for their antimicrobial as well as anti-inflammatory effect,
sometimes in combination with topical steroids. Topical application of urea cream
with K1 vitamin yielded positive results in skin-changes prevention during EGFRI 
therapy, especially with xerosis, eczema, and pruritus (6). Hair alterations in
the form of effluvium are usually tolerable, and if needed a 2% minoxidil
solution may be applied. Trichomegaly or abnormal eyelash growth can lead to
serious complications, so ophthalmologic examination is needed. At the beginning 
of the growth, regular lash clipping may reduce possibility of corneal abrasion
(7,8). Nail changes can just be a cosmetic problem (pigmentary changes, brittle
nails), and in the occurrence of paronychia or onycholysis (of several or all
nails) they result in high morbidity and impair daily activities. Nail management
should be started as soon as possible because of slow nail growth and the
relatively long half-life of EGFRI. Combination of topical iodide,
corticosteroids, antibiotics, and antifungals with avoidance of nail
traumatization will yield the best results (9). EGFRI are potentially life
prolonging therapies, and our goal as dermatovenereologists is to provide optimal
patient care and improve their quality of life in a multidisciplinary
collaboration with oncologists, radiotherapists, and ophthalmologists.


PMID: 27149134  [PubMed - in process]


16. Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci. 2016 Apr;20(7):1244-50.

N1-guanyl-1,7-diaminoheptane enhances the chemosensitivity of NSCLC cells to
cetuximab through inhibition of eukaryotic translation initiation factor 5A2
activation.

Wang X(1), Jiang R, Cui EH, Feng WM, Guo HH, Gu DH, Tang CW, Xue T, Bao Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, The First Affiliated Hospital of Huzhou
Teachers' College, the First People's Hospital of Huzhou, Huzhou, Zhejiang,
China. baoyinghz@sina.com.

OBJECTIVE: N1-guanyl-1, 7-diaminoheptane (GC7), an inhibitor of deoxyhypusine
synthase has been shown to exhibit significant anti-cancer activity. However, the
biological role of eukaryotic translation initiation factor 5A2 activation
(EIF5A2) and GC7 on drug resistance in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) has not
been investigated. In this study, we aimed to investigate the therapeutic effect 
of GC7 combined with cetuximab in NSCLC therapy.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The current study used cell viability assays, EdU
incorporation assays, and western blot to detect that the GC7 exhibited
synergistic cytotoxicity with cetuximab in NSCLC.
RESULTS: CCK-8 assays showed that combined treatment with GC7 and cetuximab
significantly inhibited the viabilities in three NSCLC cell lines. In addition,
EdU incorporation assays also indicated that GC7 co-treatment remarkably enhanced
the cetuximab sensitivity in NSCLC cells. Nevertheless, down-regulation of EIF5A2
diminished the regulatory role of GC7 in cetuximab cytotoxicity. Western blot
showed that transfection of EIF5A2 siRNA significantly suppressed the protein
expression of EIF5A2 in NSCLC cells.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings demonstrate that combined treatment with GC7 could
enhance cetuximab sensitivity by inhibiting EIF5A2 in NSCLC cells, implying the
potential clinical application of GC7 in cetuximab-based chemotherapy for NSCLC
patients.


PMID: 27097942  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Clin Cancer Res. 2016 Sep 1;22(17):4428-39. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-15-2449.
Epub 2016 Apr 13.

Secretome Signature Identifies ADAM17 as Novel Target for Radiosensitization of
Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer.

Sharma A(1), Bender S(1), Zimmermann M(1), Riesterer O(1), Broggini-Tenzer A(1), 
Pruschy MN(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Applied Radiobiology, Department of Radiation Oncology,
University Hospital Zurich, University of Zurich Zurich, Switzerland.
(2)Laboratory for Applied Radiobiology, Department of Radiation Oncology,
University Hospital Zurich, University of Zurich Zurich, Switzerland.
martin.pruschy@usz.ch.

Comment in
    J Thorac Dis. 2016 Aug;8(8):E813-5.

PURPOSE: Ionizing radiation (IR) induces intracellular signaling processes as
part of a treatment-induced stress response. Here we investigate IR-induced
ADAM17 activation and the role of ADAM17-shed factors for radiation resistance in
non-small cell lung cancer.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Large-scale secretome profiling was performed using antibody
arrays. Secretion kinetics of ADAM17 substrates was determined using ELISA across
multiple in vitro and in vivo models of non-small cell lung cancer. Clonogenic
survival and tumor xenograft assays were performed to determine
radiosensitization by ADAM17 inhibition.
RESULTS: On the basis of a large-scale secretome screening, we investigated
secretion of auto- or paracrine factors in non-small cell lung cancer in response
to irradiation and discovered the ADAM17 network as a crucial mediator of
resistance to IR. Irradiation induced a dose-dependent increase of furin-mediated
cleavage of the ADAM17 proform to active ADAM17, which resulted in enhanced
ADAM17 activity in vitro and in vivo Genetic or pharmacologic targeting of ADAM17
suppressed IR-induced shedding of secreted factors, downregulated ErbB signaling 
in otherwise cetuximab-resistant target cells, and enhanced IR-induced
cytotoxicity. The combined treatment modality of IR with the ADAM17 inhibitor
TMI-005 resulted in a supra-additive antitumor response in vivo demonstrating the
potential of ADAM17 targeting in combination with radiotherapy.
CONCLUSIONS: Radiotherapy activates ADAM17 in non-small cell lung cancer, which
results in shedding of multiple survival factors, growth factor pathway
activation, and IR-induced treatment resistance. We provide a sound rationale for
repositioning ADAM17 inhibitors as short-term adjuvants to improve the
radiotherapy outcome of non-small cell lung cancer. Clin Cancer Res; 22(17);
4428-39. ©2016 AACR.

©2016 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-15-2449 
PMID: 27076628  [PubMed - in process]


18. Oncotarget. 2016 May 10;7(19):28262-72. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.8596.

Gene therapy for colorectal cancer using adenovirus-mediated full-length
antibody, cetuximab.

Xing M(1), Wang X(1), Chi Y(1), Zhou D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Vaccine Research Center, Key Laboratory of Molecular Virology and Immunology, 
Institut Pasteur of Shanghai, Chinese Academy of Science, Shanghai, China.

Cetuximab is a chimeric monoclonal antibody, approved to treat patients with
metastatic colorectal cancer (mCRC), head and neck squamous cell carcinoma
(HNSCC), non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) for years. It functions by blocking
the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) from receiving signals or interacting
with other proteins. Although the demand for cetuximab for the treatment of
cancer patients in clinics is increasing, the complicated techniques involved and
its high cost limit its wide applications. Here, a new, cheaper form of cetuximab
was generated for cancer gene therapy. This was achieved by cloning the
full-length cetuximab antibody into two serotypes of adenoviral vectors, termed
as AdC68-CTB and Hu5-CTB. In vivo studies showed that a single dose of AdC68-CTB 
or Hu5-CTB induced sustained cetuximab expression and dramatically suppressed
tumor growth in NCI-H508- or DiFi-inoculated nude mice. In conclusion, gene
therapy using adenovirus expressing full-length cetuximab could be a novel
alternative method for the effective treatment of colorectal cancer.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.8596 
PMCID: PMC5053725
PMID: 27058423  [PubMed - in process]


19. Lung Cancer. 2016 May;95:57-64. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2016.02.013. Epub 2016 Feb
27.

ER2, a novel human anti-EGFR monoclonal antibody inhibit tumor activity in
non-small cell lung cancer models.

Kang HN(1), Kim SH(2), Yun MR(1), Kim HR(3), Lim SM(3), Kim MS(4), Hong KW(5),
Kim SM(1), Kim H(1), Pyo KH(1), Park HJ(3), Han JY(3), Youn HA(3), Chang KH(6),
Cho BC(7).

Author information: 
(1)JEUK Institute for Cancer Research, JEUK Co., Ltd., Gumi-City, Kyungbuk,
Republic of Korea. (2)University-Industry Cooperation Foundation, and Department 
of Systems Immunology, College of Biomedical Science, Kangwon National
University, Chuncheon, Kangwon-Do, Republic of Korea. (3)Division of Medical
Oncology, Yonsei Cancer Center, Department of Internal Medicine, Yonsei
University College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea. (4)Antibody Engineering
1 Team, Mogam Biotechnology Research Institute Yongin, Republic of Korea. (5)Cell
Engineering team, Green Cross Research Center, Green Cross Corp., Yongin,
Republic of Korea. (6)Antibody Engineering 1 Team, Mogam Biotechnology Research
Institute Yongin, Republic of Korea; Department of Biochemistry, Yonsei
University, Seoul, Republic of Korea. Electronic address: jkhdw@mogam.re.kr.
(7)Brain Korea 21 Project for Medical Sciences, Yonsei University College of
Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea; Division of Medical Oncology, Yonsei Cancer
Center, Department of Internal Medicine, Yonsei University College of Medicine,
Seoul, Republic of Korea. Electronic address: cbc1971@yuhs.ac.

OBJECTIVES: The epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) abnormalities including
amplification, mutation, and overexpression are frequent in non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC). We investigated in vitro and in vivo antitumor activity of ER2, a
novel human anti-EGFR monoclonal antibody, in NSCLC.
METHODS: A panel of NSCLC cell lines (A549, H460, H322, H358, H1299, HCC827, PC9,
H1975, and PC9-GR) was used to evaluate in vitro antitumor activity of ER2 and
cetuximab. The inhibitory effects of ER2 and cetuximab on downstream signaling
were assessed by western blot. Secreted VEGF was measured by Human VEGF
Quantikine ELISA kit. Antitumor effects of ER2 and cetuximab as single agents and
in combination with cisplatin were evaluated in H322, HCC827 and A549 xenograft
models.
RESULTS: ER2 efficiently inhibits EGFR and its downstream signaling molecules
including Akt and Erk1/2 in NSCLC cell lines with wild-type or mutant EGFR. ER2
inhibited cell viability of H322, HCC827 and A549 cells in a dose-dependent
manner by inducing cell cycle arrest and apoptosis. Also, ER2 suppressed
EGF-stimulated VEGF production as efficiently as cetuximab in H322, HCC827 and
A549 cells. Moreover, ER2 alone and in combination with cisplatin showed a
significant anti-tumor efficacy in xenograft mouse models.
CONCLUSION: Taken together, ER2 has significant anti-tumor activity in in vitro
and in vivo NSCLC models, suggesting a rationale for clinical development of ER2 
in NSCLC.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2016.02.013 
PMID: 27040853  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Rinsho Byori. 2015 Nov;63(11):1310-5.

[Companion Diagnostics for Solid Tumors].

[Article in Japanese]

Watanabe A.

Companion diagnostics (CoDx) will likely continue to rapidly increase in number
and application to disease areas including solid tumors, for example EGFR for
gefitinib and ALK fusion gene for crizotinib in non-small-cell lung cancer; KRAS 
against the use of cetuximab and panitumumab in colorectal cancer; HER2 for
trastuzumab in breast cancer. CoDx are an indispensable part of personalized
medicine and pharmacogenomics. In CoDx development, there are still many
challenges, such as the business model promoting cooperation between diagnostics 
and pharmaceutical companies, and also the regulations related to CoDx. The FDA
notice on the development of CoDx in 2011 recommended the co-development of a new
drug and CoDx as the best practice, and the Ministry of Health, Labour and
Welfare in Japan also issued a statement in 2013. In addition, the recent
discovery of many novel variants in the DNA sequence, advances in sequencing and 
genomic technology, and improved analytic methods have enabled the impact of
germline and somatic mutations to be determined using multiplex diagnosis. The
complex challenges to develop CoDx necessitate a close collaboration among
academic institutions, regulatory authorities, and pharmaceutical companies.
[Review].


PMID: 26995877  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Cancer Metastasis Rev. 2016 Mar;35(1):141-50. doi: 10.1007/s10555-016-9612-6.

Personalized treatment of advanced non-small-cell lung cancer in routine clinical
practice.

Pirker R(1), Filipits M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine I, Medical University of Vienna, Währinger Gürtel
18-20, 1090, Vienna, Austria. robert.pirker@meduniwien.ac.at. (2)Department of
Medicine I, Medical University of Vienna, Währinger Gürtel 18-20, 1090, Vienna,
Austria.

Personalized treatment of patients with advanced non-small-cell lung cancer based
on clinical and molecular tumor features has entered clinical routine practice.
The 2015 pathological classification of lung cancer mandates immunohistochemical 
and molecular analysis. Therapeutic strategies focused on inhibition of
angiogenesis and growth factor receptor signaling. Inhibitors of angiogenesis and
monoclonal antibodies directed against the epidermal growth factor receptor have 
shown efficacy in combination with chemotherapy. Mutations in the epidermal
growth factor receptor and anaplastic lymphoma kinase have become clinically
relevant therapeutic targets. Immune checkpoint inhibitors are also entering
routine clinical practice. Identification of predictive biomarkers is essential
and faces several challenges including tumor heterogeneity and dynamic changes of
tumor features over time. Liquid biopsies may overcome some of these challenges
in the future.

DOI: 10.1007/s10555-016-9612-6 
PMCID: PMC4821865
PMID: 26970967  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Transl Lung Cancer Res. 2016 Feb;5(1):126-33. doi:
10.3978/j.issn.2218-6751.2016.01.07.

Dose escalation for unresectable locally advanced non-small cell lung cancer: end
of the line?

Hong JC(1), Salama JK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Duke University, Durham, NC, USA.

Radiation Therapy Oncology Group (RTOG) 0617 was a randomized trial that
investigated both the impact of radiation dose-escalation and the addition of
cetuximab on the treatment of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). The results of 
RTOG 0617 were surprising, with the dose escalation randomization being closed
prematurely due to futility stopping rules, and cetuximab ultimately showing no
overall survival benefit. Locally advanced unresectable NSCLC has conventionally 
been treated with concurrent chemoradiation. Though advances in treatment
technology have improved the ability to deliver adequate treatment dose, the
foundation for radiotherapy (RT) has remained the same since the 1980s. Since
then, progressive studies have sought to establish the safety and efficacy of
escalating radiation dose to loco-regional disease. Though RTOG 0617 did not
produce the anticipated result, much interest remains in dose escalation and
establishing an explanation for the findings of this study. Cetuximab was also
not found to provide a survival benefit when applied to an unselected population.
However, planned retrospective analysis suggests that those patients with high
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) expression may benefit, suggesting that
cetuximab should be applied in a targeted fashion. We discuss the results of RTOG
0617 and additional findings from post-hoc analysis that suggest that dose
escalation may be limited by normal tissue toxicity. We also present ongoing
studies that aim to address potential causes for mortality in the dose escalation
arm through adaptive or proton therapy, and are also leveraging additional
concurrent systemic agents such as tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) for
EGFR-activating mutations or EML4-ALK rearrangements, and poly (ADP-ribose)
polymerase (PARP) inhibitors.

DOI: 10.3978/j.issn.2218-6751.2016.01.07 
PMCID: PMC4758964
PMID: 26958507  [PubMed]


23. Expert Opin Biol Ther. 2016 Jun;16(6):747-58. doi: 10.1517/14712598.2016.1163333.
Epub 2016 Mar 22.

Anti-EGFR and antiangiogenic monoclonal antibodies in metastatic non-small-cell
lung cancer.

Losanno T(1), Rossi A(2), Maione P(2), Napolitano A(3), Gridelli C(2).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Experimental Medicine , University 'Sapienza' , Rome , Italy. 
(2)b Division of Medical Oncology , S.G. Moscati Hospital , Avellino , Italy.
(3)c Division of Pharmacy , S.G. Moscati Hospital , Avellino , Italy.

INTRODUCTION: In recent years, several clinical trials have evaluated the
efficacy and safety of biological therapies in lung cancer. Epidermal growth
factor receptor (EGFR) and the axis vascular endothelial growth factor receptor
(VEGF/VEGFR) are targeted by small molecules and monoclonal antibodies (mAbs),
especially in non-squamous non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC).
AREAS COVERED: The current state of the art of anti-EGFR and antiangiogenic
monoclonal antibodies in metastatic NSCLC is reviewed and discussed.
EXPERT OPINION: Bevacizumab and cetuximab are the most studied mAbs in NSCLC, but
only bevacizumab is in clinical practice in the first-line setting. Necitumumab
is a new anti-EGFR monoclonal antibody that improves survival when combined to
cisplatin/gemcitabine chemotherapy and has been approved in first-line advanced
NSCLC. Ramucirumab, an antiangiogenic drug binding with high affinity to VEGFR-2,
improves the results of chemotherapy alone when administered with docetaxel and
has been approved in second-line setting. Moreover, the novel combination of
bevacizumab and erlotinib is very promising for the treatment of patients with
NSCLC harbouring EGFR mutations. The association of antiangiogenic mAbs and
immunotherapy is under investigation too.

DOI: 10.1517/14712598.2016.1163333 
PMID: 26950292  [PubMed - in process]


24. Clin Lung Cancer. 2016 Sep;17(5):375-383.e2. doi: 10.1016/j.cllc.2016.01.002.
Epub 2016 Jan 22.

Cetuximab Inhibits T790M-Mediated Resistance to Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor 
Tyrosine Kinase Inhibitor in a Lung Adenocarcinoma Patient-Derived Xenograft
Mouse Model.

Martin P(1), Stewart E(2), Pham NA(3), Mascaux C(1), Panchal D(3), Li M(3), Kim
L(3), Sakashita S(4), Wang D(3), Sykes J(3), Friess T(5), Shepherd FA(1), Liu
G(1), Tsao MS(6).

Author information: 
(1)Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, University Health Network, Toronto, Ontario, 
Canada; Department of Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. 
(2)Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, University Health Network, Toronto, Ontario, 
Canada; Department of Medical Biophysics, University of Toronto, Toronto,
Ontario, Canada. (3)Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, University Health Network,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada. (4)Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, University Health
Network, Toronto, Ontario, Canada; Department of Laboratory Medicine and
Pathobiology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. (5)Department of
Pharmacology, Roche Diagnostics GmbH, Mannheim, Germany. (6)Princess Margaret
Cancer Centre, University Health Network, Toronto, Ontario, Canada; Department of
Medical Biophysics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada; Department
of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada. Electronic address: Ming.Tsao@uhn.ca.

BACKGROUND: The epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) kinase domain T790M
(amino acid substitution at position 790 in EGFR from threonine [T] to methionine
[M]) mutation in non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) results in resistance to EGFR
tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs). We used a patient-derived tumor xenograft
(PDX) model containing an EGFR exon 19 deletion/T790M mutation to assess response
to the EGFR-directed antibody cetuximab. Changes in the EGFR signaling pathway
and ligand expression after treatment were investigated.
METHODS: PDX were randomized into control and treatment arms. Pharmacodynamic
studies were performed at 2 and 24 hours and at 4 days after a single
administration of cetuximab, erlotinib, or dacomitinib. Changes in the EGFR
signaling pathway were assessed using Western blot analysis, and baseline mRNA
expression of EGFR ligands using microarray analysis. Relative changes after
treatment were assessed using quantitative polymerase chain reaction.
RESULTS: The xenograft showed a dramatic response to cetuximab. A complete
reduction of total EGFR and phosphorylated EGFR occurred after cetuximab
treatment. The PDX had increased baseline levels of heparin-binding epidermal
growth factor-like growth factor (HB-EGF) compared with other PDX models with or 
without EGFR mutations. Amphiregulin was significantly reduced 2 hours after
treatment with cetuximab. Compared with control mice, cetuximab- and
EGFR-TKI-treated mice had significantly reduced HB-EGF gene expression at 2
hours, however, by day 4 the level of HB-EGF expression was higher. The effect of
cetuximab compared with EGFR TKI on HB-EGF gene expression levels differed
significantly at 2 and 24 hours but not at 4 days.
CONCLUSION: We showed a dramatic tumor response with cetuximab in an exon 19
deletion/T790M EGFR mutant lung adenocarcinoma PDX model, which suggests a role
for the autocrine feedback loop in the mutant EGFR signaling pathway. Further
investigation using cetuximab in NSCLC with T790M mutation is warranted.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cllc.2016.01.002 
PMID: 26926157  [PubMed - in process]


25. J Thorac Dis. 2016 Jan;8(1):98-115. doi: 10.3978/j.issn.2072-1439.2016.01.28.

Targeted drugs for unselected patients with advanced non-small-cell lung cancer: 
a network meta-analysis.

Sheng M(1), Zhao Y(1), Wang F(1), Li S(1), Wang X(1), Shou T(1), Luo Y(1), Tang
W(1).

Author information: 
(1)1 Laboratory of Molecular Genetics of Aging & Tumor, Medical Faculty, Kunming 
University of Science and Technology, Kunming 650500, China ; 2 First People's
Hospital of Yunnan Province, Kunming 650032, China.

BACKGROUND: Currently, targeted therapy has shown encouraging treatment benefits 
in selected patients with advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). However,
the comparative benefits of targeted drugs and chemotherapy (CT) treatments in
unselected patients are not clear. We therefore conduct a network meta-analysis
to assess the relative efficacy and safety of these regimens.
METHODS: PubMed, EMBASE, Cochrane Library and abstracts from major scientific
meetings were searched for eligible literatures. The odds ratio (OR) for
objective response rate (ORR) and safety was used for pooling effect sizes.
Bayesian network meta-analysis was conducted to calculate the efficacy and safety
of all included treatments. All tests of statistical significance were two sided.
RESULTS: A total of 13,060 patients from 24 randomized controlled trials (RCT)
were assessed. The targeted agents included bevacizumab (Bev), gefitinib (Gef),
erlotinib (Erl) and cetuximab (Cet). Network meta-analysis showed that Bev + CT
had a statistically significantly higher incidence of ORR relative to the other
six different treatments, including placebo (OR =6.47; 95% CI, 3.85-10.29), Erl
(OR =2.81; 95% CI, 2.08-3.70), CT (OR =1.92; 95% CI, 1.61-2.28), Gef (OR =1.40;
95% CI, 1.10-1.75), Erl + CT (OR =1.46; 95% CI, 1.17-1.80) and Gef + CT (OR
=1.75; 95% CI, 1.36-2.22), whereas placebo and Erl were associated with
statistically significantly lower incidence of ORR. Trend analyses of rank
probability revealed that Bev + CT had the highest probability of being the best 
treatment arm in term of ORR, followed by Cet + CT. Meanwhile, Cet + CT showed
significant severer rash and thrombocytopenia compared with Bev + CT. Gef was
probable to be the rank 3 for ORR but was associated with relatively low risk for
grade ≥3 toxicities.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study suggested that Bev + CT may offer better ORR in the
treatment of unselected patients with advanced NSCLC. Future studies will be
needed to investigate whether the increase of ORR with targeted drugs would be
translated into survival benefits.

DOI: 10.3978/j.issn.2072-1439.2016.01.28 
PMCID: PMC4740157
PMID: 26904218  [PubMed]


26. Radiother Oncol. 2016 Mar;118(3):442-6. doi: 10.1016/j.radonc.2016.02.011. Epub
2016 Feb 15.

Long-term follow-up of patients with locally advanced non-small cell lung cancer 
receiving concurrent hypofractionated chemoradiotherapy with or without
cetuximab.

Walraven I(1), van den Heuvel M(2), van Diessen J(1), Schaake E(1), Uyterlinde
W(2), Aerts J(3), Koppe F(4), Codrington H(5), Kunst P(6), Dieleman E(7), van de 
Vaart P(8), Verheij M(1), Belderbos J(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, The Netherlands Cancer Institute - Antoni
van Leeuwenhoek Hospital, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. (2)Department of Thoracic
Oncology, The Netherlands Cancer Institute - Antoni van Leeuwenhoek Hospital,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands. (3)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Amphia Hospital,
Breda, The Netherlands; Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Erasmus Medical Center,
Rotterdam, The Netherlands. (4)Department of Radiation Oncology, Verbeeten
Institute, Tilburg, The Netherlands. (5)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Haga
Hospital, The Hague, The Netherlands. (6)Department of Pulmonary Medicine,
Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. (7)Department of Radiation
Oncology, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. (8)Department of
Radiation Oncology, MC Haaglanden, The Hague, The Netherlands. (9)Department of
Radiation Oncology, The Netherlands Cancer Institute - Antoni van Leeuwenhoek
Hospital, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. Electronic address: j.belderbos@nki.nl.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Radiation dose escalation using hypofractionation might
improve overall survival (OS). We investigated OS in a phase II multicenter study
in locally advanced non-small cell lung cancer (LA-NSCLC) patients treated with
hypofractionated concurrent chemoradiotherapy.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A 2-armed phase II, multi-center study (NTR2230) was
performed with the aim to assess the effect of cetuximab to concurrent
chemoradiotherapy in LA-NSCLC patients (stage II/IIIA/B). Arm A received high
dose radiotherapy (24 × 2.75 Gy) and concurrent daily low-dose cisplatin (6
mg/m(2)). Arm B received an identical treatment regimen with additional weekly
cetuximab. Kaplan-Meier survival curves and 1-, 2- and 5-year OS proportions were
calculated.
RESULTS: Between February 2009 and May 2011, 102 patients were randomly allocated
in two arms. Median OS was 31.5 months (range 12.8-52.3), not significantly
different between arms A and B; 33.0 (range 17.0-57.0) and 30.0 (11.0-52.0)
months. 1-, 2- and 5-year OS rates were 74.5%, 59.4% and 37.3%, respectively. In 
multivariate analyses, worse performance score, V35 of the esophagus and the
existence of comorbidities were significantly (P-value<0.05) associated with a
shorter OS.
DISCUSSION: In this phase II trial, the median OS for the entire group was
remarkably high; 31.5 months. Furthermore, 5-year OS was still 37.3%.
Hypofractionation might contribute to improved OS in LA-NSCLC patients.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.radonc.2016.02.011 
PMID: 26900091  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Int J Cancer. 2016 Jul 1;139(1):171-6. doi: 10.1002/ijc.30047. Epub 2016 Mar 25.

NSCLC harboring EGFR exon-20 insertions after the regulatory C-helix of kinase
domain responds poorly to known EGFR inhibitors.

Yang M(1), Xu X(1), Cai J(1), Ning J(1), Wery JP(1), Li QX(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Crown Bioscience, Inc, 3375 Scott Blvd, Suite 108, Santa Clara, CA. (2)State
Key Laboratory of Natural and Biomimetic Drugs, Peking University, Beijing,
China.

Anecdote clinical observations hint that non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) with 
exon-20 insertions might respond poorly to epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR) tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs), contrasting to those with classic
mutations. Lack of patient-derived experimental models has been a major hurdle
for the discovery of new treatment for the diseases. We established two
NSCLC-PDXs harboring two different exon-20 insertions, LU0387-adenocarcinoma
(ADC) with a nine-base insertion at 2319 (H773-V774insNPH) and LU3075-squamous
cell carcinoma (SCC) with a nine-base insertion at 2316 (P772-H773insDNP). Both
insertions immediately follow the regulatory C-helix of the kinase domain.
Contrary to the generally good responses to EGFR inhibitors observed in PDXs with
classic mutations, both exon-20 insertions are largely resistant to cetuximab and
TKIs in vivo, suggesting fundamental difference from the classic EGFR mutations, 
consistent with the poor response rate to TKI seen in anecdotal clinic reports.
It is worth noting that although responses are generally poor, they differ
between the two exon-20 mutants depending on the type of TKI. In vitro drug
sensitivity assays using established primary cell lines from our two PDXs largely
confirmed the in vivo data. Our data from patient-derived experimental models
confirmed that exon-20 insertions in domain immediately following the C-helix
confer poor response to all known EGFR inhibitors, and suggested that these
models can be utilized to facilitate the discovery of new therapies targeting
NSCLC harboring exon-20 insertions.

© 2016 UICC.

DOI: 10.1002/ijc.30047 
PMID: 26891175  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Int J Oncol. 2016 Apr;48(4):1325-32. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2016.3369. Epub 2016 Feb 2.

PET imaging of epidermal growth factor receptor expression in tumours using
89Zr-labelled ZEGFR:2377 affibody molecules.

Garousi J(1), Andersson KG(2), Mitran B(3), Pichl ML(1), Ståhl S(2), Orlova A(3),
Löfblom J(2), Tolmachev V(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Immunology, Genetic and Pathology, Uppsala University, SE-75185
Uppsala, Sweden. (2)Division of Protein Technology, KTH Royal Institute of
Technology, SE-10691 Stockholm, Sweden. (3)Division of Molecular Imaging,
Department of Medicinal Chemistry, Uppsala University, SE-751 83 Uppsala, Sweden.

Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is a transmembrane tyrosine kinase
receptor, which is overexpressed in many types of cancer. The use of
EGFR-targeting monoclonal antibodies and tyrosine-kinase inhibitors improves
significantly survival of patients with colorectal, non-small cell lung cancer
and head and neck squamous cell carcinoma. Detection of EGFR overexpression
provides important prognostic and predictive information influencing management
of the patients. The use of radionuclide molecular imaging would enable
non-invasive repeatable determination of EGFR expression in disseminated cancer. 
Moreover, positron emission tomography (PET) would provide superior sensitivity
and quantitation accuracy in EGFR expression imaging. Affibody molecules are a
new type of imaging probes, providing high contrast in molecular imaging. In the 
present study, an EGFR-binding affibody molecule (ZEGFR:2377) was
site-specifically conjugated with a deferoxamine (DFO) chelator and labelled
under mild conditions (room temperature and neutral pH) with a positron-emitting 
radionuclide (89)Zr. The (89)Zr-DFO-ZEGFR:2377 tracer demonstrated specific high 
affinity (160 ± 60 pM) binding to EGFR-expressing A431 epidermoid carcinoma cell 
line. In mice bearing A431 xenografts, (89)Zr-DFO-ZEGFR:2377 demonstrated
specific uptake in tumours and EGFR-expressing tissues. The tracer provided
tumour uptake of 2.6 ± 0.5% ID/g and tumour-to-blood ratio of 3.7 ± 0.6 at 24 h
after injection. (89)Zr-DFO-ZEGFR:2377 provides higher tumour-to-organ ratios
than anti-EGFR antibody (89)Zr-DFO-cetuximab at 48 h after injection.
EGFR‑expressing tumours were clearly visualized by microPET using
(89)Zr-DFO-ZEGFR:2377 at both 3 and 24 h after injection. In conclusion,
8(9)Zr-DFO-ZEGFR:2377 is a potential probe for PET imaging of EGFR-expression in 
vivo.

DOI: 10.3892/ijo.2016.3369 
PMCID: PMC4777594
PMID: 26847636  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. PLoS One. 2016 Jan 11;11(1):e0146575. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0146575.
eCollection 2016.

Inhibitory Activity of (+)-Usnic Acid against Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer Cell
Motility.

Yang Y(1), Nguyen TT(1,)(2), Jeong MH(1), Crişan F(3), Yu YH(4), Ha HH(4), Choi
KH(4), Jeong HG(5), Jeong TC(6), Lee KY(7), Kim KK(8), Hur JS(1), Kim H(4).

Author information: 
(1)Korean Lichen Research Institute, Sunchon National University, Sunchon,
Republic of Korea. (2)Faculty of Natural Science and Technology, Tay Nguyen
University, Buon Ma Thuot, Vietnam. (3)Department of Taxonomy and Ecology,
Faculty of Biology and Geology, Babeș-Bolyai University, Cluj-Napoca, Romania.
(4)College of Pharmacy and Research Institute of Life and Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Sunchon National University, Sunchon, Republic of Korea. (5)College of 
Pharmacy, Chungnam National University, Daejeon, Republic of Korea. (6)College of
Pharmacy, Yeungnam University, Gyeongsan, Korea. (7)College of Pharmacy, Chonnam 
National University, Gwangju, Korea. (8)Medical Research Center for Gene
Regulation, Chonnam National University Medical School, Gwangju, Republic of
Korea.

Lichens are symbiotic organisms that produce various unique chemicals that can be
used for pharmaceutical purposes. With the aim of screening new anti-cancer
agents that inhibit cancer cell motility, we tested the inhibitory activity of
seven lichen species collected from the Romanian Carpathian Mountains against
migration and invasion of human lung cancer cells and further investigated the
molecular mechanisms underlying their anti-metastatic activity. Among them,
Alectoria samentosa, Flavocetraria nivalis, Alectoria ochroleuca, and Usnea
florida showed significant inhibitory activity against motility of human lung
cancer cells. HPLC results showed that usnic acid is the main compound in these
lichens, and (+)-usnic acid showed similar inhibitory activity that crude extract
have. Mechanistically, β-catenin-mediated TOPFLASH activity and KITENIN-mediated 
AP-1 activity were decreased by (+)-usnic acid treatment in a dose-dependent
manner. The quantitative real-time PCR data showed that (+)-usnic acid decreased 
the mRNA level of CD44, Cyclin D1 and c-myc, which are the downstream target
genes of both β-catenin/LEF and c-jun/AP-1. Also, Rac1 and RhoA activities were
decreased by treatment with (+)-usnic acid. Interestingly, higher inhibitory
activity for cell invasion was observed when cells were treated with (+)-usnic
acid and cetuximab. These results implied that (+)-usnic acid might have
potential activity in inhibition of cancer cell metastasis, and (+)-usnic acid
could be used for anti-cancer therapy with a distinct mechanisms of action.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0146575 
PMCID: PMC4708991
PMID: 26751081  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Mol Pharm. 2016 Feb 1;13(2):689-97. doi: 10.1021/acs.molpharmaceut.5b00927. Epub 
2015 Dec 29.

Enhanced Antitumor Activity of Cetuximab in Combination with the Jak Inhibitor
CYT387 against Non-Small-Cell Lung Cancer with Various Genotypes.

Hu Y(1), Dong XZ(1), Liu X(1), Liu P(1), Chen YB(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacology, Pharmacy Care Center, Chinese PLA General
Hospital , Beijing 100853, China. (2)Department of Pharmacology and System
Therapeutics, Mount Sinai School of Medicine ; New York, New York 10029, United
States.

Cetuximab, an epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) inhibitor, is effective in 
the treatment of non-small-cell lung cancers (NSCLCs). However, resistance to
EGFR inhibitors limits its effectiveness. In this study, we investigated the
effectiveness of Jak-2 inhibitor, CYT387, in combination with cetuximab.
Xenograft animal models were administered with cetuximab or CYT387 or their
combination. It was observed that NSCLC cells exhibited enormous differences in
responses to cetuximab; cell lines were more intrinsically resistant to
cetuximab. In resistant cell lines (H1975 and H1650), the efficacy of cetuximab
was increased when combined with CYT387, whereas CYT387 alone in low doses
exhibited little effect on NSCLC cell proliferation. In addition, the antitumor
activity of cetuximab was increased in H1975 resistant model in spite of low
efficacy of cetuximab treatment alone in. Jak/STAT signaling was suppressed
effectively by the combination of cetuximab and CYT387. In summary, our findings 
indicated that CYT387 has a potent indirect antitumor activity, and it is also
synergistic in its activity in combination with cetuximab against NSCLC tumors,
especially with cetuximab intrinsic-resistance tumors. These indications were
mediated via Janus kinase (Jak)-signal transducer and transcription (STAT)
pathway activator. Our results strongly and consistently supported the potential 
synergism of CYT387 as Jak inhibitor for anti-NSCLC therapy with EGFR-targeting
agents.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.molpharmaceut.5b00927 
PMID: 26685983  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Invest New Drugs. 2016 Apr;34(2):168-75. doi: 10.1007/s10637-015-0314-7. Epub
2015 Dec 14.

A phase I study of selumetinib (AZD6244/ARRY-142866), a MEK1/2 inhibitor, in
combination with cetuximab in refractory solid tumors and KRAS mutant colorectal 
cancer.

Deming DA(1), Cavalcante LL(2), Lubner SJ(2), Mulkerin DL(2), LoConte NK(2),
Eickhoff JC(2), Kolesar JM(2), Fioravanti S(3), Greten TF(3), Compton K(3), Doyle
AG(4), Wilding G(2), Duffy A(3), Liu G(2).

Author information: 
(1)University of Wisconsin-Madison Carbone Cancer Center, 600 Highland Avenue,
K6/544 CSC, Madison, WI, 53792, USA. ddeming@medicine.wisc.edu. (2)University of 
Wisconsin-Madison Carbone Cancer Center, 600 Highland Avenue, K6/544 CSC,
Madison, WI, 53792, USA. (3)National Cancer Institute/Medical Oncology Branch,
Bethesda, MD, USA. (4)Cancer Therapy Evaluation Program, National Cancer
Institute, Bethesda, MD, USA.

BACKGROUND: KRAS mutations are clinically important predictors of resistance to
EGFR-directed therapies in colorectal cancer (CRC). Oncogenic activation of the
RAS/RAF/MEK/ERK signaling cascade mediates proliferation independent of growth
factor signaling. We hypothesized that targeting MEK with selumetinib could
overcome resistance to cetuximab in KRAS mutant CRC.
METHODS: A phase I study (NCT01287130) was undertaken to determine the
tolerability, and pharmacokinetic profiles of the combination of selumetinib and 
cetuximab, with an expanded cohort in KRAS-mutant CRC.
RESULTS: 15 patients were treated in the dose escalation cohort and 18 patients
were treated in the expansion cohort. Two dose-limiting toxicities were observed.
One grade 3 acneiform rash and one grade 4 hypomagnesemia occurred. The most
common grade 1 and 2 adverse events included rash, nausea/vomiting, diarrhea, and
fatigue. The maximum tolerated dose was established at selumetinib 75 mg p.o. BID
and cetuximab 250 mg/m(2) weekly following a 400 mg/m(2) load. Best clinical
response in the dose escalation group included 1 unconfirmed partial response in 
a patient with CRC and stable disease (SD) in 5 patients (1 squamous cell
carcinoma of the tonsil, 1 non-small cell lung cancer, and 3 CRC), and in the
KRAS-mutant CRC dose expansion cohort, of the 14 patients who were evaluable for 
response, 5 patients had SD and 9 patients had progressive disease.
CONCLUSIONS: The combination of selumetinib and cetuximab is safe and well
tolerated. Minimal anti-tumor activity was observed in KRAS-mutant refractory
metastatic CRC. Further investigations might be warranted in other cancer
subtypes.

DOI: 10.1007/s10637-015-0314-7 
PMCID: PMC4788533 [Available on 2017-04-01]
PMID: 26666244  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Clin Cancer Res. 2016 May 1;22(9):2167-76. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-15-2401.
Epub 2015 Dec 4.

Comparing Patient-Derived Xenograft and Computational Response Prediction for
Targeted Therapy in Patients of Early-Stage Large Cell Lung Cancer.

Li J(1), Ye C(2), Mansmann UR(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Medical Informatics, Biometry and Epidemiology,
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, Munich, Germany. German Cancer Consortium
(DKTK), Heidelberg, Germany. German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg,
Germany. lijian@ibe.med.uni-muenchen.de. (2)Medical Research Center of Yu Huang
Hospital, Yu Huang, Zhejiang, PR China. (3)Institute for Medical Informatics,
Biometry and Epidemiology, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, Munich,
Germany. German Cancer Consortium (DKTK), Heidelberg, Germany.

PURPOSE: Targeted therapy (TT) provides highly effective cancer treatment for
appropriately selected individuals. A major challenge of TT is to select patients
who would benefit most.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: The study uses cancer material from 25 patients primarily
diagnosed with non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Patient-derived xenografts
(PDXs) are treated with cetuximab and erlotinib. Treatment response is measured
by tumor shrinkage comparing tumor volume at day 25 (V25) with tumor volume at
baseline (V0). Shrinkage below 40% is considered as treatment response: V25/V0 < 
0.4 (<40%). Furthermore, RNA-seq data from each tumor sample are used to predict 
tumor response to either treatment using an in silico molecular signaling map
(MSM) approach.
RESULTS: PDX response was 40% (10/25; 95% CI [21.13%, 61.34%]) under cetuximab
and 20% (5/25; 95% CI [6.83%, 40.70%]) under erlotinib. MSM predicted response
was 48% (12/25; 95% CI [27.8%, 68.7%]) under cetuximab and 40% (10/25; 95% CI
[21.13%, 61.34%]) under erlotinib. Agreement between PDX and MSM response
prediction is substantial under cetuximab and erlotinib: 84% (21/25, P = 0.001)
and 80% (20/25, P = 0.003). A total of 5 from the 25 patients have been treated
with cetuximab showing a clinical response identical to both predictions.
CONCLUSIONS: For NSCLC patients, this proof-of-concept study shows a considerable
agreement in response prediction from MSM and PDX approaches, but MSM saves time 
and laboratory resources. Our result indicates the potential of MSM-based
approach for clinical decision making when selecting cancer TTs. Clin Cancer Res;
22(9); 2167-76. ©2015 AACR.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-15-2401 
PMID: 26637276  [PubMed - in process]


33. Int J Clin Exp Med. 2015 Sep 15;8(9):16140-8. eCollection 2015.

Cetuximab combined with chemotherapy is beneficial for patients with advanced
non-small cell lung cancer after EGFR-tyrosine kinase inhibitors failure.

Zhang F(1), Yu Y(2), Xing L(1), Chen M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, The Second Affiliated Hospital, Harbin
Medical University Harbin, China. (2)Department of Pediatric Surgery, The First
Affiliated Hospital, Harbin Medical University Harbin, China.

To determine if cetuximab combined with chemotherapy is beneficial for patients
with advanced NSCLC after failure of first-line chemotherapy and EGFR-tyrosine
kinase inhibitors (TKI). Twenty patients were treated with cetuximab in
combination with pemetrexed, and 14 patients were treated with cetuximab in
combination with docetaxel. Short-term response rates and long-term survival
after salvage therapy were evaluated. Partial response (PR) occurred in 4
patients, stable disease (SD) occurred in 13 patients, and progressive disease
(PD) occurred in 17 patients. No patient achieved a complete response (CR). The
objective response rate (ORR) was 11.8% (4/34) and the disease control rate (DCR)
was 50.0% (17/34). The disease progression rate (DPR) was 50% (17/34). Further
analyses showed that the DCR was significantly higher in patients treated with
EGFR-TKI for ≥6 months compared to patients treated with EGFR-TKI for <6 months
(P=0.031). The median follow-up time was 5.5 months. The median progression-free 
survival (PFS) was 4.1 months. PFS was significantly longer in patients treated
with EGFR-TKI for ≥ 6 months compared to those treated <6 months with EGFR-TKI
(5.9 vs. 3.0 months; P=0.004). In general, however, patients tolerated this
therapy well and there were no therapy-related deaths. As a salvage therapy,
cetuximab combined with chemotherapy is indeed beneficial for patients with
advanced NSCLC after first-line chemotherapy and subsequent EGFR-TKI treatment
failure. In particular, this salvage regimen is beneficial for patients who were 
treated with EGFR-TKI for ≥6 months, and is well tolerated in these patients.


PMCID: PMC4659016
PMID: 26629127  [PubMed]


34. JAMA Oncol. 2016 Mar;2(3):359-67. doi: 10.1001/jamaoncol.2015.3969.

Quality of Life Analysis of a Radiation Dose-Escalation Study of Patients With
Non-Small-Cell Lung Cancer: A Secondary Analysis of the Radiation Therapy
Oncology Group 0617 Randomized Clinical Trial.

Movsas B(1), Hu C(2), Sloan J(3), Bradley J(4), Komaki R(5), Masters G(6), Kavadi
V(7), Narayan S(8), Michalski J(4), Johnson DW(9), Koprowski C(10), Curran WJ
Jr(11), Garces YI(3), Gaur R(12), Wynn RB(13), Schallenkamp J(14), Gelblum
DY(15), MacRae RM(16), Paulus R(17), Choy H(18).

Author information: 
(1)Henry Ford Hospital, Detroit, Michigan. (2)NRG Oncology Statistics and Data
Management Center, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania3Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer 
Center, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland. (3)Mayo Clinic, Rochester,
Minnesota. (4)Washington University, St Louis, Missouri. (5)MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, Texas. (6)Helen F. Graham Cancer Center, Christiana Care Health 
System, Newark, Delaware. (7)USON Texas Oncology Cancer Center, Sugar Land.
(8)Michigan Cancer Research Consortium, Community Clinical Oncology Program
(CCOP), Ann Arbor. (9)Florida Radiation Oncology Group/Baptist Regional Cancer
Institute, Jacksonville. (10)Helen F. Graham Cancer Center, Christiana Care
Health System and Christiana Care CCOP, Newark, Delaware. (11)Emory University,
Atlanta, Georgia. (12)Kansas City CCOP, Prairie Village, Kansas. (13)UPMC Cancer 
Center, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. (14)Montana Cancer Consortium CCOP, Billings.
(15)Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York. (16)The Ottawa
Hospital Cancer Centre, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada. (17)NRG Oncology Statistics and 
Data Management Center, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. (18)University of Texas
Southwestern Medical School, Dallas.

Comment in
    JAMA Oncol. 2016 Mar;2(3):368-9.
    JAMA Oncol. 2016 Mar;2(3):367-8.

IMPORTANCE: A recent randomized radiation dose-escalation trial in unresectable
stage III non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) (Radiation Therapy Oncology Group
[RTOG] 0617) showed a lower survival rate in the high-dose radiation therapy (RT)
arm (74 Gy) than in the low-dose arm (60 Gy) with concurrent chemotherapy.
OBJECTIVE: The primary QOL hypothesis predicted a clinically meaningful decline
in quality of life (QOL) via the Functional Assessment of Cancer Therapy
(FACT)-Lung Cancer Subscale (LCS) in the high-dose RT arm at 3 months.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PATIENTS: The RTOG 0617 trial was a randomized phase 3 study
(conducted from November 2007 to November 2011) in stage III NSCLC using a 2 × 2 
factorial design and stratified by histology, positron emission tomography
staging, performance status, and irradiation technique (3-dimensional conformal
RT [3D-CRT] vs intensity-modulated RT [IMRT]). A total of 185 institutions in the
United States and Canada took part. Of 424 eligible patients with stage III NSCLC
randomized, 360 (85%) consented to QOL evaluation, of whom 313 (88%) completed
baseline QOL assessments.
INTERVENTION: Treatment with 74-Gy vs 60-Gy RT with concurrent and consolidation 
carboplatin/paclitaxel with or without cetuximab.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: The QOL data were collected prospectively via FACT
Trial Outcome Index (FACT-TOI), calculated as the sum of the following measures: 
Physical Well Being (PWB), Functional Well Being (FWB), and the LCS. Data are
presented at baseline and 3 and 12 months via minimal clinically meaningful
changes of 2 points or more for PWB, FWB, and LCS or 5 points or more for TOI.
RESULTS: Of the 313 patients who completed baseline QOL assessments, 219 patients
(70%) completed the 3-month QOL assessments, and 137 of the living patients (57%)
completed the 12-month assessment. Patient demographics and baseline QOL scores
were comparable between the 74-Gy and 60-Gy arms. Significantly more patients in 
the 74-Gy arm than in the 60-Gy arm had clinically meaningful decline in FACT-LCS
at 3 months (45% vs 30%; P = .02). At 12 months, fewer patients who received IMRT
(vs 3D-CRT) had clinically meaningful decline in FACT-LCS (21% vs 46%; P = .003).
Baseline FACT-TOI was associated with overall survival in multivariate analysis.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Despite few differences in clinician-reported toxic
effects between treatment arms, QOL analysis demonstrated a clinically meaningful
decline in QOL in the 74-Gy arm at 3 months, confirming the primary QOL
hypothesis. Baseline QOL was an independent prognostic factor for survival.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: clinicaltrials.gov Identifier: NCT00533949.

DOI: 10.1001/jamaoncol.2015.3969 
PMCID: PMC4786463
PMID: 26606200  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Curr Cancer Drug Targets. 2015;15(9):792-802.

Role of EGFR Monoclonal Antibodies in the Management of Non-small Cell Lung
Cancer.

Takeda M(1), Nakagawa K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Kinki University Faculty of Medicine, 377-2
Ohno-higashi, Osaka-Sayama, Osaka 589-8511, Japan. takedamasa2004@yahoo.co.jp.

Dysregulation of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) signaling due to
receptor overexpression or activating mutation is associated with cancer cell
proliferation, metastasis, and survival. EGFR has become an important therapeutic
target for non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), and several EGFR-targeted agents, 
such as tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) and monoclonal antibodies (mAbs), have 
been developed. The EGFR-TKIs gefitinib, erlotinib, and afatinib have been
approved for the treatment of advanced NSCLC, and sensitivity to these drugs has 
been shown to be associated with the presence of EGFR mutations. Various mAbs to 
EGFR have also been evaluated in preclinical and clinical studies. In particular,
phase III trials have shown a clinically significant survival benefit for
addition of the anti-EGFR mAbs cetuximab or necitumumab to a platinum doublet in 
chemotherapy-naïve patients with advanced NSCLC. We here summarize the results of
completed and ongoing clinical trials of EGFR-targeted mAbs for the treatment of 
NSCLC.


PMID: 26567882  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Klin Onkol. 2015;28(5):321-31.

Combining Systemic Therapies with Radiation in Non small Cell Lung Cancer.

Adamowicz K, Goszczynska-Matysiak E.

Radiotherapy has been the mainstay of treatment of stage III nonsmall cell lung
cancer patients. In the early 90s, combined treatment with chemotherapy was
introduced. In 1995, a meta-analysis showed improved treatment outcome of the
sequential use of cisplatin-based chemotherapy and radiotherapy compared to
radiotherapy alone. Subsequent randomized studies and two meta-analyses
demonstrated that concurrent radiochemotherapy is superior (local control and
overall survival) to sequential usage of both method. However, several questions 
remain unanswered concerning the optimal chemotherapy regimen and radiotherapy
doses and techniques in terms of treatment outcome and toxicity profile. Targeted
therapies represent a new class of drugs, which interfere with specific molecular
targets (typically proteins) playing critical roles in tumor growth and
progression. Some combinations appear to be too toxic, such as the vascular
epithelial growth factor antibody bevacizumab. The feasibility of adding the
epidermal growth factor receptor inhibitor cetuximab has been recently reported
for nonsmall cell lung cancer patients. Strategies to incorporate safely novel
antiangiogenic agents into combined- modality therapy in lung cancer are needed. 
Hopefully, rapid development of molecular oncology will contribute to better
patient selection to particular strategies and to treatment optimization.
Increasing radiotherapy doses applied according to up -to -date techniques and
combinations with new biologicals might lead to further treatment improvements.


PMID: 26480859  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Oncotarget. 2015 Sep 22;6(28):26090-103. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.4636.

Src inhibitors act through different mechanisms in Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer
models depending on EGFR and RAS mutational status.

Formisano L(1), D'Amato V(1), Servetto A(1), Brillante S(1), Raimondo L(1), Di
Mauro C(1), Marciano R(1), Orsini RC(1), Cosconati S(2), Randazzo A(3), Parsons
SJ(4), Montuori N(5), Veneziani BM(6), De Placido S(1), Rosa R(1), Bianco R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Medicine and Surgery, University of Naples "Federico
II", Naples, Italy. (2)DiSTABiF, Second University of Naples, Caserta, Italy.
(3)Department of Pharmacy, University of Naples "Federico II", Naples, Italy.
(4)Department of Microbiology, Immunology & Cancer Biology, Cancer Center,
University of Virginia Health System, Charlottesville, Virginia, USA.
(5)Department of Translational Medical Sciences, University of Naples Federico
II, Naples, Italy. (6)Department of Molecular Medicine and Medical
Biotechnologies, University of Naples "Federico II", Naples, Italy.

Resistance to the EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) gefitinib and erlotinib,
often related to Ras or secondary EGFR mutations, is a relevant clinical issue in
Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer (NSCLC). Although Src TK has been involved in such
resistance, clinical development of its inhibitors has been so far limited. To
better define the molecular targets of the Src TKIs saracatinib, dasatinib and
bosutinib, we used a variety of in vitro/in vivo studies. Kinase assays supported
by docking analysis demonstrated that all the compounds directly inhibit EGFR TK 
variants. However, in live cells only saracatinib efficiently reduced EGFR
activation, while dasatinib was the most effective agent in inhibiting Src TK.
Consistently, a pronounced anti-proliferative effect was achieved with
saracatinib, in EGFR mutant cells, or with dasatinib, in wt EGFR/Ras mutant
cells, poorly dependent on EGFR and erlotinib-resistant. We then identified the
most effective drug combinations to overcome resistance to EGFR inhibitors, both 
in vitro and in nude mice: in T790M EGFR erlotinib-resistant cells, saracatinib
with the anti-EGFR mAb cetuximab; in Ras mutant erlotinib-resistant models,
dasatinib with the MEK inhibitor selumetinib. Src inhibitors may act with
different mechanisms in NSCLCs, depending on EGFR/Ras mutational profile, and may
be integrated with EGFR or MEK inhibitors for different cohorts of NSCLCs.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.4636 
PMCID: PMC4694888
PMID: 26325669  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. N Engl J Med. 2015 Aug 20;373(8):726-36. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1502309.

Vemurafenib in Multiple Nonmelanoma Cancers with BRAF V600 Mutations.

Hyman DM(1), Puzanov I, Subbiah V, Faris JE, Chau I, Blay JY, Wolf J, Raje NS,
Diamond EL, Hollebecque A, Gervais R, Elez-Fernandez ME, Italiano A, Hofheinz RD,
Hidalgo M, Chan E, Schuler M, Lasserre SF, Makrutzki M, Sirzen F, Veronese ML,
Tabernero J, Baselga J.

Author information: 
(1)From Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York (D.M.H., E.L.D., J.B.); 
Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville (I.P., E.C.); University of Texas
M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston (V.S.); Massachusetts General Hospital,
Boston (J.E.F., N.S.R.); Royal Marsden Hospital, Sutton, Surrey, United Kingdom
(I.C.); Centre Léon Bérard, Lyon (J.-Y.B.), Institut Gustave Roussy, Villejuif
(A.H.), Centre François Baclesse, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Côte de Nacre,
Caen (R.G.), and Institut Bergonié Cancer Center, Bordeaux (A.I.) - all in
France; University Hospital of Cologne, Cologne (J.W.), Universitätsmedizin
Mannheim, Mannheim (R.-D.H.), West German Cancer Center, University Hospital
Essen, Essen (M.S.), and German Cancer Consortium, Heidelberg (M.S.) - all in
Germany; Vall d'Hebron University Hospital and Institute of Oncology, Universitat
Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona (M.E.E.-F., J.T.), and Hospital Universitario
Madrid Sanchinarro, Madrid (M.H.) - both in Spain; and F. Hoffmann-La Roche,
Basel, Switzerland (S.F.L., M.M., F.S., M.L.V.).

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2015 Aug 20;373(8):691-3.
    Cancer Discov. 2015 Nov;5(11):1117.

BACKGROUND: BRAF V600 mutations occur in various nonmelanoma cancers. We
undertook a histology-independent phase 2 "basket" study of vemurafenib in BRAF
V600 mutation-positive nonmelanoma cancers.
METHODS: We enrolled patients in six prespecified cancer cohorts; patients with
all other tumor types were enrolled in a seventh cohort. A total of 122 patients 
with BRAF V600 mutation-positive cancer were treated, including 27 patients with 
colorectal cancer who received vemurafenib and cetuximab. The primary end point
was the response rate; secondary end points included progression-free and overall
survival.
RESULTS: In the cohort with non-small-cell lung cancer, the response rate was 42%
(95% confidence interval [CI], 20 to 67) and median progression-free survival was
7.3 months (95% CI, 3.5 to 10.8). In the cohort with Erdheim-Chester disease or
Langerhans'-cell histiocytosis, the response rate was 43% (95% CI, 18 to 71); the
median treatment duration was 5.9 months (range, 0.6 to 18.6), and no patients
had disease progression during therapy. There were anecdotal responses among
patients with pleomorphic xanthoastrocytoma, anaplastic thyroid cancer,
cholangiocarcinoma, salivary-duct cancer, ovarian cancer, and clear-cell sarcoma 
and among patients with colorectal cancer who received vemurafenib and cetuximab.
Safety was similar to that in prior studies of vemurafenib for melanoma.
CONCLUSIONS: BRAF V600 appears to be a targetable oncogene in some, but not all, 
nonmelanoma cancers. Preliminary vemurafenib activity was observed in
non-small-cell lung cancer and in Erdheim-Chester disease and Langerhans'-cell
histiocytosis. The histologic context is an important determinant of response in 
BRAF V600-mutated cancers. (Funded by F. Hoffmann-La Roche/Genentech;
ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT01524978.).

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa1502309 
PMCID: PMC4971773
PMID: 26287849  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. BioDrugs. 2015 Jun;29(3):167-83. doi: 10.1007/s40259-015-0130-9.

Next-Generation Covalent Irreversible Kinase Inhibitors in NSCLC: Focus on
Afatinib.

Hirsh V(1).

Author information: 
(1)McGill Department of Oncology, Royal Victoria Hospital, 687 Pine Avenue W.,
Montreal, QC, H3A 1A1, Canada, vera.hirsh@muhc.mcgill.ca.

First-generation, reversible epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine
kinase inhibitors (TKIs), erlotinib and gefitinib, represented an important
addition to the treatment armamentarium for non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
patients with activating EGFR mutations. However, all patients inevitably develop
acquired resistance to these agents, primarily due to secondary EGFR mutations,
molecular aberrations affecting other signaling pathways, or transformation to
small-cell histology. It was hypothesized that development of second-generation
TKIs with broader inhibitory profiles could confer longer-lasting clinical
activity and overcome acquired resistance to first-generation inhibitors. Here,
we review the development of afatinib, an irreversible ErbB family blocker that
potently inhibits signaling of all homodimers and heterodimers formed by the
EGFR, human epidermal growth factor receptor (HER)-2, HER3, and HER4 receptors.
In two phase III trials in patients with EGFR mutation-positive NSCLC, first-line
afatinib significantly improved progression-free survival (PFS) and
health-related quality of life versus standard-of-care chemotherapy. Moreover, in
preplanned sub-analyses, afatinib significantly improved overall survival in
patients harboring EGFR Del19 mutations. Afatinib has also demonstrated clinical 
activity in NSCLC patients who had progressed on erlotinib/gefitinib,
particularly when combined with cetuximab, and offers 'treatment beyond
progression' benefit when combined with paclitaxel versus chemotherapy alone.
Furthermore, a recent phase III study demonstrated that PFS was significantly
improved with afatinib versus erlotinib for the second-line treatment of patients
with squamous cell carcinoma of the lung. The activity of afatinib in both
first-line and relapsed/refractory settings may reflect its ability to
irreversibly inhibit all ErbB family members. Afatinib has a well-defined safety 
profile with characteristic gastrointestinal (diarrhea, stomatitis) and cutaneous
(rash/acne) adverse events.

DOI: 10.1007/s40259-015-0130-9 
PMCID: PMC4488453
PMID: 26123538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Bull Cancer. 2015 Jun;102(6 Suppl 1):S27-33. doi: 10.1016/S0007-4551(15)31215-7.

[Resistances to targeted therapies and strategy for following therapeutic lines
in metastatic NSCLC].

[Article in French]

Brosseau S(1), Oulkhouir Y(2), Naltet C(2), Zalcman G(3).

Author information: 
(1)Service de pneumologie et oncologie thoracique, Université de Caen-Basse
Normandie, Hôpital de la Côte-de-Nacre, 14033 Caen CS 3001, France; UMR Inserm
1086 Cancers et préventions, Université de Caen-Basse Normandie, Hôpital de la
Côte-de-Nacre, 14033 Caen CS 3001, France. (2)Service de pneumologie et oncologie
thoracique, Université de Caen-Basse Normandie, Hôpital de la Côte-de-Nacre,
14033 Caen CS 3001, France. (3)Service de pneumologie et oncologie thoracique,
Université de Caen-Basse Normandie, Hôpital de la Côte-de-Nacre, 14033 Caen CS
3001, France; UMR Inserm 1086 Cancers et préventions, Université de Caen-Basse
Normandie, Hôpital de la Côte-de-Nacre, 14033 Caen CS 3001, France; Centre de
recherche clinique/Essais de phases précoces, Université de Caen-Basse Normandie,
Hôpital de la Côte-de-Nacre, 14033 Caen CS 3001, France. Electronic address:
zalcman-g@chu-caen.fr.

EGFR, ALK, ROS1 Tyrosine Kinase Inhibitors (TKis) have changed natural history of
12 to 15% of patients with metastatic Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer (NSCLC) and
molecular alterations (mutations or translocations) in these genes. Median
Progression Free Survival (PFS) of these patients has increased from 12 months
with a platinum-based chemotherapy associated with bevacizumab, to 18 months with
TKIs, overall survival reaching several years in these patients. However, rare
primary resistance have been described in less than 10% of patients with EGFR or 
ALK-mutated cancer, whereas secondary resistance occur systematically. New
generations TKIs are currently in clinical development, which are active on tumor
clones harboring a resistance mutation, and some of them diffuse perfectly well
into brain, a classical sanctuary for metastasis. Strategies are developed to
delay secondary resistance apparition, to prolong PFS, and then overall survival.
These strategies use combinations, as soon as first linesetting, of TKIs with
either an anti-angiogenic drug (bevacizumab), or with an immunological checkpoint
inhibitors, or with Heat-Shock Protein (Hsp) inhibitors. In order to delay
acquired resistance to EGFR TKIs, the French Intergroup (IFCT) has launched a
combination trial of EGFR TKIs with an anti-estrogen (fulvestrant) in
postmenopausal women, whereas other trials associate EGFR TKIs with EFGR
monoclonal antibody cetuximab, or with a monoclonal antibody targeting c-met.

Copyright © 2015 Société Françise du Cancer. Publié par Elsevier Masson SAS. Tous
droits réservés. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S0007-4551(15)31215-7 
PMID: 26118873  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Lung Cancer. 2015 Sep;89(3):249-54. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2015.06.004. Epub 2015
Jun 17.

Induction chemotherapy with cetuximab, vinorelbine-cisplatin followed by thoracic
radiotherapy and concurrent cetuximab, vinorelbine-cisplatin in patients with
unresectable stage III non-small cell lung cancer.

Liu D(1), Zheng X(2), Chen J(3), Liu G(2), Xu Y(2), Shen Y(1), Xie L(1), Zhao
W(1), Jiang G(1), Fan M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Fudan University Shanghai Cancer Center,
Shanghai, China. (2)Department of Radiation Oncology, Zhejiang Cancer Hospital,
Zhejiang, China. (3)Department of Radiation Oncology, The First Affiliated
Hospital to Nanjing Medical University, Jiangsu, China. (4)Department of
Radiation Oncology, Fudan University Shanghai Cancer Center, Shanghai, China.
Electronic address: fanming@fudan.edu.cn.

OBJECTIVES: The modest benefits from concurrent chemoradiotherapy (CCRT) in
patients with stage III non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) warrant a more
effective treatment regimen. We herein report mature data of a phase I/II study
testing the addition of cetuximab to induction vinorelbine/cisplatin (NP)
followed by concurrent cetuximab NP and thoracic radiation in patients with
unresectable stage III NSCLC.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Eligible patients were treated with weekly cetuximab
(initial dose 400 mg/m2, day 1, week 1; maintenance dose 250 mg/m2 from week 2 to
the end of CCRT) and induction vinorelbine (25 mg/m2, days 1 and 8) and cisplatin
(75 mg/m2, day 1) every 3 weeks for 2 cycles from week 2. Concomitant thoracic
radiation (60-66 Gy/2 Gy) and two cycles of NP (vinorelbine 12.5 mg/m2, days 1
and 8; cisplatin 25mg/m2, days 1 to 3, every 3 weeks) were started from week 7.
The primary endpoints were toxicities; the secondary endpoints encompassed
response rate and survival.
RESULTS: In total, 27 patients were enrolled, and 24 completed the full regimen. 
No treatment-related death occurred. Severe (CTCAE Grade 3 or high) adverse
events were experienced by 81% patients (22/27), mostly haematologic. Severe
non-haematologic toxicities including nausea/vomiting, intestinal obstruction,
pulmonary infection and esophagitis, each of which was detected in <7% of
patients. With a median follow-up of 26.7 months, the median survival was 26.7
months, with 1- and 2-year survival rates of 88.9% and 51.9%, respectively. Six
patients remained progression-free to date, and the median progression-free
survival was 13.5 months. The overall response rate was 63% and 77.8% after the
induction and CCRT phases, respectively.
CONCLUSION: Weekly cetuximab with induction vinorelbine/cisplatin followed by
concurrent cetuximab vinorelbine/cisplatin thoracic radiation is feasible with a 
manageable toxicity profile and clinically active.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2015.06.004 
PMID: 26118463  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Onco Targets Ther. 2015 May 19;8:1137-42. doi: 10.2147/OTT.S75388. eCollection
2015.

Combination of afatinib with cetuximab in patients with EGFR-mutant
non-small-cell lung cancer resistant to EGFR inhibitors.

Ribeiro Gomes J(1), Cruz MR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Antonio Ermirio de Moraes Oncology Center, São Paulo-Brazil.

Tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) targeting the epidermal growth factor receptor 
(EGFR) have shown effectiveness for advanced non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
with activating mutations in the EGFR gene. However, resistance to the EGFR TKIs 
develops mostly secondary to T790M mutation in exon 20. The use of afatinib
associated with cetuximab represents a new possibility of therapy following
progression on gefitinib or erlotinib. We present two patients who acquired
resistance to first-generation TKI and who underwent combination treatment with
afatinib plus cetuximab as third-line therapy. Both patients presented partial
response, and the time duration of disease control was 8 months and 10 months.
The combined use of afatinib plus cetuximab emerges as a new possibility for the 
treatment of patients with advanced NSCLC harboring mutated EGFR after
progression on first-generation EGFR TKIs with consequently acquired resistance
to TKIs. Further studies are necessary to consolidate the data.

DOI: 10.2147/OTT.S75388 
PMCID: PMC4446010
PMID: 26056478  [PubMed]


43. Cancer Discov. 2015 Jul;5(7):684-5. doi: 10.1158/2159-8290.CD-NB2015-082. Epub
2015 Jun 1.

Expanding the Reach of Anti-PD-1 Therapy.

[No authors listed]

Results from three studies, including KEYNOTE-012 and CheckMate 057, indicate
that anti-PD-1 drugs look promising in cancers other than melanoma. Pembrolizumab
was twice as effective as cetuximab for advanced head and neck squamous cell
carcinoma; nivolumab induced durable antitumor activity in advanced liver cancer;
and nivolumab extended the median overall survival of patients with advanced
non-squamous non-small cell lung cancer.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/2159-8290.CD-NB2015-082 
PMID: 26034052  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2015;16(10):4439-45.

KRAS Mutation as a Biomarker for Survival in Patients with Non-Small Cell Lung
Cancer, A Meta-Analysis of 12 Randomized Trials.

Ying M(1), Zhu XX, Zhao Y, Li DH, Chen LH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical
University, Guangzhou, China E-mail : zhuxx01@126.com.

BACKGROUND: Because there is no clear consensus for the prognostic implication of
KRAS mutations in patients with non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), we conducted 
a meta-analysis based on 12 randomized trials to draw a more accurate conclusion.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A systematic computer search of articles from inception to
May 1, 2014 using the PubMed, EMBASE, and Cochrane databases was conducted. The
enrollment of articles and extraction of data were independently performed by two
authors.
RESULTS: Our analysis was based on the endpoints overall survival (OS) and
progression-free survival (PFS). Nine records (All for OS, 7 for PFS) comprising 
12 randomized trials were identified with 3701 patients who underwent a test for 
KRAS mutations. In the analysis of the pooled hazard ratios (HRs) for OS (HR:
1.39; 95% confidence interval [CI] 1.23-1.56) and PFS (HR: 1.33; 95% CI
1.17-1.51), we found that KRAS mutations are related to poor survival benefit for
NSCLC. According to a subgroup analysis stratified by disease stage and line of
therapy, the combined HRs for OS and PFS coincided with the finding that the
presence of a KRAS mutation is a dismal prognostic factor. However, the
prognostic role of KRAS mutations are not statistically significant in a subgroup
analysis of patients treated with chemotherapy in combination with cetuximab
based on the endpoints OS (P=0.141) and PFS (P=0.643).
CONCLUSIONS: Our results indicate that KRAS mutations are associated with
inferior survival benefits for NSCLC but not for those treated with
chemotherapies integrating cetuximab.


PMID: 26028111  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Clin Cancer Res. 2015 May 15;21(10):2221-6. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-14-3154.

EGFR: The Paradigm of an Oncogene-Driven Lung Cancer.

Riely GJ(1), Yu HA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Thoracic Oncology Service, Department of Medicine, Memorial Sloan Kettering
Cancer Center, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, New York.
rielyg@mskcc.org. (2)Thoracic Oncology Service, Department of Medicine, Memorial 
Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, New York.

Somatic, activating mutations in EGFR identify a significant minority of patients
with non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Although these mutations are associated 
with an approximately 70% response rate to some EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors
(gefitinib, erlotinib, and afatinib), patients develop resistance (i.e.,
"acquired resistance") after a median of 9 to 12 months. In patients with
clinical acquired resistance, repeat biopsy of tumors has identified a number of 
relevant mechanisms of resistance, but by far the most frequent event is the
acquisition of EGFR T790M, a mutation in the "gatekeeper" residue that confers
resistance to gefitinib, erlotinib, and afatinib. This emphasizes the critical
dependence upon EGFR signaling for some tumors, a property that has been
exploited therapeutically. Dual EGFR blockade using afatinib and cetuximab led to
a 29% radiographic response rate. More recently, drugs that target EGFR T790M
(e.g., rociletinib, AZD9291, and others) have entered clinical trials, with
impressive results observed in phase I clinical trials. The development of these 
newer drugs, with efficacy after resistance to first-line EGFR tyrosine kinase
inhibitor, has led to exploration of these strategies in multiple disease
settings: at resistance, in the first line, and in adjuvant treatment of those
with completely resected early-stage disease who would otherwise die of
recurrent/metastatic disease. This example of translational research that
identifies mechanisms of resistance to first-generation drugs, and then targets
those mechanisms yielding clinical benefit, is a paradigm for how targeted
therapies can be developed.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-14-3154 
PMCID: PMC4435716
PMID: 25979928  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Chin J Cancer. 2015 Apr 8;34(4):149-60. doi: 10.1186/s40880-015-0007-9.

Pharmacogenomics of EGFR-targeted therapies in non-small cell lung cancer: EGFR
and beyond.

Delaney C(1), Frank S(2), Huang RS(3,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Biological Sciences Division, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, 60637, USA. 
delaneyc@uchicago.edu. (2)Biological Sciences Division, University of Chicago,
Chicago, IL, 60637, USA. samuelfrank@uchicago.edu. (3)Department of Medicine,
University of Chicago, 900 E 57th street, KCBD room 7148, Chicago, IL, 60637,
USA. rhuang@medicine.bsd.uchicago.edu. (4)The Affiliated Hospital, School of
Medicine, Ningbo University, Ningbo, Zhejiang, 315211, P. R. China.
rhuang@medicine.bsd.uchicago.edu.

Commonly observed aberrations in epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)
signaling have led to the development of EGFR-targeted therapies for various
cancers, including non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). EGFR mutations and
overexpression have further been shown to modulate sensitivity to these
EGFR-targeted therapies in NSCLC and several other types of cancers. However, it 
is clear that mutations and/or genetic variations in EGFR alone cannot explain
all of the variability in the responses of patients with NSCLC to EGFR-targeted
therapies. For instance, in addition to EGFR genotype, genetic variations in
other members of the signaling pathway downstream of EGFR or variations in
parallel receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) pathways are now recognized to have a
significant impact on the efficacy of certain EGFR-targeted therapies. In this
review, we highlight the mutations and genetic variations in such genes
downstream of EGFR and in parallel RTK pathways. Specifically, the directional
effects of these pharmacogenetic factors are discussed with a focus on two
commonly prescribed EGFR inhibitors: cetuximab and erlotinib. The results of this
comprehensive review can be used to optimize the treatment of NSCLC with EGFR
inhibitors. Furthermore, they may provide the rationale for the design of
subsequent combination therapies that involve the inhibition of EGFR.

DOI: 10.1186/s40880-015-0007-9 
PMCID: PMC4593375
PMID: 25962919  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Ann Oncol. 2015 Aug;26(8):1734-40. doi: 10.1093/annonc/mdv219. Epub 2015 May 4.

Cilengitide combined with cetuximab and platinum-based chemotherapy as first-line
treatment in advanced non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients: results of an 
open-label, randomized, controlled phase II study (CERTO).

Vansteenkiste J(1), Barlesi F(2), Waller CF(3), Bennouna J(4), Gridelli C(5),
Goekkurt E(6), Verhoeven D(7), Szczesna A(8), Feurer M(9), Milanowski J(10),
Germonpre P(11), Lena H(12), Atanackovic D(13), Krzakowski M(14), Hicking C(15), 
Straub J(15), Picard M(15), Schuette W(16), O'Byrne K(17).

Author information: 
(1)Respiratory Oncology Unit, Department of Respiratory Medicine, University
Hospitals KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium johan.vansteenkiste@uzleuven.be.
(2)Multidisciplinary Oncology and Therapeutic Innovations, Aix Marseille
University-Assistance Publique Hôpitaux de Marseille, Marseille, France.
(3)Haematology, Oncology and Stem Cell Transplantation, University Hospital of
Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany. (4)Département d'Oncologie Médicale, Centre Rene
Gauducheau, Saint-Herblain Cedex, France. (5)Division of Medical Oncology,
Azienda Ospedaliera 'S.G. Moscati', Avellino, Italy. (6)Department of Oncology,
Hematology, Stem Cell Transplantation and Hemostaseology, University Hospital
Aachen, Aachen, Germany. (7)Iridium Cancer Network, Medical Oncology, AZ Klina,
Antwerp, Belgium. (8)Mazowieckie Centrum Leczenia Chorób Pluc i Gruźlicy, Otwock,
Poland. (9)Lungenpraxis Munich, Munich, Germany. (10)Department of Pneumology,
Oncology and Allergology, Medical University of Lublin, Lublin, Poland.
(11)Pulmonary Medicine, AZ Maria Middelares, Ghent, Belgium. (12)Pneumology, CHU 
Rennes, Rennes, France. (13)Oncology/Hematology/Stem Cell Transplantation,
University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany. (14)The Maria
Sklodowska-Curie Memorial Cancer Center and Institute of Oncology, Lung and
Thoracic Tumours, Warsaw, Poland. (15)Merck KGaA, Darmstadt. (16)Krankenhaus
Martha-Maria Halle-Dölau, Klinik für Innere Medizin II, Halle, Germany.
(17)Cancer Services, Princess Alexandra Hospital, Brisbane, Australia.

BACKGROUND: This multicentre, open-label, randomized, controlled phase II study
evaluated cilengitide in combination with cetuximab and platinum-based
chemotherapy, compared with cetuximab and chemotherapy alone, as first-line
treatment of patients with advanced non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC).
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Patients were randomized 1:1:1 to receive cetuximab plus
platinum-based chemotherapy alone (control), or combined with cilengitide 2000 mg
1×/week i.v. (CIL-once) or 2×/week i.v. (CIL-twice). A protocol amendment limited
enrolment to patients with epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) histoscore
≥200 and closed the CIL-twice arm for practical feasibility issues. Primary end
point was progression-free survival (PFS; independent read); secondary end points
included overall survival (OS), safety, and biomarker analyses. A comparison
between the CIL-once and control arms is reported, both for the total cohorts, as
well as for patients with EGFR histoscore ≥200.
RESULTS: There were 85 patients in the CIL-once group and 84 in the control
group. The PFS (independent read) was 6.2 versus 5.0 months for CIL-once versus
control [hazard ratio (HR) 0.72; P = 0.085]; for patients with EGFR histoscore
≥200, PFS was 6.8 versus 5.6 months, respectively (HR 0.57; P = 0.0446). Median
OS was 13.6 for CIL-once versus 9.7 months for control (HR 0.81; P = 0.265). In
patients with EGFR ≥200, OS was 13.2 versus 11.8 months, respectively (HR 0.95; P
= 0.855). No major differences in adverse events between CIL-once and control
were reported; nausea (59% versus 56%, respectively) and neutropenia (54% versus 
46%, respectively) were the most frequent. There was no increased incidence of
thromboembolic events or haemorrhage in cilengitide-treated patients. αvβ3 and
αvβ5 expression was neither a predictive nor a prognostic indicator.
CONCLUSIONS: The addition of cilengitide to cetuximab/chemotherapy indicated
potential clinical activity, with a trend for PFS difference in the
independent-read analysis. However, the observed inconsistencies across end
points suggest additional investigations are required to substantiate a potential
role of other integrin inhibitors in NSCLC treatment.
CLINICAL TRIAL REGISTRATION ID NUMBER: NCT00842712.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the European
Society for Medical Oncology. All rights reserved. For permissions, please email:
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/annonc/mdv219 
PMID: 25939894  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Chin J Cancer Res. 2015 Apr;27(2):172-80. doi:
10.3978/j.issn.1000-9604.2014.11.05.

Feasibility of cetuximab and chemoradiotherapy combination in Chinese patients
with unresectable stage III non-small cell lung cancer: a preliminary report.

Liu D(1), Shen YX(1), Zhao WX(1), Jiang GL(1), Chen JY(1), Fan M(1).

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Radiation Oncology, Fudan University Shanghai Cancer Center,
Shanghai 200032, China ; 2 Department of Radiation Oncology, The First Affiliated
Hospital of Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing 210006, China.

OBJECTIVE: In recent years, the combination of cetuximab and chemoradiotherapy
(CRT) has been used to treat stage III non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC);
however, limited data are available for Chinese patients. Herein, we report
preliminary data from a phase I/II study testing the combination of cetuximab
with inductive chemotherapy, followed by concurrent CRT (CCRT) in Chinese
patients with stage III NSCLC.
METHODS: Eligibility criteria were Zubrod performance status (PS) 0-1, forced
expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1) ≥1.2 L and adequate organ function. Enrolled
patients received weekly cetuximab (initial dose of 400 mg/m(2) on day 1 of week 
1 and a maintenance dose of 250 mg/m(2) on week 2 to the end of CCRT) with
cisplatin/vinorelbine (NP) chemotherapy (every 3 weeks for 2 cycles from week 2, 
followed by two cycles of concomitant NP chemotherapy and intensity-modulated
thoracic radiotherapy (TRT) (60-66 Gy/2 Gy). The primary endpoints were toxicity 
and feasibility. All patients received positron emission tomography-computerized 
tomography (PET-CT) scans within the 2 weeks prior to enrollment. Univariate
analyses were used to assess the correlation between SUV-T, SUV-N, SUV-TOTAL,
gender, age, histology, tumor-node-metastasis (TNM) stage, PS and smoking status 
and survival. Survival curves were generated for different populations using the 
Kaplan-Meier method and compared using a log-rank test.
RESULTS: Seventeen patients were enrolled and 16 completed the full regime. The
overall response rate (ORR) was 58.8% and 82.3% after the induction and CCRT
phases, respectively. With a median follow-up duration of 27.6 months, the median
survival was 27.6 months [95% confidence interval (CI): 11.3-43.9 months] with 1-
and 2-year survival rates of 88.2% (95% CI, 60.6-96.9%) and 58.8% (95% CI,
60.6-77.8%), respectively. Three patients remain progression-free to date, and
the median progression-free survival (PFS) was 13.5 months (95% CI, 6.8-20.2
months). No treatment-related death occurred; however, 76% of the patients
experienced grade 3+ adverse events (AEs), including nausea/vomiting, intestinal 
obstruction, and esophagitis (<6%), while other AEs were mostly of hematological 
nature (71%). The cut-off values for SUV-T and SUV-TOTAL were 11 and 20,
respectively. Univariate analyses revealed SUV-TOTAL (P=0.027), SUV-T (P=0.025), 
and PS (P=0.006) as potential survival predictors, with a hazard ratio (HR) of
3.4, 3.7, and 9.9, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: The combination of cetuximab with induction chemotherapy followed by
CCRT appears feasible and promising. Local and locoregional maximal SUVs, defined
by (18)F-FDG PET-CT scanning, may represent a prognostic indicator for long-term 
survival for these patients, which warrants further study.

DOI: 10.3978/j.issn.1000-9604.2014.11.05 
PMCID: PMC4409976
PMID: 25937779  [PubMed]


49. Clin Exp Med. 2016 May;16(2):169-76. doi: 10.1007/s10238-015-0349-2. Epub 2015
Apr 23.

Analysis of KRAS and BRAF genes mutation in the central nervous system metastases
of non-small cell lung cancer.

Nicoś M(1,)(2), Krawczyk P(3), Jarosz B(4), Sawicki M(5), Szumiłło J(6),
Trojanowski T(4), Milanowski J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pneumonology, Oncology and Allergology, Medical University of
Lublin, Jaczewskiego 8, 20-954, Lublin, Poland. marcin_nicos@interia.pl.
(2)Postgraduate School of Molecular Medicine, Medical University of Warsaw,
02-091, Warsaw, Poland. marcin_nicos@interia.pl. (3)Department of Pneumonology,
Oncology and Allergology, Medical University of Lublin, Jaczewskiego 8, 20-954,
Lublin, Poland. (4)Pathological Laboratory, Department of Neurosurgery and
Pediatric Neurosurgery, Medical University of Lublin, 20-954, Lublin, Poland.
(5)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Medical University of Lublin, 20-954, Lublin, 
Poland. (6)Department of Pathomorphology, Medical University of Lublin, 20-954,
Lublin, Poland.

KRAS mutations are associated with tumor resistance to EGFR TKIs (erlotinib,
gefitinib) and to monoclonal antibody against EGFR (cetuximab). Targeted
treatment of mutated RAS patients is still considered as a challenge. Inhibitors 
of c-Met (onartuzumab or tiwantinib) and MEK (selumetinib-a dual inhibitor of
MEK1 and MEK2) signaling pathways showed activity in patients with mutations in
KRAS that can became an effective approach in carriers of such disorders. BRAF
mutation is very rare in patients with NSCLC, and its presence is associated with
sensitivity of tumor cells to BRAF inhibitors (vemurafenib, dabrafenib). In the
present study, the frequency and type of KRAS and BRAF mutation were assessed in 
145 FFPE tissue samples from CNS metastases of NSCLC. In 30 patients, material
from the primary tumor was simultaneously available. Real-time PCR technique with
allele-specific molecular probe (KRAS/BRAF Mutation Analysis Kit, Entrogen, USA) 
was used for molecular tests. KRAS mutations were detected in 21.4 % of CNS
metastatic lesions and in 23.3 % of corresponding primary tumors. Five mutations 
were identified both in primary and in metastatic lesions, while one mutation
only in primary tumor and one mutation only in the metastatic tumor. Most of
mutations were observed in codon 12 of KRAS; however, an individual patient had
diagnosed a rare G13D and Q61R substitutions. KRAS mutations were significantly
more frequent in adenocarcinoma patients and smokers. Additional analysis
indicated one patient with rare coexistence of KRAS and DDR2 mutations. BRAF
mutation was not detected in the examined materials. KRAS frequency appears to be
similar in primary and CNS.

DOI: 10.1007/s10238-015-0349-2 
PMCID: PMC4844634
PMID: 25902737  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Future Oncol. 2015;11(8):1259-74. doi: 10.2217/fon.14.320.

Personalized treatment of early-stage non-small-cell lung cancer: the challenging
role of EGFR inhibitors.

Santarpia M(1), Altavilla G, Pitini V, Rosell R.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Oncology Unit, Human Pathology Department, University of Messina, Via 
Consolare Valeria 1, 98125, Messina, Italy.

Adjuvant cisplatin-based chemotherapy significantly improves outcomes of
completely resected early-stage non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients.
However, its effect on overall survival is limited and may be unsuitable for many
patients due to toxicity. Targeted therapies and individualization of adjuvant
treatment offer the potential to improve curability and extend survival of these 
patients while decreasing toxicity. Here we review Phase II and III studies
examining the role of EGF receptor inhibitors, including tyrosine kinase
inhibitors and the monoclonal antibody cetuximab, as adjuvant therapy in resected
patients or as part of multimodality treatment for stage III NSCLC. Recent
results from genotype-directed adjuvant tyrosine kinase inhibitors trials
including early-stage NSCLC patients with EGFR mutations are promising, but more 
data are needed to support their use in this setting.

DOI: 10.2217/fon.14.320 
PMID: 25832881  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Oncotarget. 2015 Apr 20;6(11):8839-50.

Constitutive asymmetric dimerization drives oncogenic activation of epidermal
growth factor receptor carboxyl-terminal deletion mutants.

Park AK(1,)(2), Francis JM(3), Park WY(1,)(2), Park JO(4), Cho J(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Samsung Genome Institute, Samsung Medical Center, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(2)Samsung Advanced Institute for Health Sciences and Technology, SungKyunKwan
University, Seoul, Republic of Korea. (3)The Broad Institute of Harvard and MIT, 
Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA. (4)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Samsung
Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of
Korea.

Genomic alterations targeting the Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor (EGFR) gene
have been strongly associated with cancer pathogenesis. The clinical
effectiveness of EGFR targeted therapies, including small molecules directed
against the kinase domain such as gefitinib, erlotinib and afatinib, have been
proven successful in treating non-small cell lung cancer patients with tumors
harboring EGFR kinase domain mutations. Recent large-scale genomic studies in
glioblastoma and lung cancer have identified an additional class of oncogenic
mutations caused by the intragenic deletion of carboxy-terminal coding regions.
Here, we report that combinations of exonic deletions of exon 25 to 28 lead to
the oncogenic activation of EGF receptor in the absence of ligand and consequent 
cellular transformation, indicating a significant role of C-terminal domain in
modulating EGFR activation. Furthermore, we show that the oncogenic activity of
the resulting C-terminal deletion mutants are efficiently inhibited by
EGFR-targeted drugs including erlotinib, afatinib, dacomitinib as well as
cetuximab, expanding the therapeutic rationale of cancer genome-based EGFR
targeted approaches. Finally, in vivo and in vitro preclinical studies
demonstrate that constitutive asymmetric dimerization in mutant EGFR is a key
mechanism for oncogenic activation and tumorigenesis by C-terminal deletion
mutants. Therefore, our data provide compelling evidence for oncogenic activation
of C-terminal deletion mutants at the molecular level and we propose that
C-terminal deletion status of EGFR can be considered as a potential genomic
marker for EGFR-targeted therapy.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.3559 
PMCID: PMC4496187
PMID: 25826094  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Transl Lung Cancer Res. 2014 Apr;3(2):89-94. doi:
10.3978/j.issn.2218-6751.2014.03.06.

Therapeutic integration of new molecule-targeted therapies with radiotherapy in
lung cancer.

Provencio M(1), Sánchez A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology of Puerta de Hierro Majadahonda, University
Hospital, Madrid, Spain.

Lung cancer is the most common form of the disease and the leading cause of
cancer deaths worldwide. Non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) accounts for
approximately 80-85% of all lung cancers. Forty percent of all cases present with
stage III, and many of them are considered inoperable (staged IIIA with
mediastinal lymph node involvement) or stage IIIB disease. Concurrent
platinum-based chemotherapy and thoracic radiation has demonstrated survival
benefits in these patients. We review the role of new target agents in
combination with radiotherapy in stage III NSCLC. Antiangiogenics improve tumor
oxygenation thereby improving the therapeutic efficacy of irradiation in models. 
Bevacizumab in combination with thoracic radiation has shown high toxicity.
However, other antiangiogenic agents are more promising. Radiation activates
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) pathways, inducing radioresistance, cell 
proliferation and enhanced DNA repair. After promising data from preclinical
models and early clinical trials, cetuximab did not show any benefit in a recent 
phase III trial. Panitumumab and nimotuzumab are under evaluation. Gefitinib has 
been investigated in combination with radiotherapy for unresectable stage III
NSCLC, but results in maintenance treatment after chemoradiotherapy were not
encouraging. Erlotinib has also been tested in a phase II trial with
chemoradiotherapy. Other new pathways and agents are being studied, such as m-TOR
pathway, bortezomib, heat shock protein 90 (Hsp90) inhibition, histone
deacetylase inhibitors (HDACS), aurora kinases, mitogen activated protein kinases
(MARK) and PARP inhibitors.

DOI: 10.3978/j.issn.2218-6751.2014.03.06 
PMCID: PMC4367654
PMID: 25806286  [PubMed]


53. Radiother Oncol. 2015 Apr;115(1):120-7. doi: 10.1016/j.radonc.2015.02.018. Epub
2015 Mar 18.

Radiosensitization of NSCLC cells by EGFR inhibition is the result of an enhanced
p53-dependent G1 arrest.

Kriegs M(1), Gurtner K(2), Can Y(3), Brammer I(3), Rieckmann T(3), Oertel R(4),
Wysocki M(2), Dorniok F(2), Gal A(5), Grob TJ(6), Laban S(7), Kasten-Pisula U(3),
Petersen C(3), Baumann M(8), Krause M(8), Dikomey E(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Radiobiology & Experimental Radiooncology, Germany. Electronic
address: m.kriegs@uke.uni-hamburg.de. (2)Department of Radiation Oncology and
OncoRay - National Center for Radiation Research in Oncology, Germany.
(3)Laboratory of Radiobiology & Experimental Radiooncology, Germany. (4)Institute
of Clinical Pharmacology, Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital Carl Gustav
Carus, Technische Universität Dresden, Germany. (5)Department of Human Genetics, 
Germany. (6)Department of Pathology, Germany. (7)Department of
Otorhinolaryngology and Head and Neck Surgery, University Medical Center Hamburg 
- Eppendorf, Germany. (8)Department of Radiation Oncology and OncoRay - National 
Center for Radiation Research in Oncology, Germany; German Cancer Consortium
(DKTK) Dresden, Germany; German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ) Heidelberg,
Germany; Hemholtz-Zentrum Dresden - Rossendorf, Germany.

PURPOSE: How EGF receptor (EGFR) inhibition induces cellular radiosensitization
and with that increase in tumor control is still a matter of discussion. Since
EGFR predominantly regulates cell cycle and proliferation, we studied whether a
G1-arrest caused by EGFR inhibition may contribute to these effects.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We analyzed human non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cell 
lines either wild type (wt) or mutated in p53 (A549, H460, vs. H1299, H3122) and 
HCT116 cells (p21 wt and negative). EGFR was inhibited by BIBX1382BS, erlotinib
or cetuximab; p21 was knocked down by siRNA. Functional endpoints analyzed were
cell signaling, proliferation, G1-arrest, cell survival as well as tumor control 
using an A549 tumor model.
RESULTS: When combined with IR, EGFR inhibition enhances the radiation-induced
permanent G1 arrest, though solely in cells with intact p53/p21 signaling. This
increase in G1-arrest was always associated with enhanced cellular
radiosensitivity. Strikingly, this effect was abrogated when cells were
re-stimulated, suggesting the initiation of dormancy. In line with this, only a
small non-significant increase in tumor control was observed for A549 tumors
treated with fractionated RT and EGFR inhibition.
CONCLUSION: For NSCLC cells increase in radiosensitivity by EGFR inhibition
results from enhanced G1-arrest. However, this effect does not lead to improved
tumor control because cells can be released from this arrest by re-stimulation.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.radonc.2015.02.018 
PMID: 25796091  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Biomed Pharmacother. 2015 Mar;70:123-8. doi: 10.1016/j.biopha.2015.01.008. Epub
2015 Jan 12.

Molecularly targeted gemcitabine-loaded nanoparticulate system towards the
treatment of EGFR overexpressing lung cancer.

Wang XB(1), Zhou HY(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Affiliated Hospital of Jining Medical
University, Jining, Shandong 272000, China. (2)Department of Oncology, Shandong
Cancer Hospital and Institute, Jinan, Shandong 250117, China. Electronic address:
zhouhaiyan180@gmail.com.

Molecularly targeted therapy emerged as a novel therapeutic strategy in the
treatment of multiple cancers. In the present study, we have developed
gemcitabine (GEM)-loaded cetuximab (CET) surface modified poly(lactic) acid (PLA)
nanoparticles (NP) (CET-GEM/PLA NP) to target to epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR) overexpressing non-small cell lung cancer (A549) cells. The resultant
CET-GEM/PLA NP showed a very uniform particle size of∼120 nm and spherical
morphology. It exhibited a pH-dependent controlled release pattern. A sustained
release of drug in the physiological conditions and faster release in tumor pH
will greatly improve the chemotherapeutic efficiency of therapeutic system.
Higher or enhanced cellular uptake of CET-GEM/PLA NP in A549 cancer cells clearly
indicates the EGFR-mediated receptor based active targeting. Nearly, a two-fold
increase in fluorescent intensity was observed for CET-GEM/PLA NP comparing to
that of non-targeted NP in the cancer cells. EGFR-mediated internalization of the
targeted NP was further confirmed by the confocal microscopy. MTT assay clearly
showed the enhanced cell killing effect of CET-conjugated NP due to the selective
delivery of GEM to the EGFR over expressing cancer cells. Finally, comparing to
the non-targeted NP, CET-GEM/PLA NP showed greater level of cell apoptosis (early
and late apoptosis∼40%). Our results showed that antibody conjugation on the
surface of NP could be a potential treatment strategy for EGFR over expressing
cancer cells. This suggests that CET-GEM/PLA NP could be potentially used for the
treatment of NSCLC (lung cancers).

Copyright © 2015. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biopha.2015.01.008 
PMID: 25776490  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Oncotarget. 2015 Mar 20;6(8):6029-39.

Molecular determinants of drug-specific sensitivity for epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR) exon 19 and 20 mutants in non-small cell lung cancer.

Tsigelny IF(1,)(2,)(3), Wheler JJ(4), Greenberg JP(2), Kouznetsova VL(1,)(2),
Stewart DJ(5), Bazhenova L(1), Kurzrock R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Personalized Cancer Therapy, Moores UCSD Cancer Center, La Jolla,
CA, USA. (2)San Diego Supercomputer Center, University of California, San Diego, 
La Jolla, CA, USA. (3)Department of Neurosciences, University of California, San 
Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA. (4)M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, University of Texas,
Houston, TX, USA. (5)Department of Medicine, University of Ottawa, Ottawa,
Canada.

We hypothesized that aberrations activating epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR) via dimerization would be more sensitive to anti-dimerization agents
(e.g., cetuximab). EGFR exon 19 abnormalities (L747_A750del; deletes amino acids 
LREA) respond to reversible EGFR kinase inhibitors (TKIs). Exon 20 in-frame
insertions and/or duplications (codons 767 to 774) and T790M mutations are
clinically resistant to reversible/some irreversible TKIs. Their impact on
protein function/therapeutic actionability are not fully elucidated.In our study,
the index patient with non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) harbored EGFR
D770_P772del_insKG (exon 20). A twenty patient trial (NSCLC cohort)
(cetuximab-based regimen) included two participants with EGFR TKI-resistant
mutations ((i) exon 20 D770>GY; and (ii) exon 19 LREA plus exon 20 T790M
mutations). Structural modeling predicted that EGFR exon 20 anomalies
(D770_P772del_insKG and D770>GY), but not T790M mutations, stabilize the active
dimer configuration by increasing the interaction between the kinase domains,
hence sensitizing to an agent preventing dimerization. Consistent with
predictions, the two patients harboring D770_P772del_insKG and D770>GY,
respectively, responded to an EGFR antibody (cetuximab)-based regimen; the
T790M-bearing patient showed no response to cetuximab combined with erlotinib. In
silico modeling merits investigation of its ability to optimize therapeutic
selection based on structural/functional implications of different aberrations
within the same gene.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.3472 
PMCID: PMC4467419
PMID: 25760241  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Future Oncol. 2015;11(5):865-78. doi: 10.2217/fon.14.312.

Current and future targeted therapies for non-small-cell lung cancers with
aberrant EGF receptors.

Kanthala S(1), Pallerla S, Jois S.

Author information: 
(1)Basic Pharmaceutical Sciences, School of Pharmacy, University of Louisiana at 
Monroe, Monroe, LA 71201, USA.

Expression of the EGF receptors (EGFRs) is abnormally high in many types of
cancer, including 25% of lung cancers. Successful treatments target mutations in 
the EGFR tyrosine kinase domain with EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs).
However, almost all patients develop resistance to this treatment, and acquired
resistance to first-generation TKI has prompted the clinical development of a
second generation of EGFR TKI. Because of the development of resistance to
treatment of TKIs, there is a need to collect genomic information about EGFR
levels in non-small-cell lung cancer patients. Herein, we focus on current
molecular targets that have therapies available as well as other targets for
which therapies will be available in the near future.

DOI: 10.2217/fon.14.312 
PMCID: PMC4375777
PMID: 25757687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Cancer. 2015 Jul 1;121(13):2253-61. doi: 10.1002/cncr.29308. Epub 2015 Mar 4.

Three-arm, randomized, phase 2 study of carboplatin and paclitaxel in combination
with cetuximab, cixutumumab, or both for advanced non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC) patients who will not receive bevacizumab-based therapy: An Eastern
Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) study (E4508).

Hanna NH(1), Dahlberg SE(2), Kolesar JM(3), Aggarwal C(4), Hirsch FR(5),
Ramalingam SS(6), Schiller JH(7).

Author information: 
(1)Indiana University Health Simon Cancer Center, Indianapolis, Indiana.
(2)Department of Biostatistics and Computational Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer
Institute, Boston, Massachusetts. (3)School of Pharmacy, University of Wisconsin,
Madison, Wisconsin. (4)Abramson Cancer Center, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. (5)School of Medicine, Division of Medical Oncology, 
University of Colorado, Denver, Colorado. (6)Winship Cancer Institute of Emory
University, Atlanta, Georgia. (7)Hematology/Oncology Division, University of
Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas.

BACKGROUND: Preclinical evidence supports the clinical investigation of
inhibitors to the insulin-like growth factor receptor (IGFR) and the epidermal
growth factor receptor (EGFR) either alone or in combination as treatment for
patients with non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC).
METHODS: Patients with chemotherapy-naïve, advanced NSCLC who had an Eastern
Cooperative Oncology Group performance status of 0 or 1 were eligible. Patients
were randomized to receive carboplatin intravenously at an area under the plasma 
drug concentration-time curve of 6.0 plus paclitaxel 200 mg/m(2) intravenously on
day 1 every 3 weeks combined with either intravenous cetuximab weekly (arm A),
intravenous cixutumumab every 2 weeks (arm B), or both (arm C). Patients who had 
nonprogessing disease after 12 weeks of therapy were permitted to continue on
maintenance antibody therapy until they developed progressive disease. The
primary endpoint was progression-free survival (PFS). The study design required
180 eligible patients and had 88% power to detect a 60% increase in median PFS
for either comparison (arm A vs arm C or arm B vs arm C) using the log-rank test.
RESULTS: From September 2009 to December 2010, 140 patients were accrued. The
study was closed to accrual early because of an excessive number of grade 5
events reported on arms A and C. Thirteen patients died during treatment (6
patients on arm A, 2 patients on arm B, and 5 patients on arm C), including 9
within approximately 1 month of starting therapy. The estimated median PFS for
arms A, B, and C were similar at 3.4 months, 4.2 months, and 4 months,
respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: On the basis of the apparent lack of efficacy and excessive
premature deaths, the current results do not support the continued investigation 
of carboplatin, paclitaxel, and cixutumumab either alone or in combination with
cetuximab for patients with advanced NSCLC.

© 2015 American Cancer Society.

DOI: 10.1002/cncr.29308 
PMCID: PMC4560671
PMID: 25740387  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Clin Exp Med. 2016 May;16(2):161-8. doi: 10.1007/s10238-015-0343-8. Epub 2015 Feb
26.

In vitro antiproliferative effect of trastuzumab (Herceptin(®)) combined with
cetuximab (Erbitux(®)) in a model of human non-small cell lung cancer expressing 
EGFR and HER2.

Privitera G(1), Luca T(2), Musso N(3), Vancheri C(4), Crimi N(4), Barresi V(3),
Condorelli D(3), Castorina S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Fondazione Mediterranea "G.B. Morgagni", Via del Bosco, 105, 95125, Catania,
Italy. giovannaprivitera@tiscali.it. (2)Fondazione Mediterranea "G.B. Morgagni", 
Via del Bosco, 105, 95125, Catania, Italy. (3)Department of Bio-Medical Sciences,
University of Catania, Catania, Italy. (4)Department of Clinical and Molecular
Biomedicine, University of Catania, Catania, Italy.

Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer death. For this reason, new therapies 
are needed for the treatment of this devastating disease. In this study, we
investigated the effects of combining cetuximab and the trastuzumab on the growth
of a model of human non-small cell lung carcinoma cell line (A549). The results
were compared with those obtained from a human lung squamous carcinoma cell line 
(NCI-H226). Both cell lines were treated with cetuximab and trastuzumab, alone or
in combination, at various concentrations, for 24, 48 and 72 h. Cell
proliferation was measured by the
3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide assay. EGFR and
HER-2 mRNA expression was detected by reverse transcription polymerase chain
reaction, and the gene amplification status of receptors was evaluated by
fluorescence in situ hybridisation. The colorimetric proliferation assay showed
that trastuzumab combined with cetuximab significantly inhibited A549 cells at a 
dose of 40 μg/ml after 72 h of treatment (p < 0.05), while no time-dose dependent
inhibition was observed in NCI-H226 cells. The combined treatment influenced both
levels of EGFR and HER-2 mRNA in A549 cells and only EGFR mRNA levels in NCI-H226
cells. Fluorescence in situ hybridisation showed that both cell lines were
aneuploid for the two genes with equally increased EGFR and CEN7 signals, as well
as HER-2 and CEN17 signals, indicating a condition of polysomy without
amplification. The preliminary results of this study encourage further
investigations to elucidate the downstream events involved and to understand how 
these mechanisms influence non-small cell lung cancers growth.

DOI: 10.1007/s10238-015-0343-8 
PMID: 25716471  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Lancet Oncol. 2015 Feb;16(2):187-99. doi: 10.1016/S1470-2045(14)71207-0. Epub
2015 Jan 16.

Standard-dose versus high-dose conformal radiotherapy with concurrent and
consolidation carboplatin plus paclitaxel with or without cetuximab for patients 
with stage IIIA or IIIB non-small-cell lung cancer (RTOG 0617): a randomised,
two-by-two factorial phase 3 study.

Bradley JD(1), Paulus R(2), Komaki R(3), Masters G(4), Blumenschein G(3), Schild 
S(5), Bogart J(6), Hu C(2), Forster K(7), Magliocco A(7), Kavadi V(8), Garces
YI(9), Narayan S(10), Iyengar P(11), Robinson C(12), Wynn RB(13), Koprowski
C(14), Meng J(15), Beitler J(16), Gaur R(17), Curran W Jr(16), Choy H(11).

Author information: 
(1)Washington University, St Louis, MO, USA. Electronic address:
jbradley@radonc.wustl.edu. (2)Radiation Therapy Oncology Group-Statistical
Center, Philadelphia, PA, USA. (3)The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, TX, USA. (4)Christiana Care/Helen Graham Medical Center, Newark,
DE, USA. (5)Mayo Clinic, Scottsdale, AZ, USA. (6)SUNY Upstate Medical University,
Syracuse NY, USA. (7)H Lee Moffitt Cancer Center, Tampa, FL, USA. (8)USON- Texas 
Oncology-Sugarland, Sugarland, TX, USA. (9)Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
(10)Michigan Cancer Research Consortium CCOP, Ypsilanti, MI, USA. (11)University 
of Texas Southwestern, Dallas, TX, USA. (12)Washington University, St Louis, MO, 
USA. (13)UPMC-Shadyside Hospital, Pittsburgh, PA, USA. (14)Christiana Care Health
CCOP, Newark, DE, USA. (15)The Ottawa Hospital Cancer Centre, Ottawa, Canada.
(16)Emory University, Atlanta, GA, USA. (17)Kansas City CCOP, Kansas City, MO,
USA.

Comment in
    Lancet Oncol. 2015 Apr;16(4):e156-7.
    Lancet Oncol. 2015 Feb;16(2):125-7.

BACKGROUND: We aimed to compare overall survival after standard-dose versus
high-dose conformal radiotherapy with concurrent chemotherapy and the addition of
cetuximab to concurrent chemoradiation for patients with inoperable stage III
non-small-cell lung cancer.
METHODS: In this open-label randomised, two-by-two factorial phase 3 study in 185
institutions in the USA and Canada, we enrolled patients (aged ≥ 18 years) with
unresectable stage III non-small-cell lung cancer, a Zubrod performance status of
0-1, adequate pulmonary function, and no evidence of supraclavicular or
contralateral hilar adenopathy. We randomly assigned (1:1:1:1) patients to
receive either 60 Gy (standard dose), 74 Gy (high dose), 60 Gy plus cetuximab, or
74 Gy plus cetuximab. All patients also received concurrent chemotherapy with 45 
mg/m(2) paclitaxel and carboplatin once a week (AUC 2); 2 weeks after
chemoradiation, two cycles of consolidation chemotherapy separated by 3 weeks
were given consisting of paclitaxel (200 mg/m(2)) and carboplatin (AUC 6).
Randomisation was done with permuted block randomisation methods, stratified by
radiotherapy technique, Zubrod performance status, use of PET during staging, and
histology; treatment group assignments were not masked. Radiation dose was
prescribed to the planning target volume and was given in 2 Gy daily fractions
with either intensity-modulated radiation therapy or three-dimensional conformal 
radiation therapy. The use of four-dimensional CT and image-guided radiation
therapy were encouraged but not necessary. For patients assigned to receive
cetuximab, 400 mg/m(2) cetuximab was given on day 1 followed by weekly doses of
250 mg/m(2), and was continued through consolidation therapy. The primary
endpoint was overall survival. All analyses were done by modified
intention-to-treat. The study is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, number
NCT00533949.
FINDINGS: Between Nov 27, 2007, and Nov 22, 2011, 166 patients were randomly
assigned to receive standard-dose chemoradiotherapy, 121 to high-dose
chemoradiotherapy, 147 to standard-dose chemoradiotherapy and cetuximab, and 110 
to high-dose chemoradiotherapy and cetuximab. Median follow-up for the
radiotherapy comparison was 22.9 months (IQR 27.5-33.3). Median overall survival 
was 28.7 months (95% CI 24.1-36.9) for patients who received standard-dose
radiotherapy and 20.3 months (17.7-25.0) for those who received high-dose
radiotherapy (hazard ratio [HR] 1.38, 95% CI 1.09-1.76; p=0.004). Median
follow-up for the cetuximab comparison was 21.3 months (IQR 23.5-29.8). Median
overall survival in patients who received cetuximab was 25.0 months (95% CI
20.2-30.5) compared with 24.0 months (19.8-28.6) in those who did not (HR 1.07,
95% CI 0.84-1.35; p=0.29). Both the radiation-dose and cetuximab results crossed 
protocol-specified futility boundaries. We recorded no statistical differences in
grade 3 or worse toxic effects between radiotherapy groups. By contrast, the use 
of cetuximab was associated with a higher rate of grade 3 or worse toxic effects 
(205 [86%] of 237 vs 160 [70%] of 228 patients; p<0.0001). There were more
treatment-related deaths in the high-dose chemoradiotherapy and cetuximab groups 
(radiotherapy comparison: eight vs three patients; cetuximab comparison: ten vs
five patients). There were no differences in severe pulmonary events between
treatment groups. Severe oesophagitis was more common in patients who received
high-dose chemoradiotherapy than in those who received standard-dose treatment
(43 [21%] of 207 patients vs 16 [7%] of 217 patients; p<0.0001).
INTERPRETATION: 74 Gy radiation given in 2 Gy fractions with concurrent
chemotherapy was not better than 60 Gy plus concurrent chemotherapy for patients 
with stage III non-small-cell lung cancer, and might be potentially harmful.
Addition of cetuximab to concurrent chemoradiation and consolidation treatment
provided no benefit in overall survival for these patients.
FUNDING: National Cancer Institute and Bristol-Myers Squibb.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S1470-2045(14)71207-0 
PMCID: PMC4419359
PMID: 25601342  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Zhonghua Zhong Liu Za Zhi. 2014 Sep;36(9):651-6.

[Cetuximab in combination with icotinib overcomes the acquired resistance caused 
by EGFR T790M mutation in non-small cell lung cancer].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang M(1), Zhang L(1), Zhao X(1), Liu J(1), Chen Y(1), Wang C(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Lung Cancer, Cancer Institute & Hospital, Tianjin Medical
University, Key Laboratory of Cancer Prevention and Therapy Tianjin, Tianjin
300060, China. (2)Department of Lung Cancer, Cancer Institute & Hospital, Tianjin
Medical University, Key Laboratory of Cancer Prevention and Therapy Tianjin,
Tianjin 300060, China. Email: ezxwm@163.com.

OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to investigate the effects of combination of
icotinib and cetuximab on the acquired drug resistance caused by T790M mutation
of EGFR in NSCLC, and provide experimental evidence for rational treatment of
NSCLC.
METHODS: The effects of these two agents on cell proliferation, apoptosis, and
EGFR-dependent signaling were evaluated using 3-(4, 5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-
5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) assay, annexin V staining, and Western
blotting. The expression of molecular markers of tumor proliferation PCNA and
Ki-67 protein was further examined by immunohistochemistry, and the expression of
EGFR-signaling-related proteins in tissue sections taken from H1975 tumor
xenografts was assessed by Western blot assay. Sensitivity to EGFR inhibitors was
detected in human H1975 tumor xenograft in nude mice.
RESULTS: The in vitro experiment showed that the proliferative ability of H1975
cells was inhibited in a dose-dependent manner, along with the increasing doses
of cetuximab and icotinib, and the combination of cetuximab with icotinib
resulted in a more pronounced growth inhibition of the H1975 cells. The apoptosis
rate of H1975 cells after treatment with 0.5 µmol/L icotinib and 1 µg/ml
cetuximab was (22.03 ± 2.41)% and that after treatment with 5 µmol/L icotinib and
10 µg/ml cetuximab was (42.75 ± 2.49)%, both were significantly higher than that 
after treatment with the same dose of icotinib or cetuximab alone (P < 0.05). The
nude mouse experiment showed that the transplanted tumor was growing to (614.5 ± 
10.8) mm(3) in the blank control group and to (611.2 ± 8.7) mm(3) at 28 days
after icotinib treatment, but (30.8 ± 2.0) mm(3) in the cetuximab treatment group
and 0 mm(3) in the cetuximab combined with icotinib group. There was a
significantly decreased expression of Ki-67 and PCNA proteins and down-regulation
of phosphorylation of EGFR signaling-related proteins in the cetuximab combined
with icotinib group.
CONCLUSIONS: The combination of icotinib with cetuximab can exert synergistic
inhibitory effect on the acquired drug resistance caused by T790M mutation of
EGFR in NSCLC H1975 cells, interrupts the EGFR-downstream signaling pathway, and 
enhances the anticancer activity of chemotherapeutic drugs. Our results provide
further experimental evidence for the clinical studies of combination of icotinib
with cetuximab in the treatment of NSCLC patients associated with secondary drug 
resistance caused by T790M mutation of EGFR.


PMID: 25564053  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Sci Rep. 2014 Dec 15;4:7490. doi: 10.1038/srep07490.

Enhanced cytotoxic activity of cetuximab in EGFR-positive lung cancer by
conjugating with gold nanoparticles.

Qian Y(1), Qiu M(1), Wu Q(2), Tian Y(3), Zhang Y(3), Gu N(3), Li S(4), Xu L(5),
Yin R(5).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Thoracic Surgery, Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Molecular and
Translational Cancer Research, Nanjing Medical University Affiliated Cancer
Hospital, Cancer Institute of Jiangsu Province, Nanjing, P.R. China 210009 [2]
The First Clinical College, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, P.R. China
210029. (2)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Huai'an First People's Hospital,
Nanjing Medical University, Huai'an, P. R. China 223300. (3)State Key Laboratory 
of Bioelectronics, Jiangsu Key Laboratory for Biomaterials and Devices, School of
Biological Science and Medical Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing, P.R.
China 210096. (4)Department of Oncology, Southeast University Affiliated Zhongda 
Hospital, Nanjing, P.R. China 210009. (5)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Jiangsu 
Key Laboratory of Molecular and Translational Cancer Research, Nanjing Medical
University Affiliated Cancer Hospital, Cancer Institute of Jiangsu Province,
Nanjing, P.R. China 210009.

Cetuximab (C225) is a unique agent, targeting epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR)-positive cancer. However, the therapeutic effect of C225 in EGFR
high-expressing non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) remains poor. Here, we report 
that conjugation of C225 with gold nanoparticles (AuNPs) enhances the
cytotoxicity of C225 in NSCLC both in vitro and in vivo. The NSCLC cell lines
A549 (EGFR(high)) and H1299 (EGFR(low)) were employed to investigate different
responses to C225, IgG-AuNPs and C225-AuNPs. The antitumor properties of
C225-AuNPs were explored in vivo by establishing a tumor xenograft model in nude 
mice. Overall, the therapeutic effect of C225-AuNPs was more pronounced in
EGFR(high) A549 cells compared with EGFR(low) H1299 cells. The cytotoxic effect
of C225-AuNPs in A549 cells increased in a dose-dependent manner. C225-AuNPs
significantly suppressed A549 cell proliferation and migration capacity and
accelerated apoptosis compared with C225, and this effect was probably due to
enhanced EGFR endocytosis and the subsequent suppression of downstream signaling 
pathway. Finally in the tumor xenograft of nude mice, treatment with C225-AuNPs
also led to a significant reduction in tumor weight and volume with low toxicity.
Our findings suggest that C225-AuNPs conjugate has promising potential for
targeted therapy of EGFR positive NSCLC patients.

DOI: 10.1038/srep07490 
PMCID: PMC4265789
PMID: 25502402  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Mol Clin Oncol. 2015 Jan;3(1):145-150. Epub 2014 Sep 22.

Indirect comparison of the efficacy and safety of gefitinib and cetuximab-based
therapy in patients with advanced non-small-cell lung cancer.

Tang J(1), Zhang H(1), Yan J(2), Shao R(2).

Author information: 
(1)The Research Center of National Drug Policy and Ecosystem, China
Pharmaceutical University, Nanjing, Jiangsu 211198, P.R. China ; School of
International Pharmaceutical Business, China Pharmaceutical University, Nanjing, 
Jiangsu 211198, P.R. China. (2)The Research Center of National Drug Policy and
Ecosystem, China Pharmaceutical University, Nanjing, Jiangsu 211198, P.R. China ;
The Research Center of National Drug Policy and Ecosystem, China Pharmaceutical
University, Nanjing, Jiangsu 211198, P.R. China.

The aim of this study was to systematically evaluate the efficacy and safety of
gefitinib and cetuximab-based therapies in patients with advanced non-small-cell 
lung cancer (NSCLC). The studies to be used for the comparisons were selected
from the available literature on gefitinib and cetuximab-based therapies compared
to conventional chemotherapy in patients with advanced NSCLC. The meta-analysis
was performed with RevMan 5.0 software and the Bucher approach was applied to
conduct the indirect comparisons. A total of 4 studies, including 935 patients,
on gefitinib therapy vs. conventional chemotherapy and 4 studies, including 1,015
patients, on cetuximab-based therapy vs. conventional chemotherapy, were used for
indirect comparisons. As regards efficacy, the risk ratio (RR) of objective
response rate and 1-year survival rate between gefitinib and cetuximab-based
therapies in patients with advanced NSCLC were 0.99 [95% confidence interval
(CI): 0.75-1.32; P=0.9584] and 0.85 (95% CI: 0.71-1.01; P=0.0696), respectively, 
and the mean difference of progression-free survival and overall survival (OS)
were -0.15 (95% CI: -0.90 to 0.60; P=0.6946) and -1.84 (95% CI: -3.53 to -0.15;
P=0.0331), respectively. As regards safety, the RR of grade 3/4 adverse events
(AEs) was 0.29 (95% CI: 0.19-0.44; P=0.0001). The results demonstrated that
cetuximab-based therapy was superior to gefitinib therapy in terms of OS and
inferior to gefitinib therapy in terms of AEs, whereas there were no significant 
differences in terms of efficacy and safety between the two therapies on other
endpoints adopted for advanced NSCLC. However, further well-designed randomized
controlled trials and continuous studies are required to confirm our findings.

DOI: 10.3892/mco.2014.424 
PMCID: PMC4251263
PMID: 25469285  [PubMed]


63. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2014 Nov 17;(11):CD009948. doi:
10.1002/14651858.CD009948.pub2.

Chemotherapy with cetuximab versus chemotherapy alone for chemotherapy-naive
advanced non-small cell lung cancer.

Yang ZY(1), Liu L, Mao C, Wu XY, Huang YF, Hu XF, Tang JL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Epidemiology, The Jockey Club School of Public Health and Primary 
Care, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China.

BACKGROUND: In advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), the effectiveness of 
standard cytotoxic chemotherapy seems to have reached a 'plateau', and there is a
continuous need for new treatments to further improve the prognosis. Cetuximab is
a monoclonal antibody targeted at the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)
signalling pathway. Basically, it is designed to inhibit the growth and
metastasis among other biological processes of cancer. In combination with
chemotherapy, it has been evaluated as a first-line treatment for advanced NSCLC 
in some randomised controlled trials (RCTs), with inconsistent results.
OBJECTIVES: To evaluate the efficacy and toxicity of chemotherapy plus cetuximab,
compared with chemotherapy alone, for advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
previously untreated with chemotherapy or epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR)-targeted drugs.
SEARCH METHODS: We systematically searched the Cochrane Lung Cancer Review
Group's Specialized Register (from inception to 17 December 2013), the Cochrane
Central Register of Controlled Trials (CENTRAL) (The Cochrane Library 2013, Issue
12), MEDLINE (accessed through PubMed, 1966 to 17 December 2013), EMBASE (1980 to
17 December 2013), ClinicalTrials.gov (from inception to 17 December 2013), and
the World Health Organization (WHO) International Clinical Trials Registry
Platform (from inception to 17 December 2013). We also handsearched the
proceedings related to lung cancer from the American Society of Clinical Oncology
and European Society of Medical Oncology (2000 to 17 December 2013). We checked
the reference lists of all eligible primary studies and review articles
for additional potentially eligible studies.
SELECTION CRITERIA: Eligible studies were RCTs that compared chemotherapy plus
cetuximab with the same chemotherapy alone, in advanced NSCLC, previously
untreated with chemotherapy or EGFR-targeted drugs, and measured at least one of 
the following: overall survival, progression-free survival, one-year survival
rate, objective response rate, quality of life, or serious adverse events.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: We used standard methodological procedures expected
by The Cochrane Collaboration. We extracted the following data from each study:
publication details, participant characteristics, regimens for intervention and
control arms, outcome measures and effect size, and information related to the
methodological quality of the study. We measured the treatment effects on
dichotomous and time-to-event outcomes by risk ratio (RR) and hazard ratio (HR), 
with 95% confidence intervals (CIs), respectively. We conducted meta-analyses
with Review Manager 5 using the random-effects model. We employed the
Mantel-Haenszel method to combine RRs and the inverse-variance method to combine 
HRs.
MAIN RESULTS: We included four trials, containing 2018 patients. The subjects
were mostly white people (female: 26% to 56%), with a median age of 58 to 66
years. About half of them had histologically proven adenocarcinoma. Of the 2018
patients, 83% to 99% had their status measured using the Eastern Cooperative
Oncology Group performance status, and had a score of 0 to 1 (which is usually
considered as physically "fit").All four studies provided data on overall
survival, progression-free survival, one-year survival rate, objective response
rate, and serious adverse events, with two studies (1901 patients) investigating 
the effect of cetuximab on quality of life as well. The risk of bias was low for 
the data on overall survival and one-year survival rate, and high for the data on
all other outcomes, mainly due to lack of blinding. Compared with chemotherapy
alone, chemotherapy plus cetuximab improved overall survival (10.5 months versus 
8.9 months; HR 0.87, 95% CI 0.79 to 0.96), one-year survival rate (45% versus
40%; RR 1.13, 95% CI 1.02 to 1.25), and objective response rate (30% versus 23%; 
RR 1.31, 95% CI 1.14 to 1.51). The difference in progression-free survival was at
the limit of the statistical significance (4.9 months versus 4.4 months; HR 0.91,
95% CI 0.83 to 1.00). No significant difference in quality of life between the
two treatment arms was reported by the two relevant studies. Patients in the
cetuximab group experienced more acneiform rash (11.2% versus 0.3%; RR 37.36, 95%
CI 10.66 to 130.95), hypomagnesemia (5.3% versus 0.8%; RR 6.57, 95% CI 1.13 to
38.12), infusion reaction (3.9% versus 1.1%; RR 3.50, 95% CI 1.76 to 6.94),
diarrhoea (4.8% versus 2.3%; RR 2.10, 95% CI 1.26 to 3.48), hypokalaemia (6.3%
versus 3.6%; RR 1.74, 95% CI 1.02 to 2.99), febrile neutropenia (10.6% versus
7.6%; RR 1.40, 95% CI 1.10 to 1.77), and leukopenia (58.1% versus 42.7%; RR 1.36,
95% CI 1.17 to 1.58) than did those in the control group. The difference in other
adverse events did not reach statistical significance. According to the reports
of original studies, the adverse events were generally manageable. There were no 
cetuximab-related deaths.The quality of the evidence is high for overall survival
and one-year survival rate, but low for most secondary outcomes.
AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: The combination of chemotherapy plus cetuximab is better
than chemotherapy alone as the first-line treatment of advanced NSCLC in
improving overall survival, while inducing higher rates of some reportedly
manageable adverse events.

DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD009948.pub2 
PMID: 25400254  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Mol Cancer. 2014 Oct 24;13:242. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-13-242.

Overcoming acquired resistance to cetuximab by dual targeting HER family
receptors with antibody-based therapy.

Iida M, Brand TM, Starr MM, Huppert EJ, Luthar N, Bahrar H, Coan JP, Pearson HE, 
Salgia R, Wheeler DL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Oncology, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and
Public Health, Wisconsin Institute for Medical Research, 1111 Highland Ave,,
Madison, WI 53705, USA. dlwheeler@wisc.edu.

BACKGROUND: Cetuximab, an anti-EGFR monoclonal antibody, is used to treat several
cancers. However, many patients who initially respond to cetuximab acquire
resistance. To examine mechanisms of acquired resistance, we developed a series
of cetuximab-resistant (Ctx(R)) clones derived from the cetuximab sensitive
(CtxS) non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cell line H226. Previous studies
characterizing this model revealed that: 1) EGFR was robustly overexpressed in
Ctx(R) clones due to decreased EGFR ubiquitination and degradation and 2) Ctx(R) 
clones expressed increased HER2 and HER3 activation resulting in constitutive
activation of the PI3K/AKT signaling axis. These findings suggest that dual
targeting HER family receptors would be highly beneficial in the Ctx(R) setting.
RESULTS: Since HER3 has been implicated in resistance to EGFR inhibitors, the
efficacy of dually targeting both EGFR and HER3 in Ctx(R) models was evaluated.
First, EGFR and HER3 expression were knocked down with siRNAs. Compared to the
Ctx(S) parental cell line (HP), all Ctx(R) clones exhibited robust decreases in
cell proliferation upon dual knockdown. Analysis of Ctx(R) clones indicated that 
neuregulin-1 was highly overexpressed compared to HP cells. Incubation of HP
cells with neuregulin-1 rendered them resistant to cetuximab. Next, dual
treatment of Ctx(R) clones with cetuximab and the HER3 neutralizing monoclonal
antibody (mAb) U3-1287 led to potent anti-proliferative effects. Blockade of EGFR
with cetuximab resulted in inactivation of MAPK, while blockade of HER3 with
U3-1287 resulted in the inactivation of AKT. Treatment with both mAbs resulted in
knockdown of both signaling pathways simultaneously. HER2 was also strongly
inactivated upon dual mAb therapy, suggesting that this treatment regimen can
diminish signaling from three HER family receptors. De novo CtxR H226 mouse
xenografts were established to determine if dual therapy could overcome acquired 
resistance to cetuximab in vivo. Tumors that had acquired resistance to cetuximab
were significantly growth delayed upon dual treatment of U3-1287 and cetuximab
compared to those continued on cetuximab only. Combinatorial-treated xenograft
tumors expressed decreased Ki67 and increased cleaved caspase-3 levels compared
to tumors treated with either monotherapy.
CONCLUSIONS: These studies demonstrate that dually targeting HER family receptors
with antibody-based therapies can overcome acquired resistance to cetuximab.

DOI: 10.1186/1476-4598-13-242 
PMCID: PMC4283113
PMID: 25344208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Curr Med Res Opin. 2015 Jan;31(1):25-33. doi: 10.1185/03007995.2014.978448. Epub 
2014 Oct 30.

Anti-epidermal-growth-factor-receptor agents and complete responses in the
treatment of advanced non-small-cell lung cancer: a meta-analysis of 17 phase III
randomized controlled trials.

Qi WX(1), Fu S, Zhang Q, Guo XM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Shanghai Proton and Heavy Ion Center (SPHIC)
, Shanghai , China.

PURPOSE: Currently, the anti-epidermal-growth-factor-receptor (EGFR) agents have 
shown encouraging treatment benefits in patients with various types of solid
tumors including non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Despite these advances,
radiological complete response to these therapies is rare. We meta-analyze the
incidence of complete response (CR) in advanced NSCLC patients treated with
anti-EGFR agents and controls in randomized controlled trials (RCTs).
METHODS: PubMed, Web of Science, Embase and Cochrane library databases were
reviewed for phase III RCTs with EGFR-targeted agents vs. non-EGFR-targeted
agents in patients with advanced NSCLC. We calculated the odds ratio of CR in
patients assigned to anti-EGFR agents compared to controls.
RESULTS: A total of 11,568 patients from 17 RCTs were included for analysis. The 
incidence of CR in patients treated with anti-EGFR agents was 1.1% (95% CI,
0.7-1.7%) compared to 0.6% (95% CI, 0.4-0.9%) in control arms. Comparing the
different types of anti-EGFR agents, the incidence of CR was 1.9% for gefitinib
(95% CI: 1.4-2.6%), 1.4% for cetuximab (95% CI: 0.8-2.7%) and 0.9% for erlotinib 
(95% CI: 0.6-1.5%), respectively. The use of anti-EGFR agents significantly
increased the odds ratio of obtaining a CR (OR 2.12, 95% CI: 1.28-3.49,
p = 0.003) compared to controls. This was found to be higher in treatment arms
involving more than 50% of: female patients, patients who had never smoked
tobacco, patients of Asian descent or patients with adenocarcinoma or EGFR
mutation. No significant differences in ORs were observed in any prespecified
sub-groups.
CONCLUSION: Although a CR is rare in advanced NSCLC patients receiving anti-EGFR 
agents, these drugs significantly increase the OR of a CR compared to controls,
especially for patients with EGFR mutations. Further studies are needed to
investigate whether the increase of CR with anti-EGFR therapy would be translated
into survival benefits.

DOI: 10.1185/03007995.2014.978448 
PMID: 25329826  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Cancer Treat Rev. 2014 Dec;40(10):1221-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ctrv.2014.09.002. Epub
2014 Sep 19.

Infectious complications in cancer patients treated with anti-EGFR monoclonal
antibodies cetuximab and panitumumab: a systematic review and meta-analysis.

Funakoshi T(1), Suzuki M(2), Tamura K(3).

Author information: 
(1)UNC Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, 170 Manning Drive, CB# 7305,
Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA. Electronic address:
tomohiro.funakoshi@unchealth.unc.edu. (2)Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, 
1275 York Avenue, New York, NY 10065, USA. (3)Division of Medical Oncology,
Hematology and Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, Fukuoka University
Hospital, Fukuoka, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Clinical trials have reported a substantial variation in the risk of 
infection related to anti-EGFR monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) cetuximab and
panitumumab. We performed a systematic review and meta-analysis to assess the
infection risk in cancer patients treated with anti-EGFR mAbs.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We searched PubMed and the ASCO online database of meeting 
abstracts up to January 2014 for relevant clinical trials. Eligible studies
included randomized controlled trials (RCTs) of cetuximab and panitumumab that
reported adequate safety data for grade 3-4 infection or febrile neutropenia
(FN). The summary incidence, relative risk (RR) and 95% confidence intervals
(CIs) were calculated.
RESULTS: A total of 14,957 patients from 28 trials were included. Treatment with 
anti-EGFR mAbs was associated with an increased risk of high-grade infection (RR,
1.49; 95% CI, 1.33-1.66; P<0.001) and FN (RR, 1.27; 95% CI, 1.09-1.48; P=0.002). 
The incidence of high-grade infection and FN due to anti-EGFR mAbs was 9.3% (95% 
CI, 7.2-12.0%) and 5.3% (95% CI, 3.3-8.3%), respectively. A significantly
increased risk of high-grade infection was observed in all subgroups analyses
(type of anti-EGFR mAb, therapy of control arm and duration of treatment) except 
for tumor type (only colorectal cancer and non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
groups had the increased risk). Subgroup analyses revealed a significantly
increased risk of FN in the following subgroups: cetuximab, NSCLC and treatment
duration longer than the median of all trials (3.1months).
CONCLUSIONS: The use of anti-EGFR mAbs is associated with a significantly higher 
risk of high-grade infection and febrile neutropenia.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ctrv.2014.09.002 
PMID: 25288497  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2014 Nov 15;90(4):828-33. doi:
10.1016/j.ijrobp.2014.07.023. Epub 2014 Sep 9.

Phase 2 study of concurrent cetuximab plus definitive thoracic radiation therapy 
followed by consolidation docetaxel plus cetuximab in poor prognosis or elderly
patients with locally advanced non-small cell lung cancer.

Dilling TJ(1), Extermann M(2), Kim J(3), Thompson LM(4), Yue B(3), Stevens CW(1),
Antonia S(5), Gray J(5), Williams C(5), Haura E(5), Pinder-Schenck M(5),
Tanvetyanon T(5), Kim S(1), Chiappori A(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Moffitt Cancer Center, Tampa, Florida.
(2)Department of Senior Adult Oncology, Moffitt Cancer Center, Tampa, Florida.
(3)Department of Biostatistics and Bioinformatics, Moffitt Cancer Center, Tampa, 
Florida. (4)Department of Supportive Care Medicine, Moffitt Cancer Center, Tampa,
Florida. (5)Department of Thoracic Oncology, Moffitt Cancer Center, Tampa,
Florida. (6)Department of Thoracic Oncology, Moffitt Cancer Center, Tampa,
Florida. Electronic address: alberto.chiappori@moffitt.org.

BACKGROUND: Recursive partitioning analysis has shown that Eastern Cooperative
Oncology Group (ECOG) Performance Status (PS) ≥2, male sex, and age ≥70 years are
prognostic of poor outcome in locally advanced non-small cell lung cancer
(LA-NSCLC) patients. Concurrent chemoradiation therapy (CRT) improves survival,
but toxicity is a concern in this frail patient cohort. We therefore opened this 
trial of concurrent definitive thoracic radiation therapy (XRT) and cetuximab,
followed by consolidation docetaxel plus cetuximab.
METHODS AND MATERIALS: Eligible patients had pathologically proven, unresectable 
LA-NSCLC (stage IIA-"dry" IIIB). They had ECOG PS 2 or weight loss ≥5% in 3
months or were aged ≥70 years. The primary objective was progression-free
survival (PFS). Secondary objectives included overall survival (OS) and overall
response rate (ORR).
RESULTS: From May 2008 to November 2010, a total of 32 patients were evaluated in
our single-institution, institutional review board-approved prospective clinical 
trial. Three patients were screen failures and 2 more withdrew consent before
treatment, leaving 27 evaluable patients. One was removed because of poor therapy
compliance, and 2 were taken off trial because of grade 3 cetuximab-related
toxicities but were followed up under intent-to-treat analysis. The median
follow-up and OS were 10.5 months. The median PFS was 7.5 months. The ORR was
59.3%. Eight early/sudden deaths were reported. Upon review, 6 patients developed
severe pulmonary complications.
CONCLUSIONS: Patients enrolled in this trial had improved OS compared with
poor-PS historical controls (10.5 vs 6.4 months) and comparable OS to good-PS
historical controls (10.5 vs 11.9 months) treated with XRT alone. However,
pulmonary toxicity is a concern. Consolidative cetuximab/docetaxel, in
conjunction with high-dose radiation therapy, is a putative cause.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijrobp.2014.07.023 
PMID: 25216856  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Target Oncol. 2015 Jun;10(2):255-65. doi: 10.1007/s11523-014-0336-7. Epub 2014
Sep 9.

Weekly and every 2 weeks cetuximab maintenance therapy after platinum-based
chemotherapy plus cetuximab as first-line treatment for non-small cell lung
cancer: randomized non-comparative phase IIIb NEXT trial.

Heigener DF(1), Pereira JR, Felip E, Mazal J, Manzyuk L, Tan EH, Merimsky O,
Sarholz B, Esser R, Gatzemeier U.

Author information: 
(1)LungenClinic Grosshansdorf, Woehrendamm 80, 22927, Grosshansdorf, Germany,
d.heigener@lungenclinic.de.

The First-Line Erbitux in Lung Cancer (FLEX) trial showed that the addition of
cetuximab to chemotherapy followed by weekly cetuximab maintenance significantly 
improved survival in the first-line treatment of advanced non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC). The phase IIIb NSCLC Erbitux Trial (NEXT) trial (NCT00820755)
investigated the efficacy and safety of weekly and every 2 weeks cetuximab
maintenance therapy in this setting. Patients were treated with platinum-based
chemotherapy plus cetuximab, and those progression-free after four to six cycles 
were randomized to every 2 weeks (500 mg/m(2)) or weekly (250 mg/m(2)) cetuximab 
maintenance. Randomization was stratified for tumor histology and response
status. The primary endpoint for a regimen would be reached if the lower boundary
of the 95 % confidence interval (CI) for the 1-year survival rate exceeded 55 %. 
A planned 480 patients were to be randomized. However, enrollment was curtailed
following a negative opinion from the European Medicines Agency with regard to
the use of cetuximab in this setting. After combination therapy, 311/583 (53.3 %)
patients without progression were randomized to maintenance therapy: 157 to every
2 weeks cetuximab and 154 to weekly cetuximab. Baseline characteristics were
balanced between these groups and exposure to cetuximab was similar. The 1-year
survival rate was 62.8 % (95 % CI, 54.7-70.0) for every 2 weeks cetuximab and
64.4 % (95 % CI, 56.2-71.4) for weekly cetuximab. Safety profiles were similar,
manageable, and in line with expectations. Therefore, in patients with advanced
NSCLC who were progression-free after four to six cycles of first-line
chemotherapy plus cetuximab, weekly and every 2 weeks cetuximab maintenance
therapy were associated with similar survival outcomes.

DOI: 10.1007/s11523-014-0336-7 
PMID: 25195590  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Cancer Res. 2014 Sep 15;74(18):5152-64. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-0294. Epub 
2014 Aug 18.

AXL mediates resistance to cetuximab therapy.

Brand TM(1), Iida M(1), Stein AP(1), Corrigan KL(1), Braverman CM(1), Luthar
N(1), Toulany M(2), Gill PS(3), Salgia R(4), Kimple RJ(1), Wheeler DL(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Oncology, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and
Public Health, Madison, Wisconsin. (2)Division of Radiobiology and Molecular
Environmental Research, Department of Radiation Oncology, Eberhard Karls
University Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany. (3)Departments of Medicine and Pathology,
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California. (4)Department of
Medicine, Division of Hematology/Oncology, University of Chicago, Chicago,
Illinois. (5)Department of Human Oncology, University of Wisconsin School of
Medicine and Public Health, Madison, Wisconsin. dlwheeler@wisc.edu.

The EGFR antibody cetuximab is used to treat numerous cancers, but intrinsic and 
acquired resistance to this agent is a common clinical outcome. In this study, we
show that overexpression of the oncogenic receptor tyrosine kinase AXL is
sufficient to mediate acquired resistance to cetuximab in models of non-small
cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC), where
AXL was overexpressed, activated, and tightly associated with EGFR expression in 
cells resistant to cetuximab (Ctx(R) cells). Using RNAi methods and novel
AXL-targeting agents, we found that AXL activation stimulated cell proliferation,
EGFR activation, and MAPK signaling in Ctx(R) cells. Notably, EGFR directly
regulated the expression of AXL mRNA through MAPK signaling and the transcription
factor c-Jun in Ctx(R) cells, creating a positive feedback loop that maintained
EGFR activation by AXL. Cetuximab-sensitive parental cells were rendered
resistant to cetuximab by stable overexpression of AXL or stimulation with EGFR
ligands, the latter of which increased AXL activity and association with the
EGFR. In tumor xenograft models, the development of resistance following
prolonged treatment with cetuximab was associated with AXL hyperactivation and
EGFR association. Furthermore, in an examination of patient-derived xenografts
established from surgically resected HNSCCs, AXL was overexpressed and activated 
in tumors that displayed intrinsic resistance to cetuximab. Collectively, our
results identify AXL as a key mediator of cetuximab resistance, providing a
rationale for clinical evaluation of AXL-targeting drugs to treat
cetuximab-resistant cancers. Cancer Res; 74(18); 5152-64. ©2014 AACR.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-0294 
PMCID: PMC4167493
PMID: 25136066  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Radiother Oncol. 2014 Jul;112(1):30-6. doi: 10.1016/j.radonc.2014.06.012. Epub
2014 Jul 16.

EGFR expression and survival in patients given cetuximab and chemoradiation for
stage III non-small cell lung cancer: a secondary analysis of RTOG 0324.

Komaki R(1), Paulus R(2), Blumenschein GR Jr(3), Curran WJ Jr(4), Robert F(5),
Thariat J(6), Werner-Wasik M(7), Choy H(8), Hirsch FR(9), Ang KK(10).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, United States. Electronic address: rkomaki@mdanderson.org.
(2)RTOG Statistical Center, Philadelphia, United States. (3)Department of
Thoracic/Head & Neck Medical Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, United States. (4)Winship Cancer Institute of Emory University, 
Atlanta, United States. (5)University of Alabama at Birmingham Comprehensive
Cancer Center, United States. (6)Department of Radiation Oncology, The University
of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, United States. Electronic address:
jthariat@hotmail.com. (7)Thomas Jefferson University Hospital, Philadelphia,
United States. (8)The University of Texas Southwestern, Dallas, United States.
(9)University of Colorado Cancer Center, Aurora, United States. (10)Department of
Radiation Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston,
United States.

PURPOSE: We investigated whether expression of epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR) was associated with survival and disease control in this secondary
analysis of a phase II trial of cetuximab+chemoradiation for stage III non-small 
cell lung cancer.
METHODS: Patients received cetuximab weekly before and during radiation (63 Gy/35
fractions/7 weeks) with weekly carboplatin + paclitaxel. We analyzed EGFR
expression by immunohistochemistry (IHC) and fluorescence in situ hybridization
(FISH) in pretreatment biopsy specimens and compared findings with overall and
progression-free survival (OS, PFS) and time to progression (TTP).
RESULTS: Specimens for IHC and FISH were collected from 51 and 45 of 87 evaluable
patients. Pretreatment characteristics did not differ for patients with (n = 51) 
or without (n= 36) EGFR IHC data, or with (n = 45) or without (n = 42) FISH data.
However, patients without IHC data had worse OS (HR = 1.63, P = 0.05), worse PFS 
(HR = 1.88, P = 0.008), and worse TTP [HR = 1.99, P = 0.01] than those with IHC
data. EGFR protein expression was not related to pretreatment characteristics or 
OS; FISH-positive disease was associated with better performance status but not
with OS, PFS, or TTP.
CONCLUSIONS: Surprisingly, outcomes differed not by EGFR expression but by the
availability of samples for analysis, underscoring the importance of obtaining
biopsy samples in such trials.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.radonc.2014.06.012 
PMCID: PMC4169722
PMID: 25042878  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Med Oncol. 2014 Aug;31(8):99. doi: 10.1007/s12032-014-0099-0. Epub 2014 Jul 19.

LMO1 is a novel oncogene in lung cancer, and its overexpression is a new
predictive marker for anti-EGFR therapy.

Zhang Y(1), Yang J, Wang J, Guo H, Jing N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of TCM, Jilin Province Tumor Hospital, Changchun, 130012, Jilin
Province, China.

Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is the leading cause of cancer mortality in
the world. We report that one oncogene amplified on chromosome 3q26, LMO1, a
master transcriptional regulator of stemness, operates to drive strong growth
phenotype in NSCLC. We first validate gene expression changes of LMO genes by
real-time quantitative RT-PCR real-time quantitative reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction analysis and immunohistochemistry, and we
identified gene overexpression of LMO1 compared with non-cancerous tissues (p <
0.01). Next, we discovered that LMO1 promoted cancer cell proliferation in our in
vitro/vivo cell proliferation assay, and our cell signaling experiments showed
that LMO1 expression correlated with elevated AKT phosphorylation in NSCLC, while
the AKT phosphorylation was required for LMO1's oncogenic effects. In addition,
we compared complete response rate, stable disease rate, disease progression
rate, and the disease control rate of patient with different LMO1 gene expression
which pointed to the usefulness of LMO1 overexpression, as a new predictive
marker for responsiveness to cetuximab. All in all, LMO1 is a commonly activated 
tumor promoter that activates AKT signaling in NSCLC and a new predictive marker 
for targeted therapy.

DOI: 10.1007/s12032-014-0099-0 
PMID: 25037573  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Ther Clin Risk Manag. 2014 Jul 9;10:527-35. doi: 10.2147/TCRM.S62572. eCollection
2014.

Drug assessment by a Pharmacy and Therapeutics committee: from drug selection
criteria to use in clinical practice.

Lozano-Blázquez A(1), Calvo-Pita C(2), Carbajales-Álvarez M(1), Suárez-Gil P(3), 
Martínez-Martínez F(4), Calleja-Hernández MÁ(5).

Author information: 
(1)Pharmacy Department, Hospital de Cabueñes, Gijón, Spain. (2)Pharmacy
Department, Primary Health Care, Servicio Madrileño de Salud, Dirección
Asistencial Oeste, Madrid, Spain. (3)Research Unit Área V, Hospital de Cabueñes, 
Gijón, Spain. (4)Responsable del Grupo de Investigación en Atención Farmacéutica,
Universidad de Granada, Spain. (5)UGC Provincial de Farmacia de Granada Instituto
de Biomedicina de Granada, Hospital Virgen de las Nieves, Granada, Spain.

BACKGROUND: In Spain, hospital medicines are assessed and selected by local
Pharmacy and Therapeutics committees (PTCs). Of all the drugs assessed, cancer
drugs are particularly important because of their budgetary impact and the
sometimes arguable added value with respect to existing alternatives. This study 
analyzed the PTC drug selection process and the main objective was to evaluate
the degree of compliance of prescriptions for oncology drugs with their criteria 
for use.
METHODS: This was a retrospective observational study (May 2007 to April 2010) of
PTC-assessed drugs. The variables measured to describe the committee's activity
were number of drugs assessed per year and number of drugs included in any of
these settings: without restrictions, with criteria for use, and not included in 
formulary. These drugs were also analyzed by therapeutic group. To assess the
degree of compliance of prescriptions, a score was calculated to determine
whether prescriptions for bevacizumab, cetuximab, trastuzumab, and bortezomib
were issued in accordance with PTC drug use criteria.
RESULTS: The PTC received requests for inclusion of 40 drugs, of which 32 were
included in the hospital formulary (80.0%). Criteria for use were established for
28 (87.5%) of the drugs included. In total, 293 patients were treated with the
four cancer drugs in eight different therapeutic indications. The average
prescription compliance scores were as follows: bevacizumab, 83% for metastatic
colorectal cancer, 100% for metastatic breast cancer, and 82.3% for
non-small-cell lung cancer; cetuximab, 62.0% for colorectal cancer and 50% for
head and neck cancer; trastuzumab, 95.1% for early breast cancer and 82.4% for
metastatic breast cancer; and bortezomib, 63.7% for multiple myeloma.
CONCLUSION: The degree of compliance with criteria for use of cancer drugs was
reasonably high. PTC functions need to be changed so that they can carry out more
innovative tasks, such as monitoring conditions for drug use.

DOI: 10.2147/TCRM.S62572 
PMCID: PMC4096492
PMID: 25031538  [PubMed]


73. Lung Cancer. 2014 Sep;85(3):479-80. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2014.06.002. Epub 2014
Jun 16.

Afatinib combined with cetuximab for lung adenocarcinoma with leptomeningeal
carcinomatosis.

Lin CH(1), Lin MT(1), Kuo YW(2), Ho CC(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Far Eastern Memorial Hospital, New Taipei
City, Taiwan. (2)Department of Internal Medicine, National Taiwan University
Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan. (3)Department of Internal Medicine, National Taiwan
University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan. Electronic address: ccho1203@gmail.com.

We report a patient with non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) developed
leptomeningeal carcinomatosis (LMC) after 4 years of multiple treatments.
High-dose tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) was given for LMC at first but was not 
effective. She then received dual therapy combining of afatinib and cetuximab.
Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a partial response of disease and
the patient experienced a clinical benefit. Our case suggests that dual targeting
of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) by a combination of afatinib and
cetuximab can be a potential novel treatment option in treating LMC when
high-dose TKI failed.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2014.06.002 
PMID: 24999085  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. J Thorac Dis. 2014 Jun;6(6):578-80. doi: 10.3978/j.issn.2072-1439.2014.06.14.

Cetuximab in advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC): the showdown?

Sgambato A(1), Casaluce F(1), Maione P(1), Rossi A(1), Ciardiello F(1), Gridelli 
C(1).

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Second University of
Naples, Naples, Italy ; 2 Division of Medical Oncology, "S. G. Moscati" Hospital,
Avellino, Italy.

DOI: 10.3978/j.issn.2072-1439.2014.06.14 
PMCID: PMC4073354
PMID: 24976974  [PubMed]


75. BMC Cancer. 2014 Jun 28;14:473. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-14-473.

Rationale and design of LUX-Head & Neck 1: a randomised, Phase III trial of
afatinib versus methotrexate in patients with recurrent and/or metastatic head
and neck squamous cell carcinoma who progressed after platinum-based therapy.

Machiels JP(1), Licitra LF, Haddad RI, Tahara M, Cohen EE.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Center, Service d'Oncologie Médicale, Cliniques Universitaires
Saint-Luc and Institut de Recherche Clinique et Expérimentale (Pole MIRO),
Université Catholique de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium.
jean-pascal.machiels@uclouvain.be.

BACKGROUND: Patients with recurrent and/or metastatic (R/M) head and neck
squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) receiving platinum-based chemotherapy as their
first-line treatment have a dismal prognosis, with a median overall survival (OS)
of ~7 months. Methotrexate is sometimes used following platinum failure or in
patients not fit enough for platinum therapy, but this agent has not demonstrated
any OS improvement. Targeted therapies are a novel approach, with the
EGFR-targeting monoclonal antibody cetuximab (plus platinum-based chemotherapy)
approved in the US and Europe in the first-line R/M setting, and as monotherapy
following platinum failure in the US. However, there is still a high unmet
medical need for new treatments that improve outcomes in the second-line R/M
setting following failure on first-line platinum-containing regimens. Afatinib,
an irreversible ErbB family blocker, was recently approved for the first-line
treatment of EGFR mutation-positive metastatic non-small cell lung cancer.
Afatinib has also shown clinical activity similar to cetuximab in a Phase II
proof-of-concept HNSCC trial. Based on these observations, the Phase III,
LUX-Head & Neck 1 study is evaluating afatinib versus methotrexate in R/M HNSCC
patients following progression on platinum-based chemotherapy in the R/M setting.
METHODS/DESIGN: Patients with progressive disease after one first-line
platinum-based chemotherapy are randomised 2:1 to oral afatinib (starting dose 40
mg once daily) or IV methotrexate (starting dose 40 mg/m(2) once weekly)
administered as monotherapy with best supportive care until progression or
intolerable adverse events. Efficacy of afatinib versus methotrexate will be
assessed in terms of progression-free survival (primary endpoint). Disease
progression will be evaluated according to RECIST v1.1 by investigator and
independent central review. Secondary endpoints include OS, tumour response and
safety. Health-related quality of life and biomarker assessments will also be
performed.
DISCUSSION: If the LUX-Head & Neck 1 trial meets its primary endpoint, it will
demonstrate the ability of afatinib to elicit an improved treatment benefit
versus a commonly used chemotherapy agent in the second-line treatment of R/M
HNSCC patients who have failed on first-line platinum-based therapy, confirm the 
clinical efficacy of afatinib observed in the Phase II proof-of-concept study,
and establish a new standard of care for this patient population.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2407-14-473 
PMCID: PMC4079914
PMID: 24973959  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Int J Biol Macromol. 2014 Aug;69:532-41. doi: 10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2014.06.009.
Epub 2014 Jun 17.

Chitosan cross-linked docetaxel loaded EGF receptor targeted nanoparticles for
lung cancer cells.

Maya S(1), Sarmento B(2), Lakshmanan VK(1), Menon D(1), Seabra V(3), Jayakumar
R(4).

Author information: 
(1)Amrita Centre for Nanosciences and Molecular Medicine, Amrita Institute of
Medical Sciences and Research Centre, Amrita Vishwa Vidyapeetham University,
Kochi 682041, India. (2)IINFACTS, Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Instituto Superior de Ciências da Saúde, CESPU, Rua Central de Gandra, 1317,
4585-116 Gandra, Portugal; INEB, Institute of Biomedical Engineering, University 
of Porto, Rua do Campo Alegre, Porto, Portugal. (3)IINFACTS, Department of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Instituto Superior de Ciências da Saúde, CESPU, Rua
Central de Gandra, 1317, 4585-116 Gandra, Portugal. (4)Amrita Centre for
Nanosciences and Molecular Medicine, Amrita Institute of Medical Sciences and
Research Centre, Amrita Vishwa Vidyapeetham University, Kochi 682041, India.
Electronic address: rjayakumar@aims.amrita.edu.

Lung cancer, associated with the up-regulated epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR) led to the development of EGFR targeted anticancer therapeutics. The
biopolymeric nanoparticles form an outstanding system for the targeted delivery
of therapeutic agents. The present work evaluated the in vitro effects of
chitosan cross-linked γ-poly(glutamic acid) (γ-PGA) nanoparticles (Nps) loaded
with docetaxel (DTXL) and decorated with Cetuximab (CET), targeted to EGFR
over-expressing non-small-cell-lung-cancer (NSCLC) cells (A549). CET-DTXL-γ-PGA
Nps was prepared by ionic gelation and CET conjugation via EDC/NHS chemistry.
EGFR specificity of targeted Nps was confirmed by the higher uptake rates of EGFR
+ve A549 cells compared to that of EGFR -ve cells (NIH3T3). The cytotoxicity of
Nps quantified using cell based (MTT/LDH) and flowcytometry (Cell-cycle analysis,
Annexin V/PI and JC-1) assays showed superior antiproliferative activity of
CET-DTXL-γ-PGA Nps over DTXL-γ-PGA Nps. The A549 cells treated with
CET-DTXL-γ-PGA NPs underwent a G2/M phase cell cycle arrest followed by reduction
in mitochondrial membrane potential of A549 cells, inducing apoptosis and
necrosis resulting in enhanced cancer cell death. CET-DTXL-γ-PGA Nps exhibited
enhanced cellular internalization and therapeutic activity, by actively targeting
EGFR on NSCLC cells and hence could be an effective alternative to non-specific, 
conventional chemotherapy by increasing its efficiency by many folds.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2014.06.009 
PMID: 24950310  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Clin Cancer Res. 2014 Sep 1;20(17):4478-87. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-13-3385.
Epub 2014 Jun 19.

Association of EGFR expression level and cetuximab activity in patient-derived
xenograft models of human non-small cell lung cancer.

Amendt C(1), Staub E(1), Friese-Hamim M(1), Störkel S(2), Stroh C(3).

Author information: 
(1)Merck KGaA, Darmstadt, Germany. (2)Institute of Pathology, University of
Witten/Herdecke and HELIOS Hospital Wuppertal, Wuppertal, Germany. (3)Merck KGaA,
Darmstadt, Germany. christopher.stroh@merckgroup.com.

PURPOSE: To explore in a panel of patient-derived xenograft models of human
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) whether high EGFR expression, was associated
with cetuximab activity.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: NSCLC patient-derived xenograft models (n=45) were implanted
subcutaneously into panels of nude mice and randomization cohorts were treated
with either cetuximab, cisplatin, cisplatin plus cetuximab, vehicle control, or
else were left untreated. Responses according to treatment were assessed at week 
3 by analyzing the relative change in tumor volume and an experimental analogue
of the Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors (RECIST) guidelines. An EGFR 
IHC score was calculated for each patient-derived xenograft model and response
was assessed according to EGFR expression level.
RESULTS: When tumors were stratified into high and low EGFR expression groups
(IHC score threshold 200; scale 0-300), a stronger antitumor activity was seen in
the high EGFR expression group compared with the low EGFR expression group in
both the cetuximab monotherapy and cisplatin plus cetuximab combination therapy
settings. For tumors treated with cisplatin plus cetuximab, the objective
response rate was significantly higher in the high EGFR expression group compared
with the low EGFR expression group (68% vs. 29%). Objective response rates were
similar in high and low expression groups for tumors treated with cisplatin alone
(27% vs. 24%, respectively).
CONCLUSION: Cetuximab activity in NSCLC patient-derived xenograft models was
demonstrated clearly only in tumors that expressed high levels of EGFR, as
defined by an IHC score of ≥200.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-13-3385 
PMID: 24947928  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Indian J Dermatol. 2014 May;59(3):271-4. doi: 10.4103/0019-5154.131398.

Dermatological Side Effects of Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor Inhibitors:
'PRIDE' Complex.

Madke B(1), Gole P(1), Kumar P(2), Khopkar U(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Seth Gordhandas Sunderdas Medical College and King 
Edward Memorial Hospital, Parel, Mumbai, Maharashtra, India. (2)Department of
Medical Oncology, Tata Memorial Hospital, Parel, Mumbai, Maharashtra, India.

Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) inhibitor therapy has become the standard
treatment for non-small cell lung cancer and head neck malignancy. This class of 
drug comprises EGFR inhibitors (erlotinib and gefitinib) and monoclonal antibody 
(cetuximab). Use of this class of drugs has been associated frequently with
dermatological side effects termed as PRIDE complex-Papulopustules and/or
paronychia, Regulatory abnormalities of hair growth, Itching, Dryness due to EGFR
inhibitors. We hereby report the cutaneous side effects of EGFR inhibitor therapy
in 15 patients of lung and head/neck cancer. The major clinical findings being
acneiform eruption and severe xerosis of skin. Management of these dermatological
adverse effects rarely requires discontinuation of targeted therapy and can be
managed symptomatically.

DOI: 10.4103/0019-5154.131398 
PMCID: PMC4037949
PMID: 24891659  [PubMed]


79. J Transl Med. 2014 May 26;12:147. doi: 10.1186/1479-5876-12-147.

Detection of activated KRAS from cancer patient peripheral blood using a weighted
enzymatic chip array.

Huang MY, Liu HC, Yen LC, Chang JY, Huang JJ, Wang JY(1), Hsiao CP, Lin SR.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Center, Kaohsiung Medical University Hospital, Kaohsiung 807, Taiwan.
cy614112@ms14.hinet.net.

BACKGROUND: The KRAS oncogene was one of the earliest discoveries of genetic
alterations in colorectal and lung cancers. Moreover, KRAS somatic mutations
might be used for predicting the efficiency of anti-EGFR therapeutic drugs. The
purpose of this research was to improve Activating KRAS Detection Chip by using a
weighted enzymatic chip array (WEnCA) platform to detect activated KRAS mutations
status in the peripheral blood of non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and
colorectal cancer (CRC) patients in Taiwan.
METHODS: Our laboratory developed an Activating KRAS Detection Chip and a WEnCA
technique that can detect activated KRAS mutation status by screening circulating
cancer cells in the surrounding bloodstream. We collected 390 peripheral blood
samples of NSCLC patients (n = 210) and CRC patients (n = 180) to evaluate
clinical KRAS activation using this gene array diagnosis apparatus, an Activating
KRAS Detection Chip and a WEnCA technique. Subsequently, we prospectively
enrolled 88 stage III CRC patients who received adjuvant FOLFOX-4 chemotherapy
with or without cetuximab. We compared the chip results of preoperative blood
specimens and their relationship with disease control status in these patients.
RESULTS: After statistical analysis, the sensitivity of WEnCA was found to be
93%, and the specificity was found to be 94%. Relapse status and chip results
among the stage III CRC patients receiving FOLFOX-4 plus cetuximab (n = 59) and
those receiving FOLFOX-4 alone (n = 29) were compared. Among the 51 stage III CRC
patients with chip negative results who were treated with FOLFOX-4 plus cetuximab
chemotherapy, the relapse rate was 33.3%; otherwise, the relapse rate was 48.5%
among the 23 out of 88 patients with chip negative results who received FOLFOX-4 
alone. Negative chip results were significantly associated to better treatment
outcomes in the FOLFOX-4 plus cetuximab group (P = 0.047).
CONCLUSIONS: The results demonstrated that the WEnCA technique is a sensitive and
convenient technique that produces easy-to-interpret results for detecting
activated KRAS from the peripheral blood of cancer patients. We suggest that the 
WEnCA technique is also a potential tool for predicting responses in CRC patients
following FOLFOX-4 plus cetuximab chemotherapy.

DOI: 10.1186/1479-5876-12-147 
PMCID: PMC4055935
PMID: 24884535  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Clin Adv Hematol Oncol. 2014 Jan;12(1 Suppl 1):2-4.

PL03.05 An intergroup randomized phase III comparison of standard-dose (60 Gy) vs
high-dose (74 Gy) chemoradiotherapy (CRT) +/- cetuximab (cetux) for stage III
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC): results on cetux from RTOG 0617.

[No authors listed]


PMID: 24852394  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Int J Cancer. 2015 Jul 15;137(2):262-6. doi: 10.1002/ijc.28940. Epub 2014 May 12.

Personalised cancer medicine.

Jackson SE(1), Chester JD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cancer and Genetics, School of Medicine, Cardiff University,
Cardiff, United Kingdom.

The evolving field of personalised medicine is playing an increasingly important 
role in cancer prevention, diagnosis, prognosis and therapeutics. Its importance 
in clinical management is demonstrated by the recent introduction into routine
clinical practice of various individualised, molecularly targeted therapies with 
increased efficacy and/or reduced toxicity. The identification of cancer
predisposition genes, such as the BRCA genes in breast cancer, permits screening 
programmes to identify patients "at-risk" of developing cancer and helps them
make decisions on individual risk-modification behaviours. Personalised medicine 
also plays an increasingly important role in cancer treatment. It is increasingly
clear that there are molecularly distinct subtypes of various common cancers,
with different therapeutic approaches required for each subtype, for example, the
use of the monoclonal antibodies (trastuzumab and cetuximab) in HER2-positive
breast cancer and wild-type KRAS colorectal cancer; tyrosine kinase inhibitors
(imatinib, gefitinib, erlotinib and crizotinib) in chronic myeloid leukaemia,
gastrointestinal stromal tumours and non-small-cell lung cancer and intracellular
agents (vemurafenib and olaparib) in metastatic malignant melanoma and ovarian,
breast and prostate cancer. The efficacy of various targeted therapies in such
disparate tumours suggests that we are entering an era in which treatment
decisions will be based on tumour molecular abnormality profile or "signature,"
rather than tumour tissue type or anatomical site of origin, improving patient
prognosis and quality of life. This mini review focuses on the role of
personalised medicine in cancer prevention and treatment as well as its future
direction in oncology.

© 2014 UICC.

DOI: 10.1002/ijc.28940 
PMID: 24789362  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Lung Cancer. 2014 Jul;85(1):81-7. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2014.04.001. Epub 2014
Apr 13.

Neoadjuvant chemo-immunotherapy modifies CD4(+)CD25(+) regulatory T cells (Treg) 
in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients.

Pircher A(1), Gamerith G(2), Amann A(2), Reinold S(3), Popper H(3), Gächter A(2),
Pall G(2), Wöll E(4), Jamnig H(5), Gastl G(2), Wolf AM(6), Hilbe W(2), Wolf D(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine V (Hematology and Oncology), Medical
University of Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria. Electronic address:
andreas.pircher@i-med.ac.at. (2)Department of Internal Medicine V (Hematology and
Oncology), Medical University of Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria. (3)Department of 
General Pathology, Medical University of Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine, St. Vinzenz Krankenhaus Zams, Zams, Austria. 
(5)Department of Pneumology, Landeskrankenhaus Natters, Natters, Austria.
(6)Department of Internal Medicine V (Hematology and Oncology), Medical
University of Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria; Medical Clinic III, Oncology,
Hematology and Rheumatology, University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany.
(7)Department of Internal Medicine V (Hematology and Oncology), Medical
University of Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria; Medical Clinic III, Oncology,
Hematology and Rheumatology, University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany. Electronic 
address: dominik.wolf@ukb.uni-bonn.de.

BACKGROUND: Regulatory T cells (Treg) are critical for cancer immune evasion;
whereas natural killer (NK) cells are central for effective anti-tumor immunity
including antibody-induced cellular cytotoxicity (ADCC). The predictive role of
Treg levels for clinical response to chemo-immunotherapy in non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC) as well as therapy-induced Treg changes remain to be defined.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: The impact of Treg on NK-mediated cetuximab-dependent
cellular cytoxicity was tested in vitro. Frequency and functional activity of
Treg was analyzed in 31 NSCLC stage IB-IIIA patients treated by neoadjuvant
Cetuximab/Docetaxel/Cisplatin prior to surgery. Data were correlated with
clinical outcome variables and Treg tumor infiltration.
RESULTS: Treg potently inhibit NK-mediated and cetuximab-induced ADCC in vitro.
In addition, a significant correlation between Treg reduction and clinical
response was seen. However, the grade of tumor infiltrating Treg in resected
tumors did not correlate with peripheral Treg levels. Moreover, Treg levels at
diagnosis did not predict clinical response to chemo-immunotherapy.
CONCLUSIONS: The drop of Treg levels during neoadjuvant chemo-immunotherapy in
NSCLC patients significantly correlates with clinical response. However, Treg at 
diagnosis are not linked to inferior clinical response to chemo-immunotherapy in 
NSCLC in vivo even though Treg efficiently inhibit ADCC in vitro.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2014.04.001 
PMID: 24780112  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. J Thorac Oncol. 2014 May;9(5):710-6. doi: 10.1097/JTO.0000000000000151.

A phase I study of concurrent individualized, isotoxic accelerated radiotherapy
and cisplatin-vinorelbine-cetuximab in patients with stage III non-small-cell
lung cancer.

Dingemans AM(1), Bootsma G, van Baardwijk A, Reymen B, Wanders R, Brans B, Das M,
Hochstenbag M, van Belle A, Houben R, Lambin P, de Ruysscher D.

Author information: 
(1)*Department of Pulmonology, GROW School for Oncology and Developmental
Biology, Maastricht University Medical Centre, Maastricht, The Netherlands;
†Department of Pulmonology, Atrium Medical Centre, Heerlen, The Netherlands;
‡Department of Radiation Oncology (MAASTRO Clinic), GROW School for Oncology and 
Developmental Biology; §Department of Nuclear Medicine, and ‖Department of
Radiology, GROW School for Oncology and Developmental Biology, Maastricht
University Medical Centre, Maastricht, The Netherlands; and ¶Department of
Radiation Oncology, University Hospitals Leuven/KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.

BACKGROUND: In this open-label phase I study, the maximum-tolerated dose of
cetuximab with concurrent chemoradiotherapy (C-CRT) in stage III non-small-cell
lung cancer together with individualized, isotoxic accelerated radiotherapy (RT) 
was investigated.
METHODS: Patients with stage III non-small-cell lung cancer, World Health
Organization performance status 0-1, forced expiratory volume in 1 second more
than 50%, carbon monoxide diffusing capacity more than 50%, weight loss less than
10%, and no severe comorbidity were enrolled. Patients without progression after 
one to two cycles of gemcitabine-carboplatin were included and treated with
cetuximab 400 mg/kg d7 and 250 mg/kg weekly together with RT and cisplatin (50
mg/m d1, 8; 40 mg/m d22)-vinorelbine for 5 weeks. Vinorelbine was escalated in
three steps; (1) 10 mg/m d1, 8 and 8 mg/m d22, 29; (2) 20 mg/m d1, 8 and 8 mg/m
d22, 29; (3) 20 mg/m d1, 8; 15 mg/m d22, 29. An individualized prescribed RT dose
based on normal tissue dose constraints was applied (e.g., mean lung dose 19 Gy).
The primary endpoint was the maximum-tolerated dose 3 months after the end of
C-CRT; secondary endpoints were toxicity and metabolic response as assessed by
positron emission tomography.
RESULTS: Between September 2007 and October 2010, 25 patients (12 men, 13 women, 
mean age 59 years) were included. The mean RT dose was 62 ± 6.6 Gy. The
vinorelbine dose could be escalated to dose level 3. Twelve of 25 patients
experienced greater than or equal to grade 3 toxicity (esophagitis 3, rash 1,
diarrhea 1, cough 1, dyspnea 1, vomiting 1, and pulmonary embolism 1). No
dose-limiting toxicities were observed. One patient with a complete pathological 
response in dose level 3 developed a fatal hemoptysis 4 months after RT.
Metabolic remissions were observed in 19 of 22 patients.
CONCLUSION: C-CRT with cetuximab and cisplatin-vinorelbine is safe to deliver at 
full dose. The recommended phase II dose is therefore cetuximab 400 mg/m d7 and
250 mg/m weekly, cisplatin 50 mg/m d1, 8; 40 mg/m d22 and vinorelbine 20 mg/m d1,
8; 15 mg/m d22, 29 for 5 weeks together with RT.

DOI: 10.1097/JTO.0000000000000151 
PMCID: PMC4132032
PMID: 24722157  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. J Thorac Oncol. 2014 May;9(5):717-24. doi: 10.1097/JTO.0000000000000141.

Relationship between EGFR expression, EGFR mutation status, and the efficacy of
chemotherapy plus cetuximab in FLEX study patients with advanced non-small-cell
lung cancer.

Douillard JY(1), Pirker R, O'Byrne KJ, Kerr KM, Störkel S, von Heydebreck A,
Grote HJ, Celik I, Shepherd FA.

Author information: 
(1)*Department of Medical Oncology, Institut de Cancerologie de l'Ouest, Centre
René Gauducheau, Saint-Herblain, France; †Department of Medicine I, Medical
University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria; ‡HOPE Directorate, St James's Hospital,
Dublin, Ireland; §Department of Pathology, Aberdeen Royal Infirmary, Aberdeen,
United Kingdom; ‖Institute of Pathology, University of Witten/Herdecke and HELIOS
Hospital Wuppertal, Wuppertal, Germany; ¶Global Biostatistics, #Biomarker
Technologies & Operations, and **Translational Innovation Platform Oncology,
Merck KGaA, Darmstadt, Germany; and ††University Health Network, Department of
Oncology and Hematology, Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, University of Toronto, 
Toronto, Canada.

INTRODUCTION: The phase III FLEX study (NCT00148798) in advanced non-small-cell
lung cancer indicated that the survival benefit associated with the addition of
cetuximab to cisplatin and vinorelbine was limited to patients whose tumors
expressed high levels of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)
(immunohistochemistry score of ≥200; scale 0-300). We assessed whether the
treatment effect was also modulated in FLEX study patients by tumor EGFR mutation
status.
METHODS: A tumor mutation screen of EGFR exons 18 to 21 included 971 of 1125
(86%) FLEX study patients. Treatment outcome in low and high EGFR expression
groups was analyzed across efficacy endpoints according to tumor EGFR mutation
status.
RESULTS: Mutations in EGFR exons 18 to 21 were detected in 133 of 971 tumors
(14%), 970 of which were also evaluable for EGFR expression level. The most
common mutations were exon 19 deletions and L858R (124 of 133 patients; 93%). In 
the high EGFR expression group (immunohistochemistry score of ≥200), a survival
benefit for the addition of cetuximab to chemotherapy was demonstrated in
patients with EGFR wild-type (including T790M mutant) tumors. Although patient
numbers were small, those in the high EGFR expression group whose tumors carried 
EGFR mutations may also have derived a survival benefit from the addition of
cetuximab to chemotherapy. Response data suggested a cetuximab benefit in the
high EGFR expression group regardless of EGFR mutation status.
CONCLUSIONS: The survival benefit associated with the addition of cetuximab to
first-line chemotherapy for advanced non-small-cell lung cancer expressing high
levels of EGFR is not limited by EGFR mutation status.

DOI: 10.1097/JTO.0000000000000141 
PMID: 24662454  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Cancer Res. 2014 May 15;74(10):2825-34. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-3157. Epub 
2014 Mar 19.

EGFR-mediated chromatin condensation protects KRAS-mutant cancer cells against
ionizing radiation.

Wang M(1), Kern AM(1), Hülskötter M(1), Greninger P(1), Singh A(1), Pan Y(1),
Chowdhury D(1), Krause M(2), Baumann M(2), Benes CH(1), Efstathiou JA(1),
Settleman J(1), Willers H(3).

Author information: 
(1)Authors' Affiliations: Department of Radiation Oncology, Massachusetts General
Hospital; Center for Cancer Research, Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer
Center; Department of Radiation Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts; Department of Radiation Oncology, Medical 
Faculty and University Hospital Carl Gustav Carus, Technische Universität
Dresden, Dresden; OncoRay-National Center for Radiation Research in Oncology,
Medical Faculty and University Hospital Carl Gustav Carus, Technische Universität
Dresden, Dresden; Institute of Radiation Oncology, Helmholtz-Zentrum
Dresden-Rossendorf, Dresden; and Cancer Consortium (DKTK) Partner Site Dresden
and German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany. (2)Authors'
Affiliations: Department of Radiation Oncology, Massachusetts General Hospital;
Center for Cancer Research, Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center;
Department of Radiation Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, Massachusetts; Department of Radiation Oncology, Medical Faculty 
and University Hospital Carl Gustav Carus, Technische Universität Dresden,
Dresden; OncoRay-National Center for Radiation Research in Oncology, Medical
Faculty and University Hospital Carl Gustav Carus, Technische Universität
Dresden, Dresden; Institute of Radiation Oncology, Helmholtz-Zentrum
Dresden-Rossendorf, Dresden; and Cancer Consortium (DKTK) Partner Site Dresden
and German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, GermanyAuthors'
Affiliations: Department of Radiation Oncology, Massachusetts General Hospital;
Center for Cancer Research, Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center;
Department of Radiation Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, Massachusetts; Department of Radiation Oncology, Medical Faculty 
and University Hospital Carl Gustav Carus, Technische Universität Dresden,
Dresden; OncoRay-National Center for Radiation Research in Oncology, Medical
Faculty and University Hospital Carl Gustav Carus, Technische Universität
Dresden, Dresden; Institute of Radiation Oncology, Helmholtz-Zentrum
Dresden-Rossendorf, Dresden; and Cancer Consortium (DKTK) Partner Site Dresden
and German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, GermanyAuthors'
Affiliations: Department of Radiation Oncology, Massachusetts General Hospital;
Center for Cancer Research, Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center;
Department of Radiation Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, Massachusetts; Department of Radiation Oncology, Medical Faculty 
and University Hospital Carl Gustav Carus, Technische Universität Dresden,
Dresden; OncoRay-National Center for Radiation Research in Oncology, Medical F
(3)Authors' Affiliations: Department of Radiation Oncology, Massachusetts General
Hospital; Center for Cancer Research, Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer
Center; Department of Radiation Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts; Department of Radiation Oncology, Medical 
Faculty and University Hospital Carl Gustav Carus, Technische Universität
Dresden, Dresden; OncoRay-National Center for Radiation Research in Oncology,
Medical Faculty and University Hospital Carl Gustav Carus, Technische Universität
Dresden, Dresden; Institute of Radiation Oncology, Helmholtz-Zentrum
Dresden-Rossendorf, Dresden; and Cancer Consortium (DKTK) Partner Site Dresden
and German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany
hwillers@partners.org.

Therapeutics that target the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) can enhance 
the cytotoxic effects of ionizing radiation (IR). However, predictive genomic
biomarkers of this radiosensitization have remained elusive. By screening 40
non-small cell lung cancer cell (NSCLC) lines, we established a surprising
positive correlation between the presence of a KRAS mutation and
radiosensitization by the EGFR inhibitors erlotinib and cetuximab. EGFR signaling
in KRAS-mutant NSCLC cells promotes chromatin condensation in vitro and in vivo, 
thereby restricting the number of DNA double-strand breaks (DSB) produced by a
given dose of IR. Chromatin condensation in interphase cells is characterized by 
an unexpected mitosis-like colocalization of serine 10 phosphorylation and lysine
9 trimethylation on histone H3. Aurora B promotes this process in a manner that
is codependent upon EGFR and protein kinase C α (PKCα). PKCα, in addition to
MEK/ERK signaling, is required for the suppression of DSB-inducible premature
senescence by EGFR. Blockade of autophagy results in a mutant KRAS-dependent
senescence-to-apoptosis switch in cancer cells treated with IR and erlotinib. In 
conclusion, we identify EGFR as a molecular target to overcome a novel mechanism 
of radioresistance in KRAS-mutant tumor cells, which stands in contrast to the
unresponsiveness of KRAS-mutant cancers to EGFR-directed agents in monotherapy.
Our findings may reposition EGFR-targeted agents for combination with
DSB-inducing therapies in KRAS-mutant NSCLC.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-3157 
PMCID: PMC4278592
PMID: 24648348  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Lung Cancer. 2014 Mar;83(3):408-10. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2013.12.007. Epub 2013
Dec 25.

Overcoming resistance to first generation EGFR TKIs with cetuximab in combination
with chemotherapy in an EGFR mutated advanced stage NSCLC patient.

Pircher A(1), Manzl C(2), Fiegl M(3), Popper H(2), Pirker R(4), Hilbe W(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Internal Medicine V, Innsbruck Medical 
University, Innsbruck, Austria. Electronic address: andreas.pircher@i-med.ac.at. 
(2)Department of Pathology, Innsbruck Medical University, Innsbruck, Austria.
(3)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Internal Medicine V, Innsbruck Medical 
University, Innsbruck, Austria. (4)Department of Internal Medicine I, Medical
University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.

We report the case of a female never-smoking patient with an epidermal growth
factor receptor (EGFR) mutation positive advanced non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC) who received multiple lines of treatment. When she evolved clinical
resistance to first generation EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKI), she was
treated with a fifth-line combination therapy with cetuximab and vinorelbine.
This combination was highly active with a treatment response lasting for 9 months
supporting the hypothesis that EGFR monoclonal antibodies in combination with
chemotherapy may play a role in reversing EGFR-TKI resistance in EGFR
mutation-positive NSCLC.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2013.12.007 
PMID: 24412619  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Curr Opin Oncol. 2014 Mar;26(2):145-51. doi: 10.1097/CCO.0000000000000056.

Novel drugs against non-small-cell lung cancer.

Pirker R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine I, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Important therapeutic advances for patients with advanced
non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) with focus on individualized therapy have
recently occurred and are summarized in this review.
RECENT FINDINGS: Cetuximab added to first-line chemotherapy has been shown to
improve survival in patients with high epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)
expression in their tumors. Afatinib has shown improved progression-free survival
and better quality of life compared to chemotherapy in patients with
EGFR-mutation-positive adenocarcinomas. Several other EGFR-directed agents are in
clinical development. Crizotinib improved progression-free survival compared to
second-line chemotherapy with docetaxel or pemetrexed in patients with advanced
anaplastic lymphoma kinase-positive NSCLC. Selumetinib added to docetaxel has
improved outcome compared with docetaxel in a randomized phase II trial in
patients with advanced KRAS-mutant NSCLC and this combination is currently
studied in a phase III trial. Nintedanib added to docetaxel improved
progression-free survival in the second-line therapy of patients with advanced
NSCLC but many other angiogenesis inhibitors failed to improve clinical outcome
in phase III trials. Several other targeted therapies are currently evaluated in 
phase III trials in patients with advanced NSCLC.
SUMMARY: Recent trials have led to the approval of afatinib and crizotinib for
subsets of patients with advanced NSCLC.

DOI: 10.1097/CCO.0000000000000056 
PMID: 24406751  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. BMC Cancer. 2014 Jan 4;14:5. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-14-5.

Evaluation of a novel rash scale and a serum proteomic predictor in a randomized 
phase II trial of sequential or concurrent cetuximab and pemetrexed in previously
treated non-small cell lung cancer.

Maitland ML(1), Levine MR, Lacouture ME, Wroblewski KE, Chung CH, Gordon IO,
Szeto L, Ratko G, Soltani K, Kozloff MF, Hoffman PC, Salgia R, Carbone DP,
Karrison TG, Vokes EE.

Author information: 
(1)University of Chicago, Section of Hematology/Oncology, 5841 S Maryland Ave, MC
2115, Chicago, IL 60637, USA. mmaitlan@medicine.bsd.uchicago.edu.

BACKGROUND: Candidate predictive biomarkers for epidermal growth factor receptor 
inhibitors (EGFRi), skin rash and serum proteomic assays, require further
qualification to improve EGFRi therapy in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). In 
a phase II trial that was closed to accrual because of changes in clinical
practice we examined the relationships among candidate biomarkers, quantitative
changes in tumor size, progression-free and overall survival.
METHODS: 55 patients with progressive NSCLC after platinum therapy were
randomized to receive (Arm A) cetuximab, followed by pemetrexed at progression,
or (Arm B) concurrent cetuximab and pemetrexed. All received cetuximab
monotherapy for the first 14 days. Pre-treatment serum and weekly rash
assessments by standard and EGFRi-induced rash (EIR) scales were collected.
RESULTS: 43 patients (20-Arm A, 23-Arm B) completed the 14-day run-in. Median
survival was 9.1 months. Arm B had better median overall (Arm B = 10.3 [95% CI
7.5, 16.8]; Arm A = 3.5 [2.8, 11.7] months P = 0.046) and progression-free
survival (Arm B = 2.3 [1.6, 3.1]; Arm A = 1.6 [0.9, 1.9] months P = 0.11). The
EIR scale distributed ratings among 6 rather than 3 categories but ordinal scale 
rash severity did not predict outcomes. The serum proteomic classifier and
absence of rash after 21 days of cetuximab did.
CONCLUSIONS: Absence of rash after 21 days of cetuximab therapy and the serum
proteomic classifier, but not ordinal rash severity, were associated with NSCLC
outcomes. Although in a small study, these observations were consistent with
results from larger retrospective analyses.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2407-14-5 
PMCID: PMC3893521
PMID: 24386952  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. J Thorac Oncol. 2014 Jan;9(1):109-13. doi: 10.1097/JTO.0000000000000043.

Preselection based on clinical characteristics in German non-small-cell lung
cancer patients screened for EML4-ALK translocation.

Tufman AL(1), Edelmann M, Gamarra F, Reu S, Borgmeier A, Schrödl K, Zauber R,
Müller-Lisse U, Huber RM.

Author information: 
(1)*Division of Respiratory Medicine and Thoracic Oncology, Department of
Internal Medicine V, Thoracic Oncology Centre Munich,
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, Munich, Germany; †Member of the German
Center for Lung Research, Comprehensive Pneumology Center Munich, Munich,
Germany; ‡Institute for Pathology, Ludwig-Maximilians Universität München,
Munich, Germany; and §Department of Radiology, Ludwig-Maximilians Universität
München, Munich, Germany.

BACKGROUND: The advent of multiple molecular targets in advanced non-small-cell
lung cancer (NSCLC) has brought new treatments, but also new logistic and
technical considerations, to the clinician. The small size of endoscopic biopsies
and the increasing number of relevant but uncommon markers has increased the need
for rational approaches to molecular testing. We present the results of clinical 
preselection before EML4-ALK testing in a German NSCLC cohort.
METHODS: Patients with stage IV NSCLC were included. Clinicians were encouraged
to consider screening epidermal growth factor receptor wild-type adenocarcinoma
patients with a limited smoking history, relatively young age, or who had
benefited from chemotherapy for a relatively long period. Break-apart
fluorescence in situ hybridization using archived paraffin tissue was performed
in a central facility.
RESULTS: From April 2010 to September 2011 we included 61 patients: mean age 56.6
years, 41% women, 90% adenocarcinoma, 5% large-cell, and 5% squamous cell
cancers. Only three patients had activating epidermal growth factor receptor
mutations; 16.4% of patients were positive for EML4-ALK fusion. The anaplastic
lymphoma kinase (ALK)-positive patients included 60% women, tended to be younger,
had smoked less, and had received significantly more systemic therapy, on average
3.7 lines of treatment over 3 years, before ALK-testing compared with the
ALK-negative patients. Long periods of progression-free survival were experienced
by ALK-positive patients treated with pemetrexed, vinorelbine, or cetuximab.
CONCLUSIONS: EML4-ALK fusion is uncommon, reported in about 5% of NSCLC patients;
however, clinical preselection increased the yield of testing to 16.4%. EML4-ALK 
positive patients seem to have distinct clinical features and show long responses
to a number of systemic therapies.

DOI: 10.1097/JTO.0000000000000043 
PMID: 24346098  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Lung Cancer. 2014 Feb;83(2):211-8. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2013.11.006. Epub 2013 
Nov 16.

Meta-analysis of individual patient data from randomized trials of chemotherapy
plus cetuximab as first-line treatment for advanced non-small cell lung cancer.

Pujol JL(1), Pirker R(2), Lynch TJ(3), Butts CA(4), Rosell R(5), Shepherd FA(6), 
Vansteenkiste J(7), O'Byrne KJ(8), de Blas B(9), Heighway J(10), von Heydebreck
A(9), Thatcher N(11).

Author information: 
(1)Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Montpellier, Hôpital Arnaud de Villeneuve,
Montpellier, France. Electronic address: jl-pujol@chu-montpellier.fr.
(2)Department of Medicine I, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(3)Smilow Cancer Hospital, Yale Cancer Center, New Haven, CT, United States.
(4)Cross Cancer Center, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada. (5)Catalan Institute of
Oncology, Hospital Germans Trias i Pujol, Badalona, Spain. (6)University Health
Network, Princess Margaret Hospital Site, University of Toronto, Toronto,
Ontario, Canada. (7)University Hospital Gasthuisberg, KU Leuven, Belgium. (8)St
James's Hospital, Dublin, Ireland. (9)Merck KGaA, Darmstadt, Germany. (10)Cancer 
Communications and Consultancy Ltd., Knutsford, Cheshire, UK. (11)Christie
Hospital NHS Trust, Manchester, UK.

OBJECTIVES: Four randomized phase II/III trials investigated the addition of
cetuximab to platinum-based, first-line chemotherapy in patients with advanced
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). A meta-analysis was performed to examine the 
benefit/risk ratio for the addition of cetuximab to chemotherapy.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The meta-analysis included individual patient efficacy
data from 2018 patients and individual patient safety data from 1970 patients
comprising respectively the combined intention-to-treat and safety populations of
the four trials. The effect of adding cetuximab to chemotherapy was measured by
hazard ratios (HRs) obtained using a Cox proportional hazards model and odds
ratios calculated by logistic regression. Survival rates at 1 year were
calculated. All applied models were stratified by trial. Tests on heterogeneity
of treatment effects across the trials and sensitivity analyses were performed
for all endpoints.
RESULTS: The meta-analysis demonstrated that the addition of cetuximab to
chemotherapy significantly improved overall survival (HR 0.88, p=0.009, median
10.3 vs 9.4 months), progression-free survival (HR 0.90, p=0.045, median 4.7 vs
4.5 months) and response (odds ratio 1.46, p<0.001, overall response rate 32.2%
vs 24.4%) compared with chemotherapy alone. The safety profile of chemotherapy
plus cetuximab in the meta-analysis population was confirmed as manageable.
Neither trials nor patient subgroups defined by key baseline characteristics
showed significant heterogeneity for any endpoint.
CONCLUSION: The addition of cetuximab to platinum-based, first-line chemotherapy 
for advanced NSCLC significantly improved outcome for all efficacy endpoints with
an acceptable safety profile, indicating a favorable benefit/risk ratio.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2013.11.006 
PMID: 24332319  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol. 2014 Jan;73(1):131-7. doi: 10.1007/s00280-013-2329-0.
Epub 2013 Dec 11.

Changes in epidermal growth factor receptor expression during chemotherapy in
non-small cell lung cancer.

Jakobsen JN(1), Santoni-Rugiu E, Sørensen JB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Rigshospitalet, 9 Blegdamsvej, 2100, Copenhagen,
Denmark, jan.nyrop.jakobsen@rh.regionh.dk.

BACKGROUND: Antibodies targeting epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), such as
cetuximab, may potentially improve outcome in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) 
patients with high EGFR expression. The EGFR expression may be heterogeneously
distributed within tumors, and small biopsies may thus not accurately reveal the 
EGFR expression. In addition, EGFR expression may also change during
chemotherapy. The current study investigates the magnitude of these two issues.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: EGFR expression in diagnostic biopsies and resection
specimen was compared in 53 NSCLC patients stage T1-4N0-1M0 treated with surgery 
without preceding chemotherapy (OP group), and 65 NSCLC patients stage T1-3N0-2M0
(NAC group) treated with preoperative carboplatin and paclitaxel in order to
evaluate the discordance of EGFR expression between samples.
RESULTS: Discordance between tumors dichotomized according to EGFR expression
(high: H-score ≥200; low: H-score <200) in diagnostic biopsies and immediate
resection specimens was 25 % in the OP group and 33 % in the NAC group (p =
0.628). Five (9 %) of primary tumors in the OP group and 4 (13 %) in the NAC
group had increased EGFR expression in the resection specimens as compared to the
diagnostic biopsies (p = 0.583). A decrease in EGFR expression was observed in 6 
(11 %) in the OP group and 7 (23 %) in the NAC group (p = 0.148).
CONCLUSION: EGFR expression in 25 % of diagnostic biopsies may potentially not be
accurate compared to the prevailing pattern in the whole tumor based on the
larger resection specimens. This may potentially be an obstacle for proper use of
antibodies targeting the EGFR in NSCLC. EGFR expression does, however, not change
significantly during paclitaxel and carboplatin and rebiopsies in order to decide
on anti-EGFR antibody therapy following chemotherapy do not seem warranted.

DOI: 10.1007/s00280-013-2329-0 
PMID: 24326616  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Pharmacol Res. 2014 Jan;79:34-74. doi: 10.1016/j.phrs.2013.11.002. Epub 2013 Nov 
20.

The ErbB/HER family of protein-tyrosine kinases and cancer.

Roskoski R Jr(1).

Author information: 
(1)Blue Ridge Institute for Medical Research, 3754 Brevard Road, Suite 116, Box
19, Horse Shoe, NC 28742, USA. Electronic address: rrj@brimr.org.

The human epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) family consists of four members
that belong to the ErbB lineage of proteins (ErbB1-4). These receptors consist of
a glycosylated extracellular domain, a single hydrophobic transmembrane segment, 
and an intracellular portion with a juxtamembrane segment, a protein kinase
domain, and a carboxyterminal tail. Seven ligands bind to EGFR including
epidermal growth factor and transforming growth factor α, none bind to ErbB2, two
bind to ErbB3, and seven ligands bind to ErbB4. The ErbB proteins function as
homo and heterodimers. The heterodimer consisting of ErbB2, which lacks a ligand,
and ErbB3, which is kinase impaired, is surprisingly the most robust signaling
complex of the ErbB family. Growth factor binding to EGFR induces a large
conformational change in the extracellular domain, which leads to the exposure of
a dimerization arm in domain II of the extracellular segment. Two ligand-EGFR
complexes unite to form a back-to-back dimer in which the ligands are on opposite
sides of the aggregate. Following ligand binding, EGFR intracellular kinase
domains form an asymmetric homodimer that resembles the heterodimer formed by
cyclin and cyclin-dependent kinase. The carboxyterminal lobe of the activator
kinase of the dimer interacts with the amino-terminal lobe of the receiver kinase
thereby leading to its allosteric stimulation. Downstream ErbB signaling modules 
include the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/Akt (PKB) pathway, the
Ras/Raf/MEK/ERK1/2 pathway, and the phospholipase C (PLCγ) pathway. Several
malignancies are associated with the mutation or increased expression of members 
of the ErbB family including lung, breast, stomach, colorectal, head and neck,
and pancreatic carcinomas and glioblastoma (a brain tumor). Gefitinib, erlotinib,
and afatinib are orally effective protein-kinase targeted quinazoline derivatives
that are used in the treatment of ERBB1-mutant lung cancer. Lapatinib is an
orally effective quinazoline derivative used in the treatment of
ErbB2-overexpressing breast cancer. Trastuzumab, pertuzumab, and ado-trastuzumab 
emtansine, which are given intravenously, are monoclonal antibodies that target
the extracellular domain and are used for the treatment of ErbB2-positive breast 
cancer; ado-trastuzumab emtansine is an antibody-drug conjugate that delivers a
cytotoxic drug to cells overexpressing ErbB2. Cetuximab and panitumumab are
monoclonal antibodies that target ErbB1 and are used in the treatment of
colorectal cancer. Cancers treated with these targeted drugs eventually become
resistant to them. The role of combinations of targeted drugs or targeted drugs
with cytotoxic therapies is being explored in an effort to prevent or delay drug 
resistance in the treatment of these malignancies.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.phrs.2013.11.002 
PMID: 24269963  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Lancet Oncol. 2013 Dec;14(13):1326-36. doi: 10.1016/S1470-2045(13)70473-X. Epub
2013 Nov 12.

Docetaxel or pemetrexed with or without cetuximab in recurrent or progressive
non-small-cell lung cancer after platinum-based therapy: a phase 3, open-label,
randomised trial.

Kim ES(1), Neubauer M, Cohn A, Schwartzberg L, Garbo L, Caton J, Robert F,
Reynolds C, Katz T, Chittoor S, Simms L, Saxman S.

Author information: 
(1)Levine Cancer Institute, Carolinas HealthCare System, Charlotte, NC, USA.
Electronic address: Edward.Kim@carolinashealthcare.org.

Erratum in
    Lancet Oncol. 2014 Jan;15(1):e4.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Clin Oncol. 2014 Jan;11(1):3.
    Lancet Oncol. 2013 Dec;14(13):1251-3.

BACKGROUND: Available preclinical and phase 2 clinical data suggest that the
addition of cetuximab, a monoclonal antibody directed against the epidermal
growth factor receptor (EGFR), to chemotherapy might improve outcome in patients 
with advanced non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC). We aimed to assess whether the 
addition of cetuximab to chemotherapy improved progression-free survival in
patients with recurrent or progressive NSCLC after platinum-based therapy.
METHODS: In this unmasked, open-label randomised phase 3 trial we enrolled
patients with metastatic, unresectable, or locally advanced NSCLC from 121 sites 
in Canada and the USA. Eligible patients were those aged 18 years or older who
had experienced progressive disease during or after one previous platinum-based
regimen. Initially, patients were randomly assigned to receive either pemetrexed 
(500 mg/m(2)) or docetaxel (75 mg/m(2)) and then randomly assigned within each
group to receive their chemotherapy with or without cetuximab (400 mg/m(2) at
first dose and 250 mg/m(2) weekly thereafter) until disease progression or
unacceptable toxicity. However, after a change in the standard of care,
investigators chose whether to treat with pemetrexed or docetaxel on a
patient-by-patient basis. The primary analysis was changed to compare
progression-free survival with cetuximab plus pemetrexed versus pemetrexed, on an
intention-to-treat basis. This study is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov,
number NCT00095199.
FINDINGS: Between Jan 10, 2005, and Feb 10, 2010, we enrolled 939 patients; data 
for one patient was accidentally discarded. Of the remaining 938 patients, 605
received pemetrexed (301 patients with cetuximab and 304 alone) and 333 received 
docetaxel (167 in combination with cetuximab and 166 alone). Median
progression-free survival with cetuximab plus pemetrexed was 2·9 months (95% CI
2·7-3·2) versus 2·8 months (2·5-3·3) with pemetrexed (HR 1·03, 95% CI 0·87-1·21; 
p=0·76). The most common grade 3-4 adverse events with cetuximab plus pemetrexed 
were fatigue (33 [11%] of 292 patients), acneiform rash (31 [11%]), dyspnoea (29 
[10%]), and decreased neutrophil count (28 [10%]), and with pemetrexed alone were
dyspnoea (35 [12%] of 289 patients), decreased neutrophil count (26 [9%]), and
fatigue (23 [8%]). A significantly higher proportion of patients in the cetuximab
plus pemetrexed group (119 [41%] of 292 patients) experienced at least one
serious adverse event than those patients in the pemetrexed group (85 [29%] of
289 patients; p=0·0054). Nine (3%) of 292 treated patients in the cetuximab and
pemetrexed group died of adverse events compared with five (2%) of 289 treated
patients in the pemetrexed alone group.
INTERPRETATION: The use of cetuximab is not recommended in combination with
chemotherapy in patients previously treated with platinum-based therapy.
FUNDING: Eli Lilly and Company and ImClone Systems LLC, a wholly owned subsidiary
of Eli Lilly and Company.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S1470-2045(13)70473-X 
PMID: 24231627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Lancet Oncol. 2013 Dec;14(13):1251-3. doi: 10.1016/S1470-2045(13)70498-4. Epub
2013 Nov 12.

Cetuximab and non-small-cell lung cancer: end of the story?

Rossi A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Oncology, SG Moscati Hospital, Contrada Amoretta, 8,
83100-Avellino, Italy. Electronic address: arossi_it@yahoo.it.

Comment on
    Lancet Oncol. 2013 Dec;14(13):1326-36.

DOI: 10.1016/S1470-2045(13)70498-4 
PMID: 24231626  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Neoplasia. 2013 Oct;15(10):1196-206.

Sym004, a novel EGFR antibody mixture, can overcome acquired resistance to
cetuximab.

Iida M(1), Brand TM, Starr MM, Li C, Huppert EJ, Luthar N, Pedersen MW, Horak ID,
Kragh M, Wheeler DL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Oncology, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and
Public Health, Wisconsin Institutes for Medical Research, Madison, WI.

The epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is a central regulator of tumor
progression in a variety of human cancers. Cetuximab is an anti-EGFR monoclonal
antibody that has been approved for head and neck and colorectal cancer
treatment, but many patients treated with cetuximab don't respond or eventually
acquire resistance. To determine how tumor cells acquire resistance to cetuximab,
we previously developed a model of acquired resistance using the non-small cell
lung cancer line NCI-H226. These cetuximab-resistant (Ctx(R)) cells exhibit
increased steady-state EGFR expression secondary to alterations in EGFR
trafficking and degradation and, further, retained dependence on EGFR signaling
for enhanced growth potential. Here, we examined Sym004, a novel mixture of
antibodies directed against distinct epitopes on the extracellular domain of
EGFR, as an alternative therapy for Ctx(R) tumor cells. Sym004 treatment of
Ctx(R) clones resulted in rapid EGFR degradation, followed by robust inhibition
of cell proliferation and down-regulation of several mitogen-activated protein
kinase pathways. To determine whether Sym004 could have therapeutic benefit in
vivo, we established de novo Ctx(R) NCI-H226 mouse xenografts and subsequently
treated Ctx(R) tumors with Sym004. Sym004 treatment of mice harboring Ctx(R)
tumors resulted in growth delay compared to mice continued on cetuximab. Levels
of total and phospho-EGFR were robustly decreased in Ctx(R) tumors treated with
Sym004. Immunohistochemical analysis of these Sym004-treated xenograft tumors
further demonstrated decreased expression of Ki67, and phospho-rpS6, as well as a
modest increase in cleaved caspase-3. These results indicate that Sym004 may be
an effective targeted therapy for Ctx(R) tumors.


PMCID: PMC3819635
PMID: 24204198  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Pharmacogenomics. 2013 Nov;14(14):1765-77. doi: 10.2217/pgs.13.177.

EGFR and KRAS mutations, and ALK fusions: current developments and personalized
therapies for patients with advanced non-small-cell lung cancer.

de Mello RA(1), Madureira P, Carvalho LS, Araújo A, O'Brien M, Popat S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Portuguese Oncology Institute, Rua Dr António 
Bernardino de Almeida, 4200-072, Porto, Portugal.

Personalized therapy has significantly developed in lung cancer treatment over
recent years. VEGF and EGF play a major role in non-small-cell lung cancer
(NSCLC) tumor angiogenesis and aggressiveness. EGFR mutation as well as KRAS and 
ALK rearrangements are important biomarkers in the field owing to potential
targeted therapies involved in clinical practice: erlotinib, geftinib, cetuximab 
and crizotinib. More recently, regulation of tumor immunity through CTLA4 and
PD1/L1 has emerged as a promising field in NSCLC management. This review will
focus on the current and future biomarkers in the advanced NSCLC field and also
address potential related targeted therapies for these patients.

DOI: 10.2217/pgs.13.177 
PMID: 24192124  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. J Thorac Oncol. 2013 Dec;8(12):1519-28. doi: 10.1097/JTO.0000000000000009.

Phase II trial of carboplatin, paclitaxel, cetuximab, and bevacizumab followed by
cetuximab and bevacizumab in advanced nonsquamous non-small-cell lung cancer:
SWOG S0536.

Kim ES(1), Moon J, Herbst RS, Redman MW, Dakhil SR, Velasco MR Jr, Hirsch FR,
Mack PC, Kelly K, Heymach JV, Gandara DR.

Author information: 
(1)*Levine Cancer Institute, Charlotte, North Carolina; †SWOG Statistical Center,
Seattle, Washington; ‡Yale Cancer Center, New Haven, Connecticut; §Cancer Center 
of Kansas and Wichita CCOP, Wichita, Kansas; ‖Central Illinois CCOP and Cancer
Care Specialists, Decatur, Illinois; ¶University of Colorado Cancer Center,
Aurora, Colorado; #University of California Davis Cancer Center, Sacramento,
California; and **MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas.

INTRODUCTION: Cetuximab and bevacizumab have each been demonstrated to prolong
survival when added to chemotherapy in patients with advanced non-small-cell lung
cancer (NSCLC). However, the potential benefit of combining cetuximab and
bevacizumab together with a platinum-based doublet had not been explored. We
designed this phase II trial to evaluate the safety, tolerability, and efficacy
of the combination of carboplatin, paclitaxel, cetuximab, and bevacizumab in
chemotherapy-naive patients with advanced, nonsquamous NSCLC.
METHODS: Patients received with up to six cycles of carboplatin (area under curve
6), paclitaxel (200 mg/m(2)), cetuximab (400 mg/m(2) day 1 then 250 mg/m(2)
weekly), and bevacizumab (15 mg/kg) every 21 days. Patients with an objective
response or stable disease received maintenance cetuximab (250 mg/m(2) weekly)
and bevacizumab (15 mg/kg every 21 days) until disease progression. The primary
endpoint was safety as defined by the frequency and severity of hemorrhagic
toxicities. Secondary endpoints included response rate, progression-free
survival, overall survival, and toxicity. Molecular biomarkers were assessed in
an exploratory manner.
RESULTS: The primary endpoint of grade 4 or higher hemorrhage of 2% (95%
confidence interval: 0%-7%) met prespecified criteria for safety. One hundred ten
patients were enrolled. There were four treatment-related deaths including lung
hemorrhage (2), infection (1), and unknown (1). Median progression-free survival 
was 7 months and median overall survival was 15 months. The response rate was 56%
with an overall disease control rate of 77%.
CONCLUSION: This regimen was safe, feasible, and effective as a frontline
treatment of advanced NSCLC, providing the basis for the ongoing phase III trial 
S0819.

DOI: 10.1097/JTO.0000000000000009 
PMCID: PMC4072123
PMID: 24189513  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Anticancer Res. 2013 Sep;33(9):3615-21.

Antitumor activity of elacytarabine combined with bevacizumab, cetuximab and
trastuzumab in human NSCLC xenografts.

Bruheim S(1), Sandvold ML, Mælandsmo GM, Fodstad O.

Author information: 
(1)Deparment of Tumor Biology, Institute for Cancer Research, The Norwegian
Radium Hospital, Oslo University Hospital, Montebello, N-0310 Oslo, Norway.
Skjalg.Bruheim@rr-research.no.

AIM: The objective of the present study was to determine the in vivo antitumor
activity of elacytarabine, the 5'-elaidic acid ester of arabinofuranosyl
cytidine, alone and in combination with bevacizumab, cetuximab and trastuzumab in
Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), Epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR)- and Human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2)-expressing non-small 
cell lung cancer xenografts.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The antitumor activity of elacytarabine, was tested at the
maximal tolerable dose (MTD; 50 mg/kg) and half MTD (25 mg/kg), alone and in
combination with the antibodies bevacizumab (5 mg/kg), cetuximab (20 mg/kg) and
trastuzumab (4 mg/kg) in two human non-small cell lung cancer xenografts.
RESULTS: Elacytarabine exhibited very high activity in the EKVX xenograft at both
dose levels, but was inactive in MAKSAX. Neither of the two xenografts were
sensitive to bevacizumab or trastuzumab, but the MAKSAX xenograft showed
intermediate response to cetuximab. The high sensitivity of EKVX to elacytarabine
precluded the assessment of a potential benefit of the combinations with the
antibodies. In the elacytarabine-, bevacizumab- and trastuzumab-insensitive
MAKSAX xenograft, the combination of either bevacizumab or trastuzumab with
elacytarabine at the MTD or half MTD resulted in intermediate activity,
suggesting a beneficial effect of the combinations, whereas for cetuximab, the
effect was enhanced when combined with elacytarabine given at the MTD, but not
half-MTD.
CONCLUSION: The results suggest that elacytarabine could be active in some cases 
of non-small cell lung cancer, and that the combination of elacytarabine and
tyrosine kinase inhibitors may exert important additive or possibly synergistic
effects of potential clinical benefit.


PMID: 24023287  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Front Oncol. 2013 Aug 28;3:219. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2013.00219. eCollection 2013.

A Pilot Study (SWOG S0429) of Weekly Cetuximab and Chest Radiotherapy for
Poor-Risk Stage III Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer.

Chen Y(1), Moon J, Pandya KJ, Lau DH, Kelly K, Hirsch FR, Gaspar LE, Redman M,
Gandara DR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Rochester , Rochester, NY ,
USA.

PURPOSE: Stage III non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients with poor
performance status (PS) or co-morbidities are often not candidates for standard
chemoradiotherapy (chemoRT) due to poor tolerance to treatments. A pilot study
for poor-risk stage III NSCLC patients was conducted combining cetuximab, a
chimeric monoclonal antibody targeting epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR),
with chest radiation (RT).
METHODS: Stage III NSCLC patients with Zubrod PS 2, or Zubrod PS 0-1 with poor
pulmonary function and co-morbidities prohibiting chemoRT were eligible. A
loading dose of cetuximab (400 mg/m(2)) was delivered week 1, followed by weekly 
cetuximab (250 mg/m(2))/RT to 64.8 Gy in 1.8 Gy daily fractions, and maintenance 
weekly cetuximab (250 mg/m(2)) for 2 years or until disease progression. H-score 
for EGFR protein expression was conducted in available tumors.
RESULTS: Twenty-four patients were enrolled. Twenty-two were assessed for outcome
and toxicity. Median survival was 14 months and median progression-free survival 
was 8 months. The response rate was 47% and disease control rate was 74%.
Toxicity assessment revealed 22.7% overall ≥Grade 3 non-hematologic toxicities.
Grade 3 esophagitis was observed in one patient (5%). The skin reactions were
mostly Grade 1 or 2 except two of 22 (9%) had Grade 3 acne and one of 22 (5%) had
Grade 3 radiation skin burn. Grade 3-4 hypomagnesemia was seen in four (18%)
patients. One patient (5%) had elevated cardiac troponin and pulmonary emboli.
H-score did not reveal prognostic significance. An initially planned second
cohort of the study did not commence due to slow accrual, which would have added 
weekly docetaxel to cetuximab/RT after completion of the first cohort of
patients.
CONCLUSION: Concurrent weekly cetuximab/chest RT followed by maintenance
cetuximab for poor-risk stage III NSCLC was well tolerated. Further studies with 
larger sample sizes will be useful to establish the optimal therapeutic ratio of 
this regimen.

DOI: 10.3389/fonc.2013.00219 
PMCID: PMC3755267
PMID: 24010120  [PubMed]


100. Lung Cancer. 2013 Nov;82(2):231-7. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2013.07.016. Epub 2013 
Aug 7.

Evaluation of EGFR protein expression by immunohistochemistry using H-score and
the magnification rule: re-analysis of the SATURN study.

Mazières J(1), Brugger W, Cappuzzo F, Middel P, Frosch A, Bara I, Klingelschmitt 
G, Klughammer B.

Author information: 
(1)Service de Pneumologie, Hôpital Larrey, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de
Toulouse, Université de Toulouse III (Paul Sabatier), Toulouse 31059, France.
Electronic address: mazieres.j@chu-toulouse.fr.

INTRODUCTION: The phase III SATURN study demonstrated that first-line maintenance
erlotinib extended progression-free survival (PFS) and overall survival (OS)
versus placebo in patients with advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC).
Analysis of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) expression by
immunohistochemistry (IHC) found no significant interaction between EGFR IHC
status and PFS (p = 0.63) or OS (p = 0.52). The FLEX study of first-line
cetuximab plus chemotherapy demonstrated that EGFR IHC expression was predictive 
of improved OS with cetuximab when assessed by H-score with a magnification rule.
This novel method was used to reassess samples from SATURN.
METHODS: The H-score method assigned a score of 0-300 to each patient, based on
the percentage of cells stained at different intensities viewed at various
magnifications. The discriminatory threshold was set at 200, per the FLEX study, 
and existing samples were re-read and classed as low (H-score < 200) or high
(≥200) EGFR expression. PFS and OS were re-analyzed based on these new
classifications.
RESULTS: In the overall and EGFR wild-type populations, erlotinib provided a
consistent survival benefit versus placebo. Hazard ratios (HRs) in the overall
population were similar between EGFR IHC-positive and -negative patients for
median PFS (HR 0.68 [95% confidence interval (CI) 0.53-0.86] and 0.76 [95% CI
0.62-0.93], respectively) and OS (HR 0.80 [95% CI 0.62-1.05] and 0.80 [95% CI
0.64-1.01] for IHC-positive and IHC-negative, respectively). In the EGFR
wild-type population, HRs were again similar between EGFR IHC-positive and
-negative subpopulations for PFS (HR 0.69 [95% CI 0.51-0.95] and 0.84 [95% CI
0.63-1.12], respectively) and OS (HR 0.78 [95% CI 0.55-1.10] and 0.76 [95% CI
0.55-1.05], respectively).
CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest that EGFR IHC does not have value as a marker to 
predict erlotinib benefit in the first-line maintenance setting for advanced
NSCLC.

Copyright © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd.. All rights
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2013.07.016 
PMID: 23972450  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Mol Cancer Ther. 2013 Oct;12(10):2167-75. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-12-1208.
Epub 2013 Aug 20.

Combining erlotinib and cetuximab is associated with activity in patients with
non-small cell lung cancer (including squamous cell carcinomas) and wild-type
EGFR or resistant mutations.

Wheler JJ(1), Tsimberidou AM, Falchook GS, Zinner RG, Hong DS, Fok JY, Fu S,
Piha-Paul SA, Naing A, Kurzrock R.

Author information: 
(1)Corresponding Author: Jennifer Wheler, The University of Texas MD Anderson
Cancer Center, Department of Investigational Cancer Therapeutics, Unit 455, 1400 
Holcombe Boulevard, Houston, TX 77030. jjwheler@mdanderson.org.

Preclinical data suggest that combined EGF receptor (EGFR) targeting with an EGFR
tyrosine kinase inhibitor and an anti-EGFR monoclonal antibody may be superior
over single-agent targeting. Therefore, as part of a phase I study, we analyzed
the outcome of 20 patients with non-small cell lung cancer treated with the
combination of erlotinib and cetuximab. EGFR mutation status was ascertained in a
Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendment-approved laboratory. There were 10 men;
median number of prior therapies was five. Overall, two of 20 patients (10%)
achieved partial response (PR), one of whom had a TKI-resistant EGFR insertion in
exon 20, time to treatment failure (TTF) = 24+ months, and the other patient had 
squamous cell histology (EGFR wild-type), TTF = 7.4 months. In addition, three of
20 patients (15%) achieved stable disease (SD) ≥6 six months (one of whom had
wild-type EGFR and squamous cell histology, and two patients had an EGFR
TKI-sensitive mutation, one of whom had failed prior erlotinib therapy).
Combination therapy with ertotinib plus cetuximab was well tolerated. The most
common toxicities were rash, diarrhea, and hypomagnesemia. The recommended phase 
II dose was erlotinib 150 mg oral daily and cetuximab 250 mg/m(2) i.v. weekly. In
summary, erlotinib and cetuximab treatment was associated with SD ≥ six months/PR
in five of 20 patients with non-small cell lung cancer (25%), including
individuals with squamous histology, TKI-resistant EGFR mutations, and wild-type 
EGFR, and those who had progressed on prior erlotinib after an initial response. 
This combination warrants further study in select populations of non-small cell
lung cancer.

©2013 AACR.

DOI: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-12-1208 
PMCID: PMC4138057
PMID: 23963360  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Cancer Res. 2013 Oct 1;73(19):5869-79. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-0344. Epub
2013 Aug 15.

Cetuximab attenuates its cytotoxic and radiosensitizing potential by inducing
fibronectin biosynthesis.

Eke I(1), Storch K, Krause M, Cordes N.

Author information: 
(1)Authors' Affiliations: OncoRay-National Center for Radiation Research in
Oncology; Department of Radiation Oncology, Medical Faculty Carl Gustav Carus,
Technische Universität Dresden; German Cancer Consortium (DKTK); German Cancer
Research Center (DKFZ); and Institute of Radiooncology, Helmholtz Center
Dresden-Rossendorf, Dresden, Germany.

Inherent and acquired resistance to targeted therapeutics continues to emerge as 
a major clinical obstacle. For example, resistance to EGF receptor targeting
occurs commonly, more so than was expected, on the basis of preclinical work.
Given emerging evidence that cancer cell-substrate interactions are important
determinants of therapeutic sensitivity, we examined the impact of
cell-fibronectin interactions on the efficacy of the EGF receptor antibody
cetuximab, which is used widely for lung cancer treatment. Our results revealed
the potential for cell-fibronectin interactions to induce radioresistance of
human non-small cell lung cancer cells. Cell adhesion to fibronectin enhanced
tumor cell radioresistance and attenuated the cytotoxic and radiosensitizing
effects of cetuximab. Both in vitro and in vivo, we found that cetuximab
treatment led to a remarkable induction of fibronectin biosynthesis. Mechanistic 
analyses revealed the induction was mediated by a p38-MAPK-ATF2 signaling pathway
and that RNAi-mediated inhibition of fibronectin could elevate the cytotoxic and 
radiosensitizing potential of cetuximab. Taken together, our findings show how
cell adhesion blunts cetuximab, which, by inducing fibronectin, generates a
self-attenuating mechanism of drug resistance.

DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-0344 
PMID: 23950208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Small. 2013 Dec 20;9(24):4221-36. doi: 10.1002/smll.201301417. Epub 2013 Jul 21.

Antibody conjugated PLGA nanoparticles for targeted delivery of paclitaxel
palmitate: efficacy and biofate in a lung cancer mouse model.

Karra N(1), Nassar T, Ripin AN, Schwob O, Borlak J, Benita S.

Author information: 
(1)The Institute for Drug Research, The School of Pharmacy, Faculty of Medicine, 
The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, POB 12065, Jerusalem, 91120, Israel.

Aberrant signaling of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is common to a 
variety of human cancers and is also found to be over-expressed in most cases of 
non-small cell lung cancer. For the development of a molecularly targeted
therapy, cetuximab-conjugated nanoparticles (immunonanoparticles, INPs) are
designed and loaded with the lipophilic paclitaxel palmitate (pcpl) prodrug.
Oleyl cysteineamide (OCA) is synthesized whereby its amphiphilic nature enables
interfacial anchoring and thiol surface functionalization of PLGA NPs,
facilitating bioconjugation to cetuximab by thioether bonds. It is demonstrated
that the in vitro targeting efficiency and improved cellular internalization and 
cytotoxicity of this targeted delivery system in lung cancer cells
over-expressing EGFR. A quantitative measure of the high binding affinity of INPs
to EGFR is demonstrated using surface plasmon resonance. In vivo tolerability and
enhanced efficacy of cetuximab pcpl INPs in a metastatic lung cancer model are
reported. Its therapeutic efficacy in A549-luc-C8 lung tumors is shown using
non-invasive bioluminescent imaging. Intravenous administration of cetuximab pcpl
INPs to mice results in significantly higher inhibition of tumor growth and
increased survival rates as compared to the non-targeted drug solution,
drug-loaded nanoparticles or blank INPs. Pharmacokinetics and organ
biodistribution of the prodrug and parent drug are evaluated by LC-MS/MS in lung 
tumor bearing mice. No enhanced total accumulation of nanoparticles or INPs is
found at the tumor tissue. However, persistent pcpl levels with sustained
conversion and release of paclitaxel are observed for the encapsulated prodrug
possibly suggesting the formation of a drug reservoir. The overall results
indicate the potential of this promising targeted platform for the improved
treatment of lung cancer and other EGFR positive tumors.

Copyright © 2013 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

DOI: 10.1002/smll.201301417 
PMID: 23873835  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Lung Cancer. 2013 Sep;81(3):416-21. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2013.06.002. Epub 2013
Jul 10.

A multicenter phase II study of cetuximab in combination with chest radiotherapy 
and consolidation chemotherapy in patients with stage III non-small cell lung
cancer.

Ramalingam SS(1), Kotsakis A, Tarhini AA, Heron DE, Smith R, Friedland D, Petro
DP, Raez LE, Brahmer JR, Greenberger JS, Dacic S, Hershberger P, Landreneau RJ,
Luketich JD, Belani CP, Argiris A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology/Oncology, Winship Cancer Institute of Emory
University School of Medicine, Atlanta, USA.

Comment in
    Lung Cancer. 2013 Dec;82(3):509.

BACKGROUND: Cetuximab has demonstrated improved efficacy in combination with
chemotherapy and radiotherapy. We evaluated the integration of cetuximab in the
combined modality treatment of stage III non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC).
METHODS: Patients with surgically unresectable stage IIIA or IIIB NSCLC were
treated with chest radiotherapy, 73.5 Gy (with lung and tissue heterogeneity
corrections) in 35 fractions/7 weeks, once daily (63 Gy without heterogeneity
corrections). Cetuximab was given weekly during radiotherapy and continued during
consolidation therapy with carboplatin and paclitaxel up to a maximum of 26
weekly doses. The primary endpoint was overall survival. Baseline tumor tissue
was analyzed for EGFR by fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH).
RESULTS: Forty patients were enrolled in this phase II study. The median overall 
survival was 19.4 months and the median progression-free survival 9.3 months. The
best overall response rate in 31 evaluable patients was 67%. No grade 3 or 4
esophagitis was observed. Three patients experienced grade 3 rash; 16 patients
(69%) developed grade 3/4 neutropenia during consolidation therapy. One patient
died of pneumonitis, possibly related to cetuximab. EGFR gene copy number on
baseline tumor tissues, analyzed by FISH, was not predictive of efficacy
outcomes.
CONCLUSIONS: The addition of cetuximab to chest radiotherapy and consolidation
chemotherapy was tolerated well and had modest efficacy in stage III NSCLC. Taken
together with the lower incidence of esophagitis, our results support evaluation 
of targeted agents instead of chemotherapy with concurrent radiotherapy in this
setting.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2013.06.002 
PMID: 23849982  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Radiother Oncol. 2013 Sep;108(3):370-7. doi: 10.1016/j.radonc.2013.06.010. Epub
2013 Jul 3.

Nuclear EGFR as a molecular target in cancer.

Brand TM(1), Iida M, Luthar N, Starr MM, Huppert EJ, Wheeler DL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Oncology, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and
Public Health, Wisconsin Institute for Medical Research, Madison, USA.

The epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) has been one of the most targeted
receptors in the field of oncology. While anti-EGFR inhibitors have demonstrated 
clinical success in specific cancers, most patients demonstrate either intrinsic 
or acquired resistance within one year of treatment. Many mechanisms of
resistance to EGFR inhibitors have been identified, one of these being attributed
to alternatively localized EGFR from the cell membrane into the cell's nucleus.
Inside the nucleus, EGFR functions as a co-transcription factor for several genes
involved in cell proliferation and angiogenesis, and as a tyrosine kinase to
activate and stabilize proliferating cell nuclear antigen and DNA dependent
protein kinase. Nuclear localized EGFR is highly associated with disease
progression, worse overall survival in numerous cancers, and enhanced resistance 
to radiation, chemotherapy, and the anti-EGFR therapies gefitinib and cetuximab. 
In this review the current knowledge of how nuclear EGFR enhances resistance to
cancer therapeutics is discussed, in addition to highlighting ways to target
nuclear EGFR as an anti-cancer strategy in the future.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.radonc.2013.06.010 
PMCID: PMC3818450
PMID: 23830194  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Oncogene. 2013 Dec 12;32(50):5593-601. doi: 10.1038/onc.2013.245. Epub 2013 Jul
1.

A novel bispecific EGFR/Met antibody blocks tumor-promoting phenotypic effects
induced by resistance to EGFR inhibition and has potent antitumor activity.

Castoldi R(1), Ecker V(1), Wiehle L(1), Majety M(1), Busl-Schuller R(1), Asmussen
M(1), Nopora A(1), Jucknischke U(1), Osl F(1), Kobold S(2), Scheuer W(1), Venturi
M(1), Klein C(3), Niederfellner G(1), Sustmann C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Pharma Research and Early Development (pRED), Roche Diagnostics GmbH,
Penzberg, Germany. (2)Division of Clinical Pharmacology, Department of Internal
Medicine IV, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, Munich, Germany. (3)pRED,
Roche Glycart AG, Schlieren, Switzerland.

Simultaneous targeting of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) and Met in
cancer therapy is under pre-clinical and clinical evaluation. Here, we report the
finding that treatment with EGFR inhibitors of various tumor cells, when
stimulated with hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) and EGF, results in transient
upregulation of phosphorylated AKT. Furthermore, EGFR inhibition in this setting 
stimulates a pro-invasive phenotype as assessed in Matrigel-based assays.
Simultaneous treatment with AKT and EGFR inhibitors abrogates this invasive
growth, hence functionally linking signaling and phenotype. This observation
implies that during treatment of tumors a balanced ratio of EGFR and Met
inhibition is required. To address this, we designed a bispecific antibody
targeting EGFR and Met, which has the advantage of a fixed 2:1 stoichiometry.
This bispecific antibody inhibits proliferation in tumor cell cultures and
co-cultures with fibroblasts in an additive manner compared with treatment with
both single agents. In addition, cell migration assays reveal a higher potency of
the bispecific antibody in comparison with the antibodies' combination at low
doses. We demonstrate that the bispecific antibody inhibits invasive growth,
which is specifically observed with cetuximab. Finally, the bispecific antibody
potently inhibits tumor growth in a non-small cell lung cancer xenograft model
bearing a strong autocrine HGF-loop. Together, our findings strongly support a
combination treatment of EGFR and Met inhibitors and further evaluation of
resistance mechanisms to EGFR inhibition in the context of active Met signaling.

DOI: 10.1038/onc.2013.245 
PMCID: PMC3898114
PMID: 23812422  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Oncotarget. 2013 May;4(5):772-84.

Revisiting clinical trials using EGFR inhibitor-based regimens in patients with
advanced non-small cell lung cancer: a retrospective analysis of an MD Anderson
Cancer Center phase I population.

Wheler J(1), Falchook G, Tsimberidou AM, Hong D, Naing A, Piha-Paul S, Chen SS,
Heymach J, Fu S, Stephen B, Fok JY, Janku F, Kurzrock R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Investigational Cancer Therapeutics-Phase I Clinical Trials
Program, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Texas, USA.
jjwheler@mdanderson.com

PURPOSE: Single-agent EGFR inhibitor therapy is effective mainly in patients with
lung cancer and EGFR mutations. Treating patients who develop resistance, or who 
are insensitive from the outset, often because of resistant mutations, other
aberrations or the lack of an EGFR mutation, probably requires rational
combinations. We therefore investigated the outcome of EGFR inhibitor-based
combination regimens in patients with heavily-pretreated non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC) referred to a Phase I Clinic.
METHODS: We reviewed the electronic records of patients with NSCLC treated with
an EGFR inhibitor-based combination regimen: erlotinib and cetuximab; erlotinib, 
cetuximab and bevacizumab; erlotinib and dasatinib; erlotinib and bortezomib; or 
cetuximab and sirolimus.
RESULTS: EGFR mutations were detected in 16% of patients (21/131). EGFR
inhibitor-based combination regimens were administered to 15 patients with
EGFR-mutant NSCLC and 24 with EGFR wild-type disease. Stable disease (SD) ≥6
months/partial remission (PR) was attained in 20% of EGFR-mutant patients (3/15; 
two with sensitive mutations and secondary resistance to prior erlotinib, and one
with a resistant mutation), as well as 26% of evaluable patients (5/19) with
wild-type disease. One of three evaluable patients with squamous cell histology
achieved SD for 26.5 months (EGFR wild-type, TP53-mutant, regimen=erlotinib,
cetuximab and bevacizumab).
CONCLUSIONS: Eight of 34 evaluable patients (24%) with advanced, refractory NSCLC
evaluable for response achieved SD ≥6 months/PR (PR=3; SD ≥6 months=5) on EGFR
inhibitor-based combination regimens (erlotinib, cetuximab; erlotinib, cetuximab 
and bevacizumab; and, erlotinib, bortezomib), including patients with secondary
resistance to single-agent EGFR inhibitors, resistant mutations, wild-type
disease, and, squamous histology.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.1028 
PMCID: PMC3742837
PMID: 23800712  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Lung Cancer. 2013 Sep;81(3):428-34. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2013.05.010. Epub 2013
Jun 20.

Phase II study of pemetrexed and cisplatin plus cetuximab followed by pemetrexed 
and cetuximab maintenance therapy in patients with advanced nonsquamous non-small
cell lung cancer.

Schmid-Bindert G(1), Gebbia V, Mayer F, Arriola E, Márquez-Medina D, Syrigos K,
Biesma B, Leschinger MI, Frimodt-Moller B, Ripoche V, Myrand SP, Nguyen TS, Hozak
RR, Zimmermann A, Visseren-Grul C, Schuette W.

Author information: 
(1)University Medical Center Mannheim of Heidelberg University, Mannheim,
Germany. gerald.schmid-bindert@medma.uni-heidelberg.de

OBJECTIVES: The aim was to determine if combined pemetrexed, cisplatin, and
cetuximab was efficacious and safe as first-line treatment in advanced
nonsquamous non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC).
PATIENTS AND METHODS: In this single-arm, multicenter clinical trial, patients
with Stage IIIB/IV nonsquamous NSCLC received first-line therapy consisting of
pemetrexed (500 mg/m(2)) and cisplatin (75 mg/m(2)) on Day 1 (21-day cycles) plus
weekly cetuximab (400 mg/m(2) loading dose, then 250 mg/m(2)) for 4-6 cycles.
Non-progressing patients received maintenance therapy consisting of pemetrexed
and cetuximab as above until disease progression. All patients received vitamin
supplementation, dexamethasone, and antihistamine prophylaxis. The primary
endpoint was objective response rate (ORR). Secondary endpoints were
progression-free survival (PFS), 1-year survival rate, translational research
(TR) and safety.
RESULTS: Of the 113 patients receiving study drug, 109 were protocol-qualified.
All patients completed ≥1 cycle of induction, and 51 (45%) and 49 (43%) patients 
completed ≥1 cycle of maintenance with pemetrexed and cetuximab, respectively.
The ORR (n = 109) was 38.5% (80% confidence interval [CI], 32.3-45.1%), all
partial responses. Median PFS was 5.8 (80% CI, 4.4-6.7) months. One-year survival
rate was 45% (80% CI, 39-51%). In exploratory analyses, there was some
preliminary evidence of potential prognostic relationships with efficacy outcomes
for epidermal growth factor receptor and thyroid transcription factor-1 protein
expression, but not for KRAS mutation or for thymidylate synthase or folate
receptor-alpha protein expression. Seventy-three (64.6%) patients had study
drug-related Grade 3/4 adverse events (AEs). Drug-related serious AEs were
reported in 31 (27.4%) patients. There were 3 (2.7%) potentially drug-related
deaths on-study or within 30 days of follow up.
CONCLUSION: Pemetrexed, cisplatin, and cetuximab appeared efficacious and
tolerable in advanced nonsquamous NSCLC patients. The TR outcomes are
hypothesis-generating given the study's size and nonrandomized nature.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2013.05.010 
PMID: 23790468  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Cancer Biol Ther. 2013 Jun;14(6):481-91. doi: 10.4161/cbt.24342.

Targeting AKT with the allosteric AKT inhibitor MK-2206 in non-small cell lung
cancer cells with acquired resistance to cetuximab.

Iida M(1), Brand TM, Campbell DA, Starr MM, Luthar N, Traynor AM, Wheeler DL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Oncology, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and
Public Health, Wisconsin Institute for Medical Research, Madison, WI, USA.

The epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is a central regulator of tumor
progression in human cancers. Cetuximab is an anti-EGFR monoclonal antibody that 
has been approved for use in oncology. Despite clinical success the majority of
patients do not respond to cetuximab and those who initially respond frequently
acquire resistance. To understand how tumor cells acquire resistance to cetuximab
we developed a model of resistance using the non-small cell lung cancer line
NCI-H226. We found that cetuximab-resistant (Ctx (R) ) clones manifested strong
activation of EGFR, PI3K/AKT and MAPK. To investigate the role of AKT signaling
in cetuximab resistance we analyzed the activation of the AKT pathway effector
molecules using a human AKT phospho-antibody array. Strong activation was
observed in Ctx (R) clones for several key AKT substrates including c-jun, GSK3β,
eIF4E, rpS6, IKKα, IRS-1 and Raf1. Inhibition of AKT signaling by siAKT1/2 or by 
the allosteric AKT inhibitor MK-2206 resulted in robust inhibition of cell
proliferation in all Ctx (R) clones. Moreover, the combinational treatment of
cetuximab and MK-2206 resulted in further decreases in proliferation than either 
drug alone. This combinatorial treatment resulted in decreased activity of both
AKT and MAPK thus highlighting the importance of simultaneous pathway inhibition 
to maximally affect the growth of Ctx (R) cells. Collectively, our findings
demonstrate that AKT activation is an important pathway in acquired resistance to
cetuximab and suggests that combinatorial therapy directed at both the AKT and
EGFR/MAPK pathways may be beneficial in this setting.

DOI: 10.4161/cbt.24342 
PMCID: PMC3813564
PMID: 23760490  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Clin Chem. 2013 Oct;59(10):1447-56. doi: 10.1373/clinchem.2012.200477. Epub 2013 
May 8.

Companion biomarkers: paving the pathway to personalized treatment for cancer.

Duffy MJ(1), Crown J.

Author information: 
(1)UCD School of Medicine and Medical Science, Conway Institute, University
College Dublin, Ireland;

BACKGROUND: Companion biomarkers are biomarkers that are used in combination with
specific therapies and that prospectively help predict likely response or severe 
toxicity. In this article we review the role of companion biomarkers in guiding
treatment in patients with cancer.
CONTENT: In addition to the established companion biomarkers such as estrogen
receptors and HER2 (human epidermal growth factor receptor 2) in breast cancer,
several new companion biomarkers have become available in recent years. These
include v-Ki-ras2 Kirsten rat sarcoma viral oncogene homolog (KRAS) mutations for
the selection of patients with advanced colorectal cancer who are unlikely to
benefit from anti-epidermal growth factor receptor antibodies (cetuximab or
panitumumab), epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutations for selecting
patients with advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) for treatment with
tyrosine kinase inhibitors (gefitinib or erlotinib), v-raf murine sarcoma viral
oncogene homolog B1 (BRAF) mutations for selecting patients with advanced
melanoma for treatment with anti-BRAF agents (vemurafenib and dabrafenib), and
anaplastic lymphoma receptor tyrosine kinase (ALK) translocations for identifying
patients with NSCLC likely to benefit from crizotinib.
SUMMARY: The availability of companion biomarkers should improve drug efficacy,
decrease toxicity, and lead to a more individualized approach to cancer
treatment.

DOI: 10.1373/clinchem.2012.200477 
PMID: 23656699  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Chest. 2013 May;143(5 Suppl):e341S-68S. doi: 10.1378/chest.12-2361.

Treatment of stage IV non-small cell lung cancer: Diagnosis and management of
lung cancer, 3rd ed: American College of Chest Physicians evidence-based clinical
practice guidelines.

Socinski MA(1), Evans T, Gettinger S, Hensing TA, Sequist LV, Ireland B,
Stinchcombe TE.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA
15232, USA. socinskima@upmc.edu

BACKGROUND: Stage IV non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is a treatable, but not
curable, clinical entity in patients given the diagnosis at a time when their
performance status (PS) remains good.
METHODS: A systematic literature review was performed to update the previous
edition of the American College of Chest Physicians Lung Cancer Guidelines.
RESULTS: The use of pemetrexed should be restricted to patients with nonsquamous 
histology. Similarly, bevacizumab in combination with chemotherapy (and as
continuation maintenance) should be restricted to patients with nonsquamous
histology and an Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) PS of 0 to 1; however,
the data now suggest it is safe to use in those patients with treated and
controlled brain metastases. Data at this time are insufficient regarding the
safety of bevacizumab in patients receiving therapeutic anticoagulation who have 
an ECOG PS of 2. The role of cetuximab added to chemotherapy remains uncertain
and its routine use cannot be recommended. Epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR) tyrosine kinase inhibitors as first-line therapy are the recommended
treatment of those patients identified as having an EGFR mutation. The use of
maintenance therapy with either pemetrexed or erlotinib should be considered
after four cycles of first-line therapy in those patients without evidence of
disease progression. The use of second- and third-line therapy in stage IV NSCLC 
is recommended in those patients retaining a good PS; however, the benefit of
therapy beyond the third-line setting has not been demonstrated. In the elderly
and in patients with a poor PS, the use of two-drug, platinum-based regimens is
preferred. Palliative care should be initiated early in the course of therapy for
stage IV NSCLC.
CONCLUSIONS: Significant advances continue to be made, and the treatment of stage
IV NSCLC has become nuanced and specific for particular histologic subtypes and
clinical patient characteristics and according to the presence of specific
genetic mutations.

DOI: 10.1378/chest.12-2361 
PMCID: PMC4694611
PMID: 23649446  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Lung Cancer. 2013 Jul;81(1):142-3. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2013.02.018. Epub 2013 
Apr 1.

Complete metabolic response in a patient with repeatedly relapsed non-small cell 
lung cancer harboring ROS1 gene rearrangement after treatment with crizotinib.

Bos M(1), Gardizi M, Schildhaus HU, Heukamp LC, Geist T, Kaminsky B, Zander T,
Nogova L, Scheffler M, Dietlein M, Kobe C, Holstein A, Maintz D, Büttner R, Wolf 
J.

Author information: 
(1)Department I of Internal Medicine, Center for Integrated Oncology Köln-Bonn,
University Hospital Cologne, Cologne, Germany.

A 55-year-old Caucasian woman with lung adenocarcinoma stage IV presented with
repeated relapse after treatment with cytotoxic chemotherapy (carboplatin,
gemcitabine, docetaxel, pemetrexed) and targeted agents (erlotinib, cetuximab,
sunitinib). Comprehensive molecular diagnostics (EGFR-, ALK-, RAS-, BRAF-,
PIK3CA-, HER2- and DDR2-aberrations) were performed and failed initially to
detect any driver mutation. While the patient suffered from rapid deterioration
of her general condition, in particular from progressive dyspnea due to lung
metastases, we implemented screening for RET- and ROS1 translocations into our
molecular diagnostic program based on recent reports of these new molecular
subgroups in lung adenocarcinoma. On retesting the patient's tumor sample was
found to harbor a ROS1-translocation. The patient was subsequently treated with
crizotinib and experienced a pronounced clinical improvement corresponding to a
complete metabolic response in (18)F-FDG-PET and a good and confirmed partial
response in CT (RECIST 1.1). Our case exemplifies the need for rapid
implementation of newly discovered rare genetic lung cancer subtypes in routine
molecular diagnostics.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2013.02.018 
PMID: 23558310  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. PLoS One. 2013;8(3):e60317. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0060317. Epub 2013 Mar 26.

miR-146a inhibits cell growth, cell migration and induces apoptosis in non-small 
cell lung cancer cells.

Chen G(1), Umelo IA, Lv S, Teugels E, Fostier K, Kronenberger P, Dewaele A,
Sadones J, Geers C, De Grève J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, First Affiliated Hospital, Guangxi Medical
University, Nanning, Guangxi, People's Republic of China.

Aberrant expression of microRNA-146a (miR-146a) has been reported to be involved 
in the development and progression of various types of cancers. However, its role
in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) has not been elucidated. The aim of this
study was to investigate the contribution of miR-146a to various aspects of the
malignant phenotype of human NSCLCs. In functional experiments, miR-146a
suppressed cell growth, induced cellular apoptosis and inhibited EGFR downstream 
signaling in five NSCLC cell lines (H358, H1650, H1975, HCC827 and H292).
miR-146a also inhibited the migratory capacity of these NSCLC cells. On the other
hand, miR-146a enhanced the inhibition of cell proliferation by drugs targeting
EGFR, including both TKIs (gefitinib, erlotinib, and afatinib) and a monoclonal
antibody (cetuximab). These effects were independent of the EGFR mutation status 
(wild type, sensitizing mutation or resistance mutation), but were less potent
compared to the effects of siRNA targeting of EGFR. Our results suggest that
these effects of miR-146a are due to its targeting of EGFR and NF-κB signaling.
We also found, in clinical formalin fixed paraffin embedded (FFPE) lung cancer
samples, that low expression of miR-146a was correlated with advanced clinical
TNM stages and distant metastasis in NSCLC (P<0.05). The patients with high
miR-146a expression in their tumors showed longer progression-free survival (25.6
weeks in miR-146a high patients vs. 4.8 weeks in miR-146a low patients, P<0.05). 
miR-146a is therefore a strong candidate prognostic biomarker in NSCLC. Thus
inducing miR-146a might be a therapeutic strategy for NSCLC.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0060317 
PMCID: PMC3608584
PMID: 23555954  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. PLoS One. 2013;8(3):e59708. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0059708. Epub 2013 Mar 18.

Synergistic effect of afatinib with su11274 in non-small cell lung cancer cells
resistant to gefitinib or erlotinib.

Chen G(1), Noor A, Kronenberger P, Teugels E, Umelo IA, De Grève J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, First Affiliated Hospital, Guangxi Medical
University, Nanning Guangxi, People's Republic of China.

Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) and c-MET receptors are expressed on many
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cells. Current single agent therapeutic
targeting of a mutant EGFR has a high efficacy in the clinic, but is not
curative. Here, we investigated the combination of targeting EGFR and c-MET
pathways in NSCLC cells resistant to receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs), 
using RNA interference and inhibition by TKIs. Different NSCLC cell lines with
various genomic characteristics (H358, H1650 and H1975) were transfected with
EGFR-specific-siRNA, T790M-specific-siRNA, c-MET siRNA or the combination.
Subsequently EGFR TKIs (gefitinib, erlotinib or afatinib) or monoclonal antibody 
cetuximab were combined respectively with the c-MET-specific TKI su11274 in NSCLC
cell lines. The cell proliferation, viability, caspase-3/7 activity and apoptotic
morphology were monitored by spectrophotometry, fluorimetry and fluorescence
microscopy. The combined effect of EGFR TKIs, or cetuximab and su11274, was
evaluated using a combination index. The results showed that the cell lines that 
were relatively resistant to EGFR TKIs, especially the H1975 cell line containing
the resistance T790M mutation, were found to be more sensitive to
EGFR-specific-siRNA. The combination of EGFR siRNA plus c-MET siRNA enhanced cell
growth inhibition, apoptosis induction and inhibition of downstream signaling in 
EGFR TKI resistant H358, H1650 and H1975 cells, despite the absence of activity
of the c-MET siRNA alone. EGFR TKIs or cetuximab plus su11274 were also
consistently superior to either agent alone. The strongest biological effect was 
observed when afatinib, an irreversible pan-HER blocker was combined with
su11274, which achieved a synergistic effect in the T790M mutant H1975 cells. In 
a conclusion, our findings offer preclinical proof of principle for combined
inhibition as a promising treatment strategy for NSCLC, especially for patients
in whom current EGFR-targeted treatments fail due to the presence of the
T790M-EGFR-mutation or high c-MET expression.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0059708 
PMCID: PMC3601073
PMID: 23527257  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Oncotarget. 2013 Jan;4(1):118-27.

Dual EGFR inhibition in combination with anti-VEGF treatment: a phase I clinical 
trial in non-small cell lung cancer.

Falchook GS(1), Naing A, Hong DS, Zinner R, Fu S, Piha-Paul SA, Tsimberidou AM,
Morgan-Linnell SK, Jiang Y, Bastida C, Wheler JJ, Kurzrock R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Investigational Cancer Therapeutics Phase I Program, U.T. MD
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA. gfalchoo@mdanderson.org

BACKGROUND: Preclinical data indicate EGFR signals through both kinase-dependent 
and independent pathways and that combining a small-molecule EGFR inhibitor, EGFR
antibody, and/or anti-angiogenic agent is synergistic in animal models.
METHODS: We conducted a dose-escalation, phase I study combining erlotinib,
cetuximab, and bevacizumab. The subset of patients with non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC) was analyzed for safety and response.
RESULTS: Thirty-four patients with NSCLC (median four prior therapies) received
treatment on a range of dose levels. The most common treatment-related grade ≥2
adverse events were rash (n=14, 41%), hypomagnesemia (n=9, 27%), and fatigue
(n=5, 15%). Seven patients (21%) achieved stable disease (SD) ≥6 months, two
achieved a partial response (PR) (6%), and two achieved an unconfirmed partial
response (uPR) (6%) (total=32%). We observed SD≥6 months/PR/uPR in patients who
had received prior erlotinib and/or bevacizumab, those with brain metastases,
smokers, and patients treated at lower dose levels. Five of 16 patients (31%)
with wild-type EGFR experienced SD≥6 months or uPR. Correlation between grade of 
rash and rate of SD≥6 months/PR was observed (p less than 0.01).
CONCLUSION: The combination of erlotinib, cetuximab, and bevacizumab was
well-tolerated and demonstrated antitumor activity in heavily pretreated patients
with NSCLC.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.763 
PMCID: PMC3702212
PMID: 23435217  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. J Thorac Oncol. 2013 Mar;8(3):338-45. doi: 10.1097/JTO.0b013e318282ded5.

Randomized phase II study of cetuximab and bevacizumab in combination with two
regimens of paclitaxel and carboplatin in chemonaive patients with stage IIIB/IV 
non-small-cell lung cancer.

Bonomi PD(1), Mace J, Mandanas RA, Min M, Olsen M, Youssoufian H, Katz TL, Sheth 
G, Lee HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Rush University Medical Center, 1725 W Harrison St, Chicago, IL 60612, USA.
philip_bonomi@rush.edu

INTRODUCTION: We conducted a phase II study of dual-agent monoclonal antibody
therapy consisting of cetuximab and bevacizumab in combination with paclitaxel
and carboplatin chemotherapy in non-small-cell lung cancer.
METHODS: Patients with stage IIIB/IV nonsquamous non-small-cell lung cancer
randomly received cetuximab (400 mg/m initially, 250 mg/m weekly thereafter) plus
bevacizumab (15 mg/kg) for six cycles combined with paclitaxel (200 mg/m) and
carboplatin (area under the curve 6) for either six cycles (six-cycle arm) or the
first three cycles (three-cycle arm) (one cycle = 3 weeks). The primary objective
was progression-free survival (PFS), estimated separately for each treatment arm.
RESULTS: In 121 patients, the median PFS was 6.05 months (95% confidence interval
[CI]: 5.65, 7.03) in the six-cycle arm and 4.50 months (95% CI: 4.01, 5.42) in
the three-cycle arm. Respective median overall survival times were 12.06 months
(95% CI: 9.40, 19.25) and 11.63 months (95% CI: 6.64, 17.61). The tumor response 
rate was 51.7% (95% CI: 39.0%, 64.3%) and 44.3% (95% CI: 31.8%, 56.7%) in the
six-cycle and three-cycle arms, respectively, with corresponding median response 
durations of 4.86 months (95% CI: 4.30, 7.16) and 3.94 months (95% CI: 2.92,
4.47). Quality of life was consistent across arms. Cetuximab-related grade 3/4
events in greater than 5% of patients (six-cycle arm, three-cycle arm) were
dermatitis acneiform (6.9%; 8.6%) and fatigue (13.8%; 5.2%). Three patients died 
during the study from drug-related adverse events (one in the six-cycle arm and
two in the three-cycle arm).
CONCLUSIONS: Both the regimens showed expected PFS and numerically comparable
overall survival. Quality of life was similar in the two arms, and both the
regimens were well tolerated.

DOI: 10.1097/JTO.0b013e318282ded5 
PMID: 23370316  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. J Thorac Oncol. 2013 Mar;8(3):373-84. doi: 10.1097/JTO.0b013e31827ed0ff.

Epidermal growth factor receptor inhibition in lung cancer: status 2012.

Hirsch FR(1), Jänne PA, Eberhardt WE, Cappuzzo F, Thatcher N, Pirker R, Choy H,
Kim ES, Paz-Ares L, Gandara DR, Wu YL, Ahn MJ, Mitsudomi T, Shepherd FA, Mok TS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Medical Oncology and Department of
Pathology, University of Colorado Cancer Center, 12801 E. 17th Avenue, Aurora, CO
80045, USA. fred.hirsch@ucdenver.edu

Lung cancer is the most common cause of cancer deaths. Most patients present with
advanced-stage disease, and the prognosis is generally poor. However, with the
understanding of lung cancer biology, and development of molecular targeted
agents, there have been improvements in treatment outcomes for selected subsets
of patients with non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) have demonstrated significantly
improved tumor responses and progression-free survival in subsets of patients
with advanced NSCLC, particularly those with tumors harboring activating EGFR
mutations. Testing for EGFR mutations is a standard procedure for identification 
of patients who will benefit from first-line EGFR TKIs. For patients with
advanced NSCLC and no activating EGFR mutations (EGFR wild-type) or no other
driving oncogenes such as ALK-gene rearrangement, chemotherapy is still the
standard of care. A new generation of EGFR TKIs, targeting multiple receptors and
with irreversible bindings to the receptors, are in clinical trials and have
shown encouraging effects. Research on primary and acquired resistant mechanisms 
to EGFR TKIs are ongoing. Monoclonal antibodies (e.g. cetuximab), in combination 
with chemotherapy, have demonstrated improved outcomes, particularly for subsets 
of NSCLC patients, but further validations are needed. Novel monoclonal
antibodies are combined with chemotherapy, and randomized comparative studies are
ongoing. This review summarizes the current status of EGFR inhibitors in NSCLC in
2012 and some of the major challenges we are facing.

DOI: 10.1097/JTO.0b013e31827ed0ff 
PMID: 23370315  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Transl Lung Cancer Res. 2013 Feb;2(1):E17-22. doi:
10.3978/j.issn.2218-6751.2012.12.07.

Targeted versus chrono-targeted chemotherapy for inhaled chemotherapy in
non-small cell lung cancer.

Zarogoulidis P(1), Darwiche K(2), Kalamaras G(3), Huang H(4), Hohenforst-Schmidt 
W(5), Zarogoulidis K(6).

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary Department-Oncology Unit, "G. Papanikolaou" General Hospital,
Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki, Greece ; ; Pulmonary
Department-Interventional Unit, "Ruhrland" Klinik, University of Duisburg-Essen, 
Essen, Germany ; (2)Pulmonary Department-Interventional Unit, "Ruhrland" Klinik, 
University of Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany ; (3)Pulmonary Department-Sleep
Medicine Unit, "G. Papanikolaou" General Hospital, Aristotle University of
Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki, Greece ; (4)Department of Respiratory diseases,
Changhai hospital, Yangpu District, Shanghai, China ; (5)II Medical Clinic,
Hospital Coburg, University of Wurzburg, Coburg, Germany. (6)Pulmonary
Department-Oncology Unit, "G. Papanikolaou" General Hospital, Aristotle
University of Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki, Greece ;

Lung cancer long term survival still remains poor and early detection is still
the best methodology to treatment. Therefore several novel approaches have been
investigated for anticancer drug administration. Inhaled therapies for lung
diseases are used since the ancient times. Inhaled anticancer treatment
administration was firstly investigated almost 30 years ago. Since then the
inclusion and exclusion criteria have been investigated in correlation with the
safety and efficacy of cisplatin, 5-fluoracil, carboplatin, paclitaxel,
docetaxel, 9-nitro camptothecine, gemcitabine, cetuximab, granulocyte-colony
stimulating factor, interleukins and recently with bevasizumab. Along with the
anticancer drug formulations administered, other aspects of this local treatment 
have been also investigated to improve the efficiency and safety, such as; proper
nebulization system, drug formulation delivery system, setting of administration,
aerosol protection measures, inhalation techniques and safety issues follow up.
During the last years with the use of actigraphy wrist watches, an extended
investigation of the circadian rhythm of animals and humans has been performed
and new insights are included in lung cancer chemotherapy administration. The
"personalized" therapy administration should not be considered only as a
molecular pathway inhibition, but also as a chrono-targeted anticancer treatment.

DOI: 10.3978/j.issn.2218-6751.2012.12.07 
PMCID: PMC4367653
PMID: 25806211  [PubMed]


119. Target Oncol. 2013 Mar;8(1):47-53. doi: 10.1007/s11523-012-0244-7. Epub 2013 Jan 
9.

EGFR-directed monoclonal antibodies in non-small cell lung cancer.

Pirker R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine I, Medical University of Vienna, Währinger Gürtel
18-20, 1090, Vienna, Austria. robert.pirker@meduniwien.ac.at

Several monoclonal antibodies directed against the epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR) have been evaluated in patients with non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC). Cetuximab, a chimeric monoclonal antibody, has been studied in
combination with first-line chemotherapy in phase II and two phase III trials in 
patients with advanced NSCLC. The phase III FLEX trial demonstrated an increase
in survival for cisplatin/vinorelbine plus cetuximab compared to chemotherapy
alone in patients with advanced EGFR-expressing NSCLC. Cetuximab added to
carboplatin/paclitaxel failed to improve progression-free survival in the BMS099 
phase III trial. However, a meta-analysis of four randomized trials confirmed a
significant survival benefit for platinum-based chemotherapy plus cetuximab
compared to chemotherapy alone. High EGFR expression of tumor cells was then
shown to predict the benefit of cetuximab, whereas KRAS mutations and EGFR
fluorescent in situ hybridization analysis were without predictive value.
Matuzumab and panitumumab have also been studied in phase II trials. Necitumumab,
a fully human monoclonal antibody, is currently evaluated in combination with
chemotherapy in two phase III trials in patients with advanced NSCLC. Cetuximab
is also studied in combination with chemoradiotherapy in patients with locally
advanced NSCLC.

DOI: 10.1007/s11523-012-0244-7 
PMID: 23300028  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2013 Sep;137(9):1255-61. doi: 10.5858/arpa.2012-0605-OA.
Epub 2012 Dec 27.

Reproducibility of immunohistochemical scoring for epidermal growth factor
receptor expression in non-small cell lung cancer: round robin test.

Rüschoff J(1), Kerr KM, Grote HJ, Middel P, von Heydebreck A, Alves VA, Baldus
SE, Büttner R, Carvalho L, Fink L, Jochum W, Lo AW, López-Ríos F, Marx A, Molina 
TJ, Olszewski WT, Rieker RJ, Volante M, Thunnissen E, Wrba F, Celik I, Störkel S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of  Pathology, Institute of Pathology Nordhessen, Kassel, Germany. 
rueschoff@patho-nordhessen.de

Comment in
    Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2013 Sep;137(9):1176-8.

CONTEXT: The addition of cetuximab to first-line chemotherapy substantially
prolonged survival in patients with advanced non-small cell lung cancer whose
tumors expressed high levels of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR;
immunohistochemistry score of ≥200 on a scale of 0-300).
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the interobserver reproducibility of this EGFR
immunohistochemistry scoring system, based on both the tumor cell membrane
staining intensity (graded 0-3+) and the percentage of cells staining at each
intensity.
DESIGN: In parts 1 (initial feasibility study) and 2 of this 2-part round robin
test, sections of different non-small cell lung cancer tissue microarrays were
stained in a central reference laboratory. Following reference evaluation, EGFR
expression in 30 selected tumor cores was characterized in serial sections by
lung cancer pathology specialists. The reproducibility of scoring by different
raters was assessed. Analysis of between-rater agreement was based on the
allocation of EGFR immunohistochemistry scores into low- (<200) and high- (≥200) 
EGFR expression groups.
RESULTS: After discussion with raters of the issues impacting reproducibility
identified in part 1 and following adjustment of processes, part 2 of the round
robin test showed a high interobserver agreement in EGFR immunohistochemistry
scoring, with an overall concordance rate of 90.9% and a mean κ coefficient of
0.812. Specimens with a reference EGFR immunohistochemistry score of lower than
200 and of 200 or higher showed mean concordance rates of 94.7% and 85.6%,
respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: After appropriate training, assessing EGFR expression by this
immunohistochemistry-based method allowed a highly reproducible allocation of
non-small cell lung cancers into clinically relevant high- or low-EGFR expression
groups.

DOI: 10.5858/arpa.2012-0605-OA 
PMID: 23270410  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2013 Feb 15;431(3):623-9. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.12.070. Epub 2012 Dec 22.

Effect of siRNAs targeting the EGFR T790M mutation in a non-small cell lung
cancer cell line resistant to EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors and combination
with various agents.

Chen G(1), Kronenberger P, Teugels E, Umelo IA, De Grève J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Medical and Molecular Oncology, Department of Medical Oncology, 
Universitair Ziekenhuis Brussel, Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Laarbeeklaan 101,
1090 Brussels, Belgium.

The epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is a validated therapeutic target in 
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). However, some mutations confer resistance to 
current available agents, especially the frequently occurring T790M mutation. In 
the current study, we have examined, in a NSCLC cell line H1975 containing both
L858R and T790M mutations, the effect of T790M-specific-siRNAs versus other
EGFR-specific-siRNAs. T790M-specific-siRNAs were able to inhibit T790M and EGFR
mRNA, to reduce EGFR protein expression, as well as to reduce the cell growth and
induce cell caspase activity in H1975 cells. However, this effect showed less
potency compared to the other EGFR-specific-siRNAs. EGFR-specific-siRNAs strongly
inhibited cell growth and induced apoptosis in H358, H1650, H292, HCC827 and also
in H1975 cells, which showed weak response to tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs)
or cetuximab. The addition of T790M-specific-siRNAs could rescue the sensitivity 
of T790M mutant H1975 cells to TKIs. The combination of T790M-specific-siRNAs and
cetuximab also additively enhanced cell growth inhibition and induction of
apoptosis in H1975 cells. Among the anti-EGFR agents tested, the strongest
biological effect was observed when afatinib was combined with
T790M-specific-siRNAs. Afatinib also offered extra effect when combined with
cetuximab in H1975 cells. In conclusion, knock-down of T790M transcript by siRNAs
further decreases the cell growth of T790M mutant lung cancer cells that are
treated with TKIs or cetuximab. The combination of a potent, irreversible kinase 
inhibitor such as afatinib, with T790M-specific-siRNAs should be further
investigated as a new strategy in the treatment of lung cancer containing the
resistant T790M mutation.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.12.070 
PMID: 23266614  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Eur J Cancer. 2013 Apr;49(6):1161-8. doi: 10.1016/j.ejca.2012.11.018. Epub 2012
Dec 19.

Predictive value of epidermal growth factor receptor expression for first-line
chemotherapy plus cetuximab in patients with head and neck and colorectal cancer:
analysis of data from the EXTREME and CRYSTAL studies.

Licitra L(1), Störkel S, Kerr KM, Van Cutsem E, Pirker R, Hirsch FR, Vermorken
JB, von Heydebreck A, Esser R, Celik I, Ciardiello F.

Author information: 
(1)Head and Neck Medical Oncology Unit, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Nazionale
Tumori, Milan, Italy.

BACKGROUND: The phase III EXTREME and CRYSTAL studies demonstrated that the
addition of cetuximab to chemotherapy significantly improved survival in the
first-line treatment of recurrent/metastatic squamous cell carcinoma of the head 
and neck (SCCHN) and KRAS wild-type metastatic colorectal cancer (mCRC). In
advanced non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC), high EGFR expression was identified 
as a tumour biomarker that can predict survival benefit associated with the
addition of cetuximab to first-line chemotherapy. We investigated whether tumour 
EGFR expression level was predictive of cetuximab benefit in EXTREME and CRYSTAL 
study patients.
METHODS: Prospectively collected tumour immunohistochemistry data were used to
generate an EGFR immunohistochemistry score (scale 1-300) for patients in the
EXTREME and CRYSTAL studies. For each study, the association between tumour
immunohistochemistry score and cetuximab benefit was investigated. The EXTREME
and CRYSTAL studies are registered with Clinical Trials.gov, numbers NCT00122460 
and NCT00154102, respectively.
FINDINGS: Tumour EGFR immunohistochemistry data were available for 411 of 442
(93%) patients from the EXTREME study intention-to-treat (ITT) population and 664
of 666 (100%) patients from the ITT population of the CRYSTAL study with
EGFR-expressing, KRAS wild-type disease. The distribution of immunohistochemistry
scores was similar between the treatment arms of each study, but differed between
studies. A clinically relevant benefit for progression-free and overall survival 
associated with the addition of cetuximab to chemotherapy was seen across the
full score range in EXTREME study patients. Similarly, CRYSTAL study patients
derived a clinical benefit across the full score range, with no meaningful
association between EGFR expression level and benefit.
INTERPRETATION: The addition of cetuximab to chemotherapy improved survival in
the first-line treatment of recurrent/metastatic SCCHN and KRAS wild-type mCRC
regardless of tumour EGFR expression level, indicating that in contrast to
findings in NSCLC, EGFR expression level is not a clinically useful predictive
biomarker in these settings.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejca.2012.11.018 
PMID: 23265711  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Expert Opin Biol Ther. 2013 Feb;13(2):209-26. doi: 10.1517/14712598.2012.748742. 
Epub 2012 Dec 14.

Monoclonal antibodies in lung cancer.

Wang Y(1), Deng G, Liu X, Cho WC.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of the Ministry of Education for Conservation and Utilization
of Special Biological Resources in Western China, Yinchuan, Ningxia, China.

INTRODUCTION: Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer death worldwide. As
clinical benefits to conventional cancer therapies are still formidable, there is
an urgent need for novel agents and approaches to improve the overall clinical
outcomes for patients with lung cancer.
AREAS COVERED: This article reviews the current understanding of targeted therapy
for lung cancer with monoclonal antibodies (mAbs), mainly bevacizumab and
cetuximab. The results from several key clinical trials validating the
effectiveness and safety of bevacizumab and cetuximab, the relation of cancer
biomarkers, the polymorphic correlation of targeted genes with the therapeutic
outcome of mAb-based treatment, as well as the impact of Biomarker-integrated
Approaches of Targeted Therapy for Lung Cancer Elimination (BATTLE) trial on
personalised treatment of lung cancer are discussed.
EXPERT OPINION: The addition of bevacizumab or cetuximab to chemotherapy has
shown promising benefits to the patients with non-small-cell lung cancer.
However, the overall benefits of mAb-based targeted therapy to lung cancer
patients vary among individuals. It is therefore necessary to define reliable
predictive biomarkers in an effort to better identify patients who are most
likely to benefit from treatment with these novel agents in lung cancer.

DOI: 10.1517/14712598.2012.748742 
PMID: 23240766  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Yonsei Med J. 2013 Jan 1;54(1):1-14. doi: 10.3349/ymj.2013.54.1.1.

The role of pharmacoethnicity in the development of cytotoxic and molecular
targeted drugs in oncology.

Saijo N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Japanese Society of Medical Oncology, Tokyo, Japan. saijo@jsmo.or.jp

The effective and toxic ranges of anticancer drugs are very narrow and, in some
cases, inverted. Thus determination of the most appropriate dosage and schedule
of administration is crucial for optimal chemotherapy. In common arm trials
conducted in Japan and by Southwest Oncology Group (SWOG) that used the same
doses and schedules for the administration of carboplatin plus paclitaxel, the
frequency of hematological toxicity was significantly higher in the Japanese
trials than in the SWOG trial, despite demonstrating similar response rates. The 
frequency of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutations in tumors was
significantly higher among East Asian populations, and these populations are also
reported to demonstrate a higher response rates to epidermal growth factor
receptor tyrosine-kinase inhibitors (EGFR-TKIs). The prevalence of interstitial
lung disease induced by treatment with EGFR-TKIs has been shown to be quite high 
in the Japanese population. Clinical trials of cetuximab against non-small cell
lung cancer and of bevacizumab against stomach cancer have shown that these
agents are only active in Caucasians. In a trial examining the use of sorafenib
after transarterial chemoembolization in Korean and Japanese patients with
advanced hepatocellular carcinoma, the compliance and dose intensity of the drug 
were quite low compared with other trials. Although not only identified
pharmacogenomics differences but also differences in social environment, and
regional medical care, including pharmacoeconomics strongly influence ethnic
differences in treatment response, further identification and understanding of
the pharmacogenomics underlying ethnic differences will be essential to timely
and reliable global development of new anticancer drugs.

DOI: 10.3349/ymj.2013.54.1.1 
PMCID: PMC3521281
PMID: 23225792  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Transl Lung Cancer Res. 2012 Dec;1(4):269-75. doi:
10.3978/j.issn.2218-6751.2012.10.09.

EGFR-directed monoclonal antibodies in non-small cell lung cancer: how to predict
efficacy?

Pirker R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine I, Medical University of Vienna, 1090 Vienna, Austria.

Cetuximab improved survival when added to first-line platinum-based chemotherapy 
in patients with advanced non-small cell lung cancer. In order to determine those
patients who will derive the greatest benefit from the addition of cetuximab, the
associations of clinical and tumor features with clinical outcome were
determined. High EGFR expression of tumor cells based on an immunohistochemistry 
score was shown to predict benefit of cetuximab. Among patients with high EGFR
expression, the hazard ratio for death was 0.73 in favor of chemotherapy plus
cetuximab compared to chemotherapy alone. Among patients with low EGFR
expression, no difference in survival was observed between patients treated with 
chemotherapy plus cetuximab compared to those treated with chemotherapy alone.
The treatment interaction test was significant. KRAS mutation status and EGFR
copy numbers were without predictive value. Patients with EGFR-activating
mutations in their tumors had longer survival independent of the use of
cetuximab. In conclusion, EGFR expression levels lend themselves as predictive
biomarkers for the selection of those patients who will benefit from the addition
of cetuximab to first-line chemotherapy with platinum-based doublets.

DOI: 10.3978/j.issn.2218-6751.2012.10.09 
PMCID: PMC4367547
PMID: 25806192  [PubMed]


126. J Immunol. 2012 Dec 1;189(11):5230-9. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1202037. Epub 2012
Oct 24.

Impact of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) cell surface expression levels 
on effector mechanisms of EGFR antibodies.

Derer S(1), Bauer P, Lohse S, Scheel AH, Berger S, Kellner C, Peipp M, Valerius
T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Stem Cell Transplantation and Immunotherapy, 2nd Department of
Medicine, Christian-Albrechts-University and University Hospital
Schleswig-Holstein, 24105 Kiel, Germany.

The epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is a widely expressed Ag that is
successfully targeted in tumor patients by mAbs or tyrosine kinase inhibitors. A 
clinical study in non-small cell lung cancer patients demonstrated a positive
correlation between EGFR expression levels and the therapeutic efficacy of the
EGFR mAb cetuximab. However, the impact of EGFR expression on the different
mechanisms of action (MoAs) triggered by the EGFR mAb has not been defined. In
this study, BHK-21 cells were stably transfected to express different EGFR
levels, which were quantified by immunofluorescence and immunohistochemistry and 
compared with EGFR levels of clinical non-small cell lung cancer samples. These
cells were used to systematically investigate the impact of target Ag expression 
levels on Fab- or Fc-mediated MoAs of EGFR mAb. A negative correlation between
EGFR levels and potency of Fab-mediated MoA was observed. Interestingly,
Ab-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity (ADCC) by NK cells, monocytes, or
polymorphonuclear cells as well as complement-dependent cytotoxicity positively
correlated with the number of EGFR molecules. In comparison with ADCC by
mononuclear cells, polymorphonuclear cell-mediated ADCC and complement-dependent 
cytotoxicity required higher EGFR expression levels and higher mAb concentrations
to trigger significant tumor cell killing. This correlation between EGFR
expression levels and Fc-mediated MoA was confirmed in an independent panel of
human tumor cell lines carrying diverse genetic alterations. Furthermore, RNA
interference-induced knockdown experiments reinforced the impact of EGFR
expression on tumor cell killing by EGFR mAb. In conclusion, these results
suggest that EGFR expression levels may determine distinct patterns of MoAs that 
contribute to the therapeutic efficacy of EGFR mAb.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1202037 
PMID: 23100515  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Exp Ther Med. 2012 May;3(5):755-762. Epub 2012 Feb 13.

Combination therapy using oral S-1 and targeted agents against human tumor
xenografts in nude mice.

Nukatsuka M(1), Saito H, Nakagawa F, Tsujimoto H, Sakamoto K, Tsukioka S, Uchida 
J, Kiniwa M, Kobunai T, Takechi T.

Author information: 
(1)Oncology Medical Affairs Division, Taiho Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., Tokushima
771-0194;

In this study, combination therapies using the oral fluoropyrimidine
tegafur-gimeracil-oteracil (S-1) with several targeted agents or antibodies, were
evaluated. First, the effects of tyrosine kinase inhibitors (erlotinib
hydrochloride, sorafenib tosilate and sunitinib malate) against human non-small
cell lung cancer (NSCLC), breast cancer and colorectal cancer were evaluated in
vivo. The effects of the combination of S-1 and targeted antibodies (bevacizumab 
and cetuximab) against human colorectal cancers was also evaluated in vivo. S-1
and the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase inhibitor,
erlotinib, showed a significant inhibition of growth in human NSCLC (Lu-99 and
PC-9 cell lines). The antitumor activity of the combination of S-1 and erlotinib 
against Lu-99 and PC-9 cancer cell lines was significantly superior to either
monotherapy (P<0.05). Combination therapy using the multi-tyrosine kinase
inhibitors, sorafenib or sunitinib, with S-1 against breast cancer (MX-1 cell
line) and NSCLC (NCI-H460 cell line) was significantly superior to either
monotherapy (P<0.01). The combination of the anti-vascular endothelial growth
factor antibody bevacizumab or the anti-EGFR antibody, cetuximab, with S-1
against human colorectal cancer [Col-1, KM20C (bevacizumab) and DLD-1 (cetuximab)
cell lines] and a 5-fluorouracil (5-FU)-resistant cell line (KM12C/5-FU) was
significantly superior to either monotherapy (p<0.01). In particular, the growth 
of the Col-1 cells was completely inhibited by the combination of S-1 and
bevacizumab. No toxic mortalities and no significant difference in the body
weight changes of the animals treated with S-1 combined with the targeted agents 
or with the mono-therapies were observed; therefore, the treatments appeared to
be well-tolerated. Our preclinical findings indicate that the combination
therapies of S-1 and targeted agents are promising treatment options.

DOI: 10.3892/etm.2012.484 
PMCID: PMC3438730
PMID: 22969964  [PubMed]


128. Transl Lung Cancer Res. 2012 Sep;1(3):179-93. doi:
10.3978/j.issn.2218-6751.2012.09.04.

Role of HGF/MET axis in resistance of lung cancer to contemporary management.

Raghav KP(1), Gonzalez-Angulo AM(1), Blumenschein GR Jr(1).

Author information: 
(1)The University of Texas M D Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Lung cancer is the number one cause of cancer related mortality with over 1
million cancer deaths worldwide. Numerous therapies have been developed for the
treatment of lung cancer including radiation, cytotoxic chemotherapy and targeted
therapies. Histology, stage of presentation and molecular aberrations are main
determinants of prognosis and treatment strategy. Despite the advances that have 
been made, overall prognosis for lung cancer patients remains dismal.
Chemotherapy and/or targeted therapy yield objective response rates of about 35% 
to 60% in advanced stage non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Even with good
initial responses, median overall survival of is limited to about 12 months. This
reflects that current therapies are not universally effective and resistance
develops quickly. Multiple mechanisms of resistance have been proposed and the
MET/HGF axis is a potential key contributor. The proto-oncogene MET
(mesenchymal-epithelial transition factor gene) and its ligand hepatocyte growth 
factor (HGF) interact and activate downstream signaling via the mitogen-activated
protein kinase (ERK/MAPK) pathway and the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase
(PI3K/AKT) pathways that regulate gene expression that promotes carcinogenesis.
Aberrant MET/HGF signaling promotes emergence of an oncogenic phenotype by
promoting cellular proliferation, survival, migration, invasion and angiogenesis.
The MET/HGF axis has been implicated in various tumor types including lung
cancers and is associated with adverse clinicopathological profile and poor
outcomes. The MET/HGF axis plays a major role in development of radioresistance
and chemoresistance to platinums, taxanes, camtothecins and anthracyclines by
inhibiting apoptosis via activation of PI3K-AKT pathway. DNA damage from these
agents induces MET and/or HGF expression. Another resistance mechanism is
inhibition of chemoradiation induced translocation of apoptosis-inducing factor
(AIF) thereby preventing apoptosis. Furthermore, this MET/HGF axis interacts with
other oncogenic signaling pathways such as the epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR) pathway and the vascular endothelial growth factor receptor (VEGFR)
pathway. This functional cross-talk forms the basis for the role of MET/HGF axis 
in resistance against anti-EGFR and anti-VEGF targeted therapies. MET and/or HGF 
overexpression from gene amplification and activation are mechanisms of
resistance to cetuximab and EGFR-TKIs. VEGF inhibition promotes hypoxia induced
transcriptional activation of MET proto-oncogene that promotes angiogenesis and
confers resistance to anti-angiogenic therapy. An extensive understanding of
these resistance mechanisms is essential to design combinations with enhanced
cytotoxic effects. Lung cancer treatment is challenging. Current therapies have
limited efficacy due to primary and acquired resistance. The MET/HGF axis plays a
key role in development of this resistance. Combining MET/HGF inhibitors with
chemotherapy, radiotherapy and targeted therapy holds promise for improving
outcomes.

DOI: 10.3978/j.issn.2218-6751.2012.09.04 
PMCID: PMC4367559
PMID: 25806180  [PubMed]


129. Biologics. 2012;6:221-31. doi: 10.2147/BTT.S24217. Epub 2012 Jul 13.

Cetuximab and biomarkers in non-small-cell lung carcinoma.

Patil N(1), Abba M, Allgayer H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Surgery, Medical Faculty Mannheim, University of
Heidelberg and Molecular Oncology of Solid Tumors Unit, German Cancer Research
Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany.

Cancer progression is a highly complex process that is driven by a constellation 
of deregulated signaling pathways and key molecular events. In non-small-cell
lung cancer (NSCLC), as in several other cancer types, the epidermal growth
factor receptor (EGFR) and its downstream signaling components represent a key
axis that has been found not only to trigger cancer progression but also to
support advanced disease leading to metastasis. Two major therapeutic approaches 
comprising monoclonal antibodies and small molecule tyrosine kinase inhibitors
have so far been used to target this pathway, with a combination of positive,
negative, and inconsequential results, as judged by patient survival indices.
Since these drugs are expensive and not all patients derive benefits from taking 
them, it has become both pertinent and paramount to identify biomarkers that can 
predict not only beneficial response but also resistance. This review focuses on 
the chimeric monoclonal antibody, cetuximab, its application in the treatment of 
NSCLC, and the biomarkers that may guide its use in the clinical setting. A
special emphasis is placed on the EGFR, including its structural and mechanistic 
attributes.

DOI: 10.2147/BTT.S24217 
PMCID: PMC3421478
PMID: 22904614  [PubMed]


130. Expert Rev Mol Diagn. 2012 Jul;12(6):593-602. doi: 10.1586/erm.12.59.

Personalized medicine and pharmacogenetic biomarkers: progress in molecular
oncology testing.

Ong FS(1), Das K, Wang J, Vakil H, Kuo JZ, Blackwell WL, Lim SW, Goodarzi MO,
Bernstein KE, Rotter JI, Grody WW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles,
CA 90048, USA. frank.ong@cshs.org

In the field of oncology, clinical molecular diagnostics and biomarker
discoveries are constantly advancing as the intricate molecular mechanisms that
transform a normal cell into an aberrant state in concert with the dysregulation 
of alternative complementary pathways are increasingly understood. Progress in
biomarker technology, coupled with the companion clinical diagnostic laboratory
tests, continue to advance this field, where individualized and customized
treatment appropriate for each individual patient define the standard of care.
Here, we discuss the current commonly used predictive pharmacogenetic biomarkers 
in clinical oncology molecular testing: BRAF V600E for vemurafenib in melanoma;
EML4-ALK for crizotinib and EGFR for erlotinib and gefitinib in non-small-cell
lung cancer; KRAS against the use of cetuximab and panitumumab in colorectal
cancer; ERBB2 (HER2/neu) for trastuzumab in breast cancer; BCR-ABL for tyrosine
kinase inhibitors in chronic myeloid leukemia; and PML/RARα for
all-trans-retinoic acid and arsenic trioxide treatment for acute promyelocytic
leukemia.

DOI: 10.1586/erm.12.59 
PMCID: PMC3495985
PMID: 22845480  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol. 2012 Dec;138(12):2069-77. doi:
10.1007/s00432-012-1291-2. Epub 2012 Jul 22.

Combined Erlotinib and Cetuximab overcome the acquired resistance to epidermal
growth factor receptors tyrosine kinase inhibitor in non-small-cell lung cancer.

Wang M(1), Zhao J, Zhang LM, Li H, Yu JP, Ren XB, Wang CL.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Cancer Prevention and Therapy Tianjin, Department of Lung
Cancer, Cancer Institute & Hospital, Tianjin Medical University, Tianjin, 300060,
People's Republic of China.

PURPOSE: Non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cells with somatic mutations in
epidermal growth factor receptors (EGFR) are initially susceptible to tyrosine
kinase inhibitor (TKI); however, eventually resistance to TKI is developed in
these cells, which leads to the failure of treatment. The most common mechanism
of this acquired drug resistance is development of a secondary T790M mutation in 
EGFR. In this study, we investigated the effects of the combination of Erlotinib 
and Cetuximab on T790M and L858R mutation lung cancer cells lines (H1975), in the
primary NSCLC cells with the T790M mutation and TKI-resistant EGFR mutations
human tumor xenograft model (H1975).
METHODS: The effects of these two agents on cell proliferation, apoptosis, and
EGFR-dependent signaling were evaluated using
3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) assay, annexin
V staining, and Western blotting. Sensitivity of EGFR inhibitors was detected in 
the primary tumor cell suspension and human tumor xenograft model (H1975).
RESULTS: Compared with single-agent treatment, the combination of Cetuximab and
Erlotinib increased apoptosis of EGFR TKI-resistant NSCLC cells (H1975),
resulting in more pronounced growth inhibition on cell proliferation and
significant inhibition of EGFR-dependent signaling.
CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest that treatment with a combination of Erlotinib
and Cetuximab overcomes T790M-mediated drug resistance.

DOI: 10.1007/s00432-012-1291-2 
PMID: 22821179  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Ther Adv Med Oncol. 2012 Jul;4(4):173-81. doi: 10.1177/1758834012440015.

Combining chemotherapy with epidermal growth factor receptor inhibition in
advanced non-small cell lung cancer.

Leung L(1), Mok TS, Loong H.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory in Oncology in South China, Sir Y.K. Pao Centre for
Cancer, Department of Clinical Oncology, Hong Kong Cancer Institute, Prince of
Wales Hospital, and The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China.

Treatment of advanced stage lung cancer is changing rapidly. With the new found
knowledge on molecular targets such as the epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR), effective therapy is now available in a selected population with the
target mutation. Single-agent epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase
inhibitor (EGFR-TKI) is a standard first-line therapy for patients with
activating-EGFR mutation such as base-pair deletion in exon 19 or point mutation 
at exon 21. At the same time, this class of drugs may be combined with
chemotherapy. Studies on the concurrent combination of chemotherapy and EGFR-TKI 
confirmed a lack of efficacy. A phase II study on sequential intercalated
combination has demonstrated an improvement in progression-free survival (PFS),
but this needs to be validated by the ongoing phase III study. The third approach
is to combine EGFR-TKI as maintenance therapy after tumour response or stable
disease to cytotoxic chemotherapy. Two phase III studies have shown improvement
in PFS, but the use of biomarkers for the selection of maintenance therapy
remains debatable. Cetuximab is a monoclonal antibody against EGFR and its
combination with chemotherapy was shown to improve overall survival in an
unselected population. A new biomarker using the H-score will help to select
patients for this combination.

DOI: 10.1177/1758834012440015 
PMCID: PMC3384091
PMID: 22754591  [PubMed]


133. Radiother Oncol. 2012 Jul;104(1):39-44. doi: 10.1016/j.radonc.2012.05.006. Epub
2012 Jun 23.

Health related quality of life in locally advanced NSCLC treated with high dose
radiotherapy and concurrent chemotherapy or cetuximab--pooled results from two
prospective clinical trials.

Hallqvist A(1), Bergman B, Nyman J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Clinical Sciences, Sahlgrenska Academy at University of
Gothenburg, Sweden. andreas.hallqvist@oncology.gu.se

BACKGROUND: In non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) stage III, data on patient
reported health-related quality of life (HRQL) are scarce, especially regarding
concurrent chemoradiotherapy.
AIMS: To evaluate HRQL in patients treated with high dose radiotherapy combined
with concurrent chemotherapy or the antibody cetuximab.
METHODS: The study population comprised all patients enroled in either of two
phase II trials in locally advanced NSCLC performed in Sweden 2002-2007. The
RAKET trial investigated three different ways of increasing local control
(accelerated hyperfractionated treatment or concurrent daily or weekly
chemotherapy). The Satellite trial evaluated the addition of cetuximab to
thoracic irradiation. HRQL was measured at four time points: At baseline, before 
radiotherapy, 4-6 weeks after radiotherapy and at 3 months follow-up, using the
EORTC QLQ-C30 and LC14 set of questionnaires.
RESULTS: 154/220 patients (65%) who completed HRQL assessments at all time points
were included in the longitudinal study. There was a significant decline over
time regarding most functioning measures. Dyspnoea and fatigue gradually
deteriorated without recovery after completed treatment. Chemotherapy related
symptoms showed a transient deterioration, whereas radiotherapy related
esophagitis had not fully recovered at 3 months. Patients with stage IIIA disease
tended to recover better regarding global QL, fatigue and dyspnoea compared to
patients with stage IIIB. Patients with WHO performance status (PS) 0 reported
improved global QL and less fatigue over time compared with PS 1. Concurrent
chemotherapy was associated with more pronounced fatigue and dysphagia, and worse
global QL compared with concurrent cetuximab. Baseline physical functioning was
an independent predictor of overall survival.
CONCLUSION: Patients undergoing high dose thoracic radiotherapy combined with
chemotherapy or cetuximab reported a gradual deterioration in functioning,
dyspnoea and fatigue, while treatment related side effects were transient.
Radiotherapy with concurrent cetuximab had less negative impact on HRQL than
concurrent chemoradiation.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.radonc.2012.05.006 
PMID: 22727262  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Drugs. 2012 Jun 19;72 Suppl 1:28-36. doi: 10.2165/1163012-S0-000000000-00000.

Prognostic and predictive value of K-RAS mutations in non-small cell lung cancer.

Califano R(1), Landi L, Cappuzzo F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, The Christie NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester,
UK.

Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is a heterogeneous disease, caused by the
presence of different clinically relevant molecular subtypes. Genetic mutations
are emerging as potential biomarkers of response and treatment selection in
patients with NSCLC. Over the past few years, activating mutations of epidermal
growth factor receptor (EGFR) have been recognized as the most important
predictor of response to EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) such as gefitinib
and erlotinib and also as a favourable prognostic factor. The RAS genes,
including H-RAS, K-RAS and N-RAS, encode a family of proteins regulating cell
growth, differentiation and apoptosis. Mutations in the K-RAS gene, mainly in
codons 12 and 13, have been found in 20-30% of NSCLC tumor samples and occur most
commonly, but not exclusively, in adenocarcinoma histology and in heavy smokers. 
In NSCLC, the presence of K-RAS mutations has generally been considered to be
associated with worse prognosis and resistance to systemic therapy in the
adjuvant as well as the metastatic setting. In early stage NSCLC, the prognostic 
role of K-RAS mutations has been evaluated in several studies without definitive 
conclusion. On the other hand, in advanced NSCLC, the presence of K-RAS mutations
identifies a subgroup of patients who do not respond to EGFR-TKI therapy but, at 
the same time, a positive survival effect from EGFR-TKIs cannot be excluded in
these patients. Similarly, K-RAS mutational status does not predict benefit from 
the anti-EGFR monoclonal antibody cetuximab, highlighting the biological
difference between lung cancer and colorectal cancer. As a result of the lack of 
conclusive data, K-RAS mutations do not represent a validated biomarker for the
negative selection of patients who are candidates for anti-EGFR therapy. The aim 
of this article is to review and discuss the data on the prognostic and
predictive value of K-RAS mutations in NSCLC.

DOI: 10.2165/1163012-S0-000000000-00000 
PMID: 22712795  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Drugs. 2012 Jun 19;72 Suppl 1:20-7. doi: 10.2165/1163013-S0-000000000-00000.

Management of non-small cell lung in cancer patients with stable disease.

Grossi F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Istituto Nazionale per Ricerca sul Cancro, Genova, Italy.
francesco.grossi@istge.it

Disease stabilization after first-line chemotherapy, also known as induction
chemotherapy, is defined, according to the Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid 
Tumours (RECIST), as having neither sufficient shrinkage to qualify as a partial 
response (PR) nor sufficient increase to qualify as progressive disease (PD). In 
oncology, stable disease (SD) has often been viewed as an equivocal result and is
therefore of unclear clinical value. In SD patients with advanced non-small cell 
lung cancer (NSCLC) who have already received four cycles of first-line
chemotherapy with platinum agents plus a third-generation agent (gemcitabine,
vinorelbine, docetaxel or paclitaxel) or pemetrexed, the continuation of the
original treatment is not recommended according to the American Society of
Clinical Oncology (ASCO) guidelines. The ASCO guidelines recommend maintenance
with bevacizumab or cetuximab, as tolerated until progression, only for
platinum-based chemotherapy combined with bevacizumab or cetuximab. Several
trials and a meta-analysis have, however, suggested a role for maintenance
treatment in patients without progression after induction chemotherapy. The
National Comprehensive Cancer Network guidelines recently suggested that
maintenance therapy may be considered after four to six cycles of induction
platinum doublets for patients with tumour responses or SD, and recommended
first-line treatment with epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase
inhibitors in EGFR mutated patients to continue until PD. More recently, two
randomized clinical trials that compared pemetrexed or erlotinib with a placebo
demonstrated a better overall survival in favour of maintenance therapy. In
subgroup analyses for both trials, patients with SD after first-line induction
chemotherapy had pronounced survival benefits when erlotinib or pemetrexed
maintenance therapy was given, although this result was not achieved in patients 
with a complete response or PR after induction chemotherapy. The management of
patients with SD after first-line chemotherapy is an important issue because only
a minority of patients with advanced NSCLC experience tumour shrinkage after
standard platinum-based chemotherapy. Many more patients experience either SD or 
PD. The notion that the prognosis of SD patients varies greatly due to the
complexity of SD should, however, be taken into careful consideration for the
treatment decision. Therefore, suggestions for the further classification of SD
are urgently needed to enable the use of an alternative therapy at an early time.

DOI: 10.2165/1163013-S0-000000000-00000 
PMID: 22712794  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Lung Cancer. 2012 Sep;77(3):482-7. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2012.05.104. Epub 2012 
Jun 14.

Intracytoplasmic epidermal growth factor receptor shows poor response to the
cetuximab antitumor effect in irradiated non-small cell lung cancer cell lines.

Ryu SH(1), Lee SW, Yang YJ, Song SY, Kim JH, Choi EK, Ahn SD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Ulsan, College of Medicine,
Asan Medical Center, Seoul, Republic of Korea.

PURPOSE: The purpose of this study was to evaluate the antitumor effect of a
blocking antibody for EGFR in the cytoplasm of a lung cancer cell line.
METHODS & MATERIALS: The A549 and H1299 cell lines were employed to demonstrate
differential responses to cetuximab in combination with radiotherapy.
Localization of EGFR was detected using confocal microscopy, and radiosensitivity
was measured.
RESULTS: Treatment with cetuximab inhibited colony formation in a dose-dependent 
manner in A549, but not H1299 cells. Confocal microscopy revealed EGFR localized 
in the cytosolic fraction, particularly around the golgi apparatus in H1299, in
contrast to cell membrane localization in A549 cell line. After irradiation,
nuclear EGFR was detected in the A549 cell line. However, EGFR did not
translocate to the nucleus in H1299 cells. While EGFR expression was decreased in
both A549 and H1299 cell lines upon treatment with a combination of cetuximab and
radiation, radiosensitivity was increased solely in A549 cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest that localization of EGFR is related to the
sensitivity/resistance of cells to a combination of cetuximab and radiotherapy.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2012.05.104 
PMID: 22704525  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Hematol Oncol. 2012 Jun;30(2):89-97. doi: 10.1002/hon.1002. Epub 2011 Aug 23.

Epidermal growth factor receptor expression in acute myelogenous leukaemia is
associated with clinical prognosis.

Sun JZ(1), Lu Y, Xu Y, Liu F, Li FQ, Wang QL, Wu CT, Hu XW, Duan HF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Oncology, The First Affiliated Hospital of
General Hospital of Chinese People's Liberation Army (PLA), Beijing, China.

The epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) family belongs to type I receptor
tyrosine kinases. Overexpression or mutation of EGFR/ErbB1 gene has been detected
in a large number of human solid tumours. According to some previous report, this
gene is not expressed in hematological malignancies. However, two recent clinical
case reports showed that erlotinib caused complete remission of acute myeloid
leukaemia (AML)-M1 in patients who had both AML-M1 and non-small-cell lung
cancer. These results are supported by preclinical studies in which EGFR tyrosine
kinase inhibitors have anti-proliferative effects on AML. These findings prompted
us to determine whether EGFR is expressed in human AML, through a large-scale
screening of both leukaemic cell lines and clinical samples. Our results show
that EGFR is expressed by about 33% of human AML (containing M1 to M7 subtypes)
and by some human leukaemia cell lines (K562, MEG-01, CEM and SKO-007). Its
expression is not limited to certain AML types but has been detected in many
leukaemic cells. In addition, EGFR expression was intimately associated with the 
poor clinical outcomes. Finally, we find that only EGFR-positive leukaemic cells 
respond to antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity of cetuximab, the monoclonal 
antibodies against EGFR.

Copyright © 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/hon.1002 
PMID: 22674781  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Transl Lung Cancer Res. 2012 Jun;1(2):105-10. doi:
10.3978/j.issn.2218-6751.2011.10.02.

Maintenance therapy in non-small-cell lung cancer.

Schmid-Bindert G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Thoracic oncology, Departement for Surgery, Medical Center Mannheim,
University Heidelberg, Mannheim, Germany.

With standard doublet chemotherapy for patients with advanced non-small-cell lung
cancer (NSCLC), we have reached an outcome plateau of about 10 months median
overall survival over the last decades. Several studies have now demonstrated
some survival benefits for patients treated beyond induction chemotherapy. In the
current discussion about treatment duration, the terms "switch" and
"continuation" maintenance therapy are now most commonly used by the scientific
community. Switch maintenance is the treatment with an agent with a different
mode of action after completion of induction chemotherapy in patients who's
tumors have not progressed, whereas continuation maintenance is the continuation 
of one compound of the induction regimen. Chemotherapeutic compounds successfully
investigated in the maintenance setting are Gemcitabine, Docetaxel and
Pemetrexed. Targeted agents, recently investigated as maintenance therapy are
Bevacizumab, Cetuximab and Erlotinib. New peer-reviewed publications of phase III
randomized clinical trials on maintenance chemotherapy have led to a change in
current practice guidelines and the use of maintenance therapy represents a new
treatment option in advanced NSCLC. The pivotal trials are described and
summarized in this review article.

DOI: 10.3978/j.issn.2218-6751.2011.10.02 
PMCID: PMC4367569
PMID: 25806166  [PubMed]


139. Cleve Clin J Med. 2012 May;79 Electronic Suppl 1:eS56-60. doi:
10.3949/ccjm.79.s2.12.

Personalized targeted therapy in advanced non-small cell lung cancer.

Ma PC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Solid Tumor Oncology, Taussig Cancer Institute, Cleveland
Clinic, 9500 Euclid Avenue, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA. map@ccf.org

Personalized targeted therapy for advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
primarily relies on the concept of "oncogene addiction," in which multiple
genetic abnormalities are addicted to one or a few genes for tumor cell
maintenance and survival. Several molecular aberrations have been identified in
NSCLC, with subsequent development of drugs targeted to these aberrations;
gefitinib, erlotinib, and cetuximab for the treatment of NSCLC harboring
epidermal growth factor receptor mutation or overexpression, and crizotinib for
the treatment of NSCLC with the EML4-ALK fusion translocation oncogene being some
examples. A more recent actionable target is MET, a multifaceted receptor
tyrosine kinase within the human kinome. Cellular heterogeneity within an
oncogene-addicted tumor can cause resistance to targeted therapy after an initial
response. As our understanding of tumor heterogeneity and tumor resistance
mechanisms evolves, more rational therapies and combinations of therapies can be 
expected.

DOI: 10.3949/ccjm.79.s2.12 
PMID: 22614968  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Clin Cancer Res. 2012 Aug 1;18(15):4004-12. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-12-0167.
Epub 2012 May 16.

Design of a phase III clinical trial with prospective biomarker validation: SWOG 
S0819.

Redman MW(1), Crowley JJ, Herbst RS, Hirsch FR, Gandara DR.

Author information: 
(1)SWOG Statistical Center, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, 1100 Fairview
Avenue North, M3-C102, Seattle, WA 98109, USA. mredman@fhcrc.org

Comment in
    Clin Cancer Res. 2012 Aug 1;18(15):4001-3.

The role of cetuximab in the treatment of advanced non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC) is currently unclear. The molecular target of cetuximab, epidermal growth
factor receptor (EGFR), as measured by FISH, has shown potential as a predictive 
biomarker for cetuximab efficacy in NSCLC. SWOG S0819 is a phase III trial
evaluating both the value of cetuximab in this setting and EGFR FISH as a
predictive biomarker. This work describes the decision process for determining
the design and interim monitoring plan for S0819. Six possible designs were
evaluated in terms of their properties and the hypotheses that can be addressed
within the design constraints. A subgroup-focused, multiple-hypothesis design was
selected for S0819 that incorporates coprimary endpoints to assess cetuximab in
both the overall study population and among EGFR FISH-positive (FISH(+))
patients, with the sample size determined based on evaluation in the EGFR FISH(+)
group. The chosen interim monitoring plan specifies interim evaluations of both
efficacy and futility in the EGFR FISH(+) group alone. The futility-monitoring
plan to determine early stopping in the EGFR FISH-nonpositive group is based on
evaluation within the positive group, the entire study population, and the
nonpositive group. SWOG S0819 uses a design that addresses both the
biomarker-driven and general-efficacy objectives of this study.

DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-12-0167 
PMCID: PMC3409929
PMID: 22592956  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Oncologist. 2012;17(5):682-93. doi: 10.1634/theoncologist.2012-0020. Epub 2012
Apr 24.

Novel approaches of chemoradiotherapy in unresectable stage IIIA and stage IIIB
non-small cell lung cancer.

Stinchcombe TE(1), Bogart JA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology and Oncology, Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center at
the University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North Carolina 27599-7305, USA.
Thomas_Stinchcombe@med.unc.edu

Approximately one third of patients with non-small cell lung cancer have
unresectable stage IIIA or stage IIIB disease, and appropriate patients are
candidates for chemoradiotherapy with curative intent. The optimal treatment
paradigm is currently undefined. Concurrent chemoradiotherapy, compared with
sequential chemotherapy and thoracic radiation therapy (TRT), results in superior
overall survival outcomes as a result of better locoregional control. Recent
trials have revealed efficacy for newer chemotherapy combinations similar to that
of older chemotherapy combinations with concurrent TRT and a lower rate of some
toxicities. Ongoing phase III trials will determine the roles of cisplatin and
pemetrexed concurrent with TRT in patients with nonsquamous histology, cetuximab,
and the L-BLP25 vaccine. It is unlikely that bevacizumab will have a role in
stage III disease because of its toxicity. Erlotinib, gefitinib, and crizotinib
have not been evaluated in stage III patients selected based on molecular
characteristics. The preliminary results of a phase III trial that compared
conventionally fractionated standard-dose TRT (60 Gy) with high-dose TRT (74 Gy) 
revealed an inferior survival outcome among patients assigned to the high-dose
arm. Hyperfractionation was investigated previously with promising results, but
adoption has been limited because of logistical considerations. More recent
trials have investigated hypofractionated TRT in chemoradiotherapy. Advances in
tumor targeting and radiation treatment planning have made this approach more
feasible and reduced the risk for normal tissue toxicity. Adaptive radiotherapy
uses changes in tumor volume to adjust the TRT treatment plan during therapy, and
trials using this strategy are ongoing. Ongoing trials with proton therapy will
provide initial efficacy and safety data.

DOI: 10.1634/theoncologist.2012-0020 
PMCID: PMC3360908
PMID: 22531360  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Lung Cancer. 2012 Aug;77(2):376-82. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2012.03.010. Epub 2012
Apr 11.

Prognostic factors in patients with advanced non-small cell lung cancer: data
from the phase III FLEX study.

Pirker R(1), Pereira JR, Szczesna A, von Pawel J, Krzakowski M, Ramlau R,
Vynnychenko I, Park K, Eberhardt WE, de Marinis F, Heeger S, Goddemeier T,
O'Byrne KJ, Gatzemeier U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine I, Medical University Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
robert.pirker@meduniwien.ac.at

The FLEX study demonstrated that the addition of cetuximab to chemotherapy
significantly improved overall survival in the first-line treatment of patients
with advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). In the FLEX intention to treat 
(ITT) population, we investigated the prognostic significance of particular
baseline characteristics. Individual patient data from the treatment arms of the 
ITT population of the FLEX study were combined. Univariable and multivariable Cox
regression models were used to investigate variables with potential prognostic
value. The ITT population comprised 1125 patients. In the univariable analysis,
longer median survival times were apparent for females compared with males (12.7 
vs 9.3 months); patients with an Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group performance
status (ECOG PS) of 0 compared with 1 compared with 2 (13.5 vs 10.6 vs 5.9
months); never smokers compared with former smokers compared with current smokers
(14.6 vs 11.1 vs 9.0); Asians compared with Caucasians (19.5 vs 9.6 months);
patients with adenocarcinoma compared with squamous cell carcinoma (12.4 vs 9.3
months) and those with metastases to one site compared with two sites compared
with three or more sites (12.4 months vs 9.8 months vs 6.4 months). Age (<65 vs
≥65 years), tumor stage (IIIB with pleural effusion vs IV) and percentage of
tumor cells expressing EGFR (<40% vs ≥40%) were not identified as possible
prognostic factors in relation to survival time. In multivariable analysis, a
stepwise selection procedure identified age (<65 vs ≥65 years), gender, ECOG PS, 
smoking status, region, tumor histology, and number of organs involved as
independent factors of prognostic value. In summary, in patients with advanced
NSCLC enrolled in the FLEX study, and consistent with previous analyses,
particular patient and disease characteristics at baseline were shown to be
independent factors of prognostic value. The FLEX study is registered with
ClinicalTrials.gov, number NCT00148798.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2012.03.010 
PMID: 22498112  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Cell Cycle. 2012 Apr 15;11(8):1656-63. doi: 10.4161/cc.20120. Epub 2012 Apr 15.

Methylation of death-associated protein kinase is associated with cetuximab and
erlotinib resistance.

Ogawa T(1), Liggett TE, Melnikov AA, Monitto CL, Kusuke D, Shiga K, Kobayashi T, 
Horii A, Chatterjee A, Levenson VV, Koch WM, Sidransky D, Chang X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology and Head and Neck Surgery, Johns Hopkins
University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA.

Anti-EGFR therapy is among the most promising molecular targeted therapies
against cancer developed in the past decade. However, drug resistance eventually 
arises in most, if not all, treated patients. Emerging evidence has linked
epigenetic changes, such as DNA methylation at CpG islands, to the development of
resistance to multiple anticancer drugs. In addition, genes that are
differentially methylated have increasingly been appreciated as a source of
clinically relevant biomarker candidates. To identify genes that are specifically
methylated during the evolution of resistance to anti-EGFR therapeutic agents, we
performed a methylation-specific array containing a panel of 56 genes that are
commonly known to be regulated through promoter methylation in two parental
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and head and neck squamous cell carcinoma
(HNSCC) cell lines and their resistant derivatives to either erlotinib or
cetuximab. We found that death-associated protein kinase (DAPK) was
hypermethylated in drug-resistant derivatives generated from both parental cell
lines. Restoration of DAPK into the resistant NSCLC cells by stable transfection 
re-sensitized the cells to both erlotinib and cetuximab. Conversely,
siRNA-mediated knockdown of DAPK induced resistance in the parental sensitive
cells. These results demonstrate that DAPK plays important roles in both
cetuximab and erlotinib resistance, and that gene silencing through promoter
methylation is one of the key mechanisms of developed resistance to anti-EGFR
therapeutic agents. In conclusion, DAPK could be a novel target to overcome
resistance to anti-EGFR agents to improve the therapeutic benefit, and further
evaluation of DAPK methylation as a potential biomarker of drug response is
needed.

DOI: 10.4161/cc.20120 
PMCID: PMC3341232
PMID: 22487682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. BMC Med. 2012 Mar 21;10:28. doi: 10.1186/1741-7015-10-28.

Targeting the epidermal growth factor receptor in non-small cell lung cancer
cells: the effect of combining RNA interference with tyrosine kinase inhibitors
or cetuximab.

Chen G(1), Kronenberger P, Teugels E, Umelo IA, De Grève J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Medical and Molecular Oncology and Department of Medical
Oncology, Universitair Ziekenhuis Brussel, Vrije Universiteit Brussel,
Laarbeeklaan 101, 1090, Brussels, Belgium.

BACKGROUND: The epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is a validated
therapeutic target in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). However, current single
agent receptor targeting does not achieve a maximal therapeutic effect, and some 
mutations confer resistance to current available agents. In the current study we 
have examined, in different NSCLC cell lines, the combined effect of RNA
interference targeting the EGFR mRNA, and inactivation of EGFR signaling using
different receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) or a monoclonal antibody
cetuximab.
METHODS: NSCLC cells (cell lines HCC827, H292, H358, H1650, and H1975) were
transfected with EGFR siRNA and/or treated with the TKIs gefitinib, erlotinib,
and afatinib, and/or with the monoclonal antibody cetuximab. The reduction of
EGFR mRNA expression was measured by real-time quantitative RT-PCR. The
down-regulation of EGFR protein expression was measured by western blot, and the 
proliferation, viability, caspase3/7 activity, and apoptotic morphology were
monitored by spectrophotometry, fluorimetry, and fluorescence microscopy. The
combined effect of EGFR siRNA and different drugs was evaluated using a
combination index.
RESULTS: EGFR-specific siRNA strongly inhibited EGFR protein expression almost
equally in all cell lines and inhibited cell growth and induced cell apoptosis in
all NSCLC cell lines studied, albeit with a different magnitude. The effects on
growth obtained with siRNA was strikingly different from the effects obtained
with TKIs. The effects of siRNA probably correlate with the overall oncogenic
significance of the receptor, which is only partly inhibited by the TKIs. The
cells which showed weak response to TKIs, such as the H1975 cell line containing 
the T790M resistance mutation, were found to be responsive to siRNA knockdown of 
EGFR, as were cell lines with downstream TKI resistance mutations. The cell line 
HCC827, harboring an exon 19 deletion mutation, was more than 10-fold more
sensitive to TKI proliferation inhibition and apoptosis induction than any of the
other cell lines. Cetuximab alone had no relevant in vitro activity at
concentrations obtainable in the clinic. The addition of EGFR siRNA to either
TKIs or cetuximab additively enhanced growth inhibition and induction of
apoptosis in all five cell lines, independent of the EGFR mutation status
(wild-type or sensitizing mutation or resistant mutation). The strongest
biological effect was observed when afatinib was combined with an EGFR-specific
siRNA.
CONCLUSIONS: EGFR knockdown by siRNA further decreases the cell growth of lung
cancer cells that are treated with TKIs or cetuximab alone, confirming that
single agent drug targeting does not achieve a maximal biological effect. The
siRNA inhibits EGFR oncogenic activity that bypasses downstream "resistance"
mutations such as KRAS and PTEN. The combined treatment of siRNA and EGFR
inhibitory agents is additive. The combination of a potent, irreversible kinase
inhibitor such as afatinib, with EGFR-specific siRNAs should be further
investigated as a new strategy in the treatment of lung cancer and other EGFR
dependent cancers, including those with downstream resistance mutations.

DOI: 10.1186/1741-7015-10-28 
PMCID: PMC3334713
PMID: 22436374  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Oncogene. 2013 Feb 7;32(6):759-67. doi: 10.1038/onc.2012.90. Epub 2012 Mar 19.

Yes and Lyn play a role in nuclear translocation of the epidermal growth factor
receptor.

Iida M(1), Brand TM, Campbell DA, Li C, Wheeler DL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Oncology, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and
Public Health, Madison, WI, USA.

The epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is a central regulator of tumor
progression in human cancers. Cetuximab is an anti-EGFR antibody that has been
approved for use in oncology. Previously we investigated mechanisms of resistance
to cetuximab using a model derived from the non-small cell lung cancer line
NCI-H226. We demonstrated that cetuximab-resistant clones (Ctx(R)) had increased 
nuclear localization of the EGFR. This process was mediated by Src family kinases
(SFKs), and nuclear EGFR had a role in resistance to cetuximab. To better
understand SFK-mediated nuclear translocation of EGFR, we investigated which SFK 
member(s) controlled this process as well as the EGFR tyrosine residues that are 
involved. Analyses of mRNA and protein expression indicated upregulation of the
SFK members Yes (v-Yes-1 yamaguchi sarcoma viral oncogene) and Lyn (v-yes-1
Yamaguchi sarcoma viral-related oncogene homolog) in all Ctx(R) clones. Further, 
immunoprecipitation analysis revealed that EGFR interacts with Yes and Lyn in
Ctx(R) clones, but not in cetuximab-sensitive (Ctx(S)) parental cells. Using RNAi
interference, we found that knockdown of either Yes or Lyn led to loss of EGFR
translocation to the nucleus. Conversely, overexpression of Yes or Lyn in low
nuclear EGFR-expressing Ctx(S) parental cells led to increased nuclear EGFR.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays confirmed nuclear EGFR complexes
associated with the promoter of the known EGFR target genes B-Myb and iNOS.
Further, all Ctx(R) clones exhibited upregulation of B-Myb and iNOS at the mRNA
and protein levels. siRNAs directed at Yes or Lyn led to decreased binding of
EGFR complexes to the B-Myb and iNOS promoters based on ChIP analyses. SFKs have 
been shown to phosphorylate EGFR on tyrosines 845 and 1101 (Y845 and Y1101), and 
mutation of Y1101, but not Y845, impaired nuclear entry of the EGFR. Taken
together, our findings demonstrate that Yes and Lyn phosphorylate EGFR at Y1101, 
which influences EGFR nuclear translocation in this model of cetuximab
resistance.

DOI: 10.1038/onc.2012.90 
PMCID: PMC3381861
PMID: 22430206  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Transl Lung Cancer Res. 2012 Mar;1(1):54-60. doi: 10.3978/j.issn.2218-6751.11.01.

Cetuximab in non-small-cell lung cancer.

Pirker R(1), Filipits M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine I, Medical University Vienna, 1090 Vienna, Austria.

Cetuximab is a chimeric monoclonal antibody that is directed towards the
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR). It has been evaluated in combination
with first-line chemotherapy in several phase II and two phase III trials in
patients with advanced NSCLC. The phase III FLEX trial demonstrated improved
survival for cetuximab combined with cisplatin plus vinorelbine compared to
chemotherapy alone. The BMS099 trial failed to show a significant improvement in 
progression-free survival but resulted in a hazard ratio for death similar to the
one seen in the FLEX trial. A meta-analysis of four randomized trials confirmed
the efficacy of cetuximab when added to chemotherapy. EGFR expression levels
based on an immunohistochemistry score have recently been shown to predict
benefit from cetuximab in the FLEX trial. In patients with high EGFR expression, 
patients had prolonged survival when treated with chemotherapy plus cetuximab
compared to chemotherapy alone. In patients with low EGFR expression, outcome was
not different between the two treatment arms. Thus platinum-based chemotherapy
combined with cetuximab represents a new treatment option for patients with
advanced NSCLC and high EGFR expression in their tumors. Cetuximab is also
evaluated in combination with chemoradiotherapy in patients with stage III NSCLC.

DOI: 10.3978/j.issn.2218-6751.11.01 
PMCID: PMC4367590
PMID: 25806155  [PubMed]


147. Med Hypotheses. 2012 Apr;78(4):420-2. doi: 10.1016/j.mehy.2012.01.001. Epub 2012 
Jan 26.

Adding cetuximab to stereotactic radiotherapy for non-small cell lung cancer
might reduce local failure rates.

Nieder C(1), Andratschke N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology and Palliative Medicine, Nordland Hospital, Bodø,
Norway. carsten.nieder@nlsh.no

Encouraging results have been obtained with stereotactic body radiation therapy
(SBRT) for early stage non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). However, local control
rates decrease in larger volume disease. Several studies have found a correlation
between T stage or tumor volume and local progression-free survival. In many
cases with larger tumor volume, sufficiently high radiation doses can not be
administered because the tolerance of surrounding normal tissues must be
respected. Under such circumstances, simultaneous administration of
radiosensitizing agents, which increase tumor cell kill, might improve the
therapeutic ratio. Based on sound preclinical evidence and recent data from
patients with stage III NSCLC and head and neck cancer, we hypothesize that
cetuximab might be an investigational agent that merits further evaluation. The
aim of prospective studies of SBRT and cetuximab would be to examine the toxicity
profile of the drug in combination with high-dose hypofractionated thoracic
radiotherapy and eventually to prove the superiority of combined treatment over
SBRT alone. If improved local control rates could be observed, overall survival
might improve accordingly.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mehy.2012.01.001 
PMID: 22281370  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Lung Cancer. 2012 Mar;75(3):348-52. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2011.08.006. Epub 2011
Sep 9.

Docetaxel-carboplatin chemotherapy combined with cetuximab in patients with
locally advanced or metastatic non small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC)--results of the
nonrandomised phase II study TaxErb.

Fischer JR(1), Griesinger F, Fink T, Salm T, Marseille A, Wolf M.

Author information: 
(1)Klinik Löwenstein gGmbH, Department of Medical Oncology, Im Geißhölzle 62,
74245 Löwenstein, Germany. jr.fischer@klinik-loewenstein.de

This open label, single arm phase II study was designed to evaluate the efficacy 
and safety of the addition of cetuximab to first line chemotherapy with
carboplatin and weekly docetaxel in patients with advanced non small-cell lung
cancer (NSCLC). From February 2007 to December 2008 74 patients with NSCLC (stage
IIIB and IV), ECOG PS ≤2 and no prior systemic chemotherapy were enrolled and
treated with carboplatin (area under the curve=5 on day 1) and docetaxel (35
mg/m(2) on days 1, 8, and 15). Cycles were repeated every 4 weeks for a minimum
of 4 and a maximum of 6 cycles. Cetuximab (400mg/m(2) on day 1 with subsequent
doses of 250 mg/m(2) weekly) was administered until progression or intolerable
toxicity up to a maximum treatment duration of 12 months. The primary endpoint
was the overall response rate (CR+PR) according to RECIST. Secondary endpoints
were progression-free survival (PFS), overall survival (OS) and toxicity.
Patients received a median of 4 cycles of docetaxel-carboplatin-chemotherapy. The
median number of administrations of cetuximab was 14. Sixty-seven patients were
evaluable for response. Partial response was seen in 29/67 patients corresponding
to an overall response rate (ORR) of 43.3% (95%CI, 28.5-53.7). No patient
experienced complete response. The clinical benefit rate (PR+SD) was 79.1%. The
1-year rates for PFS and OS were 11.2% and 64.4%, respectively. Median PFS was
4.8 months (95%CI, 3.70-5.31) and median OS 12.9 months (95%CI 8.26-∞). Adverse
events were mainly grades 1-2. Skin toxicity (76% of pts), dyspnea (36.5%) and
anemia (31.1%) were most frequent. Results from this phase II study suggest that 
the addition of cetuximab to first-line doublet carboplatin and weekly docetaxel 
results in a considerable clinical efficacy with an acceptable toxicity profile
for patients with advanced or metastatic NSCLC.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2011.08.006 
PMID: 21908069  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Clin Ther. 2017 Feb 9. pii: S0149-2918(17)30073-5. doi:
10.1016/j.clinthera.2017.01.027. [Epub ahead of print]

Retrospective Analysis of Different Treatment Schemes After Gefitinib Resistance 
in Advanced Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer.

Wang H(1), Zhang M(1), Li P(1), Zhang G(1), Yan X(1), Ma Z(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Affiliated Cancer Hospital of Zhengzhou
University, Henan Cancer Hospital, Zhengzhou, People׳s Republic of China.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Affiliated Cancer Hospital of Zhengzhou
University, Henan Cancer Hospital, Zhengzhou, People׳s Republic of China.
Electronic address: mazhiyong@csco.org.cn.

PURPOSE: The goal of this study was to assess the survival of patients with
acquired resistance to gefitinib who underwent different subsequent treatments.
METHODS: From September 2007 to July 2014, a total of 103 patients with
pathologically confirmed advanced non-small cell lung cancer and acquired
resistance to gefitinib were retrospectively analyzed. Fifty-eight (56%) patients
received chemotherapy; 36 were treated with chemotherapy and gefitinib
continuation (CT + G), and 22 patients received chemotherapy (CT) alone.
Twenty-two patients (22%) received continued gefitinib medication and local
therapy (LT + G), and 23 (22%) received best supportive care (BSC).
FINDINGS: The median age of the patients was 62 years and 99 (96%) were diagnosed
with adeno-carcinoma and 93 (90%) were stage IV cases. In the chemotherapy
groups, patients had high objective response rates and disease control rates (CT 
+ G, 16.7% and 42.7%; CT, 9.1% and 40.9%, respectively). The median
progression-free survival times from the beginning of gefitinib resistance was
5.3 months in the CT + G group, 3.6 months in the CT group, 3.1 months in the LT 
+ G group, and 1.4 months in the BSC group (P < 0.005). Moreover, the median
overall survival time after gefitinib resistance in the CT + G group was 11.6
months, which was significantly longer than for CT (9.6 months), LT + G (8.1
months), and BSC (3.7 months) patients (P < 0.001).
IMPLICATIONS: Subsequent chemotherapy after acquired gefitinib resistance led to 
better survival rates, particularly when combined with continued gefitinib
treatment. Local treatment combined with continued gefitinib is an
alternative therapy when local progression has occurred. However, larger sample
size studies in similar or other population groups are necessary to validate
these findings.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier HS Journals, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clinthera.2017.01.027 
PMID: 28190599  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. Target Oncol. 2017 Feb 10. doi: 10.1007/s11523-017-0479-4. [Epub ahead of print]

Treatment Options for EGFR T790M-Negative EGFR Tyrosine Kinase
Inhibitor-Resistant Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer.

Corallo S(1), D'Argento E(2), Strippoli A(1), Basso M(1), Monterisi S(1), Rossi
S(3), Cassano A(1), Barone CM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Fondazione Policlinico Universitario Agostino 
Gemelli, Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Largo A. Gemelli, 8, 00168, Rome, 
Italy. (2)Department of Medical Oncology, Fondazione Policlinico Universitario
Agostino Gemelli, Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Largo A. Gemelli, 8,
00168, Rome, Italy. ettoredargento@gmail.com. (3)Department of Medical Oncology, 
Humanitas Clinical and Research Center, Via Manzoni, 56, 20089, Rozzano, MI,
Italy.

The introduction of first- and second-generation EGFR-tyrosine kinase inhibitors 
(TKIs) (gefitinib, erlotinib and afatinib) for the treatment of advanced
EGFR-mutant non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) has dramatically improved
patients' prognosis and quality of life (QoL). Unfortunately, after an initial
and sometimes durable benefit from EGFR-TKI therapy, all patients with
EGFR-mutant lung cancer eventually become resistant to the treatment and
experience disease progression. In approximately 50% of these patients, genomic
alterations in the EGFR kinase domain resulting in the mutant T790M are
responsible for the resistance and this has led to the development of novel EGFR 
inhibitors active against mutant-T790M EGFR. The remaining 50% of patients with
acquired resistance (AR) to EGFR-TKIs do not harbour the T790M mutation. In these
cases, other mechanisms are involved in the development of AR such as
perturbations of downstream pathways (e.g. K-RAS mutations), activation of
alternative bypassing pathways (including c-Met, AXL, PIK3CA, BRAF), or
histologic transformation. This review summarizes the main treatment strategies
for this particular and heterogeneous group of "T790M-negative" patients.

DOI: 10.1007/s11523-017-0479-4 
PMID: 28188446  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


3. Oncotarget. 2017 Feb 2. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.15007. [Epub ahead of print]

Liver X receptors agonist GW3965 re-sensitizes gefitinib-resistant human
non-small cell lung cancer cell to gefitinib treatment by inhibiting NF-κB in
vitro.

Hu Y(1), Zang J(1,)(2), Cao H(1), Wu Y(1), Yan D(1), Qin X(1), Zhou L(1), Fan
F(1), Ni J(1), Xu X(1), Sha H(1), Liu S(1), Yu S(1), Wang Z(1), Ma R(1), Wu J(1),
Feng J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Cancer Research Center, Jiangsu Cancer Hospital,
Jiangsu Institute of Cancer Research, Nanjing Medical University Affiliated
Cancer Hospital, Nanjing, Jiangsu Province, China. (2)Department of Oncology, The
First Hospital of Harbin City, Harbin, Heilongjiang Province, China.

The recent research shows that the inhibition of the nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB)
pathway is a promising therapeutic option for patients who progress after
treatment with the novel mutant-selective EGFR-TKIs. For propose to find a
nontoxic drug to reverse the acquired gefitinib resistance, we examined whether
the Liver X Receptors agonist GW3965 affect gefitinib resistance of HCC827/GR-8-2
cells. Cell viability was measured by CCK-8 assay. Levels of NF-κB, p-AKT and
caspases were detected by Western blot analysis. Immunocytochemical analysis was 
used to detect the expression of NF-κB, p-AKT intracellularly. Induction of
apoptosis and cell cycle arrest was measured by Flow cytometry assay. And results
revealed that more than 90% of HCC827/GR-8-2 cells lived upon treatment with
gefitinib at a dose of 5μM for 48h. However, when under the combine treatment of 
GW3965 (5μM) & gefitinib(5μM), cell death rate was increased observably.
Co-administration of gefitinib & GW3965 induced cell apoptosis and cell cycle
arrest. Additionally, we observed a dose-dependent- down-regulation of NF-κB in
HCC827/GR-8-2 cells treated with gefitinib & GW3965. GW3965 and gefitinib
synergistically decreased cell proliferation and induced apoptosis by inhibiting 
NF-κB signaling pathway in gefitinib resistant cells. These findings support our 
hypothesis that GW3965 could act as a useful drug to reverse the gefitinib
resistance.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.15007 
PMID: 28178657  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


4. Ann Oncol. 2017 Feb 7. doi: 10.1093/annonc/mdw611. [Epub ahead of print]

Afatinib versus gefitinib in patients with EGFR mutation-positive advanced
non-small-cell lung cancer: overall survival data from the phase IIb LUX-Lung 7
trial.

Paz-Ares L(1), Tan EH(2), O'Byrne K(3), Zhang L(4), Hirsh V(5), Boyer M(6), Yang 
JC(7), Mok T(8), Lee KH(9), Lu S(10), Shi Y(11), Lee DH(12), Laskin J(13), Kim
DW(14), Laurie SA(15), Kölbeck K(16), Fan J(17), Dodd N(18), Märten A(19), Park
K(20).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Oncology Department, Hospital Universitario Doce de Octubre,
Universidad Complutense and CNIO, Madrid, Spain. (2)Division of Medical Oncology,
National Cancer Centre, Singapore. (3)Cancer Section, Princess Alexandra Hospital
and Queensland University of Technology, Brisbane, Australia. (4)State Key
Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Collaborative Innovation Center for Cancer
Medicine, Sun Yat-Sen University Cancer Center, Guangzhou, China. (5)Department
of Oncology, McGill University, Montreal, Canada. (6)Department of Medical
Oncology, Chris O'Brien Lifehouse, Camperdown, Australia. (7)Department of
Oncology, National Taiwan University Hospital and National Taiwan University,
Taipei, Taiwan. (8)Department of Clinical Oncology, State Key Laboratory of South
China, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong. (9)Department of Internal 
Medicine, Chungbuk National University Hospital, Cheongju, Chungbuk, South Korea.
(10)Shanghai Chest Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai.
(11)Department of Medical Oncology, Beijing Key Laboratory of Clinical Study on
Anticancer Molecular Targeted Drugs, National Cancer Center/Cancer Hospital,
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences & Peking Union Medical College, Beijing,
China. (12)Department of Oncology, Asan Medical Center, Seoul, South Korea.
(13)Medical Oncology, BC Cancer Agency, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
(14)Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul,
South Korea. (15)Division of Medical Oncology, The Ottawa Hospital Cancer Centre,
Ottawa, Ontario, Canada. (16)Pulmonary Diseases, Karolinska University Hospital, 
Solna, Stockholm, Sweden. (17)Clinical Program Leader, Boehringer Ingelheim
Pharmaceuticals, Inc, Ridgefield, USA. (18)Biostatistics, Boehringer Ingelheim
Ltd UK, Bracknell, UK. (19)TA Oncology, Boehringer Ingelheim GmbH, Ingelheim,
Germany. (20)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Samsung Medical Center,
Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Seoul, South Korea.

DOI: 10.1093/annonc/mdw611 
PMID: 28169392  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


5. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol. 2017 Feb 6. doi: 10.1007/s00280-016-3232-2. [Epub
ahead of print]

Evaluation of gefitinib efficacy according to body mass index, body surface area,
and body weight in patients with EGFR-mutated advanced non-small cell lung
cancer.

Imai H(1,)(2), Kuwako T(3,)(4), Kaira K(5), Masuda T(3), Miura Y(3,)(6), Seki
K(3), Sakurai R(3), Utsugi M(7), Shimizu K(8), Sunaga N(3), Tomizawa Y(4),
Ishihara S(9), Ishizuka T(10), Mogi A(8), Hisada T(3), Minato K(6), Takise A(11),
Saito R(4), Yamada M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Molecular Science, Gunma University Graduate School
of Medicine, Maebashi, Gunma, Japan. m06701014@gunma-u.ac.jp. (2)Department of
Respiratory Medicine, Gunma Prefectural Cancer Center, 617-1, Takahayashi-nishi, 
Ohta, Gunma, 373-8550, Japan. m06701014@gunma-u.ac.jp. (3)Department of Medicine 
and Molecular Science, Gunma University Graduate School of Medicine, Maebashi,
Gunma, Japan. (4)Division of Respiratory Medicine, National Hospital Organization
Shibukawa Medical Center, Shibukawa, Gunma, Japan. (5)Department of Oncology
Clinical Development, Gunma University Graduate School of Medicine, 3-39-15,
Showa-machi, Maebashi, Gunma, 371-8511, Japan. kkaira1970@yahoo.co.jp.
(6)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Gunma Prefectural Cancer Center, 617-1,
Takahayashi-nishi, Ohta, Gunma, 373-8550, Japan. (7)Division of Internal
Medicine, Kiryu Kosei General Hospital, Kiryu, Gunma, Japan. (8)Division of
General Thoracic Surgery, Integrative Center of General Surgery, Gunma University
Hospital, 3-39-15, Showa-machi, Maebashi, Gunma, 371-8511, Japan. (9)Division of 
Internal Medicine, Isesaki Municipal Hospital, Isesaki, Gunma, Japan.
(10)Division of Internal Medicine, Public Tomioka General Hospital, Tomioka,
Gunma, Japan. (11)Division of Respiratory Medicine, Maebashi Red Cross Hospital, 
Maebashi, Gunma, Japan.

PURPOSE: In patients with epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)-mutated,
advanced, non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), common gefitinib-sensitive EGFR
mutations that predict a greater response to therapy include the exon 19 deletion
and L858R point mutation. The objective of this study was to evaluate whether
body surface area (BSA), body weight (BW), and body mass index (BMI) affect
gefitinib efficacy in such patients.
METHODS: The medical charts of 138 consecutive patients with advanced NSCLC
harboring sensitive EGFR mutations, who underwent gefitinib treatment, were
reviewed. The median BSA and BW were used as cutoff values to evaluate their
impact on gefitinib efficacy. BMI was categorized as underweight (<18.5 kg/m(2)),
normal (18.5-25 kg/m(2)), and overweight (≥25 kg/m(2)).
RESULTS: The median BSA and BW were 1.48 m(2) and 53 kg, respectively. The
overall response rate, progression-free survival (PFS), and overall survival (OS)
were 65.2%, 12.2, and 24.2 months, respectively. There were no significant
differences in clinical outcomes according to BSA, BW, or BMI alone. Subgroup
analysis based on the mutation type and BSA revealed no significant differences
in PFS between the groups; however, the median OS in those with exon 19 deletion 
combined with low BSA was significantly favorable compared with the other groups.
CONCLUSIONS: Gefitinib efficacy in patients with NSCLC harboring sensitive EGFR
mutations did not differ according to BSA, BW, and BMI. However, OS was superior 
in patients with both the exon 19 deletion and low BSA.

DOI: 10.1007/s00280-016-3232-2 
PMID: 28168310  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


6. Pharmacol Ther. 2017 Feb 3. pii: S0163-7258(17)30015-3. doi:
10.1016/j.pharmthera.2017.02.001. [Epub ahead of print]

Treatments for EGFR-mutant Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer (NSCLC): The Road to A
Success, Paved with Failures.

Lee DH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, University of Ulsan College of Medicine, Asan Medical 
Center, 88 Olympic-ro, 43-gil, Songpa-gu, Seoul, 05505, Republic of Korea.
Electronic address: leedaeho@amc.seoul.kr.

The discovery of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) activating mutations in 
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and the success story of EGFR tyrosine kinases
inhibitors (TKIs) has changed the paradigm of cancer therapy from empirical
cytotoxic chemotherapy to molecular-targeted cancer therapy. As a result, EGFR
TKI therapy, including gefitinib, erlotinib and afatinib, has become the standard
therapy for NSCLC patients with EGFR activating mutation as first-line therapy.
However, most patients inevitably progress despite initial dramatic and rapid
response to EGFR TKIs and therefore during the last decade, a lot of efforts have
been made to identify and overcome various resistance mechanisms. Fortunately,
T790M secondary mutation, the main resistance mechanism, can be overcome by newly
developed third-generation EGFR TKIs, such as osimertinib, while most combination
trials trying to overcome resistance mechanisms other than T790M mutation have
failed so far. To make it worse, spatial and temporal tumor heterogeneity and
clonal selection or evolution is also identified in EGFR mutant NSCLC tumors.
Nevertheless, advance of comprehensive and more sensitive molecular diagnostics
and monitoring technology, such as next-generation sequencing and dynamic
monitoring technology using circulating biomarker and development of new cancer
medicine with different mechanisms from EGFR TKIs, especially immune checkpoint
inhibitors, might affect or change the treatment paradigm of EGFR mutant NSCLC in
the near future.

Copyright © 2017. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pharmthera.2017.02.001 
PMID: 28167215  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


7. Ann Transl Med. 2017 Jan;5(1):11. doi: 10.21037/atm.2016.12.64.

Gefitinib with pemetrexed as first-line therapy in patients with advanced
nonsquamous non-small cell lung cancer with activating epidermal growth factor
receptor mutations.

Yoon S(1), Lee DH(1), Kim SW(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Asan Medical Center, University of Ulsan College of
Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

Comment on
    J Clin Oncol. 2016 Sep 20;34(27):3258-66.

DOI: 10.21037/atm.2016.12.64 
PMCID: PMC5253295
PMID: 28164096  [PubMed]


8. Peptides. 2017 Jan 30. pii: S0196-9781(17)30028-1. doi:
10.1016/j.peptides.2017.01.012. [Epub ahead of print]

Endothelin causes transactivation of the EGFR and HER2 in non-small cell lung
cancer cells.

Moody TW(1), Ramos-Alvarez I(2), Perez PM(2), Mantey SA(2), Ridnour L(3), Wink
D(3), Jensen RT(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health and Human Services, National Cancer Institute, Center for
Cancer Research, Office of the Director, Bethesda, MD 20892, United States.
Electronic address: moodyt@mail.nih.gov. (2)National Institutes of Health,
National Institute of Diabetes, Digestive and Kidney Disease, Digestive Diseases 
Branch, Bethesda, MD 20892, United States. (3)National Cancer Institute, Cancer
Inflammation Program, Frederick, MD 21702, United States.

Endothelin (ET)-1 is an important peptide in cancer progression stimulating
cellular proliferation, tumor angiogenesis and metastasis. ET-1 binds with high
affinity to the ETA receptor (R) and ETBR on cancer cells. High levels of tumor
ET-1 and ETAR are associated with poor survival of lung cancer patients. Here the
effects of ET-1 on epidermal growth factor (EGF)R and HER2 transactivation were
investigated using non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cells. ETAR mRNA was
present in all 10 NSCLC cell lines examined. Addition of ET-1 to NCI-H838 or
H1975 cells increased EGFR, HER2 and ERK tyrosine phosphorylation within 2min.
The increase in EGFR and HER2 transactivation caused by ET-1 addition to NSCLC
cells was inhibited by lapatinib (EGFR and HER2 tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI)),
gefitinib (EGFR TKI), ZD4054 or BQ-123 (ETAR antagonist), GM6001 (matrix
metalloprotease inhibitor), PP2 (Src inhibitor) or Tiron (superoxide scavenger). 
ET-1 addition to NSCLC cells increased cytosolic Ca(2+) and reactive oxygen
species. ET-1 increased NSCLC clonal growth, whereas BQ123, ZD4054, lapatinib or 
gefitinib inhibited proliferation. The results indicate that ET-1 may regulate
NSCLC cellular proliferation in an EGFR- and HER2-dependent manner.

Copyright © 2017. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.peptides.2017.01.012 
PMID: 28153500  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


9. Expert Rev Respir Med. 2017 Feb 2. doi: 10.1080/17476348.2017.1290526. [Epub
ahead of print]

Chemotherapy and intercalated gefitinib or erlotinib in the treatment of advanced
non-small-cell lung cancer.

Rossi A(1), La Salvia A(2), Di Maio M(3).

Author information: 
(1)a Division of Medical Oncology , IRCCS "Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza"
Hospital , San Giovanni Rotondo (FG) - Italy. (2)b Department of Oncology ,
University of Turin, "San Luigi Gonzaga" Hospital , Orbassano (TO) - Italy. (3)c 
Department of Oncology , University of Turin, "Ordine Mauriziano" Hospital ,
Turin - Italy.

INTRODUCTION: Preclinical data showed that intercalated administration of
epidermal growth factor receptor-tyrosine kinase inhibitors (EGFR-TKIs) and
chemotherapy might be effective in the treatment of advanced non-small-cell lung 
cancer (NSCLC). This review will summarize and discuss the clinical results
available to date from prospective studies investigating this approach. Areas
covered: A structured search of bibliographic databases for peer-reviewed
literature and of main International meetings was undertaken, for trials testing 
the intercalated addition of EGFR-TKIs to chemotherapy in advanced NSCLC. Expert 
commentary: The results of intercalated schedules of EGFR-TKI and chemotherapy
are interesting but somewhat contrasting. This approach could represent a
potential treatment option in patients with advanced NSCLC, that deserves to be
further investigated within well-designed randomized trials.

DOI: 10.1080/17476348.2017.1290526 
PMID: 28152323  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


10. Front Med (Lausanne). 2017 Jan 18;3:76. doi: 10.3389/fmed.2016.00076. eCollection
2016.

Next-Generation EGFR Tyrosine Kinase Inhibitors for Treating EGFR-Mutant Lung
Cancer beyond First Line.

Sullivan I(1), Planchard D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department Medical Oncology, Gustave Roussy , Villejuif , France.

Tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) against the human epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR) are now standard treatment in the clinic for patients with
advanced EGFR mutant non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC). First-generation EGFR
TKIs, binding competitively and reversibly to the ATP-binding site of the EGFR
tyrosine kinase domain, have resulted in a significant improvement in outcome for
NSCLC patients with activating EGFR mutations (L858R and Del19). However, after a
median duration of response of ~12 months, all patients develop tumor resistance,
and in over half of these patients this is due to the emergence of the EGFR T790M
resistance mutation. The second-generation EGFR/HER TKIs were developed to treat 
resistant disease, targeting not only T790M but EGFR-activating mutations and
wild-type EGFR. Although they exhibited promising anti-T790M activity in the
laboratory, their clinical activity among T790M+ NSCLC was poor mainly because of
dose-limiting toxicity due to simultaneous inhibition of wild-type EGFR. The
third-generation EGFR TKIs selectively and irreversibly target EGFR T790M and
activating EGFR mutations, showing promising efficacy in NSCLC resistant to the
first- and second-generation EGFR TKIs. They also appear to have lower incidences
of toxicity due to the limited inhibitory effect on wild-type EGFR. Currently,
the first-generation gefitinib and erlotinib and second-generation afatinib have 
been approved for first-line treatment of metastatic NSCLC with activating EGFR
mutations. Among the third-generation EGFR TKIs, osimertinib is today the only
drug approved by the Food and Drug Administration and the European Medicines
Agency to treat metastatic EGFR T790M NSCLC patients who have progressed on or
after EGFR TKI therapy. In this review, we summarize the available
post-progression therapies including third-generation EGFR inhibitors and
combination treatment strategies for treating patients with NSCLC harboring EGFR 
mutations and address the known mechanisms of resistance.

DOI: 10.3389/fmed.2016.00076 
PMCID: PMC5241298
PMID: 28149837  [PubMed - in process]


11. Transl Lung Cancer Res. 2016 Dec;5(6):695-708. doi: 10.21037/tlcr.2016.12.02.

Third-generation epidermal growth factor receptor-tyrosine kinase inhibitors in
T790M-positive non-small cell lung cancer: review on emerged mechanisms of
resistance.

Minari R(1), Bordi P(1), Tiseo M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Oncology Unit, University Hospital of Parma, Parma, Italy.

Osimertinib, third-generation epidermal growth factor receptor-tyrosine kinase
inhibitor (EGFR-TKI), has been approved in the US and EU for the treatment of
EGFR mutant T790M-positive non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients resistant 
to first- or second-generation EGFR-TKIs, such as gefitinib, erlotinib and
afatinib. Although exciting survival data and response rates have been registered
in patients treated with this and other third-generation EGFR-TKIs, unfortunately
acquired resistance still occurs after approximately 10 months. Mechanisms
determining progression of disease are heterogeneous and not fully understood.
EGFR-dependent resistance mechanisms (such as new EGFR mutations), bypass pathway
activation [as erb-b2 receptor tyrosine kinase 2 (HER2) or MET amplification] and
histological transformation [in small cell lung cancer (SCLC)] have been
reported, similarly to previous generation TKIs. Here, we review principle
mechanisms of innate and acquired resistance described in literature both in
clinical and preclinical settings during NSCLC treatment with third-generation
EGFR-TKIs.

DOI: 10.21037/tlcr.2016.12.02 
PMCID: PMC5233880
PMID: 28149764  [PubMed - in process]


12. Transl Lung Cancer Res. 2016 Dec;5(6):563-578. doi: 10.21037/tlcr.2016.10.16.

Epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors for the treatment of 
central nervous system metastases from non-small cell lung cancer: the present
and the future.

Proto C(1), Imbimbo M(1), Gallucci R(1), Brissa A(1), Signorelli D(1), Vitali
M(1), Macerelli M(2), Corrao G(1), Ganzinelli M(1), Greco FG(3), Garassino MC(1),
Lo Russo G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Fondazione IRCCS, Istituto Nazionale dei
Tumori, Milano, Italy. (2)Department of Medical Oncology, University-Hospital of 
Santa Maria delle Grazie, Udine, Italy. (3)Radiology Unit, Fondazione IRCCS,
Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori, Milano, Italy.

Lung cancer is one of the major causes of cancer related mortality worldwide.
Brain metastases (BM) complicate clinical evolution of non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC) in approximately 25-40% of cases, adversely influencing quality of life
(QoL) and overall survival (OS). Systemic therapy remains the standard strategy
for metastatic disease. Nevertheless, the blood-brain barrier (BBB) makes central
nervous system (CNS) a sanctuary site. To date, the combination of chemotherapy
with whole brain radiation therapy (WBRT), surgery and/or stereotactic
radiosurgery (SRS) represents the most used treatment for patients (pts) with
intracranial involvement. However, due to their clinical conditions, many pts are
not able to undergo local treatments. Targeted therapies directed against
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), such as gefitinib, erlotinib and
afatinib, achieved important improvements in EGFR mutated NSCLC with favorable
toxicity profile. Although their role is not well defined, the reported objective
response rate (ORR) and the good tolerance make EGFR-tyrosine kinase inhibitors
(TKIs) an interesting valid alternative for NSCLC pts with BM, especially for
those harboring EGFR mutations. Furthermore, new-generation TKIs, such as
osimertinib and rociletinib, have already shown important activity on
intracranial disease and several trials are still ongoing to evaluate their
efficacy. In this review we want to highlight literature data about the use and
the effectiveness of EGFR-TKIs in pts with BM from NSCLC.

DOI: 10.21037/tlcr.2016.10.16 
PMCID: PMC5233868
PMID: 28149752  [PubMed - in process]


13. Mol Clin Oncol. 2017 Jan;6(1):56-62. doi: 10.3892/mco.2016.1076. Epub 2016 Nov 9.

Randomized phase II study of sequential carboplatin plus paclitaxel and gefitinib
in chemotherapy-naïve patients with advanced or metastatic non-small-cell lung
cancer: Long-term follow-up results.

Kubo E(1), Yamamoto N(1), Nokihara H(1), Fujiwara Y(1), Horinouchi H(1), Kanda
S(1), Goto Y(1), Ohe Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Oncology, National Cancer Center Hospital, Tokyo
104-0045, Japan.

The epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase inhibitor gefitinib
was initially approved in Japan in 2002 for the treatment of advanced or
metastatic non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC); however, the optimal order of
conventional cytotoxic chemotherapy (carboplatin and paclitaxel) and gefitinib
administration has not been determined. We conducted a randomized phase II study 
of carboplatin and paclitaxel followed by gefitinib vs. gefitinib followed by
carboplatin and paclitaxel to select a candidate for further development in a
phase III study of chemotherapy-naïve patients with advanced or metastatic NSCLC,
regardless of their EGFR mutation status. A total of 97 patients meeting this
description were randomly assigned to arm A (carboplatin and paclitaxel followed 
by gefitinib; n=49) or B (gefitinib followed by carboplatin and paclitaxel; n=48)
from June, 2003 to October, 2005. Carboplatin and paclitaxel were administered in
4 cycles every 3 weeks; gefitinib was continued until disease progression or
development of unacceptable toxicity. The primary endpoint was overall survival; 
the secondary endpoints were response rate and adverse event prevalence. The
median overall follow-up was 65.1 months (range, 28.7-75.1 months). The major
toxicities were hematological (carboplatin and paclitaxel) or skin rash, diarrhea
and hepatic dysfunction (gefitinib). Interstitial lung disease was observed in 1 
patient from each arm. In arms A and B, the carboplatin and paclitaxel response
rate, gefitinib response rate, and median survival durations were 34.8 and 26.5%,
33.3 and 35.7%, and 18.8 and 17.2 months, respectively. Arm A was selected for a 
subsequent phase III study.

DOI: 10.3892/mco.2016.1076 
PMCID: PMC5244976
PMID: 28123729  [PubMed]


14. Mol Clin Oncol. 2017 Jan;6(1):3-6. doi: 10.3892/mco.2016.1099. Epub 2016 Dec 1.

Toxicity profile of epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors
in patients with epidermal growth factor receptor gene mutation-positive lung
cancer.

Takeda M(1), Nakagawa K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Kinki University Faculty of Medicine,
Osaka-Sayama, Osaka 589-8511, Japan.

Recent progress in the research on the molecular biology of lung cancer revealed 
that the clinical response to epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine
kinase inhibitors (TKIs) is associated with the presence of activating EGFR
mutations. Three EGFR-TKIs, namely afatinib, erlotinib and gefitinib, are
currently available for the treatment of patients with EGFR mutation-positive
non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Due to the dearth of published phase III
trials prospectively evaluating the effects of one EGFR-TKI in comparison with
another in such patients, the decision-making regarding which agent to recommend 
to any given patient lies with the treating physician. Given the potential
long-term exposure of such patients to EGFR-TKIs, the toxicological properties of
these drugs in such patients may differ from those observed in unselected
patients. The aim of the present study was to provide an overview of the key
adverse events (rash, diarrhea, hepatotoxicity and interstitial lung disease)
reported for EGFR-TKIs in clinical trials including patients with advanced NSCLC.

DOI: 10.3892/mco.2016.1099 
PMCID: PMC5244907
PMID: 28123721  [PubMed]


15. Oncol Res Treat. 2017;40(1-2):7-13. doi: 10.1159/000455147. Epub 2017 Jan 25.

Impact of EGFR-Tyrosine Kinase Inhibitors on Postoperative Recurrent
Non-Small-Cell Lung Cancer Harboring EGFR Mutations.

Igawa S, Ryuge S, Ichinoe M, Nakashima H, Otani S, Nakahara Y, Fukui T, Sasaki J,
Kubota M, Katagiri M, Murakumo Y, Satoh Y, Sato Y, Masuda N.

BACKGROUND: It is unclear whether there is a difference in the efficacy of
treatment by epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase inhibitors
(TKIs) between patients with postoperative recurrent non-small-cell lung cancer
(NSCLC) and those with stage IV NSCLC harboring EGFR mutations.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: The records of NSCLC patients harboring EGFR mutations who 
were treated with gefitinib or erlotinib were retrospectively reviewed, and the
treatment outcomes were evaluated. Moreover, we performed an immunohistochemical 
analysis of PD-L1 expression in tumor lesions of the postoperative recurrence
group.
RESULTS: In 205 patients, both the progression-free survival (PFS) time (9.4 vs. 
16.9 months) and the median survival time (24.7 vs. 37.4 months) were
significantly longer in the postoperative group than in the stage IV group.
Additionally, multivariate analysis identified that postoperative recurrence was 
an independent predictor of PFS and overall survival, as were performance status 
and smoking status. The PFS durations were 15.7 and 16.6 months for the high- and
low-PD-L1 expression groups, respectively, and no significant difference was
observed (P = 0.73).
CONCLUSIONS: The findings of this study provide a valuable rationale for
considering postoperative recurrence as a predictive factor for favorable PFS and
overall survival in patients with NSCLC harboring activating EGFR mutations who
receive EGFR-TKIs.

© 2017 S. Karger GmbH, Freiburg.

DOI: 10.1159/000455147 
PMID: 28118631  [PubMed - in process]


16. Curr Pharm Des. 2017 Jan 23. [Epub ahead of print]

Current Status and Perspectives Regarding the Therapeutic Potential of targeting 
EGFR pathway by Curcumin in Lung Cancer.

Shafiee M, Mohamadzade E, ShahidSales S, Khakpouri S, Maftouh M, Parizadeh SA,
Hasanian SM, Avan A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Medicine Group, Department of Modern Sciences and Technologies,
School of Medicine, Mashhad University of Medical Sciences, Mashhad, Iran.

Lung cancer is among the leading cause of cancer-related-deaths and non-small
cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is the most common form of lung cancer. More than 70% of
NSCLC patients have locally advanced or metastatic disease at diagnosis, which
are then being treated with platinum-based chemotherapy or
epidermal-growth-factor-receptor (EGFR) inhibitors in patients harboring
activating EGFR-mutations. Several molecules which target multiple ErbB receptors
and EGFR, have been developed, including geﬁtinib and erlotinib, although most of
the patients become resistance. Therefore, identification of novel agents with
less toxicity is warranted. Several interesting data has been reported about the 
antitumor activity of curcumin in several tumors, including lung, breast and
colorectal cancers. In particular, a recent phase I trial evaluated the activity 
of curcumin in combination with FOLFOX chemotherapy in patients with inoperable
colorectal cancer patients. They showed that curcumin added benefit in subsets of
patients when administered with FOLFOX, and was well-tolerated chemotherapy
adjunct. Another trial is now investigating the beneﬁcial effects of curcumin
plus gefitinib or erlotinib for EGFR-mutant NSCLC, although this trial is
ongoing. Improved understanding of molecular mechanisms behind resistance to EGFR
TKIs suggest the importance of a genotype-guided approach to therapy and
inhibition of parallel and downstream pathways, using agents which target
heat-shock-protein-90, poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase, PI3K/mTOR pathway. The aim
of the current review is to give an overview of the possible molecular mechanisms
of curcumin in the preclinical and clinical investigations in solid tumors, with 
particular emphasis on its combination with other chemotherapeutic agents in lung
cancers.


PMID: 28117012  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


17. Chemotherapy. 2017 Jan 21;62(3):151-158. doi: 10.1159/000454944. [Epub ahead of
print]

Distinct Benefit of Overall Survival between Patients with Non-Small-Cell Lung
Cancer Harboring EGFR Exon 19 Deletion and Exon 21 L858R Substitution.

Koyama N(1), Watanabe Y, Iwai Y, Kawamura R, Miwa C, Nagai Y, Hagiwara K, Koyama 
S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Oncology, Tokyo Medical University Hachioji Medical
Center, Tokyo, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Exon 19 deletion (Del19) and exon 21 L858R substitution (L858R),
which account for 90% of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutations as
common mutations, are associated with favorable outcomes with EGFR-tyrosine
kinase inhibitors (TKIs) compared with other uncommon EGFR mutations in
non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC). However, whether there are differences in
overall survival (OS) between patients with these common EGFR mutations remains
controversial.
METHODS: The subjects studied were 74 NSCLC patients with common EGFR mutations
treated with gefitinib or erlotinib. Using univariate and multivariate analyses, 
we retrospectively compared the clinicopahological characteristics of patients
harboring Del19 with those harboring L858R.
RESULTS: Compared with patients harboring L858R, EGFR-TKIs provided a significant
OS benefit in patients harboring Del19 (p = 0.024), as well as favorable
therapeutic responses (p = 0.045) and progression-free survival (PFS) benefits (p
= 0.031). In multivariate analyses, Del19 was independently associated with PFS
(p = 0.029) and OS (p = 0.009), whereas no parameters other than pleural
dissemination at the initial treatment were associated with EGFR mutation types.
CONCLUSION: Del19 and L858R have distinct prognostic implications and may require
individual therapeutic strategies.

© 2017 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000454944 
PMID: 28110331  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


18. Oncotarget. 2017 Jan 17. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.14707. [Epub ahead of print]

Incidence and risk of infections associated with EGFR-TKIs in advanced
non-small-cell lung cancer: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized
controlled trials.

Wang Y(1), Wang M(1,)(2), Wang Q(1,)(2), Geng Z(1,)(2), Sun M(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Beijing Airport Hospital, Shunyi
districts, Beijing, China. (2)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Dongying
People's Hospital, Dongying, Shandong, Shandong, China.

Currently, the overall incidence and risk of infections with epidermal growth
factor receptor (EGFR)-tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) in non-small-cell lung
cancer (NSCLC) patients remained undetermined. We searched Pubmed for related
articles published from 1 January 1990 to 31 November 2015. Eligible studies
included prospective randomized controlled trials (RCTs) evaluating therapy with 
or without EGFR-TKIs in patients with NSCLC. Data on infections were extracted.
Pooled incidence, Peto odds ratio (Peto OR), and 95% confidence intervals (CIs)
were calculated. A total of 17,420 patients from 25 RCTs were included. The use
of EGFR-TKIs significantly increased the risk of developing all-grade infections 
(Peto OR 1.48, 95%CI: 1.12-1.96, p = 0.006) in NSCLC patients, but not for severe
(Peto OR 1.26, 95%CI: 0.96-1.67, p = 0.098) and fatal infections (Peto OR 0.81,
95%CI: 0.43-1.53, p = 0.52). Meta-regression indicated the risk of infections
tended to increase with the treatment duration of EGFR-TKIs. No publication of
bias was detected. In conclusion, the use of EGFR-TKIs significantly increased
the risk of developing all-grade infectious events in NSCLC patients, but not for
severe and fatal infections. Clinicians should be aware of the risks of
infections with the administration of these drugs in these patients.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.14707 
PMID: 28107192  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


19. Oncol Lett. 2016 Dec;12(6):5363-5369. doi: 10.3892/ol.2016.5373. Epub 2016 Nov 9.

HER2 overexpression reverses the relative resistance of EGFR-mutant H1975 cell
line to gefitinib.

Xu J(1), Shen L(1), Zhang BC(2), Xu WH(1), Ruan SQ(3), Pan C(4), Wei QC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, The Second Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang
University School of Medicine, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310009, P.R. China; National
Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of Cancer Prevention and Intervention,
Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310009, P.R. China.
(2)Department of Radiation Oncology, The Second Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang
University School of Medicine, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310009, P.R. China.
(3)Department of Oncology, Chongqing Zhongshan Hospital, Chongqing 400013, P.R.
China. (4)National Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of Cancer Prevention and 
Intervention, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310009, 
P.R. China.

Gefitinib is an epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor (EGFR 
TKI) that has been demonstrated to be clinically useful for the treatment of
patients with non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). However, ~50% of patients do
not respond to EGFR TKI treatment through the emergence of mutations, such as
T790M. Therefore, it is important to determine which patients are eligible for
treatment with gefitinib. As a preferred dimerization partner for EGFR, the role 
of EGFR 2 (HER2) in mediating sensitivity to gefitinib is poorly understood. In
the present study, full-length human HER2 cDNA was introduced to the NSCLC cell
lines H1975 and H1299, which have a low endogenous expression level of HER2. In
addition, it was observed in the present study that the H1975 cell line harbored 
the L858R and T790M mutations in the EGFR kinase domain. Western blot analysis
and MTT assay were used to evaluate the TKI sensitivity of HER2 expression
status, and the activation of HER3 and HER2 downstream effectors. The results
indicated that the sensitivity of H1975 cells to gefitinib was restored by the
overexpression of HER2, which stimulated HER2-driven signaling cascades
accompanied by the activation of protein kinase B. By contrast, ectopic HER2
overexpression in H1299 cells did not significantly alter the sensitivity to
gefitinib treatment. In conclusion, the current study results suggested that the 
relatively resistance of the H1975 cell line to gefitinib could be reversed by
the overexpression of HER2. Therefore, the expression of HER2 could also be
considered when evaluate the patients' potential response to gefitinib,
particularly in the subgroup of lung cancer patients who harbor an EGFR mutation.

DOI: 10.3892/ol.2016.5373 
PMCID: PMC5228548
PMID: 28105244  [PubMed]


20. Oncol Lett. 2016 Dec;12(6):4613-4617. doi: 10.3892/ol.2016.5290. Epub 2016 Oct
18.

Relationship between miR-7 expression and treatment outcomes with gefitinib in
non-small cell lung cancer.

Mou K(1), Gu W(1), Gu C(1), Zhang J(1), Qwang W(1), Ren G(1), Tian J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, People's Hospital of Laiwu City, Laiwu Hospital
Affiliated to Taishan Medical College, Laiwu, Shandong 271100, P.R. China.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Shandong Cancer Hospital Affiliated to
Shandong University, Shandong Academy of Medical Sciences, Jinan, Shandong
250117, P.R. China.

The aim of the present study was to assess the effects of gefitinib chemotherapy 
on the serum levels of miR-7 in patients with non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC).
A total of 126 patients were enrolled in the present study (stage I-II, n=54 and 
stage III-IV, n=72). Patients with stage I-II NSCLC underwent surgery in
combination with gefitinib chemotherapy, whereas only gefitinib chemotherapy was 
administered to patients with stage III-IV disease. Serum levels of miR-7 before 
and after treatment were measured with quantitative polymerase chain reaction
using fluorogenic probes, and miR-7 positivity and scoring in resected specimens 
were determined by immunohistochemistry. The number of miR-7-positive cases and
the number of cases with higher miR-7 scores were significantly lower among
patients with stage I-II NSCLC than those with stage III-IV disease.
Additionally, serum levels of miR-7 before and after intervention were lower in
stage I-II than in stage III-IV NSCLC cases. Serum levels of miR-7 after
treatment were significantly lower than those before intervention in the two
groups. The treatment success rate was significantly higher in miR-7-negative
patients than in miR-7-positive patients in the two patient groups. Adverse event
rates in miR-7-negative and -positive patients were comparable between the
groups. Among those with stage III-IV NSCLC, the survival rate of miR-7-positive 
patients was significantly lower than that of miR-7-negative patients.
Conversely, among those with I-II NSCLC, the progression-free survival and median
survival time of miR-7-positive patients were significantly lower than those of
miR-7-negative patients. Our findings suggest that serum and expression levels of
miR-7 in the tissue were closely associated with tumor staging and the
therapeutic effects of gefitinib in NSCLC.

DOI: 10.3892/ol.2016.5290 
PMCID: PMC5228447
PMID: 28105168  [PubMed]


21. Br J Cancer. 2017 Jan 19. doi: 10.1038/bjc.2016.456. [Epub ahead of print]

A phase III randomised controlled trial of erlotinib vs gefitinib in advanced
non-small cell lung cancer with EGFR mutations.

Yang JJ(1), Zhou Q(1), Yan HH(1), Zhang XC(1), Chen HJ(1), Tu HY(1), Wang Z(1),
Xu CR(1), Su J(1), Wang BC(1), Jiang BY(1), Bai XY(1), Zhong WZ(1), Yang XN(1),
Wu YL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Guangdong Lung Cancer Institute, Guangdong General Hospital & Guangdong
Academy of Medical Sciences, Guangzhou, China.

BACKGROUND: A phase III trial was conducted to compare the safety and efficacy of
erlotinib with that of gefitinib in advanced non-small cell lung cancer
harbouring epidermal growth factor receptor mutations in exon 19 or 21.
METHODS: Eligible patients were randomised to receive erlotinib (150 mg per day) 
or gefitinib (250 mg per day) orally until disease progression or unacceptable
toxicity. We aimed to determine whether erlotinib is superior to gefitinib in
efficacy. The primary end point was progression-free survival.
RESULTS: A total of 256 patients were randomised to receive erlotinib (N=128) or 
gefitinib (N=128). Median progression-free survival was not better with erlotinib
than with gefitinib (13.0 vs 10.4 months, 95% confidence interval (CI) 0.62-1.05,
P=0.108). The corresponding response rates and median overall survival were 56.3%
vs 52.3% (P=0.530) and 22.9 vs 20.1 months (95% CI 0.63-1.13, P=0.250),
respectively. There were no significant differences in grade 3/4 toxicities
between the two arms (P=0.172).
CONCLUSIONS: The primary end point was not met. Erlotinib was not significantly
superior to gefitinib in terms of efficacy in advanced non-small cell lung cancer
with epidermal growth factor receptor mutations in exon 19 or 21, and the two
treatments had similar toxicities.British Journal of Cancer advance online
publication 19 January 2017; doi:10.1038/bjc.2016.456 www.bjcancer.com.

DOI: 10.1038/bjc.2016.456 
PMID: 28103612  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


22. Oncol Lett. 2016 Dec;12(6):5349-5355. doi: 10.3892/ol.2016.5365. Epub 2016 Nov 8.

Detection of microRNA-200b may predict the inhibitory effect of gefitinib on
non-small cell lung cancer and its potential mechanism.

Liu Z(1), Yao L(1), Tan B(1), Li L(1), Chen B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Laboratory Center, The First Hospital of Lanzhou
University, Lanzhou, Gansu 730000, P.R. China.

The present study aimed to investigate the association and underlying mechanisms 
between microRNA-200b level and the inhibitory effect of gefitinib on non-small
cell lung cancer. In total, 100 patients (43 males and 57 females; median age, 63
years) with advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) were selected. All
patients were administered with gefitinib orally (250 mg/day) and the effect of
gefitinib was evaluated according to the Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid
Tumors guidelines. Tumor tissue and plasma samples were collected prior to and
subsequent to therapy. The microRNA-200b levels in tissues and plasma were
determined by quantitative polymerase chain reaction (PCR). A549 cells were
cultured in vitro and transfected with microRNA-200b mimic. Using Cell Counting
Kit-8 assay, the proliferation inhibition detected was induced by 0.1 µM
gefitinib in transfected or non-transfected A549 cells. Cell apoptosis and cell
cycle progression were analyzed by flow cytometry and the migration of cells was 
observed by Transwell assay. In addition, mRNA and protein levels of insulin-like
growth factor 1 receptor (IGF-1R), protein kinase B (AKT) and extracellular
signal-related kinase (ERK), together with the phosphorylation of AKT and ERK in 
A549 cells, were determined by quantitative PCR and western blot analysis,
respectively. The microRNA-200b levels in gefitinib-insensitive patients were
decreased compared with gefitinib-sensitive patients. Transfection with
microRNA-200b mimic increased the gefitinib induced proliferation inhibition,
apoptosis and cell cycle arrest in A549 cells. Also, transfection with
microRNA-200b mimic increased the migration inhibitory effect of gefitinib on
A549 cells. Decreased IGF-1R expression together with reduced phosphorylation of 
AKT and ERK were observed following transfection of A549 cells with the microRNA 
200b mimic. In conclusion, detection of microRNA-200b may predict the inhibitory 
effect of gefitinib on NSCLC. Upregulation of microRNA-200b led to the elevated
sensitivity of glioma cells to gefitinib, and this effect may be explained as
microRNA-200b being able to inhibit the expression of IGF-1R, thereby reducing
the activation of downstream phosphoinositide 3-kinase/AKT and mitogen-activated 
protein kinase signaling pathways.

DOI: 10.3892/ol.2016.5365 
PMCID: PMC5228080
PMID: 28101246  [PubMed]


23. Oncol Lett. 2016 Dec;12(6):4598-4604. doi: 10.3892/ol.2016.5287. Epub 2016 Oct
18.

Epidermal growth factor receptor mutation enhances expression of vascular
endothelial growth factor in lung cancer.

Hung MS(1), Chen IC(2), Lin PY(3), Lung JH(4), Li YC(4), Lin YC(1), Yang CT(5),
Tsai YH(6).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Thoracic Oncology, Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care
Medicine, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Puzih, Chiayi 61363, Taiwan, R.O.C.;
Department of Medicine, College of Medicine, Chang Gung University, Taoyuan
33302, Taiwan, R.O.C.; Department of Respiratory Care, Chang Gung University of
Science and Technology, Chiayi Campus, Puzih, Chiayi 61363, Taiwan, R.O.C.
(2)Department of Emergency Medicine, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Puzih, Chiayi 
61363, Taiwan, R.O.C. (3)Department of Anatomic Pathology, Dalin Tzu Chi
Hospital, Buddhist Tzu Chi Medical Foundation, Chiayi 62247, Taiwan, R.O.C.
(4)Division of Thoracic Oncology, Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care
Medicine, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Puzih, Chiayi 61363, Taiwan, R.O.C.
(5)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Chang-Gung Memorial
Hospital, Taoyuan 33305, Taiwan, R.O.C.; Department of Respiratory Care, College 
of Medicine, Chang Gung University, Taoyuan 33302, Taiwan, R.O.C. (6)Division of 
Thoracic Oncology, Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Chang Gung
Memorial Hospital, Puzih, Chiayi 61363, Taiwan, R.O.C.; Department of Respiratory
Care, College of Medicine, Chang Gung University, Taoyuan 33302, Taiwan, R.O.C.

Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) activation has been demonstrated to have 
a critical role in tumor angiogenesis. In the present study, the correlation
between EGFR mutations and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) was
investigated in lung cancer cell lines and non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
tumor tissues. VEGF levels were significantly increased in culture medium of lung
cancer cells and NSCLC tissues with EGFR mutations (H1650 vs. A549, P=0.0399;
H1975 vs. A549, P<0.0001). Stable lung cancer cell lines expressing mutant (exon 
19 deletion, E746-A750; exon 21 missense mutation, L858R) and wild-type EGFR
genes were established. Significantly increased expression of VEGF and stronger
inhibitory effects of gefitinib to VEGF expression were observed in exon 19
deletion stable lung cancer cells (exon 19 deletion vs. wild-type EGFR,
P=0.0005). The results of the present study may provide an insight into the
association of mutant EGFR and VEGF expression in lung cancer, and may assist
with further development of targeted therapy for NSCLC in the future.

DOI: 10.3892/ol.2016.5287 
PMCID: PMC5228119
PMID: 28101216  [PubMed]


24. Sci Signal. 2017 Jan 17;10(462). pii: eaag0528. doi: 10.1126/scisignal.aag0528.

The neuropilin 2 isoform NRP2b uniquely supports TGFβ-mediated progression in
lung cancer.

Gemmill RM(1), Nasarre P(1), Nair-Menon J(1), Cappuzzo F(2), Landi L(3),
D'Incecco A(3), Uramoto H(4), Yoshida T(5), Haura EB(5), Armeson K(6), Drabkin
HA(7).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine, Hollings Cancer
Center, Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, SC 29425, USA.
(2)Azienda Unità Sanitaria Locale della Romagna, Ravenna 48100, Italy. (3)Medical
Oncology Department, Istituto Toscano Tumori, Ospedale Civile di Livorno, Viale
Alfieri 36, Leghorn 57100, Italy. (4)Division of Thoracic Surgery, Kanazawa
Medical University, 1-1 Daigaku, Uchinada 920-0293, Japan. (5)Department of
Thoracic Oncology, Moffitt Cancer Center, Tampa, FL 33612, USA. (6)Department of 
Public Health Sciences, Hollings Cancer Center, Medical University of South
Carolina, Charleston, SC 29425, USA. (7)Division of Hematology/Oncology,
Department of Medicine, Hollings Cancer Center, Medical University of South
Carolina, Charleston, SC 29425, USA. drabkin@musc.edu.

Neuropilins (NRP1 and NRP2) are co-receptors for heparin-binding growth factors
and class 3 semaphorins. Different isoforms of NRP1 and NRP2 are produced by
alternative splicing. We found that in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cell
lines, transforming growth factor-β (TGFβ) signaling preferentially increased the
abundance of NRP2b. NRP2b and NRP2a differ only in their carboxyl-terminal
regions. Although the presence of NRP2b inhibited cultured cell proliferation and
primary tumor growth, NRP2b enhanced cellular migration, invasion into Matrigel, 
and tumorsphere formation in cultured cells in response to TGFβ signaling and
promoted metastasis in xenograft mouse models. These effects of overexpressed
NRP2b contrast with the effects of overexpressed NRP2a. Hepatocyte growth factor 
(HGF)-induced phosphorylation of the kinase AKT was specifically promoted by
NRP2b, whereas inhibiting the HGF receptor MET attenuated NRP2b-dependent cell
migration. Unlike NRP2a, NRP2b did not bind the PDZ domain scaffolding protein
GAIP carboxyl terminus-interacting protein (GIPC1) and only weakly recruited
phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN), potentially explaining the difference
between NRP2b-mediated and NRP2a-mediated effects. Analysis of NSCLC patient
tumors showed that NRP2b abundance correlated with that of the immune cell
checkpoint receptor ligand PD-L1 as well as with epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transition (EMT) phenotypes in the tumors, acquired resistance to epidermal
growth factor receptor (EGFR) inhibitors, disease progression, and poor survival 
in patients. NRP2b knockdown attenuated the acquisition of resistance to the EGFR
inhibitor gefitinib in cultured NSCLC cells. Thus, in NSCLC, NRP2b contributed to
the oncogenic response to TGFβ and correlated with tumor progression in patients.

Copyright © 2017, American Association for the Advancement of Science.

DOI: 10.1126/scisignal.aag0528 
PMID: 28096505  [PubMed - in process]


25. Curr Cancer Drug Targets. 2016 Dec 13. [Epub ahead of print]

Polyphyllin II restores sensitization of the resistance of PC-9/ZD cells to
gefitinib by a negative regulation of the PI3K/Akt/mTOR signaling pathway.

Zheng R, Jiang H(1), Li J, Liu X, Xu H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Zhejiang Hospital, No.12 Lingyin Road, Hangzhou,
Zhejiang 310013, P.R. China.

EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) are widely used for advanced non-small
cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients with a sensitizing EGFR mutation and provide a 
promising treatment strategy. However, acquired resistance to EGFR-TKIs restrict 
their application. The mechanisms underlying acquired resistance to TKIs have
been explored and Phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K)/Akt/mTOR pathway plays a very 
important role in NSCLC development as well as EGFR-TKI resistance. Polyphyllin
II(PP II) is the main steroidal saponin constituent which derives from the root
of Paris polychylia.OBJECTIVE: We examined the sensitizing effect of PP II to
gefitinib on proliferation, apoptosis, PI3K/Akt/mTOR signaling pathway and tumor 
growth on gefitinib-resistant NSCLC in vitro and in vivo.
METHODS: Gefitinib-resistant PC-9/ZD cells and gefitinib-sensitive PC-9 cells
were used. MTT assay, Annexin V/PI analyses, Absence of PI3K siRNA, Western blot,
and TUNEL, Immunohistochemistry for xenograft model were carried out.
RESULTS: PP II promoted the anti-proliferative effects of gefitinib and
gefitinib-induced apoptosis via activation of caspases and cleavage of PARP. PP
II elevated sensitization of gefitinib through targeting the PI3K/Akt/mTOR. PP II
with gefitinib treatment was more effective in inhibiting tumor growth and PI3K
inactivation on gefitinib-resistant xenograft.
CONCLUSIONS: The results indicated that PP II elevated sensitization of
drug-resistant PC-9/ZD cells to gefitinib through inhibition of PI3K/Akt/mTOR
signaling pathway. It provides a potential new strategy to overcome gefitinib
resistance for EGFR-TKI resistant NSCLC.


PMID: 28093061  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


26. Oncotarget. 2017 Jan 11. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.14597. [Epub ahead of print]

Preclinical pharmacodynamic evaluation of drug candidate SKLB-178 in the
treatment of non-small cell lung cancer.

Zhong L(1,)(2), Yang J(1), Cao Z(3), Chen X(1), Hu Y(1), Li L(4), Yang S(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Biotherapy and Cancer Center, West China Hospital,
West China Medical School, Sichuan University/Collaborative Innovation Center of 
Biotherapy, Sichuan 610041, China. (2)Personalized Drug Therapy Key Laboratory of
Sichuan Province, Hospital of the University of Electronic Science and Technology
of China and Sichuan Provincial People's Hospital, Sichuan 610072, China.
(3)Pharmacy College, Chengdu University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Sichuan 
611137, China. (4)Key Laboratory of Drug Targeting and Drug Delivery System,
Ministry of Education, West China School of pharmacy, Sichuan University, Sichuan
610041, China.

Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is a serious life-threatening malignancy.
Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase inhibitors, such as
Gefitinib and Erlotinib, are effective clinical medicines for advanced NSCLC
patients harboring EGFR-activating mutations. However, this therapy just benefits
a small percentage of sufferers. Worse still, all patients treated with drugs
ultimately develop resistance. Hence, there is still an unmet medical need among 
patients with NSCLC. In this account, we report a novel multikinase inhibitor
SKLB-178, which potently inhibits both EGFR-activating and resistant mutations,
as well as the activities of Src and VEGFR2 kinases. SKLB-178 potently inhibited 
cancer cell growth in both Gefitinib-sensitive and resistant NSCLC cells.
Meanwhile, SKLB-178 significantly suppressed the migration, invasion and tube
formation of endothelial cells, and the growth of intersegmental vessel in
zebrafish. The in vivo pharmacodynamic studies further demonstrated that SKLB-178
had wider potency than Gefitinib, and could significantly prolong survival of
animals in A549 experimental metastasis model. These advantages together with the
low toxicity of SKLB-178 indicate that SKLB-178 deserves to be further developed 
as a potential drug candidate for NSCLC therapy.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.14597 
PMID: 28086226  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


27. Clin Lung Cancer. 2016 Dec 22. pii: S1525-7304(16)30379-5. doi:
10.1016/j.cllc.2016.12.003. [Epub ahead of print]

A Multicenter Double-blind Phase II Study of Metformin With Gefitinib as
First-line Therapy of Locally Advanced Non-Small-cell Lung Cancer.

Li KL(1), Li L(1), Zhang P(2), Kang J(1), Wang YB(1), Chen HY(1), He Y(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiration, Daping Hospital, Third Military Medical University,
P.R. China. (2)Sichuan International Studies University, P.R. China.
(3)Department of Respiration, Daping Hospital, Third Military Medical University,
P.R. China. Electronic address: heyong8998@126.com.

We present the rationale and study design of the CGMT (combined gefitinib and
metformin therapy) trial (www.ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT01864681), which 
is aimed at treating locally advanced non-small-cell lung cancer. The CGMT trial 
is a multicenter, phase II randomized, double-blinded, and placebo-controlled
study, which is designed to evaluate the safety and efficacy of metformin in
combination with gefitinib as first-line therapy in patients presenting with
stage IIIb-IV non-small-cell lung cancer expressing the epidermal growth factor
receptor mutant. Two therapies are proposed for this trial. The first regimen is 
comprised of gefitinib plus metformin. The second therapy is comprised of
gefitinib plus placebo. The primary objective of this trail is to compare the
progression-free survival rate at year 1 of the study. The secondary objective of
this trial is to compare the 2-year overall survival, the 2-year progression-free
survival, the objective response rate, and the disease-control rate, and to
evaluate the relative safety of both therapies. Based on the statistical design, 
we plan to enroll approximately 200 patients.

Copyright © 2016 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cllc.2016.12.003 
PMID: 28065465  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


28. Jpn J Clin Oncol. 2017 Jan 6. doi: 10.1093/jjco/hyw206. [Epub ahead of print]

Retrospective analysis of survival in patients with leptomeningeal carcinomatosis
from lung adenocarcinoma treated with erlotinib and gefitinib.

Kashima J(1), Okuma Y(2,)(3), Miwa M(1), Hosomi Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Oncology and Respiratory Medicine, Tokyo Metropolitan
Cancer and Infectious diseases Center Komagome Hospital, Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Department of Thoracic Oncology and Respiratory Medicine, Tokyo Metropolitan
Cancer and Infectious diseases Center Komagome Hospital, Tokyo, Japan
y-okuma@cick.jp. (3)Division of Oncology, Research Center for Medical Sciences,
The Jikei University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Leptomeningeal carcinomatosis is a relatively rare metastatic form of
non-small cell lung cancer, which can impact prognosis. There is an increasing
need for selecting suitable epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine
kinase inhibitors among those currently included in standard care for EGFR
mutation-positive patients. We compared the efficacy of gefitinib and erlotinib
in survival of patients with leptomeningeal carcinomatosis.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: The medical records of 269 patients who received tyrosine
kinase inhibitors at a single center were retrospectively reviewed. Overall, 22
patients (8.2%) were treated with tyrosine kinase inhibitors for leptomeningeal
carcinomatosis from non-small cell lung cancer with EGFR mutation between 2006
and 2016. Time to death from leptomeningeal carcinomatosis diagnosis was compared
between the gefitinib and erlotinib groups.
RESULTS: Gefitinib and erlotinib were administrated to 5 and 17 patients,
respectively. Median progression-free survival was longer in the erlotinib group 
than in the gefitinib group (6.60 vs 2.12 months, P = 0.07). Overall survival was
more than twice as long in the erlotinib arm compared with that in the gefitinib 
arm (7.20 vs 2.99 months, P = 0.32). Response in patients with exon 19 deletion
was better than in those with exon 21 mutation (overall survival, 7.20 and 5.62
months, respectively, P = 0.12).
CONCLUSIONS: Erlotinib seemed more effective than gefitinib in prolonging
survival in leptomeningeal carcinomatosis from EGFR mutation-positive non-small
cell lung cancer and may be particularly beneficial in patients with EGFR exon 19
mutations, warranting further studies.

© The Author 2017. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/jjco/hyw206 
PMID: 28064206  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


29. Neoplasma. 2017 Jan 3;64(2). doi: 10.4149/neo_2017_212. [Epub ahead of print]

Outcome of EGFR inhibitors treatment in advanced NSCLC patients, not enrolled in 
clinical trials.

Mencoboni M, Filiberti RA, Taveggia P, Bruzzone A, Garuti A, Del Corso L,
Ginocchio E, Brianti A, Simonassi C, Zucali P.

Epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors (EGFR-TKIs) have
become a treatment after first-line chemotherapy in patients with advanced NSCLC.
We assessed the predictive and prognostic role of EGFR and Kras mutations in
NSCLC patients treated with TKIs after progression, not included in clinical
trials. Gefitinib 250 mg or Erlotinib 150 mg per os were administered to 70
patients. Radiological assessment was performed every six weeks. EGFR and Kras
mutations were found in 21.4% and 24.3% of patients, respectively. At
multivariate analysis, Kras mutation was positively associated with
progression-free survival (PFS; HR=0.71, 95% CI: 0.53-0.96; p=0.027) and, less
clearly, with response (OR=1.84, 95% CI: 0.98-3.45; p=0.057) and survival
(HR=0.74, 95% CI:0.54-1.02; p=0.066). EGFR mutation influenced positively PFS
(HR=0.69, 95% CI: 0.47-1.02; p=0.06), but not survival. In conclusion, in our
unselected patients mutation of Kras correlated with a better outcome. The small 
number of patients may explain some discrepancies with data in literature.

DOI: 10.4149/neo_2017_212 
PMID: 28043153  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


30. Biomed Pharmacother. 2017 Mar;87:20-26. doi: 10.1016/j.biopha.2016.12.079. Epub
2016 Dec 29.

Transcriptome analysis of EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors resistance associated
long noncoding RNA in non-small cell lung cancer.

Ma P(1), Zhang M(1), Nie F(2), Huang Z(1), He J(1), Li W(3), Han L(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, First Affiliated Hospital, Nanjing Medical University,
Nanjing, People's Republic of China. (2)Department of Oncology, Second Affiliated
Hospital, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, People's Republic of China.
(3)Department of Oncology, First Affiliated Hospital, Nanjing Medical University,
Nanjing, People's Republic of China. Electronic address: real.lw@163.com.
(4)Department of Oncology, Xuzhou Central Hospital, Affiliated Xuzhou Hospital,
College of Medicine, Southeast University, Xuzhou, People's Republic of China.
Electronic address: hanliang801223@foxmail.com.

The non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients harbor mutations in the epidermal
growth factor receptor (EGFR) can be therapeutically targeted by EGFR tyrosine
kinase inhibitors (EGFR-TKI), such as gefitinib, and show improved
progression-free survival. However, most of the patients who are initially
responsive to EGFR TKIs with activating EGFR mutations eventually develop
acquired resistance after long-term therapy, and are followed by disease
progression. Recently, diverse mechanisms of acquired EGFR TKI resistance have
been reported, but little is known about the role of long noncoding RNAs in EGFR 
TKIs resistance. To gain insight into the expression pattern and potential
function of lncRNAs in NSCLC cells EGFR-TKI resistance, we analyzed expression
patterns in EGFR-TKIs-resistant cell lines and compared it with their parental
sensitive cell line by using gene profiling datasets from Gene Expression Omnibus
(GEO). Then, the expression levels of five chose lncRNAs were validated in
PC9-gefitinib resistant cells (PC9G) and sensitive cells by using real-time
quantitative PCR (qPCR). Among of these five lncRNAs, CASC9 expression was
upregulated in PC9G and knockdown of its expression could increase the
sensitivity of PC9G cells to gefitinib, while EWAST1 (LINC00227) is downregulated
in PC9G cells and overexpressed EWAST1 also lead to increased sensitivity of PC9G
cells to gefitinib. As indicated by GO analysis, the CASC9 and EWAST1
co-expressed genes are involved in several important pathways including
regulation of cell growth, regulation of cell apoptosis and Chromatin assembly.
Taken together, dysregulated lncRNAs play critical roles in EGFR-TKIs resistant
NSCLC cells and might be used as novel potential targets to reverse EGFR-TKI
resistance for NSCLC patients.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biopha.2016.12.079 
PMID: 28040594  [PubMed - in process]


31. Oncotarget. 2016 Dec 27. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.14310. [Epub ahead of print]

Cost-effectiveness of gefitinib, icotinib, and pemetrexed-based chemotherapy as
first-line treatments for advanced non-small cell lung cancer in China.

Lu S(1), Ye M(2), Ding L(3), Tan F(3), Fu J(4), Wu B(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Shanghai Chest Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong
University, Shanghai, China. (2)Department of Radiotherapy, Renji Hospital,
School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiaotong University, Shanghai, China. (3)Betta
Pharmaceuticals Co., Ltd., Hangzhou, China. (4)Medical Decision and Economic
Group, Department of Pharmacy, Renji Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai
Jiaotong University, Shanghai, China.

Tyrosine kinase inhibitors of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) are
becoming the standard treatment option for patients with advanced non-small cell 
lung cancer (NSCLC) harboring an EGFR mutation, but the economic impact of this
practice is unclear, especially in a health resource-limited setting. A
decision-analytic model was developed to simulate 21-day patient transitions in a
10-year time horizon. The health and economic outcomes of four first-line
strategies (pemetrexed plus cisplatin [PC] alone, PC followed by maintenance with
pemetrexed, or initial treatment with gefitinib or icotinib) among patients
harboring EGFR mutations were estimated and assessed via indirect comparisons.
Costs in the Chinese setting were estimated. The primary outcome was the
incremental cost-effectiveness ratio (ICER). Sensitivity analyses were performed.
The icotinib strategy resulted in greater health benefits than the other three
strategies in NSCLC patients harboring EGFR mutations. Relative to PC alone, PC
followed by pemetrexed maintenance, gefitinib and icotinib resulted in ICERs of
$104,657, $28,485 and $19,809 per quality-adjusted life-year gained,
respectively. The cost of pemetrexed, the EGFR mutation prevalence and the
utility of progression-free survival were factors that had a considerable impact 
on the model outcomes. When the icotinib Patient Assistance Program was
available, the economic outcome of icotinib was more favorable. These results
indicate that gene-guided therapy with icotinib might be a more cost-effective
treatment option than traditional chemotherapy.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.14310 
PMID: 28036283  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


32. Respirol Case Rep. 2016 Nov 6;4(6):e00197. doi: 10.1002/rcr2.197. eCollection
2016.

Effectiveness of afatinib in lung cancer with paralytic ileus due to peritoneal
carcinomatosis.

Kobayashi H(1), Wakuda K(1), Takahashi T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Thoracic Oncology Shizuoka Cancer Center Shizuoka Japan.

A 61-year-old never-smoking woman with stage IV lung adenocarcinoma with
initially unknown epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) status, lung
metastasis, pleural dissemination, and malignant pleural effusion in 2007
received 10 prior anti-cancer regimens including gefitinib as second- and
ninth-line treatments, with minimal efficacy with gefitinib. EGFR mutation
analysis performed in pleural effusion specimens during ninth-line gefitinib was 
negative. In 2015, she developed progressive disease with peritoneal
dissemination. Few/absent bowel sounds and no gross features of mechanical
obstruction on the imaging led to the diagnosis of paralytic ileus. Blood test
revealed elevated C-reactive protein (CRP). EGFR mutation analysis revealed S768I
point mutation in EGFR exon 20 without the T790M resistance mutation in pleural
and peritoneal effusion cytology specimens. She received afatinib (20 mg once
daily) as 11th-line treatment, with resolution of peritoneal carcinomatosis and
CRP normalization, confirmed by follow-up computed tomography. At 12 months after
afatinib initiation, there was no symptomatic recurrence or disease exacerbation.

DOI: 10.1002/rcr2.197 
PMCID: PMC5167315
PMID: 28031832  [PubMed]


33. Onco Targets Ther. 2016 Dec 16;10:21-30. doi: 10.2147/OTT.S90459. eCollection
2017.

Potential role of immunotherapy in advanced non-small-cell lung cancer.

de Mello RA(1), Veloso AF(2), Esrom Catarina P(2), Nadine S(3), Antoniou G(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences and Medicine, University of Algarve, Faro;
Faculty of Medicine, University of Porto, Porto, Portugal; Research Center,
Cearense School of Oncology, Instituto do Câncer do Ceará. (2)Oncology &
Hematology League, School of Medicine, State University of Ceará (UECE),
Fortaleza, Brazil. (3)Instituto de Ciências Biomédicas Abel Salazar (ICBAS),
University of Porto, Porto, Portugal. (4)Department of Medical Oncology, The
Royal Marsden NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK.

Immuno checkpoint inhibitors have ushered in a new era with respect to the
treatment of advanced non-small-cell lung cancer. Many patients are not suitable 
for treatment with epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors
(eg, gefitinib, erlotinib, and afatinib) or with anaplastic lymphoma kinase
inhibitors (eg, crizotinib and ceritinib). As a result, anti-PD-1/PD-L1 and
CTLA-4 inhibitors may play a novel role in the improvement of outcomes in a
metastatic setting. The regulation of immune surveillance, immunoediting, and
immunoescape mechanisms may play an interesting role in this regard either alone 
or in combination with current drugs. Here, we discuss advances in immunotherapy 
for the treatment of metastatic non-small-cell lung cancer as well as future
perspectives within this framework.

DOI: 10.2147/OTT.S90459 
PMCID: PMC5179204
PMID: 28031719  [PubMed]


34. J Orthop Surg (Hong Kong). 2016 Dec;24(3):421-423.

Remarkable bone formation following gefitinib for extensive lytic bone
metastasis: a report of two cases.

Bashir ES(1), Kwan AK(2), Chan CY(2), Mun Keong K(2).

Author information: 
(1)Elneelain University, Faculty of Medicine, Khartoum, Sudan. (2)Department of
Orthopaedic Surgery, Faculty of Medicine, University of Malaya, Kuala Lumpur,
Malaysia.

Gefitinib inhibits the epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase and
improves survival in patients with non-small-cell lung cancer. We report 2
patients with extensive lytic bony metastasis in the spine and pelvis secondary
to advanced pulmonary adenocarcinoma who were treated with gefitinib and had
remarkable bone formation in the lytic bone lesions in the spine and pelvis.
Surgery for stabilisation was avoided.

DOI: 10.1177/1602400330 
PMID: 28031519  [PubMed - in process]


35. J Thorac Oncol. 2016 Dec 19. pii: S1556-0864(16)33582-1. doi:
10.1016/j.jtho.2016.11.2236. [Epub ahead of print]

Risk of Treatment-Related Toxicities from EGFR Tyrosine Kinase Inhibitors: A
Meta-analysis of Clinical Trials of Gefitinib, Erlotinib, and Afatinib in
Advanced EGFR-Mutated Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer.

Ding PN(1), Lord SJ(2), Gebski V(3), Links M(4), Bray V(5), Gralla RJ(6), Yang
JC(7), Lee CK(8).

Author information: 
(1)National Health and Medical Research Council Clinical Trials Centre, The
University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia; Department of Medical Oncology,
Liverpool Hospital, Sydney, Australia. (2)National Health and Medical Research
Council Clinical Trials Centre, The University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia;
School of Medicine, The University of Notre Dame, Sydney, Australia. (3)National 
Health and Medical Research Council Clinical Trials Centre, The University of
Sydney, Sydney, Australia. (4)Cancer Care Centre, St. George Hospital, Sydney,
Australia. (5)Department of Medical Oncology, Liverpool Hospital, Sydney,
Australia. (6)Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Jacobi Medical Center, New
York, New York. (7)Graduate Institute of Oncology, National Taiwan University and
Department of Oncology, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, Republic of 
China. (8)National Health and Medical Research Council Clinical Trials Centre,
The University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia; Cancer Care Centre, St. George
Hospital, Sydney, Australia. Electronic address: chee.lee@ctc.usyd.edu.au.

INTRODUCTION: Gefitinib, erlotinib, and afatinib are tyrosine kinase inhibitors
(TKIs) used for treatment of advanced EGFR-mutated NSCLC. Estimating differences 
in toxicity between these EGFR TKIs is important for personalizing treatment.
METHODS: We performed a meta-analysis of randomized trials that compared EGFR TKI
therapy against chemotherapy or placebo. We extracted data from the EGFR TKI arm 
for indirect comparisons to estimate the relative risk for toxic death, grade 3
to 4 (G3/4) adverse events (AEs), and discontinuation of treatment because of AE 
for each EGFR TKI.
RESULTS: Sixteen trials included 2535 patients with mutated or wild-type EGFR.
Toxic deaths were rare (1.7%), with pneumonitis being most frequent cause and no 
significant differences between EGFR TKIs. Overall, 40% of patients experienced
G3/4 AEs. The risk for G3/4 AEs was lower with gefitinib (29.1%) than with
erlotinib (54.1%) or afatinib (42.1%) (p < 0.01). Discontinuation of treatment
because of AEs occurred in 7.7% of patients, with no significant differences
between EGFR TKIs. Diarrhea (in 53.3% of cases) and rash (in 66.5%) were the most
frequent AEs. The risk for rash was higher with afatinib (84.8%) than with
erlotinib (62.0%) or gefitinib (62.0%) (p < 0.01). The risk for diarrhea was
higher with afatinib (91.7%) than with erlotinib (42.4%) or gefitinib (44.4%) (p 
< 0.01). The risk for increased liver enzyme levels was higher with gefitinib
(61.7%) than with erlotinib (17.8%) or afatinib (20.1%) (p < 0.01). A
risk-benefit contour was used to assess the trade-off between efficacy and
toxicity for different EGFR TKIs.
CONCLUSIONS: EGFR TKIs are well tolerated, with less than 10% of patients
discontinuing treatment because of AEs. The profile of and risk for toxicities
vary between EGFR TKIs and can be used to inform the selection of treatment.

Copyright © 2016 International Association for the Study of Lung Cancer.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jtho.2016.11.2236 
PMID: 28007626  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


36. Oncotarget. 2017 Jan 17;8(3):4994-5002. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.14007.

The role of T790M mutation in EGFR-TKI re-challenge for patients with EGFR-mutant
advanced lung adenocarcinoma.

Zhang Q(1), Ke E(1), Niu F(1), Deng W(1), Chen Z(1), Xu C(1), Zhang X(1), Zhao
N(1), Su J(1), Yang J(1), Yan H(1), Wu Y(1), Zhou Q(1).

Author information: 
(1)Guangdong Lung Cancer Institute, Guangdong General Hospital and Guangdong
Academy of Medical Science, Guangzhou 510080, Guangdong, PR China.

Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) T790M mutation has shown to be associated
with the clinical outcomes of patients after initial EGFR-tyrosine kinase
inhibitor (EGFR-TKI) therapy in EGFR-mutant advanced non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC). However, its predictive role in EGFR-TKI re-challenge remains unknown.
The present study was aimed to explore the correlation between T790M mutation and
any benefits from EGFR-TKI re-challenge. We retrospectively reviewed 922
consecutive patients with EGFR-mutant non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients
administered with gefitinib/erlotinib at Guangdong General Hospital.
Progression-free survival (PFS), overall survival (OS), objective response rate
(ORR) and disease control rate (DCR) were analyzed respectively. In total, 66
EGFR-mutant patients with stage IV adenocarcinoma were eligible, of whom 51
underwent re-biopsy upon initial progression. Among them, 18 (35.3%) harbored
T790M mutation. No statistical significant differences were seen between
T790M-positive and T790M-negative patients in PFS, OS, ORR or DCR. The median
PFS, median OS, ORR, and DCR of the overall 66 patients were 2.0 months, 6.8
months, 6.1% and 39.4%, respectively. Good performance status (PS) was found to
be independent favorable prognostic factor and long TKI-free interval to be
associated with superior PFS. In conclusion, T790M mutation might not predict the
clinical outcomes in first-generation EGFR-TKI re-challenge. Based on the poor
efficacy from our data, re-challenge of first-generation EGFR-TKIs could not be
recommended routinely, but for those with good PS and long TKI-free interval, it 
might be an alternative option.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.14007 
PMID: 27999211  [PubMed - in process]


37. Clin Cancer Res. 2016 Dec 16. pii: clincanres.2271.2016. doi:
10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-16-2271. [Epub ahead of print]

Histone deacetylase 3 inhibition overcomes BIM deletion polymorphism-mediated
osimertinib-resistance in EGFR-mutant lung cancer.

Tanimoto A(1), Takeuchi S(2), Arai S(2), Fukuda K(1), Yamada T(2), Roca X(3), Ong
ST(4), Yano S(5).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Oncology, Cancer Research Institute, Kanazawa University. 
(2)Division of Medical Oncology, Kanazawa University Cancer Research Institute.
(3)School of Biological Sciences, Nanyang Technological University. (4)Cancer &
Stem Cell Biology Signature Research Programme, Duke-NUS Medical School.
(5)Division of Medical Oncology, Kanazawa University Cancer Research Institute
syano@staff.kanazawa-u.ac.jp.

PURPOSE: The BIM deletion polymorphism is associated with apoptosis resistance to
epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors (EGFR-TKIs), such as 
gefitinib and erlotinib, in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) harboring EGFR
mutations. Here, we investigated whether the BIM deletion polymorphism
contributes to resistance against osimertinib, a third-generation EGFR-TKI. In
addition, we determined the efficacy of a histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor,
vorinostat, against this form of resistance and elucidated the underlying
mechanism.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We used EGFR-mutated NSCLC cell lines which were either
heterozygous or homozygous for the BIM deletion polymorphism to evaluate the
effect of osimertinib in vitro and in vivo. Protein expression was examined by
western blotting. Alternative splicing of BIM mRNA was analyzed by RT-PCR.
RESULTS: EGFR-mutated NSCLC cell lines with the BIM deletion polymorphism
exhibited apoptosis resistance to osimertinib in a polymorphism dosage-dependent 
manner, and this resistance was overcome by combined use with vorinostat.
Experiments with homozygous BIM deletion-positive cells revealed that vorinostat 
affected the alternative splicing of BIM mRNA in the deletion allele, increased
the expression of active BIM protein, and thereby induced apoptosis in
osimertinib-treated cells. These effects were mediated predominantly by HDAC3
inhibition. In xenograft models, combined use of vorinostat with osimertinib
could regress tumors in EGFR-mutated NSCLC cells homozygous for the BIM deletion 
polymorphism. Moreover, this combination could induce apoptosis even when tumor
cells acquired EGFR-T790M mutations.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings indicate the importance of developing HDAC3-selective
inhibitors, and their combined use with osimertinib, for treating EGFR-mutated
lung cancers carrying the BIM deletion polymorphism.

Copyright ©2016, American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-16-2271 
PMID: 27986747  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


38. Zhongguo Fei Ai Za Zhi. 2016 Dec 20;19(12):864-870.

[Relationship between ID1 and EGFR-TKI Resistance  in Non-small Cell Lung
Cancer].

[Article in Chinese; Abstract available in Chinese from the publisher]

Bao Y(1), Zhao Y(1), Chen B(1), Luo J(1), Deng Q(1), Sun H(2), Xie B(2), Zhou
S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Pulmonary Disease Hospital of Tongji University,
Shanghai 200433, China. (2)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Pulmonary Disease
Hospital of Tongji University, Shanghai 200433, China.

BACKGROUND: Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) presents the highest morbidity and
mortality among malignant tumors worldwide. The overall effective rate of
epidermal growth factor receptor-tyrosine kinase inhibitor (EGFR-TKI) is 30% to
40%, and PFS (progression-free sruvival) is 12 months. However, EGFR-TKI
resistance is typical in clinical observations, and this phenomenon significantly
affects tumor suppression. To overcome this resistance, a new prognostic factor
associated with lung cancer drug resistance should be discovered. This study
investigated the relationship between the inhibitor of differentiation 1 (ID1)
and non-small cell lung cancer EGFR-TKI resistance in vivo and in vitro to
determine any statistical significance and discuss the underlying mechanism.
METHODS: Western blot and qRT-PCR were used to quantify the expression of ID1 in 
lung cancer. IHC was used to detect the expression of ID1 in pathological tissues
(lung cancer tissues and adjacent tissues). MTT was used to detect cell
proliferation, in which the cells were treated with gefitinib after being
transfected by ID1 slow virus vector. Lung cancer cells were inoculated in nude
mice until the tumor diameter grew to certain measurement. Gefitinib treatment
was started, and the tumor volume was estimated.
RESULTS: ID1 was highly expressed in NSCLC (P<0.05). Both ID1 expression and drug
resistance of EGFR-TKI in NSCLC were positively correlated (P<0.05). The
treatment group with gefitinib showed obviously less expression than the control 
group.
CONCLUSIONS: ID1 is highly expressed in NSCLC. ID1 expression was positively
related to drug resistance of EGFR-TKI in NSCLC. Gefitinib can be used to
effectively treat NSCLC, and the mechanism may be associated with an increased
level of STAT3 phosphorylation.

Publisher: 背景与目的 非小细胞肺癌（non-small cell lung cancer,
NSCLC）是当今世界上发病率和死亡率最高的恶性肿瘤之一，而表皮生长因子受体-酪氨酸激酶抑制剂（epidermal growth factor
receptor-tyrosine kinase inhibitors,
EGFR-TKI）整体有效率为30%-40%，无进展生存期（progression-free survival,
PFS）为12个月。但EGFR-TKI在临床中的耐药现象也很普遍，严重影响了其抑瘤作用。因此，克服耐药、寻找一种新的与肺癌耐药相关的预后因子势在必行。本研究旨在通
过体内外实验探讨DNA结合抑制因子1（differentiation inhibitory factor 1,
ID1）与NSCLCEGFR-TKI耐药之间的关系，看其是否有统计学意义，并初步探讨其机制。方法 免疫组化（immunohistochemistry,
IHC）检测手术标本（肺癌组织和癌旁组织）1D1的表达；qRT-PCR、Western-blot检测并比较肺癌细胞敏感株与耐药株中ID1的表达变化；MTT检测吉非
替尼对ID1慢病毒载体处理肺癌细胞的细胞增殖情况，将肺癌细胞接种至裸鼠腋下，待肿瘤生长至一定体积使用吉非替尼治疗，估算肿瘤体积。结果
ID1在肺癌组织中的表达明显高于正常组织（P<0.05）；ID1的表达与NSCLC EGFR-TKI耐药呈正相关（P<0.05）。结论
ID1在NSCLC中高表达，并且参与了NSCLC EGFR-TKI的耐药，其机制可能与STAT3磷酸化程度增加有关。.
DOI: 10.3779/j.issn.1009-3419.2016.12.10 
PMID: 27978873  [PubMed - in process]


39. Oncotarget. 2017 Jan 3;8(1):1343-1353. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.13815.

Analysis of progression-free survival of first-line tyrosine kinase inhibitors in
patients with non-small cell lung cancer harboring leu858Arg or exon 19
deletions.

Kuan FC(1,)(2), Li SH(3), Wang CL(3,)(4), Lin MH(5), Tsai YH(6,)(7), Yang
CT(3,)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Department of Medicine, Chang-Gung
Memorial Hospital, Chiayi 61363, Taiwan. (2)Graduate Institute of Clinical
Medical Sciences, Chang-Gung University, Taoyuan 33302, Taiwan. (3)Department of 
Thoracic Medicine, Chang-Gung Memorial Hospital, Taoyuan 33305, Taiwan.
(4)Department of Medicine, Chang-Gung University, Taoyuan 33302, Taiwan.
(5)Cencer of Excellence for Chang Gung Research Datalink, Chang-Gung Memorial
Hospital, Chiayi 61363, Taiwan. (6)Division of Respiratory and Critical Care
Medicine, Department of Medicine, Chang-Gung Memorial Hospital, Chiayi 61363,
Taiwan. (7)Department of Respiratory Therapy, Chang-Gung University, Taoyuan
33302, Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: Gefitinib, erlotinib and afatinib provide remarkable response rates
and progression-free survival compared to platinum-based chemotherapy in patients
with non-small cell lung cancer harboring epidermal growth factor
receptor-activating mutations, and are therefore standard first-line treatment in
these patients. However, no study has compared these drugs regarding
progression-free survival.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We conducted this retrospective study at a single medical 
center in Taiwan from February 16, 2011 to October 30, 2015. We used the
Kaplan-Meier method to estimate survival, and multivariate Cox proportional
hazard models to estimate adjusted hazard ratios and 95% confidence intervals.
FINDINGS: Of the 1006 patients diagnosed with stage IIIb and IV non-small cell
lung cancer in the study period, 448 (44.5%) had EGFR-activating mutations and
received first-line therapy with gefitinib (n = 304, 67.6%), erlotinib (n = 63,
14.3%), or afatinib (n = 81, 18.1%). The median duration of follow-up for
progression-free survival was 12.1 months in the gefitinib arm (Interquartile
range [IQR]: 5.5-16.5), 11.2 months in the erlotinib arm (IQR: 4.9-16.7), and
10.3 months in the afatinib arm (IQR: 7.0-14.2). Progression-free survival was
significantly longer in the patients who received afatinib or erlotinib compared 
to those who received gefitinib (log-rank test, p < 0.001), and the median
progression-free survival was 11.4 months in the gefitinib group.
INTERPRETATION: Afatinib and erlotinib provide significant benefits in
progression-free survival compared to gefitinib in first-line treatment of
patients with non-small-cell lung cancers harboring EGFR-activating mutations.
Further clinical trials are warranted to validate these findings.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.13815 
PMID: 27935868  [PubMed - in process]


40. Biomed Pharmacother. 2017 Jan;85:113-119. doi: 10.1016/j.biopha.2016.11.100. Epub
2016 Dec 5.

miR-200c enhances sensitivity of drug-resistant non-small cell lung cancer to
gefitinib by suppression of PI3K/Akt signaling pathway and inhibites cell
migration via targeting ZEB1.

Zhou G(1), Zhang F(1), Guo Y(1), Huang J(1), Xie Y(1), Yue S(1), Chen M(1), Jiang
H(2), Li M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Anji People's Hospital, Anji, Zhejiang 313399, PR
China. (2)Department of Oncology, Zhejiang Hospital, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310013,
PR China. (3)Department of Hematology, Zhejiang Hospital, Hangzhou, Zhejiang
310013, PR China. Electronic address: 522237197@qq.com.

Acquired resistance to epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase
inhibitors (EGFR-TKIs) is a major obstacle in the treatment of non-small cell
lung cancer (NSCLC) patients. We explored the role of miR-200c in modulating the 
sensitivity of gefitinib-resistant NSCLC cells and examined the underlying
mechanism. The gefitinib-resistant cell line PC-9-ZD and its parental PC-9 cells 
were used. Growth inhibition was detected by MTT assay. The cell apoptosis was
detected by Annexin V/PI assay. Cell migration was assessed by wound-healing
assay. RT-PCR was used to detected levels of miR-200c and ZEB1. The PI3k, Bcl-2, 
Bax, caspase-3 and ZEB1 protein expression were detected using Western blot
analysis, and TUNEL, Immunohistochemistry for xenograft model. PC-9-ZD cells had 
low level of miR-200c expression compared to its parental PC-9 cells. PC-9-ZD
cells with miR-200c transfection were more sensitive to gefitinib treatment.
Apoptosis induced by gefitinib was observed in PC-9-ZD cells with miR-200c
transfection significantly. The levels of phosphorylated-Akt and Bcl-2 expression
decreased and levels of Bax and Caspase-3 expression increased in PC-9-ZD cells
with miR-200c transfection. Cell migration was inhibited and ZEB1 mRNA level and 
protein expression were significantly decreased in PC-9-ZD cells with miR-200c
transfection. Further in gefitinib resistant xenograft model, miR-200c enhanced
sensitivity of gefitinib and induced apoptosis significantly through PI3K/Akt
signaling pathway and targeting ZEB1. These results provided insights into the
functions of miR-200c and offered an alternate approach in treating
gefitinib-resistance NSCLC.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biopha.2016.11.100 
PMID: 27930974  [PubMed - in process]


41. J Huazhong Univ Sci Technolog Med Sci. 2016 Dec;36(6):839-845. Epub 2016 Dec 7.

miR-124 modulates gefitinib resistance through SNAI2 and STAT3 in non-small cell 
lung cancer.

Hu FY(1), Cao XN(2), Xu QZ(2), Deng Y(2), Lai SY(1), Ma J(3), Hu JB(4).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Institute, Huazhong University of Science and Technology,
Wuhan, 430030, China. (2)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Huazhong University of
Science and Technology, Wuhan, 430030, China. (3)Department of Respiratory and
Critical Care Medicine, Tongji Hospital, Huazhong University of Science and
Technology, Wuhan, 430030, China. (4)Cancer Research Institute, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, 430030, China. jbhu@tjh.tjmu.edu.cn.

Gefitinib is used as a first-line treatment for advanced non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC). Unfortunately, most NSCLC patients inevitably develop gefitinib
resistance during treatment. In addition to EGFR mutation status, the mechanisms 
involved are largely unknown. In this study, we showed that miR-124, a tumor
suppressor, was significantly down-regulated in gefitinib-resistant NSCLC
patients and cell lines compared with gefitinib-sensitive patients and cell
lines. In addition, the miR-124 depletion induced gefitinib resistance, and
miR-124 overexpression sensitized gefitinib-resistant cells to gefitinib.
Mechanistic analysis revealed that miR-124 decreased SNAI2 and STAT3 expression
by directly targeting their 3'UTRs and that knocking down SNAI2 or STAT3 partly
reversed the gefitinib resistance induced by miR-124 depletion. Our data
demonstrate that the miR-124 plays a new critical role in acquired resistance to 
gefitinib and that the manipulation of miR-124 might provide a therapeutic
strategy for reversing acquired gefitinib resistance.

DOI: 10.1007/s11596-016-1672-x 
PMID: 27924500  [PubMed - in process]


42. Drug Des Devel Ther. 2016 Nov 24;10:3867-3872. eCollection 2016.

Three generations of epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors 
developed to revolutionize the therapy of lung cancer.

Zhang H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Zhongda Hospital, Medical School, Southeast
University, Nanjing, People's Republic of China.

Lung cancer, ~80%-85% of which is non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC), is the
leading cause of cancer-related mortality worldwide. Sensitizing mutations in
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) gene (EGFRm(+)), such as exon 19
deletions and exon 21 L858R point mutations, are the most important drivers in
NSCLC patients. In this respect, small-molecule EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors
(TKIs) have been designed and developed, which launched the era of targeted,
personalized and precise medicine for lung cancer. Patients with EGFRm(+) could
achieve good responses to the treatment with the first-generation EGFR TKIs, such
as erlotinib and gefitinib. However, most patients develop acquired drug
resistance mostly driven by the T790M mutation occurring within exon 20. Although
the second-generation EGFR TKIs, such as afatinib, dacomitinib and neratinib,
demonstrated promising activity against T790M in preclinical models, they have
failed to overcome resistance in patients due to dose-limiting toxicity.
Recently, the third-generation EGFR TKIs have shown to be effective against cell 
lines and murine models harboring T790M mutations while sparing wild-type EGFR,
which represents a promising breakthrough approach in overcoming T790M-mediated
resistance in NSCLC patients. This article provides a comprehensive review of the
therapy revolution for NSCLC with three generations of EGFR TKIs.

DOI: 10.2147/DDDT.S119162 
PMCID: PMC5125803
PMID: 27920501  [PubMed - in process]


43. J Clin Oncol. 2016 Dec 5:JCO2016704148. [Epub ahead of print]

Unconvincing Benefit of Combination Therapy With Gefitinib and Pemetrexed in
Advanced Non-Small-Cell Lung Cancer.

Ota A(1), Gyawali B(1), Matsuoka A(1), Ando Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Akiko Ota, Bishal Gyawali, Ayumu Matsuoka, and Yuichi Ando, Nagoya University 
Hospital, Nagoya, Japan.


PMID: 27918721  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


44. J Clin Oncol. 2016 Dec 5:JCO2016702472. [Epub ahead of print]

Gefitinib Plus Pemetrexed As First-Line Treatment in Patients With Nonsquamous
Non-Small-Cell Lung Cancer With Activating Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor
Mutations.

Kim YH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Young Hak Kim, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan.


PMID: 27918713  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


45. Int J Mol Sci. 2016 Nov 29;17(12). pii: E1998.

Enhancing Anticancer Effect of Gefitinib across the Blood-Brain Barrier Model
Using Liposomes Modified with One α-Helical Cell-Penetrating Peptide or
Glutathione and Tween 80.

Lin KH(1), Hong ST(2), Wang HT(3), Lo YL(4,)(5), Lin AM(6,)(7,)(8), Yang JC(9).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pharmacology, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei 112, Taiwan. 
kuanhunglin@outlook.com. (2)Institute of Pharmacology, National Yang-Ming
University, Taipei 112, Taiwan. cat820819@gmail.com. (3)Institute of
Pharmacology, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei 112, Taiwan.
hsiangtsuiwang@gmail.com. (4)Institute of Pharmacology, National Yang-Ming
University, Taipei 112, Taiwan. yulilo@ym.edu.tw. (5)Faculty of Pharmacy,
National Yang-Ming University, Taipei 112, Taiwan. yulilo@ym.edu.tw. (6)Institute
of Pharmacology, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei 112, Taiwan.
myalin@ym.edu.tw. (7)Faculty of Pharmacy, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei
112, Taiwan. myalin@ym.edu.tw. (8)Department of Medical Research, Taipei Veterans
General Hospital, Taipei 112, Taiwan. myalin@ym.edu.tw. (9)Institute of Oncology,
National Taiwan University, Taipei 106, Taiwan. chihyang@ntu.edu.tw.

Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKI), such as
gefitinib, have been demonstrated to effectively treat the patients of
extracranial non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). However, these patients often
develop brain metastasis (BM) during their disease course. The major obstacle to 
treat BM is the limited penetration of anticancer drugs across the blood-brain
barrier (BBB). In the present study, we utilized gefitinib-loaded liposomes with 
different modifications to improve gefitinib delivery across the in vitro BBB
model of bEnd.3 cells. Gefitinib was encapsulated in small unilamellar liposomes 
modified with glutathione (GSH) and Tween 80 (SUV-G+T; one ligand plus one
surfactant) or RF (SUV-RF; one α-helical cell-penetrating peptide). GSH, Tween
80, and RF were tested by the sulforhodamine B (SRB) assay to find their
non-cytotoxic concentrations on bEnd.3 cells. The enhancement on gefitinib across
the BBB was evaluated by cytotoxicity assay on human lung adenocarcinoma PC9
cells under the bEnd.3 cells grown on the transwell inserts. Our findings showed 
that gefitinib incorporated in SUV-G+T or SUV-RF across the bEnd.3 cells
significantly reduced the viability of PC9 cells more than that of free
gefitinib. Furthermore, SUV-RF showed no cytotoxicity on bEnd.3 cells and did not
affect the transendothelial electrical resistance (TEER) and transendothelial
permeability of sodium fluorescein across the BBB model. Moreover, flow cytometry
and confocal laser scanning microscopy were employed to evaluate the endocytosis 
pathways of SUV-RF. The results indicated that the uptake into bEnd.3 cells was
mainly through adsorptive-mediated mechanism via electrostatic interaction and
partially through clathrin-mediated endocytosis. In conclusion, cell penetrating 
peptide-conjugated SUV-RF shed light on improving drug transport across the BBB
via modulating the transcytosis pathway(s).

DOI: 10.3390/ijms17121998 
PMCID: PMC5187798
PMID: 27916828  [PubMed - in process]


46. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am. 2017 Feb;31(1):83-99. doi:
10.1016/j.hoc.2016.08.003.

Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor Mutated Advanced Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer: A
Changing Treatment Paradigm.

Pakkala S(1), Ramalingam SS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Medical Oncology, Winship Cancer Institute, Emory
University School of Medicine, Clifton Rd, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA. Electronic
address: Suchita.pakkala@emoryhealthcare.org. (2)Department of Hematology and
Medical Oncology, Winship Cancer Institute, Emory University School of Medicine, 
Clifton Rd, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA.

Activating mutations in the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) are present
in approximately 15% of US patients with lung adenocarcinoma. EGFR tyrosine
kinase inhibitors are associated with high response rate and progression-free
survival for patients with non-small cell lung cancer with this genotype.
Gefitinib, erlotinib, and afatinib are the EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors that
are presently in clinical use. Understanding resistance mechanisms has led to the
identification of a secondary mutational target, T790M, in more than half of
patients, for which osimertinib has been approved. This article reviews the
current treatments, resistance mechanisms, and strategies to overcome resistance.

Copyright Â© 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.hoc.2016.08.003 
PMID: 27912836  [PubMed - in process]


47. J Biomed Sci. 2016 Dec 3;23(1):86.

Update on recent preclinical and clinical studies of T790M mutant-specific
irreversible epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors.

Liao BC(1,)(2,)(3), Lin CC(1,)(4), Lee JH(1,)(5), Yang JC(6,)(7,)(8,)(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, National Taiwan University Hospital, 7, Chung-Shan
South Road, Taipei, 100, Taiwan. (2)National Taiwan University Cancer Center,
College of Medicine, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan. (3)Graduate
Institute of Clinical Medicine, College of Medicine, National Taiwan University, 
Taipei, Taiwan. (4)Department of Urology, College of Medicine, National Taiwan
University, Taipei, Taiwan. (5)Department of Medical Research, National Taiwan
University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan. (6)Department of Oncology, National Taiwan
University Hospital, 7, Chung-Shan South Road, Taipei, 100, Taiwan.
chihyang@ntu.edu.tw. (7)National Taiwan University Cancer Center, College of
Medicine, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan. chihyang@ntu.edu.tw.
(8)Graduate Institute of Clinical Medicine, College of Medicine, National Taiwan 
University, Taipei, Taiwan. chihyang@ntu.edu.tw. (9)Graduate Institute of
Oncology, College of Medicine, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan.
chihyang@ntu.edu.tw.

The first- and second-generation epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase
inhibitors (1/2G EGFR-TKIs) gefitinib, erlotinib, and afatinib have all been
approved as standard first-line treatments for advanced EGFR mutation-positive
non-small cell lung cancer. The third-generation (3G) EGFR-TKIs have been
developed to overcome the EGFR T790M mutation, which is the most common mechanism
of acquired resistance to 1/2G EGFR-TKI treatment. This resistance mutation
develops in half of the patients who respond to 1/2G EGFR-TKI therapy. The
structures of the novel 3G EGFR-TKIs are different from those of 1/2G EGFR-TKIs. 
Particularly, 3G EGFR-TKIs have lower affinity to wild-type EGFR, and are
therefore associated with lower rates of skin and gastrointestinal toxicities.
However, many of the adverse events (AEs) that are observed in patients receiving
3G EGFR-TKIs have not been observed in patients receiving 1/2G EGFR-TKIs.
Although preclinical studies have revealed many possible mechanisms for these
AEs, the causes of some AEs remain unknown. Many mechanisms of resistance to 3G
EGFR-TKI therapy have also been reported. Here, we have reviewed the recent
clinical and preclinical developments related to novel 3G EGFR-TKIs, including
osimertinib, rociletinib, olmutinib, EGF816, and ASP8273.

DOI: 10.1186/s12929-016-0305-9 
PMCID: PMC5135794
PMID: 27912760  [PubMed - in process]


48. Oncotarget. 2016 Dec 20;7(51):85542-85550. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.13458.

EGFR kinase inhibitors and gastric acid suppressants in EGFR-mutant NSCLC: a
retrospective database analysis of potential drug interaction.

Kumarakulasinghe NB(1), Syn N(1,)(2,)(3), Soon YY(4), Asmat A(5), Zheng H(6), Loy
EY(6), Pang B(2,)(7), Soo RA(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology-Oncology, National University Cancer Institute,
Singapore. (2)Cancer Science Institute of Singapore, National University of
Singapore, Singapore. (3)Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University of 
Singapore, Singapore. (4)Department of Radiation Oncology, National University
Cancer Institute, Singapore. (5)Department of General Surgery, Tan Tock Seng
Hospital, Singapore. (6)National Registry of Diseases Office, Health Promotion
Board, Singapore. (7)Department of Pathology, National University Health System, 
Singapore.

BACKGROUND: Erlotinib and gefitinib are weak base drugs whose absorption and
clinical efficacy may be impaired by concomitant gastric acid suppressive (AS)
therapy, yet proton pump inhibitors (PPIs) and histamine-2 receptor antagonists
(H2As) are widely indicated in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients for
the prevention and treatment of erlotinib-induced gastrointestinal injury and
corticosteroid-associated gastric irritation. We assessed the clinical relevance 
of this potential drug-drug interaction (DDI) in a retrospective cohort of
EGFR-mutant NSCLC patients.
RESULTS: The AS usage rate was 35%. In the overall cohort, AS users did not
experience poorer OS (HR: 1.47, 95% CI: 0.92 - 2.35, P = 0.10; median, 11.4
versus 17.5 months) or PFS (HR = 1.37, 95% CI: 0.89 - 2.12, P = 0.16; median, 7.6
versus 8.7 months) compared with non-users in multivariate Cox regression
analysis. However, subgroup analyses indicated that AS usage was associated with 
significantly poorer OS and PFS in patients who had fewer or milder comorbidities
(Charlson comorbidity index ≤ 2), those with Karnofsky performance status < 90,
and never-smokers.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A retrospective database analysis of 157 patients given
erlotinib or gefitinib for EGFR-mutant advanced NSCLC from two institutions was
conducted. Patients were classified as AS-users if the periods of AS and
anti-EGFR therapy overlapped by ≥ 30%. Overall survival (OS) and progression-free
survival (PFS) were assessed according to AS usage.
CONCLUSIONS: Concomitant AS therapy did not have an adverse impact on OS and/or
PFS in the overall cohort. Our subgroup findings should be regarded exploratory
and require replication in a large prospective cohort.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.13458 
PMID: 27907909  [PubMed - in process]


49. Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci. 2016 Nov;20(22):4791-4795.

The effect of low dosage of procaine on lung cancer cell proliferation.

Ma XW(1), Li Y, Han XC, Xin QZ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, The First Affiliated Hospital and College of
Clinical Medicine of HENAN University of Science and Technology, Luoyang City,
Henan, China. maxiaowumaxiaowu@126.com.

OBJECTIVE: Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is the most common type of human
lung cancer leading cause of cancer death worldwide. However, first-line drugs
such as gefitinib and erlotinib showed great drug resistance in the clinical.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The cell proliferation was evaluated by MTT assay; gene
expression was detected by qPCR assay. The protein expression was analyzed by
Western blotting.
RESULTS: Our results showed that in mouse models of lung cancer by A549 or
NCI-H1975 xenograft, the local anesthetic drug Procaine (PCA) with 50 mg/kg
specifically attenuated tumors compared with the vehicle-treated group. In vitro,
PCA suppressed both two human NSCLC cell lines A549 and NCI-H1975 proliferation
in a lower dose (at nM grade). The cell proliferation marker PCNA was also
downregulated after PCA treatment in vivo. Furthermore, low-dose of PCA could
inhibit the mRNA expression of the key NSCLC target EGFR selectively in the A549 
cells, however, it was not observed in another cell line NCI-H1975, implying a
specific signaling by PCA in the cell type.
CONCLUSIONS: Taken together, our data indicate that PCA treatment leads to
suppression of tumor growth and proliferation in A549 and NCI-H1975, and there is
an EGFR transcription pathway by PCA in A549 cells.


PMID: 27906420  [PubMed - in process]


50. Expert Rev Anticancer Ther. 2017 Feb;17(2):143-155. doi:
10.1080/14737140.2017.1266265. Epub 2016 Dec 12.

Advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) with activating EGFR mutations:
first-line treatment with afatinib and other EGFR TKIs.

Brückl W(1), Tufman A(2), Huber RM(2).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Respiratory Medicine, Allergology and Sleep Medicine ,
Paracelsus Medical University, General Hospital Nuernberg , Nuremberg , Germany. 
(2)b Division of Respiratory Medicine and Thoracic Oncology, Department of
Internal Medicine V, Thoracic Oncology Centre Munich , Ludwig-Maximilians
Universität München , Munich , Germany.

INTRODUCTION: Based on the results of several randomised controlled trials,
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) have
now replaced platinum-based chemotherapy as first-line therapy for advanced
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) harboring an activating EGFR mutation. Areas
covered: This review describes the EGFR pathway and its abnormalities in NSCLC
and discusses the differential molecular and clinical activity of first and
next-generation EGFR TKIs in the first-line treatment of tumors with an
activating EGFR mutation, with a special focus on the second-generation agent
afatinib. A comprehensive literature search was conducted to identify all
relevant clinical trials including abstracts from most recent meetings to provide
up-to-date information on this topic. Expert commentary: While the
first-generation EGFR TKIs erlotinib and gefitinib exhibited good tolerability
and improved progression-free survival compared with a platinum doublet, they
failed to improve overall survival (OS). In contrast, clinical trials of afatinib
(LUX-Lung 3 and 6) demonstrated a significant OS advantage over a platinum
doublet, particularly in patients whose tumors harbored the Del19 mutation.
Moreover, in a head-to-head comparison afatinib improved efficacy versus
gefitinib in patients with common EGFR mutations across a range of clinically
relevant endpoints. Afatinib is therefore a promising first-line option in these 
patients.

DOI: 10.1080/14737140.2017.1266265 
PMID: 27898252  [PubMed - in process]


51. Oncol Lett. 2016 Nov;12(5):3941-3943. Epub 2016 Sep 22.

Drug resistance analysis of gefitinib-targeted therapy in non-small cell lung
cancer.

Liu S(1), Yang H(2), Ge X(3), Su L(3), Zhang A(1), Liang L(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Yantaishan Hospital, Yantai, Shandong 264001, 
P.R. China. (2)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Affiliated Hospital of Taishan
Medical University, Tai'an, Shandong 271000, P.R. China. (3)Department of
Radiotherapy, Yantaishan Hospital, Yantai, Shandong 264001, P.R. China.
(4)Oncology Center, Sichuan Provincial People's Hospital, Chengdu, Sichuan
610000, P.R. China.

The aim of the study was to examine the drug resistance analysis of
gefitinib-targeted therapy in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). In total, 156
NSCLC patients without surgical treatment were selected, including 117 cases of
adenocarcinoma (75%), to receive single gefitinib 0.25 g/day or combined with
platinum chemotherapy. Computed tomography was used to evaluate tumor growth for 
the response and non-response groups. The chemotherapy regimen was changed or
combined with radiotherapy in the non-response group. Tumor progression or
metastasis in the response group was considered as the generation of drug
resistance. The chemotherapy regimen was altered in the response group. Eleven
cases had tumor response in the non-response group after the chemotherapy regimen
was adjusted (20%), 33 cases had complete response (CR) (32.7%), 44 cases had
partial response (PR) (43.6%), and 24 cases had stable disease (SD) (23.8%) in
the response group. The drug resistance rates of CR, PR, and SD showed no
significant difference (P>0.05). However, the drug-resistant time of CR was
significantly delayed and the difference was statistically significant (P<0.05). 
The response rates of CR, PR, and SD patients regaining the response rate showed 
no statistical significance after the chemotherapy regimen was adjusted, and the 
difference was not statistically significant (P>0.05). In conclusion,
gefitinib-targeted therapy in NSCLC showed certain drug resistance, which may not
be related to the response.

DOI: 10.3892/ol.2016.5171 
PMCID: PMC5104210
PMID: 27895753  [PubMed]


52. Front Genet. 2016 Nov 15;7:197. eCollection 2016.

MiR-30a-5p Overexpression May Overcome EGFR-Inhibitor Resistance through
Regulating PI3K/AKT Signaling Pathway in Non-small Cell Lung Cancer Cell Lines.

Meng F(1), Wang F(1), Wang L(1), Wong SC(1), Cho WC(2), Chan LW(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health Technology and Informatics, The Hong Kong Polytechnic
University Hong Kong, China. (2)Department of Clinical Oncology, Queen Elizabeth 
Hospital Hong Kong, China.

Lung cancer is one of the most common deadly diseases worldwide, most of which is
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). The epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)
mutant NSCLCs frequently respond to the EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors
(EGFR-TKIs) treatment, such as Gefitinib and Erlotinib, but the development of
acquired resistance limits the utility. Multiple resistance mechanisms have been 
explored, e.g., the activation of alternative tyrosine kinase receptors (TKRs)
sharing similar downstream pathways to EGFR. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are short,
endogenous and non-coding RNA molecules, regulating the target gene expression.
In this study, we explored the potential of miR-30a-5p in targeting the EGFR and 
insulin-like growth factor receptor-1 (IGF-1R) signaling pathways to overcome the
drug resistance. IGF-1R is one of the tyrosine kinase receptors that share the
same EGFR downstream molecules, including phosphatidylinositol 3 kinase (PI3K)
and protein kinase B (AKT). In this work, an in vitro study was designed using
EGFR inhibitor (Gefitinib), IGF-1R inhibitor (NVP-AEW541), and miRNA mimics in
two Gefitinib-resistant NSCLC cell lines, H460 and H1975. We found that the
combination of EGFR and IGF-1R inhibitors significantly decreased the
phosphorylated AKT (p-AKT) expression levels compared to the control group in
these two cell lines. Knockdown of phosphoinositide-3-kinase regulatory subunit 2
(PIK3R2) had the same effect with the dual inhibition of EGFR and IGF-1R to
reduce the expression of p-AKT in the signaling pathway. Overexpression of
miR-30a-5p significantly reduced the expression of the PI3K regulatory subunit
(PIK3R2) to further induce cell apoptosis, and inhibit cell invasion and
migration properties. Hence, miR-30a-5p may play vital roles in overcoming the
acquired resistance to EGFR-TKIs, and provide useful information for establishing
novel cancer treatment.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2016.00197 
PMCID: PMC5108768
PMID: 27895663  [PubMed - in process]


53. Korean J Intern Med. 2016 Nov 25. doi: 10.3904/kjim.2015.276. [Epub ahead of
print]

Invasive pulmonary aspergillosis in a patient with metastatic non-small cell lung
cancer after treatment with gefitinib.

Park S(1), Park S(1), Choi H(1), Park JY(1), Lim HS(1), Park MJ(1), Kim SY(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Kyung Hee University
Medical Center, Seoul, Korea. (2)Department of Hematology-Oncology, Kyung Hee
University Medical Center, Seoul, Korea.

DOI: 10.3904/kjim.2015.276 
PMID: 27889954  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


54. Respir Investig. 2016 Nov;54(6):468-472. doi: 10.1016/j.resinv.2016.06.007. Epub 
2016 Aug 25.

Tolerability and efficacy of afatinib at a low starting dosage in 10 elderly or
low performance status patients with advanced refractory non-small-cell lung
cancer.

Kashiwabara K(1), Semba H(2), Fujii S(2), Tsumura S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Kumamoto Regional Medical Center, 5-16-10 
hon-jo, Kumamoto, 860-0811, Japan. Electronic address: kskkswbr@krmc.or.jp.
(2)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Kumamoto Regional Medical Center, 5-16-10 
hon-jo, Kumamoto, 860-0811, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Whether a full dosage of afatinib is tolerable and effective for
elderly or low performance status (PS) patients with advanced refractory
non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is unclear.
METHODS: We retrospectively evaluated the tolerability and efficacy of afatinib
in 10 patients (the majority elderly) with a low PS score (2 or 3), who had
advanced refractory adenocarcinoma and were carrying active epidermal growth
factor receptor mutations. Afatinib was administered at a starting dosage of 20
or 30mg/day, followed by 10mg increases in dose up to a maximum dosage of
40mg/day.
RESULTS: The median patient age was 76 years and 50% of the patients had a PS of 
3. The patients had previously been treated with gefitinib and/or erlotinib, with
a median number of three chemotherapy regimens. All the patients received at
least 30mg/day of afatinib. Eight patients did not receive the 40mg/day dosage
because of patient refusal due to grade 2 diarrhea (n=6) or the judgment of the
doctor (n=2). One patient discontinued the treatment because of drug-induced
interstitial lung disease. The most frequent adverse event was grade 2 diarrhea. 
The objective response rate was 11% and the PS score of five cases improved after
afatinib therapy. The median progression-free survival and overall survival
periods were 3.6 months and 5.8 months, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: A low starting dosage of afatinib might enable elderly or low PS
patients with advanced refractory NSCLC to receive this drug as salvage therapy.

Copyright Â© 2016 The Japanese Respiratory Society. Published by Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.resinv.2016.06.007 
PMID: 27886859  [PubMed - in process]


55. Onco Targets Ther. 2016 Nov 9;9:6843-6855. eCollection 2016.

Synergistic activity of vorinostat combined with gefitinib but not with sorafenib
in mutant KRAS human non-small cell lung cancers and hepatocarcinoma.

Jeannot V(1), Busser B(2), Vanwonterghem L(1), Michallet S(1), Ferroudj S(1),
Cokol M(3), Coll JL(1), Ozturk M(4), Hurbin A(1).

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U1209, Department Cancer Targets and Experimental Therapeutics,
Grenoble, France; University Grenoble Alpes, Institute for Advanced Biosciences, 
Grenoble, France. (2)INSERM U1209, Department Cancer Targets and Experimental
Therapeutics, Grenoble, France; University Grenoble Alpes, Institute for Advanced
Biosciences, Grenoble, France; Department of Biochemistry, Toxicology and
Pharmacology, Grenoble University Hospital, Grenoble, France. (3)Faculty of
Engineering and Natural Sciences, Sabanci University, Istanbul, Turkey. (4)INSERM
U1209, Department Cancer Targets and Experimental Therapeutics, Grenoble, France;
University Grenoble Alpes, Institute for Advanced Biosciences, Grenoble, France; 
Faculty of Medicine, Dokuz Eyul University, Izmir Biomedicine and Genome Center, 
Izmir, Turkey.

Development of drug resistance limits the efficacy of targeted therapies.
Alternative approaches using different combinations of therapeutic agents to
inhibit several pathways could be a more effective strategy for treating cancer. 
The effects of the approved epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)-tyrosine
kinase inhibitor (gefitinib) or a multi-targeted kinase inhibitor (sorafenib) in 
combination with a histone deacetylase inhibitor (vorinostat) on cell
proliferation, cell cycle distribution, apoptosis, and signaling pathway
activation in human lung adenocarcinoma and hepatocarcinoma cells with wild-type 
EGFR and mutant KRAS were investigated. The effects of the synergistic drug
combinations were also studied in human lung adenocarcinoma and hepatocarcinoma
cells in vivo. The combination of gefitinib and vorinostat synergistically
reduced cell growth and strongly induced apoptosis through inhibition of the
insulin-like growth factor-1 receptor/protein kinase B (IGF-1R/AKT)-dependent
signaling pathway. Moreover, the gefitinib and vorinostat combination strongly
inhibited tumor growth in mice with lung adenocarcinoma or hepatocarcinoma tumor 
xenografts. In contrast, the combination of sorafenib and vorinostat did not
inhibit cell proliferation compared to a single treatment and induced G2/M cell
cycle arrest without apoptosis. The sorafenib and vorinostat combination
sustained the IGF-1R-, AKT-, and mitogen-activated protein kinase-dependent
signaling pathways. These results showed that there was synergistic cytotoxicity 
when vorinostat was combined with gefitinib for both lung adenocarcinoma and
hepatocarcinoma with mutant KRAS in vitro and in vivo but that the combination of
vorinostat with sorafenib did not show any benefit. These findings highlight the 
important role of the IGF-1R/AKT pathway in the resistance to targeted therapies 
and support the use of histone deacetylase inhibitors in combination with
EGFR-tyrosine kinase inhibitors, especially for treating patients with mutant
KRAS resistant to other treatments.

DOI: 10.2147/OTT.S117743 
PMID: 27877053  [PubMed - in process]


56. Clin Lung Cancer. 2017 Jan;18(1):23-33.e1. doi: 10.1016/j.cllc.2016.08.006. Epub 
2016 Oct 28.

Intercalated Chemotherapy and Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor Inhibitors for
Patients With Advanced Non-Small-cell Lung Cancer: A Systematic Review and
Meta-analysis.

La Salvia A(1), Rossi A(2), Galetta D(3), Gobbini E(1), De Luca E(1), Novello
S(1), Di Maio M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, University of Turin, "San Luigi Gonzaga" Hospital,
Orbassano, Italy. (2)Division of Medical Oncology, "S. G. Moscati" Hospital,
Avellino, Italy. Electronic address: arossi_it@yahoo.it. (3)Medical Oncology
Department, Clinical Cancer Center Giovanni Paolo II, Bari, Italy.

Randomized clinical trials (RCTs) of concurrent epidermal growth factor
receptor-tyrosine kinase inhibitors (EGFR-TKIs) plus chemotherapy for unselected 
patients with advanced non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) produced negative
results. Intercalated administration could avoid the reduction of chemotherapy
activity due to G1 cell-cycle arrest from EGFR-TKIs. A PubMed search was
performed in December 2015 and updated in February 2016. The references from the 
selected studies were also checked to identify additional eligible trials.
Furthermore, the proceedings of the main international meetings were searched
from 2010 onward. We included RCTs comparing chemotherapy intercalated with an
EGFR-TKI versus chemotherapy alone for patients with advanced NSCLC. Ten RCTs
were eligible (6 with erlotinib, 4 with gefitinib): 39% of patients had a known
EGFR mutational status, 43% of whom EGFR mutation positive. The intercalated
combination was associated with a significant improvement in overall survival
(OS; hazard ratio [HR], 0.82; 95% confidence interval [CI], 0.71-0.95; P = .01), 
progression-free survival (PFS; HR, 0.60; 95% CI, 0.53-0.68; P < .00001), and
objective response rate (ORR; odds ratio [OR], 2.70; 95% CI, 2.08-3.49; P <
.00001). Considering only first-line trials, similar differences were found in OS
(HR, 0.85; 95% CI, 0.72-1.00; P = .05), PFS (HR, 0.63; 95% CI, 0.55-0.73; P <
.00001), and ORR (OR, 2.21; 95% CI, 1.65-2.95; P < .00001). In EGFR
mutation-positive patients, the addition of an intercalated EGFR-TKI produced a
significant benefit in PFS (129 patients; HR, 0.24; 95% CI, 0.16-0.37; P <
.00001) and ORR (168 patients; OR, 11.59; 95% CI, 5.54-24.25; P < .00001). In
patients with advanced NSCLC, chemotherapy plus intercalated EGFR-TKIs was
superior to chemotherapy alone, although a definitive interpretation was
jeopardized by the variable proportion of patients with EGFR mutation-positive
tumors included.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cllc.2016.08.006 
PMID: 27876230  [PubMed - in process]


57. Target Oncol. 2016 Dec;11(6):825-835.

Afatinib: A Review in Advanced Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer.

Keating GM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Springer, Private Bag 65901, Mairangi Bay, 0754, Auckland, New Zealand.
demail@springer.com.

Afatinib (Giotrif(®), Gilotrif(®)) is an orally administered, irreversible
inhibitor of the ErbB family of tyrosine kinases. In the first-line treatment of 
patients with advanced lung adenocarcinoma with activating epidermal growth
factor receptor (EGFR) mutations, afatinib significantly prolonged
progression-free survival (PFS) and time to treatment failure (TTF), but not
overall survival (OS), compared with gefitinib (LUX-Lung 7 trial). In the overall
population of patients receiving first-line treatment for advanced lung
adenocarcinoma with activating EGFR mutations, afatinib significantly prolonged
PFS, but not OS, compared with pemetrexed plus cisplatin (LUX-Lung 3 trial) or
gemcitabine plus cisplatin (LUX-Lung 6 trial). However, in both LUX-Lung 3 and
LUX-Lung 6, OS was significantly prolonged in the subgroup of patients with
deletions in exon 19 receiving afatinib versus chemotherapy. In the second-line
treatment of advanced squamous non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), afatinib
significantly prolonged PFS and OS, compared with erlotinib, regardless of EGFR
mutation status (LUX-Lung 8 trial). Afatinib had a predictable and manageable
tolerability profile in patients with advanced NSCLC. In conclusion, afatinib is 
an important option for the first-line treatment of patients with advanced NSCLC 
and activating EGFR mutations, and provides an additional option for the
treatment of patients with squamous NSCLC that has progressed following
first-line platinum-based chemotherapy.

DOI: 10.1007/s11523-016-0465-2 
PMID: 27873136  [PubMed - in process]


58. Pharmacol Res. 2017 Jan;115:45-55. doi: 10.1016/j.phrs.2016.11.011. Epub 2016 Nov
15.

Shikonin inhibits gefitinib-resistant non-small cell lung cancer by inhibiting
TrxR and activating the EGFR proteasomal degradation pathway.

Li X(1), Fan XX(1), Jiang ZB(1), Loo WT(1), Yao XJ(1), Leung EL(2), Chow LW(3),
Liu L(4).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Quality Research in Chinese Medicine/Macau Institute
For Applied Research in Medicine and Health, Macau University of Science and
Technology, Macau (SAR), China. (2)State Key Laboratory of Quality Research in
Chinese Medicine/Macau Institute For Applied Research in Medicine and Health,
Macau University of Science and Technology, Macau (SAR), China. Electronic
address: lhleung@must.edu.mo. (3)State Key Laboratory of Quality Research in
Chinese Medicine/Macau Institute For Applied Research in Medicine and Health,
Macau University of Science and Technology, Macau (SAR), China. Electronic
address: wcchow@must.edu.mo. (4)State Key Laboratory of Quality Research in
Chinese Medicine/Macau Institute For Applied Research in Medicine and Health,
Macau University of Science and Technology, Macau (SAR), China. Electronic
address: lliu@must.edu.mo.

Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is the dominant type of lung cancer. Molecular
targeting has highly improved the treatment efficacy of lung cancer, but new
challenges have emerged, such as gefitinib-resistance and cancer recurrence.
Therefore, new chemotherapeutic agents and treatment strategies are urgently
needed. Shikonin is the main active component of a Chinese medicinal plant 'Zi
Cao', which has been shown to exhibit powerful anti-cancer activity in certain
types of cancer; however, its activity in gefitinib-resistant lung cancer has
never been addressed. In this study, we used a high-throughput screening assay
for epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) inhibitors and discovered that
Shikonin is a potent inhibitor of EGFR. The cytotoxicity of Shikonin and its
anti-cancer mechanism in NSCLC was deeply explored. Shikonin exhibited selective 
cytotoxicity among two NSCLC cell lines (H1975 and H1650) and one normal lung
fibroblast cell line (CCD-19LU). Shikonin significantly increased the activity of
caspases and poly (ADP-ribosyl) polymerase (PARP), which are indicators of
apoptosis, and the intensity of ROS by greater than 10-fold. NAC, an inhibitor of
ROS, completely blocked apoptosis, caspase and PARP activation induced by
Shikonin. Shikonin remarkably suppressed the phosphorylation of EGFR and led to
EGFR degradation. The enhancement of ROS generation in H1650 and H1975
gefitinib-resistant NSCLC cells leads to impairment of growth and induction of
apoptosis, whereas modulation of EGFR degradation and its downstream signalling
pathways by Shikonin contributes to its anti-tumour properties in H1975
gefitinib-resistant NSCLC cells (with T790M and L858R activating mutations).
Shikonin-induced cell apoptosis is closely associated with ROS elevation in the
cells. These findings indicate that Shikonin can be an effective small molecule
treating gefitinib-resistant NSCLC.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.phrs.2016.11.011 
PMID: 27864022  [PubMed - in process]


59. ESMO Open. 2016 Jul 21;1(4):e000063. eCollection 2016.

Phase II study of erlotinib plus tivantinib (ARQ 197) in patients with locally
advanced or metastatic EGFR mutation-positive non-small-cell lung cancer just
after progression on EGFR-TKI, gefitinib or erlotinib.

Azuma K(1), Hirashima T(2), Yamamoto N(3), Okamoto I(4), Takahashi T(5), Nishio
M(6), Hirata T(7), Kubota K(8), Kasahara K(9), Hida T(10), Yoshioka H(11),
Nakanishi K(12), Akinaga S(12), Nishio K(13), Mitsudomi T(14), Nakagawa K(15).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Respirology, Neurology and Rheumatology, Department of Internal
Medicine , Kurume University School of Medicine , Kurume , Japan. (2)Department
of Thoracic Malignancy , Osaka Prefectural Hospital Organization Osaka
Prefectural Medical Center for Respiratory and Allergic Diseases , Habikino ,
Japan. (3)Third Department of Internal Medicine , Wakayama Medical University ,
Wakayama , Japan. (4)Department of Medical Oncology, Kinki University Faculty of 
Medicine, Osaka-Sayama, Japan; Research Institute for Diseases of the Chest,
Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan.
(5)Division of Thoracic Oncology , Shizuoka Cancer Center , Shizuoka , Japan.
(6)Department of Thoracic Medical Oncology , The Cancer Institute Hospital of
Japanese Foundation for Cancer Research , Tokyo , Japan. (7)Center for Innovative
Clinical Medicine, Okayama University Hospital , Okayama , Japan. (8)Department
of Pulmonary Medicine and Oncology , Graduate School of Medicine, Nippon Medical 
School , Tokyo , Japan. (9)Department of Respiratory Medicine , Kanazawa
University Hospital , Kanazawa , Japan. (10)Department of Thoracic Oncology ,
Aichi Cancer Center Hospital , Nagoya , Japan. (11)Department of Respiratory
Medicine , Kurashiki Central Hospital , Kurashiki , Japan. (12)R&D Division ,
Kyowa Hakko Kirin Co, Ltd , Tokyo , Japan. (13)Department of Genome Biology ,
Kinki University School of Medicine , Osaka-Sayama , Japan. (14)Department of
Thoracic Surgery , Kinki University Faculty of Medicine , Osaka-Sayama , Japan.
(15)Department of Medical Oncology , Kinki University Faculty of Medicine ,
Osaka-Sayama , Japan.

BACKGROUND: Patients with epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) activation
mutation-positive non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) respond well to EGFR
tyrosine kinase inhibitors (EGFR-TKIs), but eventually become resistant in most
cases. The hepatocyte growth factor/c-Met (HGF/c-Met) pathway is reported as a
poor prognostic factor in various cancers. As c-Met is involved in EGFR-TKI
resistance, a c-Met inhibitor and EGFR-TKI combination may reverse the
resistance. This study evaluated the efficacy and safety of a c-Met selective
inhibitor, tivantinib (ARQ 197), in combination with erlotinib, in Japanese EGFR 
mutation-positive patients with NSCLC who progressed while on EGFR-TKIs.
METHODS: This study enrolled 45 patients with NSCLC with acquired resistance to
EGFR-TKIs, who were orally administered a daily combination of
tivantinib/erlotinib. The primary end point was the overall response rate (ORR)
and secondary end points included disease control rate, progression-free survival
(PFS) and overall survival (OS). The patients underwent a mandatory second biopsy
just after progression on EGFR-TKIs. The predictive biomarkers were extensively
analysed using tumour and blood samples.
RESULTS: The ORR was 6.7% (95% CI 1.4% to 18.3%), and the lower limit of 95% CI
did not exceed the target of 5%. The median PFS (mPFS) and median OS (mOS) were
2.7 months (95% CI 1.4 to 4.2) and 18.0 months (95% CI 13.4 to 22.2),
respectively. Both were longer in c-Met high patients (c-Met high vs low: mPFS
4.1 vs 1.4 months; mOS 20.7 vs 13.9 months). Partial response was observed in
three patients, all of whom were c-Met and HGF high. The common adverse events
and their frequencies were similar to those known to occur with tivantinib or
erlotinib alone.
CONCLUSIONS: Although this study did not prove clinical benefit of tivantinib in 
patients with acquired resistance to EGFR-TKIs, activated HGF/c-Met signalling, a
poor prognostic factor, may define a patient subset associated with longer
survival by the tivantinib/erlotinib combination.
TRIAL REGISTRATION NUMBER: NCT01580735.

DOI: 10.1136/esmoopen-2016-000063 
PMCID: PMC5070235
PMID: 27843623  [PubMed - in process]


60. Oncol Rep. 2017 Jan;37(1):66-76. doi: 10.3892/or.2016.5227. Epub 2016 Nov 7.

Construction of a novel cell-based assay for the evaluation of anti-EGFR drug
efficacy against EGFR mutation.

Hoshi H(1), Hiyama G(1), Ishikawa K(2), Inageda K(1), Fujimoto J(2), Wakamatsu
A(2), Togashi T(2), Kawamura Y(2), Takahashi N(1), Higa A(1), Goshima N(3), Semba
K(4), Watanabe S(1), Takagi M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Medical-Industrial Translational Research Center, Fukushima Medical
University, Fukushima, Fukushima 960-1295, Japan. (2)Japan Biological Informatics
Consortium (JBIC), Koto-ku, Tokyo 135-0064, Japan. (3)National Institute of
Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST), Koto-ku, Tokyo 135-0064,
Japan. (4)Department of Life Science and Medical Bioscience, School of Advanced
Science and Engineering, Waseda University, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 162-8480, Japan.

Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) overexpression and EGFR-mediated
signaling pathway dysregulation have been observed in tumors from patients with
various cancers, especially non-small cell lung cancer. Thus, several anti-EGFR
drugs have been developed for cancer therapy. For patients with known EGFR
activating mutations (EGFR exon 19 in-frame deletions and exon 21 L858R
substitution), treatment with an EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor (EGFR TKI;
gefitinib, erlotinib or afatinib) represents standard first-line therapy.
However, the clinical efficacy of these TKIs is ultimately limited by the
development of acquired drug resistance such as by mutation of the gatekeeper
T790 residue (T790M). To overcome this acquired drug resistance and develop novel
anti-EGFR drugs, a cell-based assay system for EGFR TKI resistance
mutant-selective inhibitors is required. We constructed a novel cell-based assay 
for the evaluation of EGFR TKI efficacy against EGFR mutation. To this end, we
established non-tumorigenic immortalized breast epithelial cells that proliferate
dependent on EGF (MCF 10A cells), which stably overexpress mutant EGFR. We found 
that the cells expressing EGFR containing the T790M mutation showed higher
resistance against gefitinib, erlotinib and afatinib compared with cells
expressing wild-type EGFR. In contrast, L858R mutant-expressing cells exhibited
higher TKI sensitivity. The effect of T790M-selective inhibitors (osimertinib and
rociletinib) on T790M mutant-expressing cells was significantly higher than
gefitinib and erlotinib. Finally, when compared with commercially available
isogenic MCF 10A cell lines carrying introduced mutations in EGFR, our EGFR
mutant-overexpressing cells exhibited obviously higher responsiveness to
EGFR TKIs depending on the underlying mutations because of the higher levels of
EGFR phosphorylation in the EGFR mutant-overexpressing cells than in the isogenic
cell lines. In conclusion, we successfully developed a novel cell-based assay for
evaluating the efficacy of anti-EGFR drugs against EGFR mutation.

DOI: 10.3892/or.2016.5227 
PMID: 27840973  [PubMed - in process]


61. Acta Pharmacol Sin. 2017 Jan;38(1):100-109. doi: 10.1038/aps.2016.116. Epub 2016 
Nov 14.

Capilliposide from Lysimachia capillipes inhibits AKT activation and restores
gefitinib sensitivity in human non-small cell lung cancer cells with acquired
gefitinib resistance.

Zhang SR(1,)(2), Xu YS(1,)(2), Jin E(2), Zhu LC(2), Xia B(2), Chen XF(3), Li
FZ(1), Ma SL(2).

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Zhejiang Chinese Medical University,
Hangzhou 310053, China. (2)Department of Oncology, Hangzhou First People's
Hospital, Nanjing Medical University, Hangzhou 310006, China. (3)Department of
Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of California at Los Angeles, Los
Angeles CA, 90095, USA.

Most gefitinib-treated patients with non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) would
eventually develop resistance. Lysimachia capillipes (LC) capilliposide extracts 
from LC Hemsl. show both in vitro and in vivo anti-cancer effects. In this study 
we investigated whether LC capilliposide in combination with gefitinib could
overcome the resistance of NSCLC cells to gefitinib and identified the signaling 
pathways involved. Treatment with LC capilliposide alone inhibited the growth of 
a panel of NSCLC cell lines (PC-9, H460, H1975, H1299 and PC-9-GR) sensitive or
resistant to gefitinib with IC50 values in the range of μg/mL. In the
gefitinib-resistant PC-9-GR cells (which have a T790M EGFR mutation), LC
capilliposide (at the IC30, i.e.1.2 μg/mL) markedly enhanced the inhibitory
effects of gefitinib with its IC50 value being decreased from 6.80±1.00 to
0.77±0.12 μmol/L. By using the median effect analysis we showed that combination 
treatment of LC capilliposide and gefitinib could restore gefitinib sensitivity
in PC-9-GR cells. Furthermore, LC capilliposide (1.2 μg/mL) significantly
increased the apoptotic responses to gefitinib (0.77 μmol/L) in PC-9-GR cells,
but did not affect gefitinib-induced G0/G1 arrest. Moreover, LC capilliposide
(1.2 μg/mL) in combination with gefitinib (0.77, 1.0 μmol/L) markedly decreased
the phosphorylation of the EGFR downstream signaling molecule AKT, which neither 
LC capilliposide nor gefitinib alone affected. In PC-9-GR cells with siRNA
knockdown of AKT, addition of LC capilliposide was unable to increase gefitinib
sensitivity. In a PC-9-GR xenograft mouse model, combination treatment with LC
capilliposide (15 mg·kg(-1)·d(-1), ip) and gefitinib (50 mg·kg(-1)·d(-1), ip)
dramatically enhanced tumor growth suppression (with a TGI of 109.3%), compared
with TGIs of 22.6% and 56.6%, respectively, in mice were treated with LC
capilliposide or gefitinib alone. LC capilliposide can restore the cells'
sensitivity to gefitinib through modulation of pAKT levels, suggesting that a
combination of LC capilliposide and gefitinib may be a promising therapeutic
strategy to overcome gefitinib resistance in NSCLCs with a T790M mutation.

DOI: 10.1038/aps.2016.116 
PMCID: PMC5220541
PMID: 27840409  [PubMed - in process]


62. Oncotarget. 2016 Dec 6;7(49):81598-81610. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.13150.

Characterization of osimertinib (AZD9291)-resistant non-small cell lung cancer
NCI-H1975/OSIR cell line.

Tang ZH(1), Jiang XM(1), Guo X(1), Fong CM(1), Chen X(1), Lu JJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Quality Research in Chinese Medicine, Institute of
Chinese Medical Sciences, University of Macau, Macao, China.

Osimertinib (OSI, also known as AZD9291) is the newest FDA-approved epidermal
growth factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase inhibitor for non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC) patients with EGFR T790M mutation. However, resistance to OSI is
likely to progress and the study of potential OSI-resistant mechanisms in
advanced is necessary. Here, the OSI-resistant NCI-H1975/OSIR cells were
established. After cells developed resistance to OSI, cell proliferation was
decreased while cell migration and invasion were increased. The NCI-H1975/OSIR
cells exhibited more resistance to gefitinib, erlotinib, afatinib, rociletinib,
doxorubicin, and fluorouracil, meanwhile showing higher sensitivity to
paclitaxel, when compared with NCI-H1975 cells. In addition, the NCI-H1975/OSIR
cells did not display multidrug resistance phenotype. The activation and
expression of EGFR were decreased after cells exhibited resistance. Compared with
NCI-H1975 cells, the activation of ERK and AKT in NCI-H1975/OSIR cells could not 
be significantly inhibited by OSI treatment. Navitoclax (ABT-263)-induced cell
viability inhibition and apoptosis were more significant in NCI-H1975/OSIR cells 
than that in NCI-H1975 cells. Moreover, these effects of navitoclax in
NCI-H1975/OSIR cells could be reversed by pretreatment of Z-VAD-FMK.
Collectively, loss of EGFR could pose as one of the OSI-resistant mechanisms and 
navitoclax might be the candidate drug for OSI-resistant NSCLC patients.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.13150 
PMID: 27835594  [PubMed - in process]


63. Oncotarget. 2016 Dec 27;7(52):85917-85928. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.13185.

Glucocorticoids may compromise the effect of gefitinib in non-small cell lung
cancer.

Wang HY(1,)(2), Chang YL(3), Cheng CC(4), Chao MW(4), Lin SI(5,)(6), Pan SL(4),
Hsu CC(3), Liu TW(7), Cheng HC(8,)(9), Tseng CP(2), Liu SJ(6,)(10), Tsai
HJ(11,)(12,)(13), Chang HY(3,)(14), Hsu JT(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biotechnology and Pharmaceutical Research, National Health
Research Institutes, Miaoli County, Taiwan. (2)Institute of Molecular Medicine
and Bioengineering, National Chiao Tung University, Hsinchu City, Taiwan.
(3)Institute of Population Health Sciences, National Health Research Institutes, 
Miaoli County, Taiwan. (4)The Ph.D. Program for Cancer Biology and Drug
Discovery, College of Medical Science and Technology, Taipei Medical University, 
Taipei City, Taiwan. (5)Graduate Institute of Life Sciences, National Defense
Medical Center, Taipei City, Taiwan. (6)National Institute of Infectious Diseases
and Vaccinology, National Health Research Institutes, Miaoli County, Taiwan.
(7)Institute of Cancer Research, National Health Research Institutes, Miaoli
County, Taiwan. (8)Institute of Bioinformatics and Systems Biology, National
Chiao Tung University, Hsinchu City, Taiwan. (9)Miaoli General Hospital, Ministry
of Health and Welfare, Miaoli County, Taiwan. (10)Graduate Institute of
Immunology, China Medical University, Taichung City, Taiwan. (11)Division of
Biostatistics and Bioinformatics, Institute of Population Health Sciences,
National Health Research Institutes, Miaoli County, Taiwan. (12)Department of
Public Health, China Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan, Taichung City, Taiwan.
(13)Department of Pediatrics, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern
University, Chicago, IL, USA. (14)Institute of Public Health, National Yang-Ming 
University, Taipei City, Taiwan.

The epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)-targeting tyrosine kinase inhibitors 
(TKIs) have shown remarkable benefits in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
patients with drug-sensitive mutations in the EGFR gene. Responsive patients are 
usually continuously prescribed with TKIs until disease progression.
Glucocorticoids (GCs) are potent homeostasis maintaining drugs and are frequently
used in cancer patients to alleviate discomforts caused by anti-cancer therapies.
Several previous studies reported that concomitant use of GCs may compromise the 
efficacy of chemo-therapeutics in patients with solid tumors. Little is known in 
the concomitant use of target therapy with GCs in treating NSCLC. In this study, 
we hypothesized that concomitant use of GCs in EGFR-TKI therapy may be
detrimental and addressed this issue using cell cultures and xenograft studies
followed by a retrospective population study based on data from the Taiwan
national health insurance system. In cell cultures and xenograft studies, GCs
were shown to unequally compromise the anti-cancer efficacy of TKIs in both PC9
and NCI-H1975 NSCLC cells models. In the retrospective population study, patients
with similar disease status that were co-medicated with GCs had a significantly
higher risk of disease progression.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.13185 
PMID: 27835586  [PubMed - in process]


64. Hum Vaccin Immunother. 2016 Nov 10:0. [Epub ahead of print]

Targeted Therapies for the Treatment of Non-Small-Cell Lung Cancer: Monoclonal
Antibodies and Biological Inhibitors.

Silva AP(1), Coelho PV(1), Anazetti M(1,)(2), Simioni PU(1,)(3,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Biomedical Science , Faculty of Americana , Av. Joaquim Boer, 
733, 13477-360 Americana , SP , Brazil. (2)b Department of Health Science ,
Faculty DeVry Metrocamp , R. Dr. Sales de Oliveira, 1661, 13035-500 , Campinas , 
SP , Brazil. (3)c Department of Genetics , Evolution and Bioagents, Institute of 
Biology, University of Campinas (UNICAMP) , 13083-970 , Campinas , SP , Brazil.
(4)d Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology , Institute of Biosciences,
Universidade Estadual Paulista, UNESP , Av. 24 A,1515, 13506-900 - Rio Claro , SP
, Brazil.

The usual treatments for patients with non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC), such
as advanced lung adenocarcinoma, are unspecific and aggressive, and include lung 
resection, radiotherapy and chemotherapy. Recently, treatment with monoclonal
antibodies and biological inhibitors has emerged as an effective alternative,
generating effective results with few side effects. In recent years, several
clinical trials using monoclonal antibodies presented potential benefits to
NSCLC, and four of them are already approved for the treatment of NSCLC, such as 
cetuximab, bevacizumab, nivolumab and pembrolizumab. Also, biological inhibitors 
are attractive tolls for biological applications. Among the approved inhibitors
are crizotinib, erlotinib, afatinib and gefitinib, and side effects are usually
mild to intense. Nevertheless, biological molecule treatments are under
development, and several new monoclonal antibodies and biological inhibitors are 
in trial to treat NSCLC. Also under trial study are as follows: anti-epidermal
growth factor receptor (EGFR) antibodies (nimotuzumab and ficlatuzumab), anti-IGF
1 receptor (IGF-1R) monoclonal antibody (figitumumab), anti-NR-LU-10 monoclonal
antibody (nofetumomab) as well as antibodies directly affecting the cytotoxic
T-lymphocyte-associated antigen 4 (CTLA-4) molecule (ipilimumab and
tremelimumab), to receptor activator of nuclear factor-kappa B ligand (RANKL)
(denosumab) or to polymerase enzyme (veliparib and olaparib). Among new
inhibitors under investigation are poly-ADP ribose polymerase (PARP) inhibitors
(veliparib and olaparib) and phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) inhibitor
(buparlisib). However, the success of immunotherapies still requires extensive
research and additional controlled trials to evaluate the long-term benefits and 
side effects.

DOI: 10.1080/21645515.2016.1249551 
PMID: 27831000  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


65. Oncotarget. 2016 Dec 20;7(51):84951-84964. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.13069.

PD 0332991, a selective cyclin D kinase 4/6 inhibitor, sensitizes lung cancer
cells to treatment with epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase
inhibitors.

Liu M(1), Xu S(1,)(2), Wang Y(2), Li Y(2), Li Y(2), Zhang H(1), Liu H(2), Chen
J(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Lung Cancer Surgery, Lung Cancer Institute, Tianjin Medical
University General Hospital, 300052, Tianjin, China. (2)Laboratory of Lung Cancer
Metastasis and Tumor Microenvironment, Tianjin Lung Cancer Institute, Tianjin
Medical University General Hospital, 300052, Tianjin, China.

Acquired resistance to epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase
inhibitors (EGFR-TKIs) is a major challenge to targeted therapy for non-small
cell lung cancer (NSCLC). We investigated whether a cyclin D kinase 4/6 (CDK4/6) 
inhibitor, PD 0332991, could reverse EGFR-TKI resistance in human lung cancer
cells and explored the underlying mechanisms. We found that PD 0332991
potentiated gefitinib-induced growth inhibition in both EGFR-TKI-sensitive (PC-9)
and EGFR-TKI-resistant (PC-9/AB2) cells by down-regulating proliferation and
inducing apoptosis and G0/G1 cell cycle arrest. Tumor xenografts were then used
to verify the effects of PD 0332991 in vivo. Mice treated with a combination of
PD 0332991 and gefitinib had the fastest tumor regression and delayed relapse.
Tumors from mice receiving the combination treatment exhibited down-regulated
proliferation, up-regulated apoptosis, and less angiogenesis. Finally, lung
adenocarcinoma patients with acquired resistance to EGFR-TKIs were given an
exploratory treatment of PD 0332991. One patient with gefitinib resistance
exhibited clinical remission after treatment with PD 0332991. These findings
suggest PD 0332991 reverses acquired EGFR-TKI-resistance in NSCLC cells, and may 
provide a novel treatment strategy for NSLSC patients with EGFR-TKI resistance.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.13069 
PMID: 27825114  [PubMed - in process]


66. Oncotarget. 2016 Nov 3. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.13056. [Epub ahead of print]

A randomized, phase II study of gefitinib alone versus nimotuzumab plus gefitinib
after platinum-based chemotherapy in advanced non-small cell lung cancer (KCSG
LU12-01).

Kim HR(1), Jang JS(2), Sun JM(3), Ahn MJ(3), Kim DW(4), Jung I(5), Lee KH(6), Kim
JH(1), Lee DH(7), Kim SW, Cho BC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Medical Oncology, Yonsei Cancer
Center, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea. (2)Department of
Internal Medicine, Chung-Ang University, College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(3)Department of Medicine, Division of Hematology-Oncology, Samsung Medical
Center, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Seoul, Korea. (4)Department
of Internal Medicine, Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul, Republic of
Korea. (5)Department of Biostatistics and Medical Informatics, Yonsei University 
College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea. (6)Department of Internal Medicine, Chungbuk
National University, College of Medicine, Cheongju, Korea. (7)Department of
Oncology, University of Ulsan College of Medicine, Asan Medical Center, Seoul,
Korea.

We aimed to evaluate the efficacy of dual inhibition of epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR) with nimotuzumab (EGFR monoclonal antibody) plus gefitinib
(EGFR-tyrosine kinase inhibitor) in advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
after platinum-based chemotherapy. An open label, randomized, phase II trial was 
conducted at 6 centers; 160 patients were randomized (1:1) to either gefitinib
alone or nimotuzumab (200 mg, i.v. weekly) plus gefitinib (250 mg p.o. daily)
until disease progression or intolerable toxicity. The primary endpoint was
progression-free survival (PFS) at 3 months. Of the total 160 enrolled patients, 
155 (77: gefitinib, 78: nimotuzumab plus gefitinib) received at least one dose
and could be evaluated for efficacy and toxicity. The majority had adenocarcinoma
(65.2%) and ECOG performance status of 0 to 1 (83.5%). The median follow-up was
22.1 months, and the PFS rate at 3 months was 48.1% in gefitinib and 37.2% in
nimotuzumab plus gefitinib (P = not significant, NS). The median PFS and OS were 
2.8 and 13.2 months in gefitinib and 2.0 and 14.0 months in nimotuzumab plus
gefitinib. Combined treatment was not associated with superior PFS to gefitinib
alone in patients with EGFR mutation (13.5 vs. 10.2 months in gefitinib alone,
P=NS) or those with wild-type EGFR (0.9 vs. 2.0 months in gefitinib alone, P=NS).
Combined treatment did not increase EGFR inhibition-related adverse events with
manageable toxicities. The dual inhibition of EGFR with nimotuzumab plus
gefitinib was not associated with better outcomes than gefitinib alone as a
second-line treatment of advanced NSCLC (NCT01498562).

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.13056 
PMID: 27823977  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


67. Oncologist. 2017 Jan;22(1):3-11. doi: 10.1634/theoncologist.2016-0285. Epub 2016 
Nov 7.

Understanding Mechanisms of Resistance in the Epithelial Growth Factor Receptor
in Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer and the Role of Biopsy at Progression.

Socinski MA(1), Villaruz LC(2), Ross J(3,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Florida Hospital Cancer Institute, Orlando, Florida, USA
mark.socinski.md@flhosp.org. (2)University of Pittsburgh Cancer Institute,
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA. (3)Department of Pathology and Laboratory
Medicine, Albany Medical College, Albany, New York, USA. (4)Foundation Medicine
Inc., Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA.

Molecular profiling and the discovery of drugs that target specific activating
mutations have allowed the personalization of treatment for non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC). The epithelial growth factor receptor (EGFR) is frequently
over-expressed and/or aberrantly activated in different cancers, including NSCLC.
The most common activating mutations of EGFR in NSCLC fall within the tyrosine
kinase-binding domain. Three oral EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) have
been approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for first-line use
in patients with EGFR mutation-positive NSCLC (exon 19 deletions or exon 21
[L858R] substitution mutations), as detected by an FDA-approved test. However,
disease progression is common and is often the result of secondary mutations, of 
which the EGFR T790M mutation is the most prevalent. Few options were available
upon progression until the introduction of osimertinib, a kinase inhibitor that
targets the T790M mutation, which was recently approved for use in patients with 
metastatic EGFR T790M mutation-positive NSCLC, as detected by an FDA-approved
test, who progressed on or after EGFR TKI therapy. With the introduction of
osimertinib, outcomes can now be improved in select patients. Therefore,
performing a biopsy at progression to determine the underlying molecular cause of
the acquired resistance is important for the enabling of individualized options
that may provide the greatest opportunity for improved outcomes. This review
discusses the latest updates in molecular testing at progression and outlines
treatment options for this difficult-to-treat population.THE ONCOLOGIST:
2017;22:3-11 IMPLICATIONS FOR PRACTICE: Although the epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs)-gefitinib, erlotinib, and
afatinib-have changed the treatment paradigm for non-small cell lung cancer among
those with EGFR mutation positive disease, most patients experience progression
after approximately 12 months of treatment. Until recently, options were limited 
for patients who progressed, but improvements in molecular profiling and the
approval of osimertinib, which targets the resistance mutation T790M, afford the 
opportunity for improved outcomes in many patients with this mutation. This
article explains the options available after progression on initial EGFR TKI
therapy and the importance of molecular testing at progression in making
treatment decisions.

© AlphaMed Press 2016.

DOI: 10.1634/theoncologist.2016-0285 
PMID: 27821794  [PubMed - in process]


68. Oncotarget. 2016 Nov 22;7(47):77342-77347. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.12999.

Overexpression of OCT4 is associated with gefitinib resistance in non-small cell 
lung cancer.

Li B(1), Yao Z(1), Wan Y(1), Lin D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Shandong Provincial Hospital Affiliated to
Shandong University, Shandong University, Jinan, Shandong, China, 250021.

Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)-targeted tyrosine kinase inhibitors
(TKIs) have emerged as first-line drugs for non-small cell lung cancers (NSCLCs).
However, the resistance to TKIs represents the key limitation for their
therapeutic efficacy. We found that the difference of OCT4 expression between
NSCLC and the adjacent non-tumourous tissues was statistically significant.
Knockdown of OCT4 in NSCLC cells could decrease cell proliferation, and
potentiate apoptosis induced by gefitinib, suggesting OCT4 may contribute to
gefitinib resistance in NSCLC.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.12999 
PMID: 27816965  [PubMed - in process]


69. Cancer Genomics Proteomics. 2016 11-12;13(6):475-482.

Association of BIM Deletion Polymorphism and BIM-γ RNA Expression in NSCLC with
EGFR Mutation.

Isobe K(1), Kakimoto A(2), Mikami T(3), Kaburaki K(2), Kobayashi H(2), Yoshizawa 
T(2), Makino T(4), Otsuka H(4), Sano GO(2), Sugino K(2), Sakamoto S(2), Takai
Y(2), Tochigi N(5), Iyoda A(3), Homma S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Respiratory Medicine, Toho University School of Medicine, Tokyo,
Japan kazutoshiisobe@med.toho-u.ac.jp. (2)Division of Respiratory Medicine, Toho 
University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan. (3)Division of Pathology, Toho
University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan. (4)Division of Chest Surgery, Toho
University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan. (5)Division of Surgical Pathology,
Toho University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.

AIM: This pilot study assessed the association of BIM deletion polymorphism and
BIM RNA isoform in patients with EGFR-positive non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC).
PATIENTS AND METHODS: The study included 33 patients with EGFR-positive NSCLC
treated with gefitinib. BIM deletion polymorphism and BIM RNA isoform (EL/L/S/γ) 
were determined by polymerase chain reaction (PCR).
RESULTS: BIM-γ expression was significantly higher in patients with BIM deletion 
polymorphism than among those without BIM deletion polymorphism inside tumors
(p=0.038) and around tumors (p=0.0024). Relative BIM-γ expression was
significantly higher in patients with BIM deletion polymorphism than among those 
without BIM deletion polymorphism (p=0.0017). Patients with BIM-γ had
significantly shorter progression-free survival than those without BIM-γ (median:
304 vs. 732 days; p=0.023).
CONCLUSION: Expression of BIM-γ mRNA and BIM deletion polymorphism were strongly 
associated. BIM-γ overexpression may have a role in apoptosis related to
EGFR-tyrosine kinase inhibitor.

Copyright© 2016, International Institute of Anticancer Research (Dr. John G.
Delinasios), All rights reserved.


PMCID: PMC5219921
PMID: 27807070  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Thorac Cancer. 2016 Nov;7(6):648-654. doi: 10.1111/1759-7714.12379. Epub 2016 Sep
1.

Effects of epidermal growth factor receptor-tyrosine kinase inhibitors alone on
EGFR-mutant non-small cell lung cancer with brain metastasis.

Zhang Q(1,)(2), Zhang X(3), Yan H(2), Jiang B(2), Xu C(2), Yang J(2), Chen Z(3), 
Su J(3), Wu YL(4,)(5), Zhou Q(6).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Graduate Studies, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, China.
(2)Division of Pulmonary Oncology, Guangdong Lung Cancer Institute, Guangdong
General Hospital & Guangdong Academy of Medical Sciences, Guangzhou, China.
(3)Medical Research Center of Guangdong General Hospital, Guangdong Lung Cancer
Institute, Guangdong Academy of Medical Sciences, Guangzhou, China. (4)Division
of Pulmonary Oncology, Guangdong Lung Cancer Institute, Guangdong General
Hospital & Guangdong Academy of Medical Sciences, Guangzhou, China.
syylwu@live.cn. (5)Medical Research Center of Guangdong General Hospital,
Guangdong Lung Cancer Institute, Guangdong Academy of Medical Sciences,
Guangzhou, China. syylwu@live.cn. (6)Division of Pulmonary Oncology, Guangdong
Lung Cancer Institute, Guangdong General Hospital & Guangdong Academy of Medical 
Sciences, Guangzhou, China. gzzhouqing@126.com.

BACKGROUND: Epidermal growth factor receptor-tyrosine kinase inhibitors
(EGFR-TKIs) are remarkably effective for treating EGFR-mutant non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC). However, the individual role of EGFR-TKIs in patients with brain 
metastasis (BM) arising from EGFR-mutant NSCLC remains unclear.
METHODS: Patients with BM secondary to NSCLC and harboring EGFR-activating
mutations were retrospectively screened. Patients who received gefitinib or
erlotinib to control both extracranial lesions (ECLs) and intracranial lesions
(ICLs) were eligible. If ECLs remained stable or remissive while ICLs progressed;
asymptomatic BM progressed to symptomatic BM; BM symptoms were not alleviated
within two weeks; or BM symptoms deteriorated after initial release, patients
received brain radiotherapy or other local treatments and continued taking TKIs
until ECLs progression occurred.
RESULTS: In 43 eligible patients, the objective response and disease control
rates for ICLs were 57% and 91%, respectively. Median progression-free survival
(PFS) was 9.3 months. The median PFS for ICLs and ECLs was 9.7 and 13.7 months,
respectively. Non-smokers and second-line TKIs were found to be independent
positive prognostic factors for PFS and overall survival (OS) respectively, with 
a hazard ratio of 0.29 (95% confidence interval [CI] 0.14-0.61; P = 0.001) and
0.34 (95% CI 0.16-0.70; P = 0.003). No significant difference in median OS was
observed between patients who did or did not receive brain radiotherapy (23.6 vs.
18.7 months; P = 0.317).
CONCLUSION: EGFR-TKIs alone are effective for treating BM arising from
EGFR-mutant NSCLC. The efficacy of TKIs in ICLs and ECLs should be evaluated
separately.

© 2016 The Authors. Thoracic Cancer published by China Lung Oncology Group and
John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/1759-7714.12379 
PMCID: PMC5093172
PMID: 27755835  [PubMed - in process]


71. Thorac Cancer. 2016 Nov;7(6):663-669. doi: 10.1111/1759-7714.12384. Epub 2016 Aug
24.

Study of efficacy and safety of pulsatile administration of high-dose gefitinib
or erlotinib for advanced non-small cell lung cancer patients with secondary drug
resistance: A single center, single arm, phase II clinical trial.

Zhu Y(1), Du Y(1), Liu H(1), Ma T(1), Shen Y(1), Pan Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Anhui Medical
University, Hefei, China. (2)Department of Oncology, The Affiliated Provincial
Hospital of Anhui Medical University, Hefei, China. yueyinpan1965@126.com.

BACKGROUND: The objective of the study was to observe the efficacy and safety of 
pulsatile administration of high-dose gefitinib or erlotinib in patients with
advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) with secondary drug resistance to
standard doses of tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) treatment.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We recruited 42 NSCLC patients from our hospital, between 
August 2014 and December 2015, who had experienced drug resistance after one year
of conventional treatment with gefitinib or erlotinib. The gefitinib group (29
patients) received one dose of 1000 mg gefitinib every four days. The erlotinib
group (13 patients) received one dose of 450 mg erlotinib every three days.
Treatments continued until disease progression according to Response Evaluation
Criteria In Solid Tumors 1.1 or development of intolerable toxicity.
RESULTS: Median progression-free survival (PFS) was 30 months (gefitinib vs.
erlotinib: 31 vs. 24 months; P > 0.05). After high-dose pulsatile administration,
eight patients achieved a partial response (PR), 11 had stable disease (SD), and 
23 had progressive disease (PD; relative risk 19.0%; disease control rate 45.2%; 
median PFS six months). Patients were categorized based on epidermal growth
factor receptor gene mutation: exon 19 (no patients achieved complete response
[CR], 4 PR, 6 SD, and 17 PD) and exon 21 mutation groups (no patients achieved
CR, 4 PR, 5 SD, and 6 PD).
CONCLUSION: High-dose TKI pulsatile treatment is safe, efficient, and can improve
prognoses for certain patients with advanced NSCLC.

© 2016 The Authors. Thoracic Cancer published by China Lung Oncology Group and
John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/1759-7714.12384 
PMCID: PMC5093174
PMID: 27755796  [PubMed - in process]


72. Thorac Cancer. 2017 Jan;8(1):51-53. doi: 10.1111/1759-7714.12382. Epub 2016 Nov
1.

Heterogeneity of the resistance to gefitinib treatment in a non-small cell lung
cancer patient with active epidermal growth factor receptor mutation.

Xu CR(1), Zhong WZ(1), Zhou Q(1), Zhang XC(1), Yang JJ(1), Wu YL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary Oncology, Guangdong Lung Cancer Institute, Guangdong
General Hospital and Guangdong Academy of Medical Sciences, Guangzhou, China.

We report the case of a 37-year-old male non-small cell lung cancer patient with 
an active epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutation who received gefitinib
as first-line treatment. After 13.7 months, the patient experienced disease
progression and was treated with platinum-based doublet chemotherapy plus
gefitinib for 5.4 months. A subsequent lung biopsy showed cMET overexpression;
therefore, the patient received a cMET inhibitor with the gefitinib. The response
in the different lesions of several organs was diverse. Stable disease was
achieved in the lung lesion; however, the liver metastases enlarged. A liver
biopsy found T790M mutation in EGFR exon 20, thus, third generation EGFR-tyrosine
kinase inhibitors were used and a partial response was achieved.

© 2016 The Authors. Thoracic Cancer published by China Lung Oncology Group and
John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/1759-7714.12382 
PMCID: PMC5217905
PMID: 27801981  [PubMed - in process]


73. Anticancer Res. 2016 Nov;36(11):5827-5833.

Isoflavone Extracts Enhance the Effect of Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor
Inhibitors in NSCLC Cell Lines.

Ambrosio R(1), Ombra MN(2), Gridelli C(1), Picariello G(2), DI Stasio M(2), Volpe
MG(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Oncology, S.G. Moscati Hospital, Avellino, Italy.
(2)Institute of Food Sciences, National Research Council, Avellino, Italy.
(3)Institute of Food Sciences, National Research Council, Avellino, Italy
mgvolpe@isa.cnr.it.

AIM: We investigated the effects of the pharmacological inhibition in vitro of
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) in combination with isoflavones.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Four anticancer drugs (erlotinib, gefitinib, afatinib and 
AZD9291) were combined with soy and red clover isoflavone extracts and used in
cellular proliferation assays. The antitumor activity of inhibitors alone and in 
combination with isoflavone extracts was compared on three non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC) cell lines with affiant EGFR genotype: A549 (EGFR wt); H1795 (EGFR
T790M); HCC827 (EGFR del E746-A750).
RESULTS: Combined treatment with extracts significantly enhanced the
antiproliferative activity of all inhibitors against these cell lines. Bioactive 
compounds of extracts may synergize the antitumor efficacy of the inhibitors.
CONCLUSION: To date, as far as we are aware, this is the first report of the
combined effect of isoflavone extracts and EGFR inhibitors on human NCSLC cell
growth. Sequential treatment with these drugs combined with isoflavones may
represent the basis for a new therapeutic approach.

Copyright© 2016 International Institute of Anticancer Research (Dr. John G.
Delinassios), All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.21873/anticanres.11167 
PMID: 27793905  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Case Rep Oncol. 2016 Oct 4;9(3):565-567.

Achievement of Cure with Gefitinib in Advanced Lung Adenocarcinoma Harboring an
Activating EGFR Mutation: A Case Report.

Kuwata T(1), Yoneda K(1), Kobayashi K(1), Oyama R(1), Matumiya H(1), Shinohara
S(1), Takenaka M(1), Oka S(1), Chikaishi Y(1), Imanishi N(1), Kuroda K(1), Tanaka
F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Second Department of Surgery, School of Medicine, University of Occupational
and Environmental Health, Kitakyushu, Japan.

Tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) 
may achieve long-term survival in selected cases with advanced non-small cell
lung cancer harboring activating mutations in the EGFR gene, but a cured case has
not been reported yet. Here, we present the first case of EGFR-mutated lung
adenocarcinoma cured with an EGFR-TKI, as the 75-year-old Japanese man has
achieved complete response with gefitinib treatment and has survived without
tumor 10 years after termination of gefitinib treatment.

DOI: 10.1159/000449371 
PMCID: PMC5075735
PMID: 27790122  [PubMed]


75. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2016 Nov 18;480(3):369-374. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2016.10.055. Epub 2016 Oct 18.

miR-543 is up-regulated in gefitinib-resistant non-small cell lung cancer and
promotes cell proliferation and invasion via phosphatase and tensin homolog.

Bi M(1), Chen W(2), Yu H(3), Wang J(1), Ding F(3), Tang DJ(3), Tang C(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, Weihai Woman and Children's Hospital, 51
Guangming Road, Weihai 264200, PR China. (2)Department of Breast Surgery, Weihai 
Woman and Children's Hospital, 51 Guangming Road, Weihai 264200, PR China.
(3)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Weihai Woman and Children's Hospital, 51
Guangming Road, Weihai 264200, PR China. (4)Department of Laboratory Medicine,
Weihai Woman and Children's Hospital, 51 Guangming Road, Weihai 264200, PR China.
Electronic address: cuiyantang@gmail.com.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) play important roles in the pathogenesis of many types of
cancers by negatively regulating gene expression at posttranscriptional level.
Here, we identified that miR-543 is up-regulated in gefitinib-resistant non-small
cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients comparing gefitinib-sensitive ones. It promotes
NSCLC cell proliferation by negatively regulates its target gene PTEN. In NSCLC
cell lines, CCK-8 proliferation assay indicated that the cell proliferation is
promoted by miR-543 mimics. Transwell assay showed that miR-543 mimics promotes
the invasion and migration of NSCLC cells. Luciferase assays confirmed that
miR-543 directly binds to the 3'untranslated region of PTEN, and western blotting
showed that miR-543 suppresses the expression of PTEN at the protein level. This 
study indicates that miR-543 promotes proliferation and invasion of NSCLC cell
lines by PTEN. The miR-543 may represent a potential therapeutic target for
gefitinib-resistant NSCLC intervention.

Copyright © 2016. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2016.10.055 
PMID: 27769862  [PubMed - in process]


76. Onco Targets Ther. 2016 Oct 11;9:6137-6145. eCollection 2016.

Effectiveness of tyrosine kinase inhibitors on uncommon E709X epidermal growth
factor receptor mutations in non-small-cell lung cancer.

Wu JY(1), Shih JY(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, National Taiwan University Hospital Yun-Lin
Branch, Yun-Lin, Taiwan. (2)Department of Internal Medicine, National Taiwan
University Hospital, and College of Medicine, National Taiwan University, Taipei,
Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: Clinical features of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)
mutations: L858R, deletions in exon 19, T790M, insertions in exon 20, G719X, and 
L861X in non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) are well-known. The clinical
significance of other uncommon EGFR mutations, such as E709X, is not well
understood. This study aimed to improve the understanding of E709X, and the
clinical response to tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) of NSCLC patients with
such an uncommon mutation.
METHODS: Specimens from 3,146 patients were tested for EGFR mutations. We
surveyed the clinical data and the effectiveness of TKI treatment in NSCLC
patients with EGFR mutations E709X.
RESULTS: Of the 3,146 patients, 1,689 (53.7%) had EGFR mutations. This included
726 patients with deletions in exon 19, 733 patients with L858R, and 230 (13.6%) 
patients with other EGFR mutations. In the 230 patients who had mutations other
than single deletion in exon 19 or single L858R in exon 21, 25 (1.5%) patients
had the uncommon E709X mutations. Twenty patients had complex E709X mutations and
five had single E709X mutation: delE709-T710insD. Of these 25 patients, 18
received either gefitinib or erlotinib treatment. The response rate of TKIs
treatment was 50.0%, and the median progression-free survival was 6.2 months. All
5 patients who had delE709-T710insD were non-responders to TKI treatments.
CONCLUSION: E709X EGFR mutations constituted a small part of the whole group of
EGFR mutations. Most patients had complex mutations. The mutation
delE709-T710insD was a single mutation and was not associated with good response 
to TKI treatment.

DOI: 10.2147/OTT.S118071 
PMCID: PMC5067004
PMID: 27785061  [PubMed - in process]


77. Onco Targets Ther. 2016 Oct 6;9:6065-6074. eCollection 2016.

New developments in the management of non-small-cell lung cancer, focus on
rociletinib: what went wrong?

Van Der Steen N(1), Caparello C(2), Rolfo C(3), Pauwels P(4), Peters GJ(1),
Giovannetti E(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, the
Netherlands. (2)Polo Oncologico, Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria Pisana, Pisa, 
Italy. (3)Phase I - Early Clinical Trials Unit, Oncology Department, Antwerp
University Hospital, Edegem. (4)Center for Oncological Research, University of
Antwerp, Wilrijk, Antwerp, Belgium. (5)Cancer Pharmacology Lab, AIRC Start-Up
Unit, University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy.

Recently, the development of the third-generation epidermal growth factor
receptor-small molecule inhibitor (EGFR-TKI) rociletinib had failed. In this
review, the wide-ranging aspects of the evolution of EGFR-TKIs were collected,
with a special focus on rociletinib. The influence of different oncogenic
mutations on EGFR activity was also discussed. Resistance to the first
(erlotinib, gefitinib)- and second (afatinib)-generation EGFR-TKIs provided the
rationale behind the development of the third-generation inhibitors (rociletinib,
osimertinib). On the basis of these data, a comparison of their efficacy on the
different mutated EGFRs and the respective resistance mechanisms is further
reported. Moreover, the evolution and results of the clinical trials of
rociletinib (TIGER trials) are compared with the trials on osimertinib, another
third-generation EGFR-TKI that now has been granted US Food and Drug
Administration approval. The reasons behind the arrest in the further development
of rociletinib are put in the perspective of future drug development.

DOI: 10.2147/OTT.S97644 
PMCID: PMC5063481
PMID: 27785053  [PubMed - in process]


78. Ther Adv Respir Dis. 2016 Dec;10(6):549-565. Epub 2016 Oct 26.

Osimertinib in the treatment of patients with epidermal growth factor receptor
T790M mutation-positive metastatic non-small cell lung cancer: clinical trial
evidence and experience.

Sullivan I(1), Planchard D(2).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Oncology Department, Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France. (2)Medical
Oncology Department, Gustave Roussy, 114 rue Édouard Vaillant, 94800 Villejuif,
France david.planchard@gustaveroussy.fr.

Patients with advanced epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutant non-small
cell lung cancer (NSCLC) are particularly sensitive to treatment with first- or
second-generation EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors such as gefitinib, erlotinib
and afatinib, which block the cell-signaling pathways that drive the growth of
tumor cells. Unfortunately, the majority of patients develop resistance to them
after a median duration of response of around 10 months, and in over half of
these patients the emergence of the EGFR T790M resistance mutation is detected.
Osimertinib is an oral, highly selective, irreversible inhibitor of both
EGFR-activating mutations and the T790M-resistance mutation, while sparing the
activity of wild-type EGFR This article reviews clinical trial development of
osimertinib in patients with NSCLC, presenting efficacy and safety evidence for
its value in the EGFR T790M mutation-positive population and in different
settings, including patients with metastatic disease. The preclinical background 
of clinically acquired resistance to osimertinib is presented and the combination
tactics being investigated in an attempt to circumvent this are addressed.

© The Author(s), 2016.

DOI: 10.1177/1753465816670498 
PMID: 27784815  [PubMed - in process]


79. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol. 2016 Nov;78(5):941-947. Epub 2016 Sep 2.

Potential influence of being overweight on the development of hepatic dysfunction
in Japanese patients with EGFR-mutated non-small cell lung cancer undergoing
gefitinib monotherapy: the Okayama Lung Cancer Study Group experience.

Oda N(1), Hotta K(2,)(3), Yoshioka H(4), Kudo K(5), Ichihara E(1), Kato Y(1),
Ninomiya K(1), Minami D(1), Ninomiya T(1), Kubo T(6), Ohashi K(1), Sato A(1),
Takigawa N(7), Tabata M(6), Tanimoto M(1), Kiura K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Okayama University Hospital, Okayama,
Japan. (2)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Okayama University Hospital,
Okayama, Japan. khotta@okayama-u.ac.jp. (3)Center for Innovative Clinical
Medicine, Okayama University Hospital, 2-5-1, Shikatacho, Kitaku, Okayama,
700-8558, Japan. khotta@okayama-u.ac.jp. (4)Department of Respiratory Medicine,
Kurashiki Central Hospital, Okayama, Japan. (5)Department of Respiratory
Medicine, National Hospital Organization Iwakuni Medical Center, Iwakuni, Japan. 
(6)Center for Clinical Oncology, Okayama University Hospital, Okayama, Japan.
(7)Department of General Internal Medicine 4, Kawasaki Hospital, Kawasaki Medical
School, Okayama, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Being overweight has been reported to induce hepatic dysfunction
during cytotoxic chemotherapy. Severe hepatic dysfunction can also be observed
during gefitinib monotherapy, leading to interrupted or discontinued treatment.
However, whether being overweight is a risk factor during gefitinib therapy is
unknown.
METHODS: We retrospectively reviewed 183 Japanese patients with epidermal growth 
factor receptor (EGFR)-tyrosine kinase inhibitor-naïve non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC) harboring EGFR mutations, who received gefitinib monotherapy between July
2007 and February 2014. We defined being overweight as having a body mass index
(BMI) ≥ 25 kg/m(2) and assessed its potential relationship with ≥grade 2 hepatic 
dysfunction.
RESULTS: The patient demographics were as follows: 114 women; median age 72 years
(range 42-95 years); BMI ≥ 25 kg/m(2), n = 32; performance status 0-1, n = 136;
stage IIIB/IV, n = 141; and major EGFR mutations, n = 171. Hepatic
dysfunction ≥grade 2 during the gefitinib therapy was observed in 44 (24.0 %)
patients, 22 (50.0 %) of whom interrupted or discontinued treatment. The median
duration from gefitinib administration to the development of hepatic dysfunction 
was 56 days (range 6-1,352 days). Overweight patients were more likely to develop
hepatic dysfunction ≥grade 2 compared to non-overweight patients according to a
multivariate analysis adjusted for several confounding factors (hazard ratio
2.24; 95 % confidence interval 1.01-4.95; p = 0.046).
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that being overweight may induce hepatic
dysfunction during gefitinib monotherapy in Japanese patients with EGFR-mutated
NSCLC.

DOI: 10.1007/s00280-016-3146-z 
PMID: 27590708  [PubMed - in process]


80. Bull Cancer. 2016 Oct;103(10):815-821. doi: 10.1016/j.bulcan.2016.06.007. Epub
2016 Sep 15.

[Osimertinib (Tagrisso(®)): Activity, indication and modality of use in non-small
cell lung cancer].

[Article in French]

Giroux Leprieur E(1), Cortot AB(2), Cadranel J(3), Wislez M(4).

Author information: 
(1)AP-HP, hôpital Ambroise-Paré, service de pneumologie et oncologie thoracique, 
9, avenue Charles-de-Gaulle, 92100 Boulogne-Billancourt, France; Université
Paris-Saclay, UVSQ, laboratoire EA4340, biomarqueurs en cancérologie et
onco-hématologie, 9, avenue Charles-de-Gaulle, 92100 Boulogne-Billancourt,
France. (2)CHU de Lille, hôpital Calmette, service de pneumologie et oncologie
thoracique, boulevard du Pr-Jules-Leclercq, 59000 Lille, France; Institut de
biologie de Lille, UMR8161, 1, rue du Pr-Calmette, BP 245, 59019 Lille cedex,
France. (3)AP-HP, hôpital Tenon, service de pneumologie, 4, rue de la Chine,
75020 Paris, France; Sorbonne universités, UPMC université Paris 06, GRC n(o) 04,
Theranoscan, 75252 Paris, France. (4)AP-HP, hôpital Tenon, service de
pneumologie, 4, rue de la Chine, 75020 Paris, France; Sorbonne universités, UPMC 
université Paris 06, GRC n(o) 04, Theranoscan, 75252 Paris, France. Electronic
address: marie.wislez@aphp.fr.

The acquisition of a resistance EGFR mutation in exon 20 (T790M) occurs in half
of the cases of secondary resistance to EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKI),
given in first-line treatment in advanced EGFR-mutated non-small cell lung
cancers (NSCLC). Osimertinib (AZD9291, Tagrisso(®)) is a third-generation,
irreversible EGFR TKI, active in case of T790M mutation. A large phase I trial
showed the efficacy of osimertinib after failure of first-generation EGFR TKI
(erlotinib, gefitinib), with response rate at 51% and up to 61% in case of T790M 
mutation. Progression-free survival was 9.6 months in case of T790M. Toxicity
profile was acceptable, with mainly digestive (diarrhea) and skin (rash) side
effects. Preliminary data from a phase II trial confirmed these efficacy and
safety data. Screening of T790M mutation at the time of progression with TKI can 
be performed in circulating tumor DNA in plasma, with good diagnostic
performances.

Copyright © 2016 Société Française du Cancer. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS.
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bulcan.2016.06.007 
PMID: 27641462  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Arch Pharm Res. 2017 Jan;40(1):96-105. doi: 10.1007/s12272-016-0848-z. Epub 2016 
Oct 21.

Chalcone-templated Hsp90 inhibitors and their effects on gefitinib resistance in 
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC).

Jeong JH(1), Oh YJ(1), Kwon TK(2), Seo YH(3).

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmacy, Keimyung University, Daegu, 704-701, Korea. (2)Department
of Immunology, School of Medicine, Keimyung University, Daegu, 704-701, Korea.
(3)College of Pharmacy, Keimyung University, Daegu, 704-701, Korea.
seoyho@kmu.ac.kr.

The molecular chaperone Hsp90 has emerged as an attractive cancer therapeutic
target due to its role in cellular homeostasis by modulating the stabilization
and maturation of many oncogenic proteins. In this study, we designed and
synthesized a series of Hsp90 inhibitors that hybridized NVP-AUY992 (2) and PU3
(3) in the chalcone scaffold using a structure-based approach. Our results
indicate that compound 1g inhibited the proliferation of gefitinib-resistant
non-small cell lung cancer (H1975) cells, downregulated the expression of client 
proteins of Hsp90 including EGFR, MET, Her2 and Akt, and up-regulated the
expression of Hsp70. The compound 1g represents a new class of Hsp90 inhibitors
with a chalcone structure. The design, synthesis, and evaluation of 1g are
described herein.

DOI: 10.1007/s12272-016-0848-z 
PMID: 27770383  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol. 2016 Dec;78(6):1305-1310. Epub 2016 Oct 21.

EGFR mutation status of paired cerebrospinal fluid and plasma samples in
EGFR mutant non-small cell lung cancer with leptomeningeal metastases.

Zhao J(1), Ye X(2), Xu Y(1), Chen M(1), Zhong W(1), Sun Y(2), Yang Z(2), Zhu
G(2), Gu Y(3), Wang M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Peking Union Medical College Hospital,
Peking Union Medical College, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, No. 1
Shuaifuyuan, Dongcheng District, Beijing, 100730, China. (2)Asia and Emerging
Markets Innovative Medicine, AstraZeneca R&D, 199 Liangjing Road, Bldg 2,
Shanghai, 201203, China. (3)Asia and Emerging Markets Innovative Medicine,
AstraZeneca R&D, 199 Liangjing Road, Bldg 2, Shanghai, 201203, China.
yi.gu@astrazeneca.com. (4)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Peking Union
Medical College Hospital, Peking Union Medical College, Chinese Academy of
Medical Sciences, No. 1 Shuaifuyuan, Dongcheng District, Beijing, 100730, China. 
mengzhaowang@sina.com.

PURPOSE: Central nervous system (CNS) is the prevalent site for metastases in
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI)-relapsed 
NSCLC patients. To understand the EGFR mutation status in paired cerebrospinal
fluid (CSF) and plasma samples after EGFR-TKI treatment failure might be useful
to guide the treatment of intra- and extracranial tumors in those patients.
METHODS: Paired CSF and plasma samples were collected from seven NSCLC patients
with CNS metastases after EGFR-TKI failure. EGFR mutations were tested by
amplification refractory mutation system (ARMS) and droplet digital PCR (ddPCR)
methods. Gefitinib concentrations were evaluated by high-performance liquid
chromatography-mass spectrometry (HPLC-MS/MS).
RESULTS: EGFR mutations were detected in all seven CSF samples, including three
of E19-Del, three of L858R and one of E19-Del&T790M by both methods. On the other
hand, majority of the matched plasma samples (5/7) were negative for EGFR
mutations by both methods. The other two plasma samples were positive for
E19-Del&T790M by ddPCR, and one of them had undetectable T790M by ARMS. Gefitinib
concentration in CSF was much lower than that in plasma (mean CSF/plasma ratio:
1.8 %).
CONCLUSIONS: After EGFR-TKI failure, majority of the NSCLC patients with CNS
metastases remained positive detection of EGFR sensitive mutations in CSF, but
much less detection in the matched plasma. Significantly low exposure of
gefitinib in CSF might explain the intracranial protection of the EGFR sensitive 
mutation positive tumor cells.

DOI: 10.1007/s00280-016-3155-y 
PMID: 27770237  [PubMed - in process]


83. Clin Lung Cancer. 2016 Nov;17(6):483-492. doi: 10.1016/j.cllc.2016.05.016. Epub
2016 Jun 8.

EGFR Testing in Advanced Non-Small-Cell Lung Cancer, A Mini-Review.

Sheikine Y(1), Rangachari D(2), McDonald DC(2), Huberman MS(2), Folch ES(3),
VanderLaan PA(4), Costa DB(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA. (2)Department of Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical
Center and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA. (3)Department of Surgery, Beth
Israel Deaconess Medical Center and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA.
(4)Department of Pathology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center and Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA. (5)Department of Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess
Medical Center and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA. Electronic address:
dbcosta@bidmc.harvard.edu.

Expert consensus guidelines have defined minimum requirements for routine testing
and identification of classical epidermal growth factor (EGFR) mutations (ie,
exon 19 deletions and exon 21 L858R substitution) and anaplastic lymphoma kinase 
(ALK) rearrangements in advanced non-small-cell lung cancers of adenocarcinoma
histology, with the intent of permitting use of these predictive biomarkers to
select patients who will derive maximal benefit from approved oral tyrosine
kinase inhibitors (TKIs) directed against EGFR and ALK, respectively. However,
the practice of precision medicine is incumbent upon optimal tumor sampling,
accurate tumor testing, and informed application of results to patient care. We
report on a brief review of EGFR testing methodologies (Sanger sequencing,
allele-specific polymerase chain reaction, and targeted next-generation
sequencing) to identify classical and other (ie, exon 18 G719X, exon 19
insertions, exon 20 insertions, exon 21 L861Q) EGFR mutations; practical
considerations (type of tissue/biopsies with different success rates of DNA
isolation, and timeliness of result-reporting to facilitate therapeutic
decision-making); role of rebiopsy (to identify mechanisms of acquired resistance
to first- and second-generation EGFR TKIs, most importantly EGFR-T790M); and
clinical vignettes highlighting the nuances of testing in day-to-day practice.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cllc.2016.05.016 
PMID: 27381270  [PubMed - in process]


84. Thorac Cancer. 2016 Sep;7(5):614-618. doi: 10.1111/1759-7714.12364. Epub 2016 Jul
4.

Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)-tyrosine kinase inhibitors combined with 
chemotherapy in first-line treatment in an advanced non-small cell lung cancer
patient with EGFR sensitive mutation.

Huang A(1), Li R(1), Zhao J(1), Wang X(1), Jin B(1), Niu Y(1), Zhang J(1), Jiang 
L(1), Han B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Shanghai Chest Hospital, Shanghai, China.

This article demonstrates a case of a lung adenocarcinoma patient in stage IV
harboring an epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) 19 exon deletion mutation
treated with 500 mg/m(2) pemetrexed and 75 mg/m(2) cisplatin on day 1, sequenced 
with 250 mg gefitinib on prescription on days 4-28 for six cycles as first-line, 
then by gefitinib combined with pemetrexed as maintenance therapy. The patient
achieved a partial response. Performance status increased from grade 2 to 1. The 
progression-free survival period was 17 months. Overall survival is now over
three years. Side effects of grade two liver dysfunction and dermal toxicity were
tolerable. Combined gefitinib with platinum-based chemotherapy as first-line
treatment probably benefits non-small cell cancer patients in stage IV harboring 
sensitive EGFR gene mutations with a better local control rate, longer survival, 
and tolerable side effects.

© 2016 The Authors. Thoracic Cancer published by China Lung Oncology Group and
John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/1759-7714.12364 
PMID: 27766772  [PubMed - in process]


85. Oncotarget. 2016 Oct 18. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.12741. [Epub ahead of print]

A phase II open-label multicenter study of gefitinib in combination with
irradiation followed by chemotherapy in patients with inoperable stage III
non-small cell lung cancer.

Levy A(1,)(2,)(3), Bardet E(4), Lacas B(5,)(6), Pignon JP(5,)(6), Adam J(7),
Lacroix L(7), Artignan X(8,)(9), Verrelle P(10), Le Péchoux C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Gustave Roussy, Université Paris-Saclay,
Institut Thoracique d'Oncologie (IOT), Villejuif, France. (2)INSERM U1030,
Molecular Radiotherapy, Gustave Roussy, Université Paris-Saclay, Villejuif,
France. (3)Univ Paris Sud, Université Paris-Saclay, Le Kremlin-Bicêtre, France.
(4)Department of Medical Oncology, Institut de Cancérologie de l'Ouest, Nantes,
France. (5)Gustave Roussy, Université Paris-Saclay, Department of Biostatistics
and Epidemiology, Villejuif, France. (6)INSERM U1018, CESP, Université Paris-Sud,
Université Paris-Saclay, Villejuif, France. (7)Department of Medical Biology and 
Pathology, Translational Research Laboratory and Biobank (UMS3655 CNRS / US23
INSERM), INSERM Unit U981, Villejuif, France. (8)Department of Radiation
Oncology, University Hospital Grenoble, Grenoble, France. (9)Department of
Radiation Oncology, St Grégoire Hospital, St Grégoire, France. (10)Department of 
Radiation Oncology, Centre Jean Perrin, Clermont-Ferrand, France.

BACKGROUND: Gefitinib is an oral EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors which may act as
a radiosensitizer.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: This phase II study evaluated the efficacy of gefitinib 250
mg once daily in combination with thoracic radiotherapy (66 Gy in 6.5 weeks, 2
Gy/day, 5 fractions/week) followed by consolidation chemotherapy (IV cisplatin
and vinorelbine) as first line treatment in a population of unselected stage IIIB
NSCLC patients according to EGFR mutation status.
RESULTS: Due to a low accrual rate in this study, the sample size (n = 50) was
not reached. Sixteen patients were included in four centers, 50% had
adenocarcinoma and 75% were male. Genomic alterations (7 patients studied)
retrieved TP53 mutation in 2 patients and no EGFR mutation. Four weeks after
radiotherapy, 3 patients (19%) had a partial response, 6 (38%) had a stable
disease, and 7 had a progression (44%). Median overall survival was 11 months and
median progression-free survival was 5 months. At the time of the last contact, 5
patients (31%) were still alive. Main toxicities were gastrointestinal (81%),
cutaneous (81%), general (56%), and respiratory (50%). There were 12>G3 adverse
events in 7 (47%) patients, and there was one toxic-death during the concomitant 
period due to an interstitial pneumonitis. There were two possible adverse
events-related deaths during the chemotherapy period (pulmonary embolism (n = 1) 
and sudden death after the administration of the 3rd course of chemotherapy (n = 
1)).
CONCLUSION: The benefit of Gefitinib-RT could not be confirmed due to premature
trial discontinuation. Further evaluation is required, especially in patients
with EGFR mutated NSCLC.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.12741 
PMID: 27764781  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


86. Med Oncol. 2016 Nov;33(11):129. Epub 2016 Oct 18.

Survival of patients with brain metastases from non-small cell lung cancer
harboring EGFR mutations treated with epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine
kinase inhibitors.

Kashima J(1), Okuma Y(2,)(3), Miwa M(1), Hosomi Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Oncology and Respiratory Medicine, Tokyo Metropolitan
Cancer and Infectious diseases Center Komagome Hospital, Honkomagome 3-18-22,
Bunkyo, Tokyo, 113-8677, Japan. (2)Department of Thoracic Oncology and
Respiratory Medicine, Tokyo Metropolitan Cancer and Infectious diseases Center
Komagome Hospital, Honkomagome 3-18-22, Bunkyo, Tokyo, 113-8677, Japan.
y-okuma@cick.jp. (3)Division of Oncology, Research Center for Medical Sciences,
Jikei University School of Medicine, Nishi-Shinbashi 3-25-8, Minato, Tokyo,
105-8461, Japan. y-okuma@cick.jp.

Brain metastases (BM) is one of the most crucial distant metastases in patients
with non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) harboring epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR) mutations. There is no consensus about which EGFR tyrosine kinase
inhibitor (TKI) is most effective against BM in such patients. Here, we compared 
prognoses of patients with EGFR-TKI naïve EGFR-positive BM treated with erlotinib
or gefitinib after BM diagnosis. Of 269 patients with NSCLC treated with
EGFR-TKIs at a single institution, we reviewed medical records of 205 patients
with documented EGFR mutations. Eleven patients were administered erlotinib, and 
52 patients were administered gefitinib as the first-line EGFR-TKI treatment
after diagnosis. We used propensity score matching to balance patient backgrounds
between groups, and the log-rank test to compare survival curves. Patients with
BM at the induction of chemotherapy had a poorer prognosis than those without BM 
[median overall survival (OS) 18.5 vs. 28.0 months]. Meanwhile, there was no
significant difference in OS between those with or without BM at the initiation
of EGFR-TKI treatment (20.3 vs. 23.8 months). Median OS of patients treated with 
erlotinib was not significantly longer than that of patients treated with
gefitinib (25.0 vs. 18.1 months). The presence of BM at the initiation of
EGFR-TKI treatment had no apparent effect on survival. Erlotinib was deemed more 
effective than gefitinib in preventing intracranial lesions and prolonging
survival; however, prospective studies are needed to confirm these results.

DOI: 10.1007/s12032-016-0843-8 
PMID: 27757781  [PubMed - in process]


87. Curr Med Res Opin. 2016 Nov;32(11):1839-1848. Epub 2016 Aug 11.

The strange connection between epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase
inhibitors and dapsone: from rash mitigation to the increase in anti-tumor
activity.

Boccellino M(1), Quagliuolo L(1), Alaia C(1), Grimaldi A(1), Addeo R(2),
Nicoletti GF(3), Kast RE(4), Caraglia M(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Biochemistry, Biophysics and General Pathology , Second
University of Naples , Naples , Italy. (2)b Oncology DH ASL Napoli 3 Nord,
Frattamaggiore Hospital , Frattamaggiore , Naples , Italy. (3)c Medical-Surgical 
and Dental Specialities, Second University of Naples , Naples , Italy. (4)d
IIAIGC Study Center , VT , USA.

The presence of an aberrantly activated epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)
in many epithelial tumors, due to its overexpression, activating mutations, gene 
amplification and/or overexpression of receptor ligands, represent the
fundamental basis underlying the use of EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors
(EGFR-TKIs). Drugs inhibiting the EGFR have different mechanisms of action; while
erlotinib and gefitinib inhibit the intracellular tyrosine kinase, monoclonal
antibodies like cetuximab and panitumumab bind the extracellular domain of the
EGFR both activating immunomediated anti-cancer effect and inhibiting receptor
function. On the other hand, interleukin-8 has tumor promoting as well as
neo-angiogenesis enhancing effects and several attempts have been made to inhibit
its activity. One of these is based on the use of the old sulfone antibiotic
dapsone that has demonstrated several interleukin-8 system inhibiting actions.
Erlotinib typically gives a rash that has recently been proven to come out via
up-regulated keratinocyte interleukin-8 synthesis with histological features
reminiscent of typical neutrophilic dermatoses. In this review, we report
experimental evidence that shows the use of dapsone to improve quality of life in
erlotinib-treated patients by ameliorating rash as well as short-circuiting a
growth-enhancing aspect of erlotinib based on increased interleukin-8 secretion.

DOI: 10.1080/03007995.2016.1211522 
PMID: 27398628  [PubMed - in process]


88. Oncol Rep. 2016 Dec;36(6):3529-3535. doi: 10.3892/or.2016.5149. Epub 2016 Oct 5.

microRNA-520a-3p inhibits proliferation and cancer stem cell phenotype by
targeting HOXD8 in non-small cell lung cancer.

Liu Y(1), Miao L(1), Ni R(1), Zhang H(1), Li L(2), Wang X(2), Li X(2), Wang J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, The First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou
University, Zhengzhou, Henan 450052, P.R. China. (2)Department of Oncology
Medicine, The First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, Henan
450052, P.R. China.

Formation of cancer stem cells (CSCs) and increased cells proliferation are
involved in tumorigenesis, tumour recurrence and therapy resistance and microRNA 
is essential for the development of the biological traits of CSCs and the
increased cells proliferation. Studying molecular mechanism of tumorigenesis,
tumour recurrence and therapy resistance of lung cancer will help us to further
understand the pathogenesis and progression of the disease and offer new targets 
for effective therapies. In the present study, we found that miR-520a-3p
expression is downregulated in NSCLC (non-small cell lung cancer) and SCLC (small
cell lung cancer). miR-520a-3p can inhibit proliferation and cancer stem cell
phenotype in NSCLC and SCLC cells. Overexpressing miR-520a-3p can degrade HOXD8
mRNA in NSCLC cells, but its overexpression cannot suppress HOXD8 in SCLC cells. 
HOXD8 protein is upregulated in NSCLC tissues and its overexpression can promote 
proliferation, formation of cancer stem cells, migration and invasion in NSCLC
cells. MET amplification plays a pivotal role in gefitinib resistance in lung
cancer. We found that miR-520a-3p can downregulate MET protein expression and
HOXD8 can upregulate MET protein expression. Thus, we concluded that
microRNA-520a-3p inhibits proliferation and cancer stem cell phenotype by
targeting HOXD8 in NSCLC cells and restoration of microRNA-520a-3p might be a
therapeutic strategy to reverse gefitinib resistance.

DOI: 10.3892/or.2016.5149 
PMID: 27748920  [PubMed - in process]


89. Respir Med Case Rep. 2016 Sep 30;19:137-139. eCollection 2016.

A long-term survivor of non-small-cell lung cancer harboring concomitant EGFR
mutation and ALK translocation.

Imamura F(1), Inoue T(1), Kimura M(1), Nishino K(1), Kumagai T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Oncology, Osaka Medical Center for Cancer and
Cardiovascular Diseases, Osaka, Japan.

In January 2003, a 55-year old, non-smoking woman visited our hospital to undergo
treatment for T4N0M0 pulmonary adenocarcinoma of the left lung. Until death in
October 2015, she received over 20 lines of treatment including a second line
therapy with gefitinib, which showed long response. In March 2014, she noticed
the left axillar lymph node swelling. Aspiration cytology of the lymph node
revealed the presence of adenocarcinoma harboring EGFR exon 19 deletion (Ex19del)
but not T790M. Concomitant ALK translocation of variant 1 was also detected.
Crizotinib and alectinib showed marked decrease of serum CEA value from 731.9 to 
122.2 and moderate radiologic response. In contrast, both Ex19del and T790M, but 
not ALK translocation, were detected in the metastasis to the left anterior chest
wall.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmcr.2016.09.002 
PMCID: PMC5053035
PMID: 27747151  [PubMed - in process]


90. Expert Rev Mol Diagn. 2016 Dec;16(12):1251-1257. Epub 2016 Oct 27.

Profile of the therascreen® EGFR RGQ PCR kit as a companion diagnostic for
gefitinib in non-small cell lung cancer.

Hsiue EH(1), Lee JH(1,)(2,)(3,)(4), Lin CC(1,)(3,)(4,)(5), Yang
JC(1,)(2,)(3,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Oncology , National Taiwan University Hospital , Taipei ,
Taiwan. (2)b Department of Medical Research , National Taiwan University Hospital
, Taipei , Taiwan. (3)c Graduate Institute of Oncology , National Taiwan
University College of Medicine , Taipei , Taiwan. (4)d National Taiwan University
Cancer Center , Taipei , Taiwan. (5)e Department of Urology , National Taiwan
University Hospital , Taipei , Taiwan.

INTRODUCTION: Gefitinib is recently approved by the US Food and Drug
Administration as a first-line treatment for non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
patients harboring EGFR mutations. The therascreen® EGFR RGQ PCR Kit is approved 
as a companion diagnostic to select patients with EGFR exon 19 deletions and
L858R mutation for treatment with gefitinib. Areas covered: This article reviews 
the methods for detecting EGFR mutations, the technology and indication of the
therascreen® kit, and the clinical utility of the assay in phase 3 and phase 4
clinical trials. Studies that compared the performance of the therascreen® kit
with other assays and assessed the kit's application in non-tissue samples are
also discussed. Expert commentary: The therascreen® kit is a highly sensitive
real-time polymerase chain reaction test that provides standardised testing and
automated interpretation of EGFR mutation status in formalin-fixed,
paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissue samples. Although not indicated for these
applications, the test has also shown utility in detecting uncommon sensitizing
EGFR mutations as well as mutations in non-tissue samples.

DOI: 10.1080/14737159.2016.1248414 
PMID: 27737606  [PubMed - in process]


91. Oncol Res. 2016;24(5):295-303.

Anexelekto (AXL) Increases Resistance to EGFR-TKI and Activation of AKT and
ERK1/2 in Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer Cells.

Tian Y(1), Zhang Z, Miao L, Yang Z, Yang J, Wang Y, Qian D, Cai H, Wang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Drum Tower Hospital Affiliated to Medical 
School of Nanjing University, Nanjing, China.

Recently, epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors (EGFR-TKIs)
have revolutionized non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) treatment. However,
resistance remains a major obstacle. Anexelekto (AXL) is a member of receptor
tyrosine kinases (RTKs) and shares the same downstream signaling pathways with
EGFR, such as PI3K/AKT and MAPK/ERK. AXL overexpression in resistant tumors has
been implicated in many previous studies in vitro and in vivo. In this study, we 
further examined whether expression of AXL and its downstream targets increased
in gefitinib-resistant PC9 cells (PC9GR). In addition, we hypothesize that
knocking down AXL in PC9GR and overexpressing AXL in PC9 using genetic tools can 
restore and decrease the sensitivity to gefitinib, respectively. We found that
silencing AXL could sensitize the resistance to gefitinib, and the downstream
pathways were significantly inhibited. Interestingly, we also discovered that
increased AXL expression did promote the resistance, and its downstream targets
were activated accordingly. Then 69 NSCLC patients who harbored EGFR mutation
were recruited to analyze the expression of AXL and the association between AXL
expression and clinical characteristics. We found that 5 of the 69 patients were 
AXL positive (about 7%), and AXL was related to tumor differentiation and tumor
size. In this study, we concluded that the molecular mechanisms of AXL mediated
resistance involved in the increased activity of the PI3K/AKT and MAPK/ERK1/2
pathways, and AXL overexpression could promote resistance, but it can be weakened
when AXL expression is silenced.

DOI: 10.3727/096504016X14648701447814 
PMID: 27712586  [PubMed - in process]


92. Oncol Res Treat. 2016;39(10):605-614. Epub 2016 Sep 15.

Survival Outcomes in EGFR Mutation-Positive Lung Cancer Patients Treated with
Gefitinib until or beyond Progression.

Moiseyenko FV(1), Moiseyenko VM, Aleksakhina SN, Chubenko VA, Volkov NM, Kozyreva
KS, Kramchaninov MM, Zhuravlev AS, Shelekhova KV, Ivantsov AO, Venina AR,
Preobrazhenskaya EV, Mitiushkina NV, Iyevleva AG, Imyanitov EN.

Author information: 
(1)City Cancer Center, St.-Petersburg, Russia.

BACKGROUND: Discontinuation of gefitinib treatment is often accompanied by a
disease flare. Some studies have demonstrated a benefit of the use of epidermal
growth factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKI) beyond
progression; however, long-term results of these investigations remain limited.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We observed 70 patients with EGFR-mutated (EGFR-M+)
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) receiving single-agent gefitinib in a routine 
clinical setting; 56 patients were experiencing RECIST progression at the time of
the analysis.
RESULTS: There was a significant increase (p = 0.00001) in overall survival (OS) 
in patients continuing on gefitinib beyond progression (n = 21; median duration
of continued gefitinib use: 4.2 months; median OS: not reached; expected OS: 29.7
months) as compared to those who stopped gefitinib treatment upon disease
progression (n = 35; median OS: 14.0 months). The association between extended
gefitinib use and improved OS remained true in multivariate Cox regression
analysis (hazard ratio = 4.49, 95% confidence interval 1.25-16.09; p = 0.021).
Patient selection bias constitutes an essential limitation of this clinical
observational study, given that patients with a more favorable disease course
and/or high initial tumor sensitivity to TKI treatment were more likely to be
considered for prolonged gefitinib use.
CONCLUSION: This study confirms that continued administration of gefitinib beyond
progression is a viable treatment option for some patients with EGFR-M+ NSCLC, in
particular those who cannot be rescued by novel EGFR mutation-specific inhibitors
such as osimertinib.

© 2016 S. Karger GmbH, Freiburg.

DOI: 10.1159/000449024 
PMID: 27710972  [PubMed - in process]


93. Mol Clin Oncol. 2016 Oct;5(4):488-490. Epub 2016 Aug 4.

Successful treatment of non-small-cell lung cancer with afatinib and a
glucocorticoid following gefitinib- and erlotinib-induced interstitial lung
disease: A case report.

Tani T(1), Naoki K(2), Asakura T(1), Hirano T(1), Suzuki S(1), Masuzawa K(1),
Hasegawa H(1), Kuroda A(1), Yasuda H(1), Ishii M(1), Soejima K(1), Betsuyaku
T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary Medicine, Department of Medicine, Keio University School
of Medicine, Shinjuku, Tokyo 160-8582, Japan. (2)Cancer Center, Keio University
School of Medicine, Shinjuku, Tokyo 160-8582, Japan.

Epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor (EGFR-TKI)-induced
interstitial lung disease (ILD) may be a life-threatening condition that may
develop during treatment of lung cancer patients harboring EGFR mutations. We
herein present the case of a 41-year-old female patient diagnosed with lung
adenocarcinoma with an EGFR mutation (exon 19 deletion). The patient was treated 
with gefitinib followed by erlotinib and developed ILD induced by both EGFR-TKIs;
furthermore, the patient acquired resistance to EGFR-TKI treatment. A repeat
biopsy revealed a T790M mutation, which is associated with resistance to
first-generation EGFR-TKIs, along with an exon 19 deletion identified by cytology
of the pleural fluid. Treatment with afatinib and prednisolone resulted in tumor 
shrinkage, without worsening of the ILD. The present case demonstrated that
combination treatment with afatinib and a glucocorticoid may be effective for the
treatment of lung cancer patients who develop EGFR-TKI-induced ILD.

DOI: 10.3892/mco.2016.981 
PMCID: PMC5038222
PMID: 27699048  [PubMed]


94. J Pharmacopuncture. 2016 Sep;19(3):259-263.

Combination Therapy of Gefitinib and Korean Herbal Medicines Could be a
Beneficial Option for Patients with Non-Small-Cell Lung Cancer.

Lee K(1), Kim YS(2), Son CG(3), Cho JH(3), Yoo HS(4), Lee J(5), Ryu J(1), Lee
N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Oncology, Cheonan Korean Medical Hospital, Daejeon
University, Daejeon, Korea; Department of Internal Medicine, Cheonan Korean
Medical Hospital, Daejeon University, Daejeon, Korea. (2)Department of Internal
Medicine, Cheonan Korean Medical Hospital, Daejeon University, Daejeon, Korea.
(3)Liver and Immunology Research Center, Daejeon Korean Medical Hospital, Daejeon
University, Daejeon, Korea. (4)East West Cancer Center, Dunsan Korean Medical
Hospital, Daejeon University, Daejeon, Korea. (5)Department of Integrative Cancer
Center, Woosuk Korean Medicine Hospital, Woosuk University, Jeonju, Korea.

ABSTRACT:
ABSTRACT: Lung cancer has a high mortality rate and is often diagnosed at the
metastatic stage. Gefitinib is a targeted molecular therapeutic drug used to
treat patients with non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Korean herbal medicines
may also have therapeutic efficacy against lung cancer, reduce the side effects
associated with chemotherapy, and improve patient quality of life (QOL). This
case report describes the effects of a Korean herbal medicine regimen combined
with gefitinib in a patient with NSCLC and bone metastasis. The Korean herbal
medicine regimen included woohwanggeosa-dan, hwanggibujeong-dan and
geonchilgyebok-jeong. The computed tomography (CT) findings showed that following
combination treatment, the size of the tumor was markedly decreased without
serious adverse events. Moreover, the Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG)
performance status was improved and cancer-related pain was decreased. These
results suggest that a combination of Korean herbal medicines and gefitinib may
be an effective therapeutic option for patients with advanced NSCLC and bone
metastasis. Further studies are needed to examine the mechanism and the clinical 
efficacy of Korean herbal medicines against NSCLC. Lung cancer has a high
mortality rate and is often diagnosed at the metastatic stage. Gefitinib is a
targeted molecular therapeutic drug used to treat patients with non-small-cell
lung cancer (NSCLC). Korean herbal medicines may also have therapeutic efficacy
against lung cancer, reduce the side effects associated with chemotherapy, and
improve patient quality of life (QOL). This case report describes the effects of 
a Korean herbal medicine regimen combined with gefitinib in a patient with NSCLC 
and bone metastasis. The Korean herbal medicine regimen included
woohwanggeosa-dan, hwanggibujeong-dan and geonchilgyebok-jeong. The computed
tomography (CT) findings showed that following combination treatment, the size of
the tumor was markedly decreased without serious adverse events. Moreover, the
Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) performance status was improved and
cancer-related pain was decreased. These results suggest that a combination of
Korean herbal medicines and gefitinib may be an effective therapeutic option for 
patients with advanced NSCLC and bone metastasis. Further studies are needed to
examine the mechanism and the clinical efficacy of Korean herbal medicines
against NSCLC.

DOI: 10.3831/KPI.2016.19.028 
PMCID: PMC5043091
PMID: 27695636  [PubMed - in process]


95. Oncotarget. 2016 Nov 8;7(45):73188-73199. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.12283.

MiR-128 reverses the gefitinib resistance of the lung cancer stem cells by
inhibiting the c-met/PI3K/AKT pathway.

Jiang J(1), Feng X(2), Zhou W(1), Wu Y(1), Yang Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Geriatrics, First Affiliated Hospital, School of Medicine,
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310003, China. (2)Division of Hepatobiliary and
Pancreatic Surgery, Department of Surgery, First Affiliated Hospital, School of
Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310003, China.

Gefitinib is a first line anti-tumor drug used for the treatment of patients with
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) harboring EGFR mutations. However, the drug
resistance to gefitinib limits its clinical application. Here, we observed the
CSCs of PC9 are obviously resistant to gefitinib compared with the non-CSCs.
Furthermore, we found the gefitinib failed to suppress the PI3K/AKT pathway in
the PC9-CSCs. Mechanically, we showed significant down-regulation of miR-128 in
the PC9-CSCs compared with the non-CSCs. Overexpression of miR-128 significantly 
increased the sensitivity of PC9-CSCs to gefitinib-induced apoptosis. In
addition, the gene of c-met was proved to be directly inhibited by miR-128.
Enforced expression of c-met could "rescue" the miR-128 promoted apoptosis and
cleavage of caspases in PC9-CSCs treated with gefitinib. Thus, these results
indicate that the miR-128/c-met pathway enhances the gefitinib sensitivity of the
lung cancer stem cells by suppressing the PI3K/AKT pathway.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.12283 
PMID: 27690301  [PubMed - in process]


96. Contemp Oncol (Pozn). 2016;20(4):320-6. doi: 10.5114/wo.2016.61853. Epub 2016 Sep
5.

Interferon-α reduces the gefitinib sensitivity of human non-small cell lung
cancer.

Pan C(1), Weng S(2), Duan Y(3), Ding L(2), Zhang S(3), Huang J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Institute, School of Medicine, Zhejiang University, HangZhou, PR China.
(2)Medical Oncology, The Second Affiliated Hospital, School of Medicine, Zhejiang
University, HangZhou, PR China. (3)Cancer Institute, The Second Affiliated
Hospital, School of Medicine, Zhejiang University, HangZhou, PR China.

AIM OF THE STUDY: Many studies have shown that interferon-α (IFN-α) enhances the 
antiproliferative effect of gefitinib in some solid tumours. We aimed to
determine the effect of combining IFN-α with gefitinib in human non-small cell
lung cancer (NSCLC) cell lines (A549, H1299, HCC827) with different EGFR and
K-Ras gene statuses.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: An MTT assay was used to assess cell proliferation.
Apoptosis was detected by an Annexin V/propidium iodide assay using flow
cytometry, and western blotting was used to determine the expression of epidermal
growth factor receptor/phosphorylated epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR/p-EGFR) and signal transducers and activators of transcription
3/phosphorylated signal transducers and activators of transcription 3
(STAT3/p-STAT3).
RESULTS: There was an additive interaction when gefitinib was combined with IFN-α
in all cell lines; however, there was antagonism when gefitinib followed IFN-α
pretreatment in three cell lines. Notably, IFN-α pretreatment significantly
reduced the gefitinib sensitivity of HCC827 cells. Surprisingly, while IFN-α
inhibited STAT3 phosphorylation in cell lines, gefitinib could do so.
CONCLUSIONS: The results might confirm the hypothesis that IFN-α induces
gefitinib sensitivity of NSCLC, and IFN-α inhibits phosphorylation of STAT3,
which may be dependent on EGFR signal activation playing a role in the reduction 
of gefitinib sensitivity after IFN-α treatment in NSCLC cell lines.

DOI: 10.5114/wo.2016.61853 
PMCID: PMC5032161
PMID: 27688730  [PubMed]


97. Medicine (Baltimore). 2016 Sep;95(39):e4830. doi: 10.1097/MD.0000000000004830.

Rapid onset of radiation maculopathy after whole-brain radiation therapy: A case 
report.

Hsu CR(1), Tai MC, Chang YH, Chien KH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Tri-Service General Hospital, National Defense
Medical Center, Taipei, Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: Radiation maculopathy is a phenomenon that occurs after radiation
exposure. The rapid onset of unilateral macular atrophy without peripheral
retinopathy after radiation has rarely been described.
METHODS: A case report and literature review.
RESULTS: We report a case of stage 4 non-small cell lung cancer under targeted
therapy using Gefitinib who presented with severely impaired visual acuity
related to rapid onset of unilateral macular atrophy and diminished photoreceptor
inner segment/outer segment (IS/OS) junction 1 month after whole-brain radiation 
therapy. The fundus fluorescein angiography revealed an enlarged diamond-shaped
clear-cut foveal avascular zone in the macula without peripheral retinal vascular
changes that differed from typical radiation retinopathy. We confirmed the
diagnosis by evaluating the total radiation dosage and by excluding target
therapy-induced maculopathy based on a review of the medical literature.
CONCLUSION: Current therapeutic interventions for macular atrophy after radiation
therapy remain a challenge. Vasodilators or antiplatelet medication may be
beneficial; however, long-term follow-up is needed. Further studies are required 
to support the use of early aggressive therapy for the prevention of radiation
retinopathy.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000004830 
PMCID: PMC5265908
PMID: 27684815  [PubMed - in process]


98. J Thorac Oncol. 2016 Oct;11(10S):S203-S204. doi: 10.1016/j.jtho.2016.08.056. Epub
2016 Sep 22.

P1.34: First-Line Afatinib vs Gefitinib for Patients With EGFR Mutation-Positive 
Non-Small-Cell Lung Cancer: The LUX-Lung 7 Trial: Track: Advanced NSCLC.

Aix SP(1), Park K(2), Tan EH(3), O'Byrne K(4), Zhang L(5), Boyer M(6), Mok T(7), 
Hirsh V(8), Chih-Hsin Yang J(9), Märten A(10), Paz-Ares L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centro Nacional Investigaciones Oncológicas (cnio), Oncosur, Hospital 12 de
Octubre, Madrid/SPAIN. (2)Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University School 
of Medicine, Seoul/KOREA, REPUBLIC OF. (3)National Cancer Centre,
Singapore/SINGAPORE. (4)Translational Research Institute, Princess Alexandra
Hospital and Queensland University of Technology, Brisbane/QLD/AUSTRALIA.
(5)Cancer Center of Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou/CHINA. (6)Chris O'Brien
Lifehouse, Camperdown/NSW/AUSTRALIA. (7)Department pf Clinical Oncology, State
Key Laboratory of South China, Hong Kong Cancer Institute, The Chinese University
of Hong Kong, Hong Kong/CHINA. (8)Faculty of Medicine, McGill University,
Montreal/QC/CANADA. (9)Department of Oncology, National Taiwan University
Hospital and National Taiwan University, Taipei/TAIWAN. (10)Ta Oncology,
Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma GmbH & Co. KG, Ingelheim am Rhein/GERMANY.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jtho.2016.08.056 
PMID: 27676520  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


99. J Investig Med. 2017 Jan;65(1):72-81. doi: 10.1136/jim-2016-000252. Epub 2016 Sep
23.

EGFR gene copy number as a predictive/biomarker for patients with non-small-cell 
lung cancer receiving tyrosine kinase inhibitor treatment: a systematic review
and meta-analysis.

Zhang X(1), Zhang Y(2), Tang H(3), He J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Guangzhou Institute of Respiratory Disease and
China State Key Laboratory of Respiratory Disease, The First Affiliated Hospital 
of Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, China. (2)Department of Preventive
Medicine Grade 2015, College of Public Hygiene of Guangzhou Medical University,
Guangzhou, China. (3)Department of Transformation Laboratory, The First
Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, China.

Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) gene copy number has been proposed as a
candidate biomarker for predicting treatment response to EGFR tyrosine kinase
inhibitors (EGFR-TKIs) in patients with advanced non-small-cell lung cancer
(NSCLC). MEDLINE, PubMed, Cochrane, and Google Scholar databases were searched
until October 21, 2015 using the following search terms: lung neoplasms/lung
cancer/non-small cell lung cancer/NSCLC, EGFR, gene amplification, copy number,
erlotinib, gefitinib, tyrosine-kinase inhibitor/TKI, predictor. 17 studies were
included in the analysis with a total of 2047 patients. The overall analysis
found that increased EGFR gene copy number was associated with higher overall
response rate (ORR), overall survival (OS) and progression-free survival (PFS; p 
values ≤0.008) compared with patients without a high EGFR gene copy number.
Subgroup analysis found that in a population of patients who were primarily
Caucasian, a higher EGFR gene copy number was also associated with increased ORR,
OS, and PFS (p values ≤0.018). The results were similar in a population of Asian 
patients, except that a higher EGFR gene copy number was not associated with
improved OS (p=0.248). Sensitivity analysis indicated that no one study overly
influenced the results and that the findings are robust. The result of the
analysis found that EGFR gene copy number was associated with increased OS and
PFS, supporting the idea that EGFR gene copy number is a biomarker for response
to EGFR-TKI therapy in patients with advanced NSCLC.

Copyright © 2016 American Federation for Medical Research.

DOI: 10.1136/jim-2016-000252 
PMID: 27664271  [PubMed - in process]


100. Clin Cancer Res. 2016 Sep 23. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-16-1179. [Epub ahead of 
print]

AZ1366: An Inhibitor of Tankyrase and the Canonical Wnt Pathway that Limits the
Persistence of Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer Cells Following EGFR Inhibition.

Scarborough HA(1), Helfrich BA(2), Casás-Selves M(1), Schuller AG(3), Grosskurth 
SE(3), Kim J(2), Tan AC(2), Chan DC(2), Zhang Z(2), Zaberezhnyy V(1), Bunn PA(2),
DeGregori J(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics. (2)Division of Medical
Oncology, University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus (AMC), Aurora, Colorado.
(3)AstraZeneca R&D, Boston, Massachusetts. (4)Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Genetics. james.degregori@ucdenver.edu.

PURPOSE: The emergence of EGFR inhibitors such as gefitinib, erlotinib, and
osimertinib has provided novel treatment opportunities in EGFR-driven non-small
cell lung cancer (NSCLC). However, most patients with EGFR-driven cancers treated
with these inhibitors eventually relapse. Recent efforts have identified the
canonical Wnt pathway as a mechanism of protection from EGFR inhibition and that 
inhibiting tankyrase, a key player in this pathway, is a potential therapeutic
strategy for the treatment of EGFR-driven tumors.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We performed a preclinical evaluation of tankyrase inhibitor
AZ1366 in combination with multiple EGFR-inhibitors across NSCLC lines,
characterizing its antitumor activity, impingement on canonical Wnt signaling,
and effects on gene expression. We performed pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic 
profiling of AZ1366 in mice and evaluated its therapeutic activity in an
orthotopic NSCLC model.
RESULTS: In combination with EGFR inhibitors, AZ1366 synergistically suppressed
proliferation of multiple NSCLC lines and amplified global transcriptional
changes brought about by EGFR inhibition. Its ability to work synergistically
with EGFR inhibition coincided with its ability to modulate the canonical Wnt
pathway. Pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic profiling of AZ1366-treated
orthotopic tumors demonstrated clinically relevant serum drug levels and
intratumoral target inhibition. Finally, coadministration of an EGFR inhibitor
and AZ1366 provided better tumor control and improved survival for Wnt-responsive
lung cancers in an orthotopic mouse model.
CONCLUSIONS: Tankyrase inhibition is a potent route of tumor control in
EGFR-dependent NSCLC with confirmed dependence on canonical Wnt signaling. These 
data strongly support further evaluation of tankyrase inhibition as a cotreatment
strategy with EGFR inhibition in an identifiable subset of EGFR-driven NSCLC.
Clin Cancer Res; 1-11. ©2016 AACR.

©2016 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-16-1179 
PMID: 27663586  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


101. Onco Targets Ther. 2016 Sep 6;9:5461-73. doi: 10.2147/OTT.S94745. eCollection
2016.

Next-generation EGFR/HER tyrosine kinase inhibitors for the treatment of patients
with non-small-cell lung cancer harboring EGFR mutations: a review of the
evidence.

Wang X(1), Goldstein D(2), Crowe PJ(1), Yang JL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery; Sarcoma and Nanooncology Group, Adult Cancer Program,
Lowy Cancer Research Centre. (2)Department of Medical Oncology, Prince of Wales
Clinical School, Faculty of Medicine, University of New South Wales, Sydney, NSW,
Australia.

Tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) against human epidermal growth factor receptor 
(EGFR/HER) family have been introduced into the clinic to treat cancers,
particularly non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC). There have been three
generations of the EGFR/HER-TKIs. First-generation EGFR/HER-TKIs, binding
competitively and reversibly to the ATP-binding site of the EGFR TK domain, show 
a significant breakthrough treatment in selected NSCLC patients with activating
EGFR mutations (actEGFRm) EGFR (L858R) and EGFR (Del19), in terms of safety,
efficacy, and quality of life. However, all those responders inevitably develop
acquired resistance within 12 months, because of the EGFR (T790M) mutation, which
prevents TKI binding to ATP-pocket of EGFR by steric hindrance. The
second-generation EGFR/HER-TKIs were developed to prolong and maintain more
potent response as well as overcome the resistance to the first-generation
EGFR/HER-TKIs. They are different from the first-generation EGFR/HER-TKIs by
covalently binding to the ATP-binding site, irreversibly blocking enzymatic
activation, and targeting EGFR/HER family members, including EGFR, HER2, and
HER4. Preclinically, these compounds inhibit the enzymatic activation for
actEGFRm, EGFR (T790M), and wtEGFR. The second-generation EGFR/HER-TKIs improve
overall survival in cancer patients with actEGFRm in a modest way. However, they 
are not clinically active in overcoming EGFR (T790M) resistance, mainly because
of dose-limiting toxicity due to simultaneous inhibition against wtEGFR. The
third-generation EGFR/HER-TKIs selectively and irreversibly target EGFR (T790M)
and actEGFRm while sparing wtEGFR. They yield promising efficacy in NSCLC
patients with actEGFRm as well as EGFR (T790M) resistant to the first- and
second-generation EGFR-TKIs. They also appear to have a lower incidence of
toxicity due to the reduced inhibitory effect on wtEGFR. Currently, the
first-generation EGFR/HER-TKIs gefitinib and erlotinib and second-generation
EGFR/HER-TKI afatinib have been approved for use as the first-line treatment of
metastatic NSCLC with actEGFRm. This review will summarize and evaluate a broad
range of evidence of recent development of EGFR/HER-TKIs, with a focus on the
second- and third-generation EGFR/HER-TKIs, in the treatment of patients with
NSCLC harboring EGFR mutations.

DOI: 10.2147/OTT.S94745 
PMCID: PMC5021053
PMID: 27660463  [PubMed]


102. Sci Rep. 2016 Sep 22;6:33949. doi: 10.1038/srep33949.

Identification of gefitinib off-targets using a structure-based systems biology
approach; their validation with reverse docking and retrospective data mining.

Verma N(1), Rai AK(1), Kaushik V(1), Brünnert D(2), Chahar KR(1), Pandey J(1),
Goyal P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, School of Life Sciences, Central University of
Rajasthan, Bandarsindri, NH-8, Kishangarh, Ajmer, Rajasthan 305 817 India.
(2)Comprehensive Cancer Center Mainfranken, University Hospital of Würzburg,
Versbacher Str. 5, D-97078, Würzburg, Germany.

Gefitinib, an EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor, is used as FDA approved drug in
breast cancer and non-small cell lung cancer treatment. However, this drug has
certain side effects and complications for which the underlying molecular
mechanisms are not well understood. By systems biology based in silico analysis, 
we identified off-targets of gefitinib that might explain side effects of this
drugs. The crystal structure of EGFR-gefitinib complex was used for binding
pocket similarity searches on a druggable proteome database (Sc-PDB) by using
IsoMIF Finder. The top 128 hits of putative off-targets were validated by reverse
docking approach. The results showed that identified off-targets have efficient
binding with gefitinib. The identified human specific off-targets were confirmed 
and further analyzed for their links with biological process and clinical disease
pathways using retrospective studies and literature mining, respectively.
Noticeably, many of the identified off-targets in this study were reported in
previous high-throughput screenings. Interestingly, the present study reveals
that gefitinib may have positive effects in reducing brain and bone metastasis,
and may be useful in defining novel gefitinib based treatment regime. We propose 
that a system wide approach could be useful during new drug development and to
minimize side effect of the prospective drug.

DOI: 10.1038/srep33949 
PMCID: PMC5032012
PMID: 27653775  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


103. Sci Rep. 2016 Sep 20;6:33860. doi: 10.1038/srep33860.

Defining a Radiomic Response Phenotype: A Pilot Study using targeted therapy in
NSCLC.

Aerts HJ(1,)(2,)(3), Grossmann P(1,)(3), Tan Y(4), Oxnard GG(5), Rizvi N(6),
Schwartz LH(4), Zhao B(4).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Radiation Oncology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. (2)Departments of Radiology, Brigham and Women's
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. (3)Departments of
Biostatistics &Computational Biology Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Brigham and
Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. (4)Departments of
Radiology Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons and New York
Presbyterian Hospital, New York, NY, USA. (5)Department of Medicine, Departments 
of Lowe Center for Thoracic Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA,
USA. (6)Department of Medicine, Division of Oncology Columbia University College 
of Physicians and Surgeons and New York Presbyterian Hospital, New York, NY, USA.

Medical imaging plays a fundamental role in oncology and drug development, by
providing a non-invasive method to visualize tumor phenotype. Radiomics can
quantify this phenotype comprehensively by applying image-characterization
algorithms, and may provide important information beyond tumor size or burden. In
this study, we investigated if radiomics can identify a gefitinib
response-phenotype, studying high-resolution computed-tomography (CT) imaging of 
forty-seven patients with early-stage non-small cell lung cancer before and after
three weeks of therapy. On the baseline-scan, radiomic-feature Laws-Energy was
significantly predictive for EGFR-mutation status (AUC = 0.67, p = 0.03), while
volume (AUC = 0.59, p = 0.27) and diameter (AUC = 0.56, p = 0.46) were not.
Although no features were predictive on the post-treatment scan (p > 0.08), the
change in features between the two scans was strongly predictive (significant
feature AUC-range = 0.74-0.91). A technical validation revealed that the
associated features were also highly stable for test-retest (mean ± std:
ICC = 0.96 ± 0.06). This pilot study shows that radiomic data before treatment is
able to predict mutation status and associated gefitinib response non-invasively,
demonstrating the potential of radiomics-based phenotyping to improve the
stratification and response assessment between tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) 
sensitive and resistant patient populations.

DOI: 10.1038/srep33860 
PMCID: PMC5028716
PMID: 27645803  [PubMed - in process]


104. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2016 Nov 1;310:140-149. doi: 10.1016/j.taap.2016.09.010. 
Epub 2016 Sep 14.

Nrf2 but not autophagy inhibition is associated with the survival of wild-type
epidermal growth factor receptor non-small cell lung cancer cells.

Zhou Y(1), Li Y(2), Ni HM(2), Ding WX(2), Zhong H(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonary, Shanghai Chest Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, Shanghai 200030, China; Department of Pharmacology, Toxicology and
Therapeutics, The University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City, KS 66160,
USA. (2)Department of Pharmacology, Toxicology and Therapeutics, The University
of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City, KS 66160, USA. (3)Department of Pulmonary,
Shanghai Chest Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200030, China.
Electronic address: eddiedong8@hotmail.com.

Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is one of the most common malignancies in the 
world. Icotinib and Gefitinib are two epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)
tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) that have been used to treat NSCLC. While it is
well known that mutations of EGFR can affect the sensitivity of NSCLC to the
EGFR-TKI, other mechanisms may also be adopted by lung cancer cells to develop
resistance to EGFR-TKI treatment. Cancer cells can use multiple adaptive
mechanisms such as activation of autophagy and Nrf2 to protect against various
stresses and chemotherapeutic drugs. Whether autophagy or Nrf2 activation
contributes to the resistance of NSCLC to EGFR-TKI treatment in wild-type EGFR
NSCLC cells remains elusive. In the present study, we confirmed that Icotinib and
Gefitinib induced apoptosis in EGFR mutant HCC827 but not in EGFR wild-type A549 
NSCLC cells. Icotinib and Gefitinib did not induce autophagic flux or inhibit
mTOR in A549 cells. Moreover, suppression of autophagy by chloroquine, a
lysosomal inhibitor, did not affect Icotinib- or Gefitinib-induced cell death in 
A549 cells. In contrast, Brusatol, an Nrf2 inhibitor, significantly suppressed
the cell survival of A549 cells. However, Brusatol did not further sensitize A549
cells to EGFR TKI-induced cell death. Results from this study suggest that
inhibition of Nrf2 can decrease cell vitality of EGFR wild-type A549 cells
independent of autophagy.

Copyright © 2016. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.taap.2016.09.010 
PMID: 27639429  [PubMed - in process]


105. J Hematol Oncol. 2016 Sep 13;9(1):86. doi: 10.1186/s13045-016-0316-8.

Serial cfDNA assessment of response and resistance to EGFR-TKI for patients with 
EGFR-L858R mutant lung cancer from a prospective clinical trial.

Zhou Q(1), Yang JJ(1), Chen ZH(1), Zhang XC(1), Yan HH(1), Xu CR(1), Su J(1),
Chen HJ(1), Tu HY(1), Zhong WZ(1), Yang XN(1), Wu YL(2).

Author information: 
(1)Guangdong Lung Cancer Institute, Guangdong General Hospital & Guangdong
Academy of Medical Sciences, 106 Zhongshan Er Road, Guangzhou, 510080, China.
(2)Guangdong Lung Cancer Institute, Guangdong General Hospital & Guangdong
Academy of Medical Sciences, 106 Zhongshan Er Road, Guangzhou, 510080, China.
syylwu@live.cn.

BACKGROUND: Detecting epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) activating
mutations in plasma could guide EGFR-tyrosine kinase inhibitor (EGFR-TKI)
treatment for advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). However, dynamic
quantitative changes of plasma EGFR mutations during the whole course of EGFR-TKI
treatment and its correlation with clinical outcomes were not determined. The aim
of this study was to measure changes of plasma EGFR L858R mutation during
EGFR-TKI treatment and to determine its correlation with the response and
resistance to EGFR-TKI.
METHODS: This study was a pre-planned exploratory analysis of a randomized phase 
III trial conducted from 2009 to 2014 comparing erlotinib with gefitinib in
advanced NSCLC harboring EGFR mutations in tumor (CTONG0901). Totally, 256
patients were enrolled in CTONG0901 and randomized to receive erlotinib or
gefitinib. One hundred and eight patients harbored L858R mutation in their tumors
and 80 patients provided serial blood samples as pre-planned scheduled. Serial
plasma L858R was detected using quantitative polymerase chain reaction. Dynamic
types of plasma L858R were analyzed using Ward's hierarchical clustering method. 
Progression-free survival (PFS) and overall survival (OS) were compared between
different types.
RESULTS: As a whole, the quantity of L858R decreased and reached the lowest level
at the time of best response to EGFR-TKI. After the analysis of Ward's
hierarchical clustering method, two dynamic types were found. In 61 patients,
L858R increased to its highest level when disease progressed (ascend type), while
in 19 patients, L858R maintained a stable level when disease progressed (stable
type). Median PFS was 11.1 months (95 % CI, 6.6-15.6) and 7.5 months (95 % CI,
1.4-13.6) in patients with ascend and stable types, respectively (P = 0.023).
Median OS was 19.7 months (95 % CI, 16.5-22.9) and 16.0 months (95 % CI,
13.4-18.5), respectively (P = 0.050).
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first report finding two different dynamic types of
plasma L858R mutation during EGFR-TKI treatment based on a prospective randomized
study. Different dynamic types were correlated with benefits from EGFR-TKI. The
impact of plasma L858R levels at disease progression on subsequent treatment
strategy needs further exploration.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov, NCT01024413.

DOI: 10.1186/s13045-016-0316-8 
PMCID: PMC5020532
PMID: 27619632  [PubMed - in process]


106. Acta Pharmacol Sin. 2016 Dec;37(12):1587-1596. doi: 10.1038/aps.2016.85. Epub
2016 Sep 12.

Targeting Hsp90 with FS-108 circumvents gefitinib resistance in EGFR mutant
non-small cell lung cancer cells.

Wang YQ(1), Shen AJ(2), Sun JY(2), Wang X(2), Liu HC(2), Zhang MM(2), Chen DQ(3),
Xiong B(3), Shen JK(3), Geng MY(2), Zheng M(4), Ding J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of New Drug Screening Center, China Pharmaceutical University,
Nanjing 210009, China. (2)Division of Anti-tumor Pharmacology, Shanghai 201203,
China. (3)Synthetic Organic and Medicinal Chemistry Laboratory, State Key
Laboratory of Drug Research, Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 201203, China. (4)Department of Thoracic Surgery,
Shanghai Tongren Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine,
Shanghai 200336, China.

AIM: Inhibition of heat shock protein (Hsp90) has been proven to be effective in 
overriding primary and acquired resistance of kinase inhibitors. In this study,
we investigated the role of FS-108, a newly developed Hsp90 inhibitor, to
overcome gefitinib resistance in EGFR mutant non-small cell lung cancer cells.
METHODS: Cell proliferation was assessed using the SRB assay. Cell cycle
distribution and apoptosis were analyzed by flow cytometry. Protein expression
was examined by Western blotting. The in vivo effectiveness of FS-108 was
determined in an NCI-H1975 subcutaneous xenograft model.
RESULTS: FS-108 triggered obvious growth inhibition in gefitinib-resistant
HCC827/GR6, NCI-H1650 and NCI-H1975 cells through inducing G2/M phase arrest and 
apoptosis. FS-108 treatment resulted in a remarkable degradation of key client
proteins involved in gefitinib resistance and further abrogated their downstream 
signaling pathways. Interestingly, FS-108 alone exerted an identical or superior 
effect on circumventing gefitinib resistance compared to combined kinase
inhibition. Finally, the ability of FS-108 to overcome gefitinib resistance in
vivo was validated in an NCI-H1975 xenograft model.
CONCLUSION: FS-108 is a powerful agent that impacts the survival of
gefitinib-resistant cells in vitro and in vivo through targeting Hsp90.

DOI: 10.1038/aps.2016.85 
PMCID: PMC5260832
PMID: 27616574  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Mol Cancer Ther. 2016 Dec;15(12):3040-3054. Epub 2016 Sep 9.

Acquired Resistance Mechanisms to Combination Met-TKI/EGFR-TKI Exposure in
Met-Amplified EGFR-TKI-Resistant Lung Adenocarcinoma Harboring an Activating EGFR
Mutation.

Yamaoka T(1), Ohmori T(2), Ohba M(2), Arata S(2,)(3), Kishino Y(4), Murata Y(4), 
Kusumoto S(4), Ishida H(5), Shirai T(4), Hirose T(4), Ohnishi T(4), Sasaki Y(5).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Oncology, Showa University, Tokyo, Japan.
yamaoka.t@med.showa-u.ac.jp. (2)Institute of Molecular Oncology, Showa
University, Tokyo, Japan. (3)Center for Biotechnology, Showa University, Tokyo,
Japan. (4)Division of Allergology and Respiratory Medicine, Department of
Medicine, Showa University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan. (5)Division of
Medical Oncology, Department of Medicine, Showa University School of Medicine,
Tokyo, Japan.

Met-amplified EGFR-tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI)-resistant non-small cell lung 
cancer (NSCLC) harboring an activating EGFR mutation is responsive to concurrent 
EGFR-TKI and Met-TKI treatment in a preclinical model. Here, we determined that
Met-amplified gefitinib-resistant cells acquire dual resistance to inhibition of 
EGFR and Met tyrosine kinase activities. PC-9 lung adenocarcinoma cells harboring
15-bp deletions (Del E746_A750) in EGFR exon 19 were treated with increasing
concentrations of the Met-TKI PHA665752 and 1 μmol/L gefitinib for 1 year; three 
resistant clones were established via Met amplification. The three
dual-resistance cell lines (PC-9DR2, PC-9DR4, and PC-9DR6, designated as DR2,
DR4, and DR6, respectively) exhibited different mechanisms for evading both EGFR 
and Met inhibition. None of the clones harbored a secondary mutation of EGFR
T790M or a Met mutation. Insulin-like growth factor (IGF)/IGF1 receptor
activation in DR2 and DR4 cells acted as a bypass signaling pathway. Met
expression was attenuated to a greater extent in DR2 than in PC-9 cells, but was 
maintained in DR4 cells by overexpression of IGF-binding protein 3. In DR6 cells,
Met was further amplified by association with HSP90, which protected Met from
degradation and induced SET and MYND domain-containing 3 (SMYD3)-mediated Met
transcription. This is the first report describing the acquisition of dual
resistance mechanisms in NSCLC harboring an activating EGFR mutation to Met-TKI
and EGFR-TKI following previous EGFR-TKI treatment. These results might inform
the development of more effective therapeutic strategies for NSCLC treatment. Mol
Cancer Ther; 15(12); 3040-54. ©2016 AACR.

©2016 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-16-0313 
PMID: 27612490  [PubMed - in process]


108. Proteome Sci. 2016 Sep 8;14(1):12. doi: 10.1186/s12953-016-0102-0. eCollection
2016.

Identifying EGFR mutation-induced drug resistance based on alpha shape model
analysis of the dynamics.

Ma L(1), Zou B(1), Yan H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Electronic Engineering, City University of Hong Kong, 83 Tat
Chee Avenue, Kowloon, Hong Kong.

BACKGROUND: Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutation-induced drug
resistance is a difficult problem in lung cancer treatment. Studying the
molecular mechanisms of drug resistance can help to develop corresponding
treatment strategies and benefit new drug design.
METHODS: In this study, Rosetta was employed to model the EGFR mutant structures.
Then Amber was carried out to conduct molecular dynamics (MD) simulation.
Afterwards, we used Computational Geometry Algorithms Library (CGAL) to compute
the alpha shape model of the mutants.
RESULTS: We analyzed the EGFR mutation-induced drug resistance based on the
motion trajectories obtained from MD simulation. We computed alpha shape model of
all the trajectory frames for each mutation type. Solid angle was used to
characterize the curvature of the atoms at the drug binding site. We measured the
knob level of the drug binding pocket of each mutant from two ways and analyzed
its relationship with the drug response level. Results show that 90 % of the
mutants can be grouped correctly by setting a certain knob level threshold.
CONCLUSIONS: There is a strong correlation between the geometric properties of
the drug binding pocket of the EGFR mutants and the corresponding drug responses,
which can be used to predict the response of a new EGFR mutant to a drug
molecule.

DOI: 10.1186/s12953-016-0102-0 
PMCID: PMC5015241
PMID: 27610045  [PubMed]


109. Onco Targets Ther. 2016 Aug 24;9:5287-95. doi: 10.2147/OTT.S105976. eCollection
2016.

Noninvasive monitoring of the genetic evolution of EGFR-mutant non-small-cell
lung cancer by analyzing circulating tumor DNA during combination chemotherapy
with gefitinib and pemetrexed or S-1.

Nakahara Y(1), Takagi Y(2), Hosomi Y(3), Kagei A(4), Yamamoto T(4), Sawada T(5), 
Yomota M(3), Okuma Y(3), Mikura S(6), Okamura T(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Oncology and Respiratory Medicine, Tokyo Metropolitan
Cancer and Infectious Diseases Center Komagome Hospital, Tokyo; Department of
Respiratory Medicine, Kitasato University School of Medicine, Sagamihara.
(2)Department of Thoracic Oncology and Respiratory Medicine, Tokyo Metropolitan
Cancer and Infectious Diseases Center Komagome Hospital, Tokyo; Oncology
Scientific Affairs, Merck Sharp & Dohme Corp. (3)Department of Thoracic Oncology 
and Respiratory Medicine, Tokyo Metropolitan Cancer and Infectious Diseases
Center Komagome Hospital, Tokyo. (4)GeneticLab Co., Ltd., Sapporo. (5)Department 
of Medical Oncology, Tokyo Metropolitan Cancer and Infectious Diseases Center
Komagome Hospital, Tokyo. (6)Department of Thoracic Oncology and Respiratory
Medicine, Tokyo Metropolitan Cancer and Infectious Diseases Center Komagome
Hospital, Tokyo; Department of Respiratory Medicine, Fujieda Municipal General
Hospital, Fujieda, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Repetitive genotyping is useful to assess the genetic evolution of
non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) during treatment, but the need for sampling by
biopsy is a major obstacle. Digital polymerase chain reaction (PCR) is a
promising procedure for the detection of mutant alleles in plasma of cancer
patients.
METHODS: This prospective study enrolled patients with NSCLC and known epidermal 
growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutations and who had experienced disease
progression during ongoing EGFR-tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) therapy. Eligible
patients received daily gefitinib and either pemetrexed or S-1 every 3 weeks
until disease progression or the development of unacceptable toxicity. Peripheral
blood was collected before and after the combination therapy for digital PCR and 
hepatocyte growth factor measurement.
RESULTS: From May 2012 to January 2014, nine patients with a median age of 67
(range 52-80) years were enrolled. Patterns of disease progression during
adjacent EGFR-TKI therapy were acquired resistance, observed in seven patients,
and primary resistance, observed in two patients. Known EGFR mutations were
detected in plasma samples of six (67%) patients at study enrollment. Of these,
T790M mutation was concurrently detected in three (50%) patients. Four patients
underwent gefitinib plus pemetrexed therapy, and five patients underwent
gefitinib and S-1 therapy. The median number of cycles delivered was five, and
the median progression-free survival was 5.7 months. Efficacy outcomes did not
differ between treatments. After the combination therapy, plasma T790M status
changed to positive in two patients. Hepatocyte growth factor level did not
significantly change through the combination therapy.
CONCLUSION: The usefulness of monitoring the genetic evolution of EGFR-driven
tumors using noninvasive procedures was demonstrated. Since continuation of
EGFR-TKI therapy with cytotoxic agents has an acceptable tolerability and a
possibility of inducing T790M mutation, the combination therapy may be useful for
EGFR-mutant NSCLC resistant to EGFR-TKI therapy without T790M mutation.

DOI: 10.2147/OTT.S105976 
PMCID: PMC5004997
PMID: 27601920  [PubMed]


110. Pharmacol Rep. 2016 Dec;68(6):1140-1148. doi: 10.1016/j.pharep.2016.07.003. Epub 
2016 Jul 20.

A decrease in D-dimer concentration and an occurrence of skin rash as iatrogenic 
events and complementary predictors of survival in lung cancer patients treated
with EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors.

Zaborowska-Szmit M(1), Kowalski DM(1), Piórek A(1), Krzakowski M(1), Szmit S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Lung & Thoracic Tumors Department, The Maria Sklodowska-Curie Memorial Cancer 
Centre & Institute of Oncology, Warszawa, Poland. (2)Department of Pulmonary
Circulation and Thromboembolic Diseases, Centre of Postgraduate Medical
Education, European Health Centre Otwock, Otwock, Poland. Electronic address:
s.szmit@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Progression of lung cancer is associated with some abnormalities in
coagulation. The aim of the study was to determine the predictive and prognostic 
value of changes in D-dimer concentration in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
patients on anti-EGFR targeted therapy.
METHODS: The analysis included fifty two NSCLC patients treated with EGFR
tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs): erlotinib or gefitinib. All clinical data were
collected before treatment and after 2 cycles (60days) of therapy and correlated 
with progression free and overall survival (PFS, OS).
RESULTS: Two iatrogenic events were noted within the first 60days of anti-EGFR
treatment: typical skin rash in 38 (73.1%) and a decrease in D-dimer
concentration in 26 (50%) patients. Multivariate analysis revealed a decrease of 
D-dimer concentration as the strongest factor associated with longer PFS
(HR=0.39; 95%CI: 0.16-0.91; p=0.029) and OS (HR=0.33; 95%CI: 0.13-0.82, p=0.017) 
independently of skin rash, baseline level of D-dimer and other clinical
characteristics. Coexisting a decrease in D-dimer concentration with an
occurrence of skin rash correlated significantly with the positive objective
response after 60days of anti-EGFR therapy (p=0.0175) and indicated the longest
PFS (HR=0.31; 95%CI: 0.16-0.60, p=0.0005) as well as OS (HR=0.30; 95%CI:
0.15-0.59, p=0.0005).
CONCLUSION: Adverse events may predict the outcomes of cancer patients. Apart
from skin rash, change in D-dimer concentration may be valuable parameter in
creation of predictive and prognostic models in NSCLC patients receiving
anti-EGFR targeted therapy.

Copyright © 2016. Published by Elsevier Urban & Partner Sp. z o.o.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pharep.2016.07.003 
PMID: 27588390  [PubMed - in process]


111. Gene. 2016 Dec 5;594(1):23-29. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2016.08.043. Epub 2016 Aug 28.

Drug-resistant CXCR4-positive cells have the molecular characteristics of EMT in 
NSCLC.

Yin H(1), Wang Y(2), Chen W(2), Zhong S(3), Liu Z(4), Zhao J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Wuxi Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Wuxi, China; Department of
Epidemiology, School of Public Health, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing,
China. (2)Department of Respiratory Diseases, Nanjing Chest Hospital, Nanjing,
China. (3)Center of Clinical Laboratory Science, Jiangsu Cancer Hospital, Nanjing
Medical University, Nanjing, China. (4)Department of Epidemiology, School of
Public Health, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, China; Department of
Respiratory Diseases, Nanjing Chest Hospital, Nanjing, China; Center of Clinical 
Laboratory Science, Jiangsu Cancer Hospital, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing,
China. Electronic address: liuz@njmu.edu.cn.

High expression of Chemokine receptor 4 (CXCR4) is important in tumor invasion,
metastasis, drug-resistance and maintenance of stemness in non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC). We therefore studied the molecular characteristics of
drug-resistant CXCR4-positive cells on epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT)
for the future identification of the tumor cells with the properties of both EMT 
and stemness. EMT RT(2) Profier PCR Array was performed to determine the
expression levels of mRNA genes in A549 with TGF-β1 induced EMT (A549/TGF-β1) and
gefitinib-resistant CXCR4-positive cells (A549/GR). TCGA database on the cBio
Cancer Genomics Portal website and Gene Network Central (GNC) Pro Tutorial were
used to analyze their clinical relevance and pathway interactions. CXCR4 was
up-regulated both in TGF-β induced EMT cells and in gefitinib-resistant cells. In
84 mRNA genes related to EMT, 17 mRNA genes were up-regulated in CXCR4-positive
population of A549/GR when compared to those in CXCR4 negative fraction, while 66
mRNA genes were up-regulated during TGF-β induced EMT. ITGA5, BMP7, MMP3, VIM,
RGS2, ZEB2, TCF3, SNAI2, VCAN, PLEK2, WNT5A, COL3A1, SPARC and FOXC2 were doubly 
up-regulated during the two biological processes. Kaplan-Meier analysis indicated
that the doubly up-regulated ITGA5, RGS2, SNAI2 and PLEK2 mRNA genes were related
to poor overall survival in lung adenocarcinoma patients (P=9.291e-6, 0.0090,
3.81e-7 and 0.0013, respectively). In GNC analysis, SNAI2 mRNA gene but not
ITGA5, RGS2 and PLEK2 was dependent on the signaling pathway of CXCR4. The
molecular characteristics of drug-resistant CXCR4-positive cells have a crosstalk
with EMT, which has the potential to find the marker with prognostic value on
multiple signaling pathways in NSCLC.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gene.2016.08.043 
PMID: 27581786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Ann Transl Med. 2016 Aug;4(15):285. doi: 10.21037/atm.2016.07.18.

Have adjuvant tyrosine kinase inhibitors lost their shine?

Sabari JK(1), Chaft JE(2).

Author information: 
(1)Thoracic Oncology Service, Division of Solid Tumor Oncology, Department of
Medicine, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, USA ; (2)Thoracic
Oncology Service, Division of Solid Tumor Oncology, Department of Medicine,
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, USA;; Department of
Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, NY, USA.

Comment on
    J Clin Oncol. 2015 Dec 1;33(34):4007-14.

Despite broad advances in molecularly targeted therapies, lung cancer remains the
leading cause of cancer related mortality in the United States. Epidermal growth 
factor receptor (EGFR) mutations occur in approximately 17% of advanced non-small
cell lung cancer (NSCLC) in the US population. The remarkable efficacy of
small-molecule EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) in this unique subset of
patients has revolutionized the therapeutic approach to lung cancer. The success 
of these agents in the metastatic setting leads to the logical question of what
role these drugs may have in the adjuvant setting for patients with earlier stage
disease. RADIANT, an international randomized, double-blind, placebo controlled
phase III study in patients with completely resected stage IB to IIIA NSLC whose 
tumors expressed EGFR by IHC and EGFR amplification by FISH, attempted to answer 
the question of whether erlotinib would improve disease free survival and overall
survival in the adjuvant setting. While RADIANT does not conclude for or against 
adjuvant use of EGFR-TKIs, all data points towards benefit in a selected
population. As clinicians, we must continue to enroll to potentially practice
changing therapeutic neoadjuvant and adjuvant chemotherapy studies
internationally.

DOI: 10.21037/atm.2016.07.18 
PMCID: PMC4980379
PMID: 27568486  [PubMed]


113. Lung Cancer. 2016 Sep;99:31-7. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2016.06.008. Epub 2016 Jun 
14.

Efficacy and safety of rechallenge treatment with gefitinib in patients with
advanced non-small cell lung cancer.

Cappuzzo F(1), Morabito A(2), Normanno N(3), Bidoli P(4), Del Conte A(5),
Giannetta L(6), Montanino A(7), Mazzoni F(8), Buosi R(9), Burgio MA(10), Cerea
G(11), Chiari R(12), Cortinovis D(13), Finocchiaro G(14), Foltran L(15),
Migliorino MR(16), Tiseo M(17), Ferrari S(18), De Marinis F(19).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Oncology Department, Istituto Toscano Tumori, Ospedale Civile, Viale
Alfieri 36, 57100 Livorno, Italy. Electronic address: f.cappuzzo@googlemail.com. 
(2)Thoracic Medical Oncology, Istituto Nazionale Tumori "Fondazione G
Pascale"-IRCCS, Via Semmola, 80131 Naples, Italy. Electronic address:
a.morabito@istitutotumori.na.it. (3)Cell Biology & Biotherapy Unit, Istituto
Nazionale Tumori "Fondazione G Pascale"-IRCCS, Via Semmola, 80131 Naples, Italy. 
Electronic address: n.normanno@istitutotumori.na.it. (4)Department of Oncology,
San Gerardo Hospital, Monza, Via Pergolesi 33, 20900 Monza, Italy. Electronic
address: p.bidoli@hsgerardo.org. (5)Medical Oncology, Azienda per l'Assistenza
Sanitaria No. 5 (AAS5) - Friuli Occidentale - Presidio Ospedaliero di Pordenone, 
Via Montereale 24, 33170 Pordenone, Italy. Electronic address:
alessandro.delconte@aas5.sanita.fvg.it. (6)Oncologia Falck, Division of Medical
Oncology, Niguarda Ca' Granda Hospital, Piazza Ospedale Maggiore 3, 20162 Milan, 
Italy. Electronic address: laura.giannetta@ospedaleniguarda.it. (7)Thoracic
Medical Oncology, Istituto Nazionale Tumori "Fondazione G Pascale"-IRCCS, Via
Semmola, 80131 Naples, Italy. Electronic address:
a.montanino@istitutotumori.na.it. (8)Medical Oncology, University Hospital
Careggi, L. go Brambilla 3, 50134 Florence, Italy. Electronic address:
francescamazzoni@hotmail.com. (9)Division of Oncology, Department of
Translational Medicine, University of Eastern Piedmont "Amedeo Avogadro", 28100
Novara, Italy. Electronic address: r.buosi@maggioreosp.novara.it. (10)Department 
of Medical Oncology, IRCCS Istituto Scientifico Romagnolo per lo Studio e la Cura
dei Tumori (IRST), Meldola, Italy. Electronic address: marco.burgio@irst.emr.it. 
(11)Oncologia Falck, Division of Medical Oncology, Niguarda Ca' Granda Hospital, 
Piazza Ospedale Maggiore 3, 20162 Milan, Italy. Electronic address:
giulio.cerea@ospedaleniguarda.it. (12)Department of Medical Oncology, "Santa
Maria della Misericordia" Hospital, Azienda Ospedaliera di Perugia, 06132
Perugia, Italy. Electronic address: rita.chiari@ospedale.perugia.it.
(13)Department of Oncology, San Gerardo Hospital, Monza, Via Pergolesi 33, 20900 
Monza, Italy. Electronic address: d.cortinovis@hsgerardo.org. (14)Department of
Medical Oncology, Istituto Clinico Humanitas IRCCS, Via Manzoni 56, 20089
Rozzano, Milan, Italy. Electronic address:
giovanna.finocchiaro@cancercenter.humanitas.it. (15)Medical Oncology, Azienda per
l'Assistenza Sanitaria No. 5 (AAS5) - Friuli Occidentale - Presidio Ospedaliero
di Pordenone, Via Montereale 24, 33170 Pordenone, Italy. Electronic address:
luisa.foltran@aas5.sanita.fvg.it. (16)Department of Thoracic Oncology, 1st
Pulmonary Oncological Unit, Azienda Ospedaliera San Camillo-Forlanini, Rome,
Italy. Electronic address: ritamigliorino@tiscali.it. (17)Division of Medical
Oncology, University Hospital of Parma, Via Gramsci, 14, 43126 Parma, Italy.
Electronic address: mtiseo@ao.pr.it. (18)AstraZeneca, Palazzo Ferraris, Via
Ludovico il Moro 6/C, 20080 Basiglio, Milan, Italy. Electronic address:
silvia.ferrari@astrazeneca.com. (19)Thoracic Oncology Division, Istituto Europeo 
di Oncologia (IEO), Via Ripamonti 435, 20141 Milan, Italy, Italy; Formerly
Department of Thoracic Oncology, 1st Pulmonary Oncological Unit, Azienda
Ospedaliera San Camillo-Forlanini, Rome, Italy. Electronic address:
filippo.demarinis@ieo.it.

OBJECTIVES: Although patients with advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
and an activating epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutation benefit from
the use of EGFR-tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKI), most of them progress within 12
months from treatment start due to acquired resistance. In clinical practice,
many physicians frequently offer these patients retreatment with EGFR-TKIs after 
a chemotherapy break, based on small or retrospective studies.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A phase II trial was conducted in patients with stage
III/IV NSCLC, to assess the efficacy, safety and impact on quality of life (QoL) 
and disease-related symptoms of gefitinib rechallenge. Eligible patients had
initially responded to first-line gefitinib and progressed after second-line
chemotherapy.
RESULTS: Of 61 enrolled patients, 73.8% were female, 100% had EGFR-mutated
adenocarcinoma and 67.2% were never-smokers. Thirty-two (52.5%) patients obtained
a clinical benefit, with 3 (4.9%) achieving a partial response and 29 (47.5%)
having stable disease. Median progression-free survival was 2.8 months, overall
survival 10.2 months and duration of gefitinib treatment 3.6 months. The most
common all grade-adverse events were diarrhea (27.6%), nausea and/or vomiting
(20.3%), rash (14.7%) and dyspnea (10.3%); no new toxicities were apparent.
CONCLUSION: Findings from this study indicate that gefitinib rechallenge offers
modest benefit and may be taken into consideration only for patients for whom no 
other treatment option exists.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2016.06.008 
PMID: 27565910  [PubMed - in process]


114. Lung Cancer. 2016 Sep;99:1-3. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2016.05.002. Epub 2016 Jun
6.

Successful treatment with afatinib after grade 3 hepatotoxicity induced by both
gefitinib and erlotinib in EGFR mutation-positive non-small cell lung cancer.

Zenke Y(1), Umemura S(2), Sugiyama E(1), Kirita K(1), Matsumoto S(1), Yoh K(1),
Niho S(1), Ohmatsu H(1), Goto K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Oncology, National Cancer Center Hospital East,
Kashiwa, Chiba, Japan. (2)Department of Thoracic Oncology, National Cancer Center
Hospital East, Kashiwa, Chiba, Japan. Electronic address:
sumemura@east.ncc.go.jp.

Hepatotoxicity is a major cause of the withdrawal of epidermal growth factor
receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors (EGFR-TKIs) when treating EGFR
mutation-positive non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). We report a case in which
gefitinib- and elrotinib-induced severe hepatotoxicity arose in a patient with
the uridine diphosphate glucuronosyltransferase isoform 1A1 (UGT1A1) and
cytochrome p450 3A5 (CYP3A5) poor metabolizer phenotypes. Afatinib is not
significantly metabolized by cytochrome p450-mediated pathways. We describe
successful management of the patient's tumor by switching to afatinib. Evaluation
of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in metabolic enzymes might be useful to
predict severe hepatotoxicity induced by EGFR-TKIs.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2016.05.002 
PMID: 27565905  [PubMed - in process]


115. Sci Rep. 2016 Aug 25;6:32258. doi: 10.1038/srep32258.

Down-regulation of SerpinB2 is associated with gefitinib resistance in non-small 
cell lung cancer and enhances invadopodia-like structure protrusions.

Bae SY(1), Park HJ(1), Hong JY(1), Lee HJ(1), Lee SK(1).

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmacy, Natural Products Research Institute, Seoul National
University, Seoul 151-742, Korea.

The failure of targeted therapy due to the resistance to epidermal growth factor 
receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors (EGFR-TKIs), such as gefitinib, is considered
a major problem in the treatment of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients. 
SerpinB2, a component of the urokinase plasminogen activator (uPA) system, has
been recognized as a biomarker for the progression and metastasis of lung cancer.
Nevertheless, the relationship between SerpinB2 and EGFR-TKI resistance has not
been elucidated. Here, we report that SerpinB2 is down-regulated in
gefitinib-resistant (H292-Gef) cells compared to gefitinib-sensitive (H292)
cells. The low SerpinB2 levels in H292-Gef cells were also associated with an
enhancement in invasiveness and increase in the length of invadopodia-like
structures in the cells. The effect on invasiveness and gefitinib sensitivity was
confirmed by knockdown and overexpression of SerpinB2. In addition, the
possibility to overcome the resistance through the up-regulation of SerpinB2 was 
supported by employing an antitumor agent yuanhuadine (YD). Treatment with YD
effectively elevated SerpinB2 levels and suppressed invasive properties in
H292-Gef cells. Collectively, these findings demonstrate the prospective role of 
SerpinB2 as a novel biomarker for acquired gefitinib resistance and a potential
target for NSCLC treatment.

DOI: 10.1038/srep32258 
PMCID: PMC4997607
PMID: 27558531  [PubMed - in process]


116. Drugs. 2016 Sep;76(14):1321-36. doi: 10.1007/s40265-016-0628-6.

Second-Line Treatment of Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer: New Developments for Tumours
Not Harbouring Targetable Oncogenic Driver Mutations.

Barnfield PC(1,)(2), Ellis PM(3,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, McMaster University, Hamilton, ON, Canada. (2)Division
of Medical Oncology, Juravinski Cancer Centre, 699 Concession St, Hamilton, ON,
L8V 5C2, Canada. (3)Department of Oncology, McMaster University, Hamilton, ON,
Canada. ellisp@hhsc.ca. (4)Division of Medical Oncology, Juravinski Cancer
Centre, 699 Concession St, Hamilton, ON, L8V 5C2, Canada. ellisp@hhsc.ca.

Platinum-based doublet chemotherapy with or without bevacizumab is the standard
of care for the initial management of advanced and metastatic non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC) without a targetable molecular abnormality. However, the majority 
of patients with NSCLC will ultimately develop resistance to initial
platinum-based chemotherapy, and many remain candidates for subsequent lines of
therapy. Randomised trials over the past 10-15 years have established pemetrexed 
(non-squamous histology), docetaxel, erlotinib and gefitinib as approved
second-line agents in NSCLC without targetable driver mutations or
rearrangements. Trials comparing these agents with other chemotherapy, evaluating
the addition of an epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase
inhibitor (TKI) to chemotherapy or the addition of another targeted agent to
erlotinib or gefitinib have all failed to demonstrate an improvement in overall
survival for patients with NSCLC. In contrast, recent data comparing therapy with
novel monoclonal antibodies against programmed cell death 1 (PD-1) or PD ligand
(PD-L1) pathway versus standard chemotherapy following platinum failure have
demonstrated significant improvements in overall survival. Therapy with nivolumab
or pembrolizumab would now be considered standard second-line therapy in patients
without contraindication to immune checkpoint inhibitors. Atezolizumab also
appears promising in this setting.

DOI: 10.1007/s40265-016-0628-6 
PMID: 27557830  [PubMed - in process]


117. Bioorg Med Chem. 2016 Nov 1;24(21):5036-5046. doi: 10.1016/j.bmc.2016.08.008.
Epub 2016 Aug 6.

The discovery of 2,5-isomers of triazole-pyrrolopyrimidine as selective Janus
kinase 2 (JAK2) inhibitors versus JAK1 and JAK3.

Lee SM(1), Yoon KB(2), Lee HJ(2), Kim J(3), Chung YK(4), Cho WJ(5), Mukai C(6),
Choi S(4), Kang KW(3), Han SY(7), Ko H(8), Kim YC(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical System Engineering, Gwangju Institute of Science and
Technology (GIST), 123 Cheomdan-gwagiro, Buk-gu, Gwangju 61005, Republic of
Korea. (2)College of Pharmacy and Research Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 
Gyeongsang National University, Jinju 52828, Republic of Korea. (3)College of
Pharmacy and Research Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Seoul National
University, Seoul 08826, Republic of Korea. (4)National Leading Research
Laboratory (NLRL) of Molecular Modeling & Drug Design, College of Pharmacy and
Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Ewha Womans University, Seoul 03760, 
Republic of Korea. (5)College of Pharmacy and Research Institute of Drug
Development, Chonnam National University, Gwangju 61186, Republic of Korea.
(6)School of Pharmacy, Kanazawa University, Kakuma-machi, Kanazawa 920-1192,
Japan. (7)College of Pharmacy and Research Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 
Gyeongsang National University, Jinju 52828, Republic of Korea. Electronic
address: syhan@gnu.ac.kr. (8)School of Life Science, Gwangju Institute of Science
and Technology (GIST), Republic of Korea. Electronic address:
kohyojin@gist.ac.kr. (9)Department of Medical System Engineering, Gwangju
Institute of Science and Technology (GIST), 123 Cheomdan-gwagiro, Buk-gu, Gwangju
61005, Republic of Korea; School of Life Science, Gwangju Institute of Science
and Technology (GIST), Republic of Korea. Electronic address:
yongchul@gist.ac.kr.

Members of the Janus kinase (JAK) family are potential therapeutic targets.
Abnormal signaling by mutant JAK2 is related to hematological malignancy, such as
myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPNs), and tyrosine kinase inhibitor
(TKI)-resistance in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). We discovered a potent
and highly selective inhibitor of JAK2 over JAK1 and -3 based on the structure of
4-(2,5-triazole)-pyrrolopyrimidine. Among all triazole compounds tested,
2,5-triazole regioisomers more effectively inhibited JAK2 kinase activity than
isomers with substitutions of various alkyl groups at the R2 position, except for
methyl-substituted 1,5-triazole, which was more potent than the corresponding
1,4- and 2,5-triazoles. None of the synthesized 1,4-isomers inhibited all three
JAK family members. Compounds with phenyl or tolyl group substituents at the R1
position were completely inactive compared with the corresponding analogues with 
a methyl substituted at the R1 position. As a result of this structure-activity
relationship, 54, which is substituted with a cyclopropylmethyl moiety, exhibited
significant inhibitory activity and selectivity (IC50=41.9nM, fold selectivity
JAK1/2 10.6 and JAK3/2 58.1). Compound 54 also exhibited an equivalent inhibition
of wild type JAK2 and the V617F mutant. Moreover, 54 inhibited the proliferation 
of HEL 92.1.7 cells, which carry JAK2 V617F, and gefitinib-resistant HCC827
cells. Compound 54 also suppressed STAT3 phosphorylation at Y705.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmc.2016.08.008 
PMID: 27555284  [PubMed - in process]


118. Invest New Drugs. 2016 Dec;34(6):797-799. Epub 2016 Aug 23.

Successful treatment with afatinib after gefitinib- and erlotinib-induced
hepatotoxicity.

Ueda H(1), Hayashi H(2), Kudo K(3), Takeda M(1), Nakagawa K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Kindai University Faculty of Medicine, 377-2
Ohno-higashi, Osaka-Sayama, Osaka, 589-8511, Japan. (2)Department of Medical
Oncology, Kindai University Faculty of Medicine, 377-2 Ohno-higashi,
Osaka-Sayama, Osaka, 589-8511, Japan. hayashi_h@dotd.med.kindai.ac.jp.
(3)Department of Respiratory Medicine, National Hospital Organization, Osaka
Minami Medical Center, 2-1 Kido-higashimachi, Kawachi, Osaka, Nagano, 586-8521,
Japan.

Clinical trials of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase
inhibitors (TKIs) gefitinib and erlotinib have shown that some patients receiving
these agents develop severe hepatotoxicity that necessitates treatment cessation.
Both drugs undergo extensive hepatic metabolism mediated predominantly by
cytochrome P450 family enzymes. Afatinib is a second-generation, irreversible
EGFR-TKI that competes with ATP for binding to EGFR and the related proteins HER2
and HER4 and whose major circulating metabolites are covalent drug-protein
adducts. We here describe a patient with EGFR mutation-positive lung
adenocarcinoma who developed severe hepatotoxicity during treatment first with
gefitinib and then with erlotinib, but who was subsequently able to continue
treatment with afatinib for at least 44 weeks with no evidence of hepatotoxicity 
or disease progression. As far as we are aware, this is the first report of
successful treatment with afatinib after the development of high-grade
hepatotoxicity during both gefitinib and erlotinib therapy.

DOI: 10.1007/s10637-016-0384-1 
PMID: 27550238  [PubMed - in process]


119. Sci Rep. 2016 Aug 17;6:30245. doi: 10.1038/srep30245.

Targeted nanoconjugate co-delivering siRNA and tyrosine kinase inhibitor to KRAS 
mutant NSCLC dissociates GAB1-SHP2 post oncogene knockdown.

Srikar R(1), Suresh D(2), Zambre A(1), Taylor K(3), Chapman S(4), Leevy M(4),
Upendran A(5,)(6), Kannan R(1,)(2,)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiology, Medical Sciences Building, University of Missouri,
Columbia, MO 65212, USA. (2)Department of Bioengineering, University of Missouri,
Columbia, MO 65212, USA. (3)Department of Pathology, Medical Sciences Building,
University of Missouri, Columbia, MO 65212, USA. (4)Notre Dame Integrated Imaging
Facility, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN 46556, USA. (5)Department of
Medical Pharmacology and Physiology, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO 65212, 
USA. (6)Institute of Clinical and Translational Science, University of Missouri, 
Columbia, MO 65212, USA. (7)International Center for Nano/Micro Systems and
Nanotechnology, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO 65212, USA.

A tri-block nanoparticle (TBN) comprising of an enzymatically cleavable porous
gelatin nanocore encapsulated with gefitinib (tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI))
and surface functionalized with cetuximab-siRNA conjugate has been synthesized.
Targeted delivery of siRNA to undruggable KRAS mutated non-small cell lung cancer
cells would sensitize the cells to TKI drugs and offers an efficient therapy for 
treating cancer; however, efficient delivery of siRNA and releasing it in
cytoplasm remains a major challenge. We have shown TBN can efficiently deliver
siRNA to cytoplasm of KRAS mutant H23 Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer (NSCLC) cells
for oncogene knockdown; subsequently, sensitizing it to TKI. In the absence of
TKI, the nanoparticle showed minimal toxicity suggesting that the cells adapt a
parallel GAB1 mediated survival pathway. In H23 cells, activated ERK results in
phosphorylation of GAB1 on serine and threonine residues to form GAB1-p85 PI3K
complex. In the absence of TKI, knocking down the oncogene dephosphorylated ERK, 
and negated the complex formation. This event led to tyrosine phosphorylation at 
Tyr627 domain of GAB1 that regulated EGFR signaling by recruiting SHP2. In the
presence of TKI, GAB1-SHP2 dissociation occurs, leading to cell death. The
outcome of this study provides a promising platform for treating NSCLC patients
harboring KRAS mutation.

DOI: 10.1038/srep30245 
PMCID: PMC4987653
PMID: 27530552  [PubMed - in process]


120. Curr Treat Options Oncol. 2016 Oct;17(10):54. doi: 10.1007/s11864-016-0429-x.

Adjuvant Therapy of Resected Non-small Cell Lung Cancer: can We Move Forward?

Buffoni L(1), Vavalà T(2), Novello S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology at San Luigi Hospital, University of Turin, Regione
Gonzole 10, 10043, Orbassano, Torino, Italy. (2)Department of Oncology, ASL CN1, 
Via C. Boggio, 12, 12100, Cuneo, Italy. tvavala@hotmail.it.

OPINION STATEMENT: Twenty years ago, an individual patient data meta-analysis of 
eight cisplatin-based adjuvant chemotherapy (AC) studies in completely resected
early stage non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) demonstrated a 13 % reduction of
the risk of death favoring chemotherapy that was of borderline statistical
significance (p = 0.08). This marginal benefit boosted a new generation of
randomized trials to evaluate the role of modern platinum-based regimens in
resectable stages of NSCLC and, although individual studies generated conflicting
results, overall they contributed to confirm the role of AC which is now
recommended for completely resected stage II and III NSCLC, mostly 4 cycles,
while subset analyses suggested a benefit in patients with large IB tumors.
Cisplatin-based therapy was the core regimen of those adjuvant clinical trials
and even if a substitution with other platinum-derived was also suggested, mainly
based on extrapolated data from studies in advanced disease, cisplatin was
confirmed to be slightly superior to carboplatin and is still the drug of choice 
in the adjuvant setting. Currently, any attempt to improve efficacy of
cisplatin-based chemotherapy through antiangiogenic drugs association or
pharmacogenomics approaches have failed, while results of additional studies are 
eagerly awaited. In the context of promising targeted therapies, even if several 
randomized trials in the advanced setting evaluated tyrosine kinase inhibitors
(TKis) versus platinum-based chemotherapy and showed impressive results, clinical
experience with TKIs in the adjuvant setting is still limited and most of the
trials have not required patients to be molecularly tested for the drug-specific 
molecular predictive factor. At the present time, the role of targeted agents as 
adjuvant approaches remains largely not investigated. Finally, with the negative 
experience of the use of vaccines in this setting, the integration of
immunotherapy (mainly immunocheckpoint inhibitors) in platinum-based schedules
has just started to be evaluated, representing a potential future clinical
option, but still far from clinical practice.

DOI: 10.1007/s11864-016-0429-x 
PMID: 27523606  [PubMed - in process]


121. Med Hypotheses. 2016 Sep;94:20-2. doi: 10.1016/j.mehy.2016.06.009. Epub 2016 Jun 
9.

Hepatic metastasis is a poor predictive marker for erlotinib in lung
adenocarcinoma.

He Y(1), Wang Y(1), Zhang S(1), Ren S(1), Li J(2), Zhou C(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Shanghai Pulmonary Hospital, Tongji University
Medical School Cancer Institute, Tongji University School of Medicine, PR China. 
(2)Department of Lung Cancer and Immunology, Shanghai Pulmonary Hospital, Tongji 
University Medical School Cancer Institute, Tongji University School of Medicine,
PR China. (3)Department of Medical Oncology, Shanghai Pulmonary Hospital, Tongji 
University Medical School Cancer Institute, Tongji University School of Medicine,
PR China. Electronic address: caicunzhoudr@163.com.

Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer related death worldwide and most of
lung cancer patients have had metastases when they are diagnosed. With respect to
chemotherapy, target therapy is a more effective and less toxic treatments. The
epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors (EGFR-TKIs), such as 
gefitinib or erlotinib, are one of the representatives of targeted therapy which 
have been widely used in first line, maintenance and 2nd/3rd line therapy among
advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). But those with hepatic metastases
may insensitive to EGFR-TKIs due to MET activation by hepatocyte growth factor
(HGF). In our retrospective analysis, 164 lung adenocarcinoma patients with known
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutation status who received the
treatment of erlotinib as 2nd/3rd line setting were reviewed. The disease control
rate (DCR) in patients without hepatic metastases group was higher than that in
patients with hepatic metastases (66.1% vs 54.5%, p<0.001). In EGFR
mutation-positive patients, median PFS was significantly longer in patients
without hepatic metastases than that in those with hepatic metastases (9.9months 
95% CI 7.74-12.06months vs. 7.9months 95% CI 5.88-9.92months; p=0.017).
Therefore, we assume that hepatic metastasis may be a poor predictive marker for 
erlotinib in lung adenocarcinoma.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mehy.2016.06.009 
PMID: 27515192  [PubMed - in process]


122. Eur J Pharmacol. 2016 Oct 15;789:458-67. doi: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2016.08.004. Epub 
2016 Aug 8.

Anti-cancer synergy of dichloroacetate and EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors in
NSCLC cell lines.

Yang Z(1), Tam KY(2).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Macau, Taipa, Macau, China.
(2)Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Macau, Taipa, Macau, China.
Electronic address: kintam@umac.mo.

Glycolysis has been observed as a predominant process for most cancer cells to
utilize glucose, which was referred to as "Warburg Effect". Targeting critical
enzymes, such as pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase (PDK) that inversely regulating
the process of glycolysis could be a promising approach to work alone or in
combination with other treatments for cancer therapy. EGFR inhibitors for
Non-Small-Cell Lung Cancer (NSCLC) treatment have been applied for decades in
clinical practices with great success, but also their clinical benefits were
somewhat hampered by the rising acquired-resistance. Combination drug therapy is 
an effective strategy to cope with the challenge. In this study, we utilized
Dichloroacetate (DCA), a widely regarded PDK inhibitor, together with Erlotinib
and Gefitinib, two well-known EGFR inhibitors, and demonstrated that the
applications of DCA in combination with either Erlotinib or Gefitinib
significantly attenuated the viability of EGFR mutant NSCLC cells (NCI-H1975 and 
NCI-H1650) in a synergistic manner. This synergistic outcome appears to be a
combination effect in promoting apoptosis, rather than co-suppression of either
EGFR or PDK signaling pathways. Moreover, we have shown that the combination
treatment did not exhibit synergistic effect in other NSCLC cell lines without
EGFR mutations (A549 or NCI-H460). Together, these observations suggested that
combined targeting of EGFR and PDK in NSCLC cells exerted synergistic effects in 
an EGFR mutation-dependent fashion.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2016.08.004 
PMID: 27514773  [PubMed - in process]


123. Pneumologie. 2016 Aug;70(8):514-21. doi: 10.1055/s-0042-109749. Epub 2016 Aug 11.

[Exon-dependent Subgroup-analysis of the Non-interventional REASON-Study: PFS and
OS in EGFR-mutated NSCLC Patients Treated with Gefitinib or Chemotherapy].

[Article in German]

Schuette W(1), Dietel M(2), Thomas M(3), Eberhardt W(4), Griesinger F(5),
Zirrgiebel U(6), Radke S(7), Schirmacher P(8).

Author information: 
(1)Krankenhaus Martha-Maria Halle-Doelau, Klinik für Innere Medizin II, Halle.
(2)Pathologisches Institut Humboldt Universität Berlin. (3)Internistische
Onkologie der Thoraxtumoren, Thoraxklinik im Universitätsklinikum Heidelberg,
Translational Lung Research Center Heidelberg (TLRC-H), Member of the German
Center for Lung Research, Heidelberg. (4)Innere Klinik (Tumorforschung),
Ruhrlandklinik, Westdeutsches Tumorzentrum (WTZ), Essen, Universitätsklinikum
Essen, Universität Duisburg-Essen. (5)Pius-Hospital Oldenburg. (6)iOMEDICO AG,
Freiburg. (7)Medical Affairs, AstraZeneca, Wedel. (8)Pathologisches Institut
Universitätsklinik Heidelberg.

PURPOSE: To analyze the influence of the localization of mutations in the
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) gene on progression-free (PFS) and
overall survival (OS) in patients (pts) with locally advanced or metastatic
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) treated with gefitinib (gef) or chemotherapy
(CT) under real world conditions within the REASON study.
METHODS: Subgroups of pts with mutations in exon 19 (n = 141), 18/20 (n = 43),
and 21 (n = 104) were analyzed for PFS and OS according to gef or CT treatment
and compared using the log-rank test.
RESULTS: Pts with mutations in exon 19 and 18/20 treated with gef as first line
therapy showed increased PFS and OS compared to CT. This increase was
statistically significant in pts with exon 19 mutation (11.3 vs. 6.5 months), but
was not found in pts with exon 21 mutation (9.1 vs. 9.3 months). Also, OS was
significantly increased in patients with mutation in exon 19 treated with gef
ever over all treatment lines compared to CT (21.8 vs. 10.6 months), whereas this
was not found in pts with mutation in exon 21 (14.1 vs. 13.9 months).
CONCLUSION: Localization and nature of EGFR mutations influences gefitinib
treatment outcomes under routine conditions and should therefore be analyzed in
detail.

© Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0042-109749 
PMID: 27512931  [PubMed - in process]


124. J Clin Oncol. 2016 Sep 20;34(27):3258-66. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2016.66.9218. Epub
2016 Aug 9.

Randomized Phase II Trial of Gefitinib With and Without Pemetrexed as First-Line 
Therapy in Patients With Advanced Nonsquamous Non-Small-Cell Lung Cancer With
Activating Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor Mutations.

Cheng Y(1), Murakami H(1), Yang PC(1), He J(1), Nakagawa K(1), Kang JH(1), Kim
JH(1), Wang X(1), Enatsu S(1), Puri T(1), Orlando M(1), Yang JC(2).

Author information: 
(1)Ying Cheng, Jilin Provincial Cancer Hospital, Changchun; Jianxing He, The
First Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou Medical University, Guangdong; Xin Wang,
Eli Lilly, Shanghai, China; Haruyasu Murakami, Shizuoka Cancer Center, Shizuoka; 
Kazuhiko Nakagawa, Kinki University School of Medicine, Osaka; Sotaro Enatsu, Eli
Lilly Japan, Kobe, Japan; Pan-Chyr Yang and James Chih-Hsin Yang, National Taiwan
University Hospital; James Chih-Hsin Yang, National Taiwan University Cancer
Center, Taipei, Taiwan; Jin Hyoung Kang, The Catholic University of Korea, Seoul;
Joo-Hang Kim, CHA Bundang Medical Center, CHA University, Gyeonggi-do, Korea;
Tarun Puri, Eli Lilly, Gurgaon, Haryana, India; and Mauro Orlando, Eli Lilly
Interamérica, Buenos Aires, Argentina. (2)Ying Cheng, Jilin Provincial Cancer
Hospital, Changchun; Jianxing He, The First Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou
Medical University, Guangdong; Xin Wang, Eli Lilly, Shanghai, China; Haruyasu
Murakami, Shizuoka Cancer Center, Shizuoka; Kazuhiko Nakagawa, Kinki University
School of Medicine, Osaka; Sotaro Enatsu, Eli Lilly Japan, Kobe, Japan; Pan-Chyr 
Yang and James Chih-Hsin Yang, National Taiwan University Hospital; James
Chih-Hsin Yang, National Taiwan University Cancer Center, Taipei, Taiwan; Jin
Hyoung Kang, The Catholic University of Korea, Seoul; Joo-Hang Kim, CHA Bundang
Medical Center, CHA University, Gyeonggi-do, Korea; Tarun Puri, Eli Lilly,
Gurgaon, Haryana, India; and Mauro Orlando, Eli Lilly Interamérica, Buenos Aires,
Argentina. chihyang@ntu.edu.tw.

Comment in
    J Thorac Dis. 2016 Oct;8(10 ):E1293-E1295.
    J Thorac Dis. 2016 Nov;8(11):E1520-E1524.
    Ann Transl Med. 2017 Jan;5(1):11.

PURPOSE: To determine whether the addition of pemetrexed to gefitinib (P+G)
provides clinical benefit, compared with gefitinib monotherapy, in patients with 
advanced nonsquamous (NS) non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and activating
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutations.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Chemotherapy-naïve for advanced NSCLC patients from China, 
Japan, Korea, and Taiwan (35 sites) with advanced, EGFR-mutant, NS NSCLC were
randomly assigned (2:1; computer-generated, interactive voice response) to
open-label pemetrexed (500 mg/m(2) on day 1 of every 21-day cycle) plus gefitinib
(250 mg/d [n = 129]) or gefitinib alone (n = 66). The primary end point was
progression-free-survival (PFS); secondary end points were time to progressive
disease, overall survival, tumor response rates, duration of response, and
safety. All end points were assessed in the intent-to-treat and safety population
(P+G, n = 126; gefitinib alone, n = 65).
RESULTS: PFS was significantly longer with P+G (median, 15.8 months; 95% CI, 12.6
to 18.3 months) than with gefitinib (median, 10.9 months; 95% CI, 9.7 to 13.8
months; adjusted hazard ratio [HR], 0.68; 95% CI, 0.48 to 0.96; one-sided P =
.014; two-sided P = .029). Results of EGFR exon 19 deletion and EGFR exon 21
L858R point mutation subgroup analyses were consistent with the intent-to-treat
result. P+G, compared with gefitinib alone, resulted in significantly longer time
to progressive disease (median, 16.2 v 10.9 months, respectively; HR, 0.66; 95%
CI, 0.47 to 0.93) and numerically longer duration of response (median, 15.4 v
11.3 months, respectively; HR, 0.74; 95% CI, 0.50 to 1.08). Tumor response rates 
did not differ. Overall survival data are immature. Drug-related grade 3 or 4
adverse events were more common with P+G, but toxicities were manageable.
CONCLUSION: P+G improved PFS compared with gefitinib alone in East Asian patients
with advanced NS NSCLC and activating EGFR mutations. This combination may offer 
EGFR mutation-positive patients new treatment options and improved clinical
outcomes compared with the current standard of care.

© 2016 by American Society of Clinical Oncology.

DOI: 10.1200/JCO.2016.66.9218 
PMID: 27507876  [PubMed - in process]


125. Clin Lung Cancer. 2016 Jul 9. pii: S1525-7304(16)30182-6. doi:
10.1016/j.cllc.2016.07.003. [Epub ahead of print]

Phase II Study of the EGFR-TKI Rechallenge With Afatinib in Patients With
Advanced NSCLC Harboring Sensitive EGFR Mutation Without T790M: Okayama Lung
Cancer Study Group Trial OLCSG 1403.

Oda N(1), Ichihara E(2), Hotta K(3), Ninomiya K(1), Ninomiya T(1), Kubo T(1),
Minami D(4), Murakami T(5), Yokoyama T(6), Harada D(7), Kuyama S(8), Ichikawa
H(9), Inoue K(10), Kishino D(5), Inoue M(11), Takigawa N(12), Shibayama T(4),
Harita S(13), Tanimoto M(1), Kiura K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Allergy and Respiratory Medicine, Okayama University Hospital,
Okayama, Japan. (2)Department of Allergy and Respiratory Medicine, Okayama
University Hospital, Okayama, Japan. Electronic address:
ichiha-e@md.okayama-u.ac.jp. (3)Department of Allergy and Respiratory Medicine,
Okayama University Hospital, Okayama, Japan; Center for Innovative Clinical
Medicine, Okayama University Hospital, Okayama, Japan. (4)Department of
Respiratory Medicine, National Hospital Organization Okayama Medical Center,
Okayama, Japan. (5)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Himeji Red Cross Hospital,
Himeji, Japan. (6)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Kurashiki Central Hospital,
Kurashiki, Japan. (7)Department of Thoracic Oncology, National Hospital
Organization Shikoku Cancer Center, Matsuyama, Japan. (8)Department of
Respiratory Medicine, National Hospital Organization Iwakuni Medical Center,
Yamaguchi, Japan. (9)Department of Respiratory Medicine, KKR Takamatsu Hospital, 
Takamatsu, Japan. (10)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Ehime Prefectural
Central Hospital, Matsuyama, Japan. (11)Department of Thoracic Surgery,
Shimonoseki City Hospital, Shimonoseki, Japan. (12)Department of General Internal
Medicine 4, Kawasaki Hospital, Kawasaki Medical School, Okayama, Japan.
(13)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Chugoku Central Hospital, Fukuyama,
Japan.

Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) as
first-line therapy for patients with EGFR-mutated non-small-cell lung cancer
(NSCLC) have shown a significantly better objective response rate and
progression-free survival than platinum doublet therapy. However, acquired
resistance often occurs within 12 months. One of the potential strategies for
treating acquired resistance in NSCLC is the readministration of EGFR-TKIs, a
strategy that has mainly been evaluated using gefitinib or erlotinib. The aim of 
the present study is to investigate the efficacy and safety of EGFR-TKI
readministration with afatinib in patients with advanced NSCLC harboring
activating EGFR mutations without T790M. The primary endpoint is progression-free
survival. The secondary endpoints include the objective response rate, disease
control rate, overall survival, toxicity, and quality of life. A total of 12
patients will be enrolled in this trial.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cllc.2016.07.003 
PMID: 27506489  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


126. Int J Oncol. 2016 Oct;49(4):1576-88. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2016.3644. Epub 2016 Aug 3.

Autophagic degradation of epidermal growth factor receptor in gefitinib-resistant
lung cancer by celastrol.

Xu SW(1), Law BY(1), Mok SW(1), Leung EL(1), Fan XX(1), Coghi PS(1), Zeng W(1),
Leung CH(2), Ma DL(3), Liu L(1), Wong VK(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Quality Research in Chinese Medicine, Macau University
of Science and Technology, Macau, P.R. China. (2)State Key Laboratory of Quality 
Research in Chinese Medicine, Institute of Chinese Medical Sciences, University
of Macau, Macau, P.R. China. (3)Department of Chemistry, Hong Kong Baptist
University, Hong Kong, P.R. China.

Drug resistance of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is highly correlated to the
mutation of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR). Although EGFR tyrosine
kinase inhibitors (TKIs) are available clinically, the molecular complexity of
NSCLC has made it necessary to search for alternative therapeutic approaches to
overcome the drug resistance of NSCLC. In the present study, we identified a
triterpene molecule derived from the herbal plant Tripterygium wilfordii,
celastrol, as a novel autophagy inducer. We demonstrate that celastrol exhibited 
selective cytotoxic effect towards EGFR mutant NSCLCs. In addition, celastrol
also facilitated the autophagic degradation of Hsp90 client protein including
EGFR and Akt on both EGFR wild-type and mutant NSCLCs via calcium-mediated
autophagy. Blockage of celastrol-induced autophagic degradation of EGFR by
autophagic inhibitor or calcium chelator decreased celastrol-mediated cell death 
in gefitinib-resistant NSCLCs. Overall, our findings suggest that celastrol may
be developed as an effective anticancer agent for treatment of
gefitinib-resistant NSCLC in the future.

DOI: 10.3892/ijo.2016.3644 
PMID: 27498688  [PubMed - in process]


127. Recent Pat Anticancer Drug Discov. 2016;11(4):393-400.

EGFR and EML4-ALK Updated Therapies in Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer.

Mello RA(1), Liu DJ, Aguiar PN, Tadokoro H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences and Medicine, University of Algarve, Campus 
de Gambelas, Ala nascente, Edifício 7, 3º Andar, 8005-139, Faro, Portugal.
ramondemello@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Non-small cell lung cancer is the leading cancer-related cause of
death.
OBJECTIVE: We review the latest therapies for NSCLC with EGFR and ELM4-ALK
mutations as well as the most relevant studies and promising patents.
METHOD: A literature search of PubMed database was carried out to identify recent
Clinical Trials using EGFR therapies and novel patents involving diagnosis and
therapies on NSCLC. We conducted a search to find new therapy strategies, new
biomarkers, and selected five patents we find relevant.
RESULTS: Over the last few years, identification of cancer harboring epidermal
growth factor receptor mutations (EGFR) or chromosomal rearrangements of
anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) led to new ways in classifying and treating
NSCLC. On the other hand, acquired resistance are a constantly challenge in the
management of patients with these mutations and new drugs options are in
development to improve and amplify treatment strategies.
CONCLUSIONS: Currently, EGFR TKIs (e.g.: erlotinib, gefitinib, osimertinib) and
ALK inhibitors (crizotinib, ceritinib, alectinib) provided a new face for
advanced NSCLC outcomes. To understand the disease molecular profile is mandatory
to define the best approach for each patient.


PMID: 27491402  [PubMed - in process]


128. Onco Targets Ther. 2016 Jul 8;9:4181-6. doi: 10.2147/OTT.S108242. eCollection
2016.

Clinical efficacy of first-generation EGFR-TKIs in patients with advanced
non-small-cell lung cancer harboring EGFR exon 20 mutations.

Chen D(1), Song Z(2), Cheng G(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of
Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing. (2)Department of Chemotherapy.
(3)Department of Pathology, Zhejiang Cancer Hospital, Hangzhou, People's Republic
of China.

PURPOSE: Subsets of non-small-cell lung cancer patients with epidermal growth
factor receptor (EGFR) mutations carry uncommon subtypes. We evaluated the
efficacy of first-generation EGFR-tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs; erlotinib,
gefitinib, and icotinib) in patients with non-small-cell lung cancer carrying
insertions and T790M and S768I mutations in EGFR exon 20.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Patients carrying EGFR exon 20 insertion/T790M/S768I
mutations and treated with EGFR-TKIs were evaluated from 2005 to 2014 in Zhejiang
Cancer Hospital. The efficacy was evaluated using the Kaplan-Meier method and
compared with the log-rank test.
RESULTS: Sixty-two patients with exon 20 insertion/T790M/S768I mutations were
enrolled. Mutations including exon 20 insertions and T790M and S768I mutations
were observed in 29, 23, and ten patients, respectively. In total, the response
rate and median progression-free survival (PFS) were 8.1% and 2.1 months,
respectively. Patients with S768I mutation manifested the longest median PFS (2.7
months), followed by those with T790M (2.4 months) and exon 20 insertions (1.9
months; P=0.022). Patients with complex mutations show a better PFS than those
with single mutations (2.7 months vs 1.9 months; P=0.034).
CONCLUSION: First-generation EGFR-TKIs are less effective in patients with exon
20 uncommon mutations than in those with common mutations. Patients with complex 
mutations benefited more from first-generation EGFR-TKIs than those with single
mutations.

DOI: 10.2147/OTT.S108242 
PMCID: PMC4944908
PMID: 27468240  [PubMed]


129. Oncotarget. 2016 Aug 9;7(32):52392-52403. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.10721.

Inhibition of SREBP increases gefitinib sensitivity in non-small cell lung cancer
cells.

Li J(1,)(2), Yan H(1,)(2), Zhao L(1,)(2), Jia W(1,)(2), Yang H(3), Liu L(1,)(2), 
Zhou X(1,)(2), Miao P(1,)(2), Sun X(1,)(2), Song S(1,)(2), Zhao X(1,)(2), Liu
J(1,)(2), Huang G(1,)(2,)(3,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nuclear Medicine, Ren Ji Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai 
Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200127, China. (2)Institute of Clinical Nuclear
Medicine, Ren Ji Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University,
Shanghai 200127, China. (3)Institute of Health Sciences, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University School of Medicine & Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 200025, China. (4)Shanghai University of
Medicine and Health Sciences, Shanghai 201318, China.

The clinical success of EGFR inhibitors in patients with lung cancer is limited
by the inevitable development of treatment resistance. Here, we show that
inhibition of SREBP increase gefitinib sensitivity in vitro and in vivo.
Interference of SREBP1 binding partner MARVELD1 potentiate the therapeutic effect
of gefitinib as well. Mechanistically, SREBP inhibition decreases the cell
membrane fluidity, results in a decreased tyrosine phosphorylation of EGFR.
Therefore, targeting lipid metabolism combined with EGFR-TKIs is potentially a
novel therapeutic strategies for cancer treatment.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.10721 
PMCID: PMC5239560
PMID: 27447558  [PubMed - in process]


130. J Med Econ. 2017 Jan;20(1):1-7. Epub 2016 Aug 3.

Financial consequences of a payment-by-results scheme in Catalonia: gefitinib in 
advanced EGFR-mutation positive non-small-cell lung cancer.

Clopes A(1), Gasol M(2), Cajal R(3), Segú L(4), Crespo R(1), Mora R(2), Simon
S(3), Cordero LA(3), Calle C(1), Gilabert A(2), Germà JR(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Catalan Institute of Oncology , Barcelona , Spain. (2)b Catalan Health
Service , Barcelona , Spain. (3)c AstraZeneca , Madrid , Spain. (4)d Oblikue
Consulting , Barcelona , Spain.

BACKGROUND: In 2011 the first payment-by-results (PbR) scheme in Catalonia was
signed between the Catalan Institute of Oncology (ICO), the Catalan Health
Service, and AstraZeneca (AZ) for the introduction of gefitinib in the treatment 
of advanced EGFR-mutation positive non-small-cell lung cancer. The PbR scheme
includes two evaluation points: at week 8, responses, stabilization and
progression were evaluated, and at week 16 stabilization was confirmed. AZ was to
reimburse the total treatment cost of patients that failed treatment, defined as 
progression at weeks 8 or 16.
OBJECTIVE: To estimate the financial consequences of this PbR reimbursement model
and determine the perception of the stakeholders involved in the agreement.
METHODS: Differential drug costs between two scenarios, with and without the PbR,
were calculated. A qualitative investigation of the organizational elements was
performed by interviewing the parties involved in the agreement.
RESULTS: Forty-one patients were included from June 2011 to October 2013 and
assessed at two evaluation points. Clinical results were comparable to those
observed in the pivotal studies of gefitinib. The difference in the cost of
gefitinib using the PbR compared to the traditional purchasing scenario was 6.17%
less at 8 weeks, 11.18% at 16 weeks and 4.15% less for the overall treatment. The
PbR resulted in total savings of around €36,000 (€880 per patient). From an
operational and organizational perspective, the availability of adequate data
systems to measure outcomes and monitor accountability and the involvement of
healthcare professionals were acknowledged as crucial.
CONCLUSIONS: Tangible and intangible benefits were identified with respect to the
interests of the parties involved. This has led to the incorporation of
innovation for patients under acceptable conditions.

DOI: 10.1080/13696998.2016.1215991 
PMID: 27441909  [PubMed - in process]


131. Clin Cancer Res. 2016 Oct 15;22(20):5130-5140. Epub 2016 Jul 19.

Preclinical Comparison of Osimertinib with Other EGFR-TKIs in EGFR-Mutant NSCLC
Brain Metastases Models, and Early Evidence of Clinical Brain Metastases
Activity.

Ballard P(1), Yates JW(2), Yang Z(3), Kim DW(4), Yang JC(5), Cantarini M(6),
Pickup K(7), Jordan A(7), Hickey M(8), Grist M(7), Box M(7), Johnström P(9),
Varnäs K(10), Malmquist J(10), Thress KS(11), Jänne PA(12), Cross D(13).

Author information: 
(1)iMED Oncology, AstraZeneca, Macclesfield, United Kingdom.
Darren.Cross@astrazeneca.com pbdmpk@gmail.com. (2)iMED Oncology, AstraZeneca,
Cambridge, United Kingdom. (3)Asia and Emerging Markets iMED, AstraZeneca,
Shanghai, China. (4)Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul National University
Hospital, Seoul, Korea. (5)National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei City,
Taiwan. (6)Global Medicines Development, AstraZeneca, Macclesfield, United
Kingdom. (7)iMED Oncology, AstraZeneca, Macclesfield, United Kingdom.
(8)AstraZeneca, Cambridge, United Kingdom. (9)AstraZeneca Translational Science
Centre, Stockholm, Sweden. Department of Clinical Neuroscience, Karolinska
Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. (10)Department of Clinical Neuroscience,
Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. (11)iMED Oncology, AstraZeneca,
Gatehouse Park, Waltham, Massachusetts. (12)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston,
Massachusetts. (13)iMED Oncology, AstraZeneca, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
Darren.Cross@astrazeneca.com pbdmpk@gmail.com.

PURPOSE: Approximately one-third of patients with non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC) harboring tumors with EGFR-tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI)-sensitizing
mutations (EGFRm) experience disease progression during treatment due to brain
metastases. Despite anecdotal reports of EGFR-TKIs providing benefit in some
patients with EGFRm NSCLC brain metastases, there is a clinical need for novel
EGFR-TKIs with improved efficacy against brain lesions.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We performed preclinical assessments of brain penetration
and activity of osimertinib (AZD9291), an oral, potent, irreversible EGFR-TKI
selective for EGFRm and T790M resistance mutations, and other EGFR-TKIs in
various animal models of EGFR-mutant NSCLC brain metastases. We also present case
reports of previously treated patients with EGFRm-advanced NSCLC and brain
metastases who received osimertinib in the phase I/II AURA study (NCT01802632).
RESULTS: Osimertinib demonstrated greater penetration of the mouse blood-brain
barrier than gefitinib, rociletinib (CO-1686), or afatinib, and at clinically
relevant doses induced sustained tumor regression in an EGFRm PC9 mouse brain
metastases model; rociletinib did not achieve tumor regression. Under positron
emission tomography micro-dosing conditions, [(11)C]osimertinib showed markedly
greater exposure in the cynomolgus monkey brain than [(11)C]rociletinib and
[(11)C]gefitinib. Early clinical evidence of osimertinib activity in previously
treated patients with EGFRm-advanced NSCLC and brain metastases is also reported.
CONCLUSIONS: Osimertinib may represent a clinically significant treatment option 
for patients with EGFRm NSCLC and brain metastases. Further investigation of
osimertinib in this patient population is ongoing. Clin Cancer Res; 22(20);
5130-40. ©2016 AACR.

©2016 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-16-0399 
PMID: 27435396  [PubMed - in process]


132. BMC Cancer. 2016 Jul 18;16:491. doi: 10.1186/s12885-016-2519-3.

AT-101 enhances gefitinib sensitivity in non-small cell lung cancer with EGFR
T790M mutations.

Zhao R(1,)(2), Zhou S(3), Xia B(4), Zhang CY(1,)(2), Hai P(1,)(2), Zhe H(1,)(2), 
Wang YY(5,)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of radiation oncology, General Hospital of Ningxia Medical
University, Yinchuan, 750004, Ningxia, China. (2)Cancer Institute, Ningxia
Medical University, Yinchuan, 750004, Ningxia, China. (3)Graduated School,
Ningxia Medical University, Yinchuan, 750004, Ningxia, China. (4)Department of
Radiation Oncology, Hangzhou Cancer Hospital, Nanjing Medical University,
Hangzhou, 310000, Zhejiang, China. (5)Department of radiation oncology, General
Hospital of Ningxia Medical University, Yinchuan, 750004, Ningxia, China.
fdwyy1981@hotmail.com. (6)Cancer Institute, Ningxia Medical University, Yinchuan,
750004, Ningxia, China. fdwyy1981@hotmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Although epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors 
(EGFR TKIs) have become the standard care of patients with advanced EGFR-mutant
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), development of acquired resistance is
inevitable. A secondary mutation of threonine 790 (T790M) is associated with
approximately half of the cases of acquired resistance. Strategies or agents to
overcome this type of resistance are still limited. In this study, enhanced
antitumor effect of AT-101, a-pan-Bcl-2 inhibitor, on gefitinib was explored in
NSCLC with T790M mutation.
METHODS: The effect of cotreatment with AT-101 and gefitinib on the viability of 
NSCLC cell lines harboring acquired T790M mutation was investigated using the MTT
assay. The cellular apoptosis of NSCLC cells after cotreatment with AT-101 and
gefitinib was assessed by FITC-annexin V/PI assay and Western blots analysis. The
potential underlying mechanisms of the enhanced therapeutic effect for AT-101 was
also studied using Western blots analysis. The in vivo anti-cancer efficacy of
the combination with AT-101 and gefitinib was examined in a mouse xenograft
model.
RESULTS: In this study, we found that treatment with AT-101 in combination with
gefitinib significantly inhibited cell proliferation, as well as promoted
apoptosis of EGFR TKIs resistant lung cancer cells. The apoptotic effects of the 
use of AT-101 was related to the blocking of antiapoptotic protein: Bcl-2,
Bcl-xl, and Mcl-1 and downregrulation of the molecules in EGFR pathway. The
observed enhancements of tumor growth suppression in xenografts supported the
reverse effect of AT-101 in NSCLC with T790M mutation, which has been found in in
vitro studies before.
CONCLUSIONS: AT-101 enhances gefitinib sensitivity in NSCLC with EGFR T790M
mutations. The addition of AT-101 to gefitinib is a promising strategy to
overcome EGFR TKIs resistance in NSCLC with EGFR T790M mutations.

DOI: 10.1186/s12885-016-2519-3 
PMCID: PMC4950625
PMID: 27431492  [PubMed - in process]


133. Med Clin (Barc). 2016 Apr;146 Suppl 1:7-11. doi: 10.1016/S0025-7753(16)30257-3.

[Mechanism of action and preclinical development of afatinib].

[Article in Spanish]

Diz Taín P(1), González AL(2), García-Palomo A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Oncología Médica, Complejo Asistencial Universitario de León
(CAULE), León, España. Electronic address: pilardiz@tudiscovirtual.com.
(2)Servicio de Oncología Médica, Complejo Asistencial Universitario de León
(CAULE), León, España.

Afatinib, together with gefitinib and erlotinib, is approved for first-line
treatment of advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) with activating
mutations of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR). This is an irreversible
inhibitor of the ErbB family, acting on EGFR (HER1, ErbB1), ErbB2 (HER2) and
ErbB4 (HER4). Covalent attachment to cysteine residues in the catalytic domain of
EGFR, HER2 and ErbB4 inhibits the tyrosine kinase activity (TKIs) of these
receptors, decreasing auto- and transphosphorylation between ErbB dimers, and
thus blocking the activity of downstream signalling pathways related to growth
and apoptosis suppression. In preclinical models, this has resulted in a
reduction in tumour size. Furthermore, due to its mechanism of action, afatinib
may be more potent than the first-generation EGFR TKIs (gefitinib and erlotinib) 
and may even be able to overcome acquired resistance to such treatments. Finally,
because of the demonstrated synergism with other chemotherapeutic and target
agents, it could be interesting to enhance its clinical development in
combination with other drugs.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier España, S.L.U. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S0025-7753(16)30257-3 
PMID: 27426242  [PubMed - in process]


134. Invest New Drugs. 2016 Oct;34(5):584-95. doi: 10.1007/s10637-016-0370-7. Epub
2016 Sep 1.

A phase I dose-escalation study of LY2875358, a bivalent MET antibody, given as
monotherapy or in combination with erlotinib or gefitinib in Japanese patients
with advanced malignancies.

Yoh K(1), Doi T(2), Ohmatsu H(1), Kojima T(1), Takahashi H(1), Zenke Y(1),
Wacheck V(3), Enatsu S(4), Nakamura T(4), Turner K(3), Uenaka K(4).

Author information: 
(1)National Cancer Center Hospital East, 5-1, Kashiwanoha 6-chome, Kashiwa,
Chiba, 277-8577, Japan. (2)National Cancer Center Hospital East, 5-1, Kashiwanoha
6-chome, Kashiwa, Chiba, 277-8577, Japan. tdoi@east.ncc.go.jp. (3)Eli Lilly and
Company, Indianapolis, IN, USA. (4)Eli Lilly Japan K. K., Kobe, Japan.

Background MET is a tyrosine kinase receptor involved in the regulation of cell
proliferation and migration. Reported here are the phase I dose-escalation
results for LY2875358, a monoclonal antibody against MET, in Japanese patients
with advanced malignancies. Methods The study comprised a 3 + 3 dose-escalation
part for LY2875358 monotherapy in patients with advanced malignancies (Part A)
followed by an assessment of LY2875358 in combination with erlotinib or gefitinib
in patients with non-small cell lung cancer (Part B). LY2875358 was administered 
once every 2 weeks. The primary objective was to evaluate the safety and
tolerability of LY2875358; secondary objectives included evaluation of
pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics, and antitumor activity. Results Eleven
patients received LY2875358 monotherapy at 3 dose levels (700 mg, N = 3; 1400 mg,
N = 3; 2000 mg, N = 5) and 6 patients received LY2875358 2000 mg in combination
with erlotinib (N = 3) or gefitinib (N = 3). No dose-limiting toxicities or
serious adverse events related to LY2875358 were observed. The most frequently
reported drug-related adverse events were hypoalbuminemia (2 patients) in Part A 
and dermatitis acneiform (4 patients) in Part B. LY2875358 area under the curve
(AUC) and maximum concentration (Cmax) increased with dose over the dose range of
700 mg to 2000 mg. A best response of stable disease was achieved by 2/11
patients in Part A and 4/6 patients in Part B (disease control rate: 35 %).
Conclusions LY2875358 at doses up to 2000 mg demonstrated a favorable safety and 
tolerability profile as monotherapy or in combination with erlotinib or gefitinib
in Japanese patients with advanced malignancies.

DOI: 10.1007/s10637-016-0370-7 
PMCID: PMC5007274
PMID: 27422720  [PubMed - in process]


135. Oncotarget. 2016 Aug 16;7(33):52862-52869. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.10594.

Overexpression of mutant EGFR protein indicates a better survival benefit from
EGFR-TKI therapy in non-small cell lung cancer.

Ling Y(1), Yang X(2), Li W(1), Li Z(1), Yang L(1), Qiu T(1), Guo L(1), Dong L(1),
Li L(1), Ying J(1), Lin D(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, National Cancer Center/Cancer Hospital, Chinese
Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, China.
(2)Key laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Translational Research (Ministry of
Education), Department of Pathology, Peking University Cancer Hospital &
Institute, Beijing, China.

BACKGROUND: Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is a novel target for therapy
in a subset of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Tumors with EGFR mutations
showed good response to EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs). We aimed to
identify the discriminating capacity of immunohistochemistry (IHC) to detect EGFR
L858R and del E746-A750 mutations in NSCLC patients and predict EGFR TKIs
response.
METHODS: We collected specimens from 200 patients with NSCLC whose EGFR mutation 
status had been validated by direct DNA sequencing. IHC analyses using EGFR
mutation-specific antibodies were employed for all samples. After staining and
scoring, the sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value (PPV) and
negative predictive value (NPV) were calculated.
RESULTS: The sensitivity, specificity, PPV, and NPV of IHC using EGFR del
E746-A750 and L858R mutation antibodies were 95.0%/95.1%, 85.7%/94.1%,
74.0%/91.8%, and 97.6%/96.5%, respectively. When score 2+ and 3+ were considered 
as positive, the sensitivity, specificity, PPV, and NPV were 53.3%/36.6%,
99.3%/100%, 97.0%/100%, and 83.2%/65.3%, respectively. The median
progression-free survival (PFS) after the start of gefitinib treatment was
significantly longer in patients with a high score for mutant EGFR expression
than in those with a low score (31.0 versus 13.0 months, p <0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: IHC with EGFR mutation-specific antibodies is a promising screening 
method for detecting EGFR mutations in NSCLC patients. Otherwise, quantitative
analysis of mutant EGFR expression might also predict the efficacy of TKIs
treatment for NSCLC patients harboring sensitive EGFR mutation.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.10594 
PMCID: PMC5288154
PMID: 27418143  [PubMed - in process]


136. Oncotarget. 2016 Aug 2;7(31):49948-49960. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.10521.

Long non-coding RNA BC087858 induces non-T790M mutation acquired resistance to
EGFR-TKIs by activating PI3K/AKT and MEK/ERK pathways and EMT in non-small-cell
lung cancer.

Pan H(1), Jiang T(1), Cheng N(1), Wang Q(1), Ren S(1), Li X(2), Zhao C(2), Zhang 
L(1), Cai W(1), Zhou C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Shanghai Pulmonary Hospital, Tongji University
School of Medicine, Yangpu District, Shanghai, P.R. China. (2)Department of Lung 
Cancer and Immunology, Shanghai Pulmonary Hospital, Tongji University, Tongji
University Medical School Cancer Institute, Shanghai, P.R. China.

Our previous study demonstrated that long non-coding RNA (lncRNA) BC087858 could 
stimulate acquired resistance to EGFR-TKIs in non-small cell lung (NSCLC) but the
specific regulatory mechanism remained unknown. We aimed to explore the role and 
mechanism of lncRNA BC087858 on EGFR-TKIs acquired resistance. LncRNA BC087858
mRNA expression was detected by reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction
in different NSCLC cell lines and tissues. The relationship between BC087858
expression and clinicopathological factors was performed by Cox multivariate
regression analysis. Small-interfering RNA, flow cytometry and trans-well assay
were conducted to explore the biological functions of BC087858. Western blotting 
was used to analyze the target proteins expression. Over-expression was observed 
in NSCLC cells and patients with acquired resistance to EGFR-TKIs and
significantly associated with a shorter progression-free survival (PFS) (12.0 vs.
17.0 months, P = 0.0217) in tumors with respond to EGFR-TKIs. The significant
relationship was not observed in patients with T790M mutation (median PFS 17.6
vs. 12.5 months, P = 0.522) but in patients with non-T790M (median PFS 8.0 vs.
18.25 months,P = 0.0427). Down-regulation of BC087858 could significantly promote
PC9/R and PC9/G2 cells invasion (P < 0.05; respectively). BC087858 knockdown
restored gefitinib sensitivity in acquired resistant cells with non-T790M and
inhibited the activation of the PI3K/AKT and MEK/ERK pathways and
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) via up- regulating ZEB1 and Snail. In
conclusion, LncRNA BC087858 could promote cells invasion and induce non-T790M
mutation acquired resistance to EGFR-TKIs by activating PI3K/AKT and MEK/ERK
pathways and EMT via up- regulating ZEB1 and Snail in NSCLC.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.10521 
PMCID: PMC5226560
PMID: 27409677  [PubMed - in process]


137. J Med Chem. 2016 Aug 11;59(15):7111-24. doi: 10.1021/acs.jmedchem.6b00403. Epub
2016 Jul 21.

Discovery and Structural Optimization of N5-Substituted
6,7-Dioxo-6,7-dihydropteridines as Potent and Selective Epidermal Growth Factor
Receptor (EGFR) Inhibitors against L858R/T790M Resistance Mutation.

Hao Y(1), Wang X(1), Zhang T(2), Sun D(1), Tong Y(1), Xu Y(1), Chen H(1), Tong
L(2), Zhu L(1), Zhao Z(1), Chen Z(1), Ding J(2), Xie H(2), Xu Y(1), Li H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Key Laboratory of New Drug Design, Shanghai Key Laboratory of
Chemical Biology, State Key Laboratory of Bioreactor Engineering, School of
Pharmacy, East China University of Science and Technology , Shanghai, 200237,
China. (2)Division of Anti-Tumor Pharmacology, State Key Laboratory of Drug
Research, Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Sciences ,
Shanghai, 201203, China.

EGFR-targeted inhibitors (gefitinib and erlotinib) provided an effective strategy
for the treatment of non-small-cell lung cancer. However, the EGFR T790M
secondary mutation has become a leading cause of clinically acquired resistance
to these agents. Herein, on the basis of the previously reported irreversible
EGFR inhibitor (compound 9), we present a structure-based design approach, which 
is rationalized via analyzing its binding model and comparing the differences of 
gatekeeper pocket between the T790M mutant and wild-type (WT) EGFR kinases.
Guided by these results, a novel 6,7-dioxo-6,7-dihydropteridine scaffold was
discovered and hydrophobic modifications at N5-position were conducted to
strengthen nonpolar contacts and improve mutant selectivity over EGFR(WT).
Finally, the most representative compound 17d was identified. This work
demonstrates the power of structure-based strategy in discovering lead compounds 
and provides molecular insights into the selectivity of EGFR(L858R/T790M) over
EGFR(WT), which may play an important role in designing new classes of
mutant-selective EGFR inhibitors.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.jmedchem.6b00403 
PMID: 27396610  [PubMed - in process]


138. Curr Drug Deliv. 2016 Jul 8. [Epub ahead of print]

Pharmacokinetics of Gefitinb: Roles of Drug Metabolizing Enzymes and
Transporters.

Zhao C, Han SY(1), Li PP.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Translational Research (Ministry of
Education), Department of Integration of Chinese and Western Medicine, Peking
University School of Oncology, Beijing Cancer Hospital & Institute, Beijing
100142, PR China.

Gefitinib (Iressa, AstraZeneca) has been widely used for the treatment of locally
advanced or metastatic non-small cell lung cancer. A numbers of studies have been
reported on its pharmacokinetics profiles, especially on the metabolism. In this 
review, we have comprehensively summarized the pharmacokinetic characteristics of
gefitinib: absorption, distribution, metabolism and excretion (ADME). Overall,
gefitinb reached the maximum plasma level relatively fast and distributed
extensively. It underwent extensive biotransformation and predominantly excreted 
in feces, less than 7% in the urine. CYP450 enzymes played critical roles in the 
process of gefitinib metabolism. The major enzyme involved in the metabolism was 
CYP3A4 with other CYP450 enzymes playing a secondary role. A high clearance of
gefitinb might lead to drug resistance because of the lowered drug concentration.
The transporters involved in pharmacokinetics of gefitinib including the
ATP-binding cassette and the solute carrier superfamily. The enhanced efflux and 
decreased uptake by transporters were another important drug resistance
mechanism. Understanding the pharmacokinetics property of gefitinib may provide
valuable and new information for dealing with drug resistance and making
personalized therapy according to their interindividual variability.


PMID: 27396387  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


139. Oncotarget. 2016 Jul 6. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.10420. [Epub ahead of print]

Evaluation on efficacy and safety of the addition of X-knife therapy to gefitinib
in NSCLC patients with symptomatic brain metastases.

Cai L(1), Qiu X(2), Yang H(3), Lai M(1), Shan C(1), Hong W(1), Li J(1), Luo L(1),
Zhang P(1), Wang L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of oncology, Guangdong 999 Brain Hospital, Guangzhou, China.
(2)Department of neurosurgery of Beijing Tiantan Hospital, Capital Medical
University, Beijing, China. (3)Department of oncology, the First Affiliated
Hospital of Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, China.

BACKGROUND: Stereotactic radiosurgery (SRS) is a widely used therapy for brain
metastases(BMs) in Non-small cell lung cancer(NSCLC). However, its role in
symptomatic patients with EGFR mutation remains unclear. We have retrospectively 
reviewed the clinical data of patients with symptomatic BMs whom received SRS as 
a salvage approach and concurrent gifitinib therapy.
METHODS: Seven patients with primary NSCLC, symptomatic BMs, and EGFR mutation
were identified in a retrospective review of patients treated with SRS using
X-knife at Guangdong 999 Brain Hospital between 1 January 2012 and 31 August
2014. The median follow-up of these patients was 16 months. Image fusion
technique was used to determine cumulative doses to targeted lesions, whole
brain, and critical brain structures. Toxicities and complications were
identified by clinical records.
RESULTS: SRS(X-knife) was selected to be performed on seven patients (two males
and five females) diagnosed with NSCLC and EGFR mutation due to the presence of
encephaledema, compression of ventricles, or other complications. Neurological
symptoms (such as paresis, aphasia, sensory and visual disturbances) were not
present in any patients before or after SRS treatment, and the postoperative
Karnofsky performance status(KPS) was improved in all patients. Median overall
survival(OS) was 16 months and median progression free survival(PFS) was 10
months.
CONCLUSIONS: The improvement of KPS and survival were reliable by SRS(X-knife)
with concurrent gifitinib therapy in NSCLC patients with symptomatic BMs, and
EGFR mutation. Given the small sample size, further prospective studies with a
greater number of patients are warranted to confirm our results.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.10420 
PMID: 27391341  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


140. Thorac Cancer. 2016 Jul;7(4):498-502. doi: 10.1111/1759-7714.12335. Epub 2016 Feb
2.

Gefitinib for asymptomatic brain metastasis from advanced non-small cell lung
cancer: Report of a favourable outcome.

Liu WY(1), Liu YT(2), Yang L(3), Zhang Y(1), Liu P(2), Wang Y(2), Hui ZG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Cancer Hospital and Institute Peking Union
Medical College (PUMC) and Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences (CAMS) Beijing
China. (2)Department of Medical Oncology, Cancer Hospital and Institute Peking
Union Medical College (PUMC) and Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences (CAMS)
Beijing China. (3)Department of Pathology, Cancer Hospital and Institute Peking
Union Medical College (PUMC) and Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences (CAMS)
Beijing China.

Brain metastasis (BM) is common in patients with non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC). Although epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase
inhibitors (TKIs) have now been included as standard treatment options for NSCLC 
harboring EGFR-activating mutations, only a few prospective reports demonstrate
the efficacy of these agents in a BM setting. We report a case of a patient with 
advanced NSCLC, in which oral gefitinib documented a significant antitumor effect
on parallel progression of extracranial lesion and BM occurred during
chemotherapy.

DOI: 10.1111/1759-7714.12335 
PMCID: PMC4930972
PMID: 27385995  [PubMed]


141. Thorac Cancer. 2016 Jul;7(4):422-7. doi: 10.1111/1759-7714.12346. Epub 2016 Mar
24.

Pilot study of radiofrequency hyperthermia in combination with gefitinib in
gefitinib-effective patients with advanced NSCLC.

Qin Y(1), Sun Y(2), Liu Y(3), Luo Y(1), Zhu J(3).

Author information: 
(1)West China School of Medicine Sichuan University Chengdu China. (2)Department 
of Radiation Oncology West China Hospital, Sichuan University Chengdu China.
(3)Department of Thoracic Oncology West China Hospital, Sichuan University
Chengdu China.

BACKGROUND: Non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is the leading cause of death from
cancer in China. Gefitinib is effective for patients with positive epidermal
growth factor receptor gene mutation; however, acquired drug resistance
counteracts the duration response. Hyperthermia is widely clinically applied in
the treatment of solid tumors. This pilot study was designed to evaluate the
feasibility of the combination of gefitinib and hyperthermia.
METHODS: Patients newly diagnosed with advanced NSCLC were screened. Eleven
patients who responded to first-line gefitinib treatment were enrolled in the
study. Along with 250 mg gefitinib daily, local radiofrequency hyperthermia was
administered twice a week until tumor progression was observed. The serum, heat
shock protein (HSP)70, was also frequently detected during the course.
RESULTS: The most common toxicity included skin rash (81.8%) and abnormal liver
function (45.5%) when treated with gefitinib, and fatty scleroma (36.4%) was
observed when combined with hyperthermia. Grade 3 side effects (skin rash)
occurred in only one patient. Median progression-free survival was 22 months (95%
confidence interval [CI]: 12.95-31.05 months) and median overall survival was 26 
months (95% CI: 22.81-29.19 months). Serum HSP70 concentration increased and
maintained a significantly high level compared with the baseline before
hyperthermia administration.
CONCLUSIONS: The novel therapy of gefitinib combined with radiofrequency
hyperthermia is safe and effective for advanced NSCLC patients. Whether an
improvement in therapeutic efficacy is associated with the elevation of serum
HSP70 concentration requires further study.

DOI: 10.1111/1759-7714.12346 
PMCID: PMC4930961
PMID: 27385984  [PubMed]


142. Onco Targets Ther. 2016 Jun 22;9:3711-26. doi: 10.2147/OTT.S106399. eCollection
2016.

Intrinsic resistance to EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors in advanced
non-small-cell lung cancer with activating EGFR mutations.

Wang J(1), Wang B(1), Chu H(1), Yao Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, General Hospital, Jinan Command of the People's
Liberation Army, Jinan, People's Republic of China.

Identifying activating EGFR mutations is a useful predictive strategy that helps 
select a population of advanced non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients for
treatment with EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs). Patients with sensitizing 
EGFR mutations (predominantly an in-frame deletion in exon 19 and an L858R
substitution) are highly responsive to first-generation EGFR TKIs, such as
gefitinib and erlotinib, and show improved progression-free survival without
serious side effects. However, all patients with activating EGFR mutations who
are initially responsive to EGFR TKIs eventually develop acquired resistance
after a median progression-free survival of 10-16 months, followed by disease
progression. Moreover, ~20%-30% of NSCLC patients have no objective tumor
regression on initial EGFR TKI treatment, although they harbor an activating EGFR
mutation. These patients represent an NSCLC subgroup that is defined as having
intrinsic or primary resistance to EGFR TKIs. Different mechanisms of acquired
EGFR TKI resistance have been identified, and several novel compounds have been
developed to reverse acquired resistance, but little is known about EGFR TKI
intrinsic resistance. In this review, we summarize the latest findings involving 
mechanisms of intrinsic resistance to EGFR TKIs in advanced NSCLC with activating
EGFR mutations and present possible therapeutic strategies to overcome this
resistance.

DOI: 10.2147/OTT.S106399 
PMCID: PMC4922765
PMID: 27382309  [PubMed]


143. Cell Death Dis. 2016 Jun 30;7(6):e2290. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2016.192.

TC-N19, a novel dual inhibitor of EGFR and cMET, efficiently overcomes EGFR-TKI
resistance in non-small-cell lung cancer cells.

Wu DW(1), Chen TC(1), Huang HS(1), Lee H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Cancer Biology and Drug Discovery, College of Medical
Science and Technology, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan.

Epidermal growth factor receptor-tyrosine kinase inhibitors (EGFR-TKIs) show a
clinical benefit when used to treat patients with EGFR-mutated non-small-cell
lung cancer (NSCLC), but this treatment unfortunately fails in patients with
TKI-resistant tumors. We here provide evidence that TC-N19 (N19), a novel dual
inhibitor of EGFR and cMET, efficiently overcomes the EGFR-TKI resistance in
EGFR-mutated NSCLC cells via simultaneous degradation of both proteins by
ubiquitin proteasomes. Comparison with HSP90 inhibitor treatment and knockdown of
EGFR and cMET by small hairpin RNAs reveal that the reduction of EGFR and cMET
expression by N19 is responsible for overcoming the intrinsic TKI resistance
mediated by paxillin (PXN) in high PXN-expressing cells, PXN-overexpressing PC9
cells (PC9-PXN), the EGFR-T790M-mediated TKI resistance in H1975 and CL97 cells, 
and the acquired resistance to gefitinib in gefitinib-resistant PC9 cells
(PC9GR). Annexin V-PI staining assay showed that the induction of apoptosis in
NSCLC cells by N19 depended on the reduction in levels of both proteins.
Xenograft tumor formation in nude mice induced by a PC9-PXN-stable clone and by
PC9GR cells was nearly completely suppressed by N19 treatment, with no changes in
animal body weight. MTT assays of normal lung cells and reticulocytes showed no
cytotoxicity responses to N19. In summary, N19 may act as a novel dual inhibitor 
of EGFR and cMET that induces apoptosis in TKI-resistant EGFR-mutated NSCLC cells
and suppresses xenograft tumor formation. We suggest that N19 may be a potential 
new-generation TKI or HSP90 inhibitor used for treatment of NSCLC patients who
show resistance to current TKI-targeting therapies.

DOI: 10.1038/cddis.2016.192 
PMCID: PMC5108342
PMID: 27362807  [PubMed - in process]


144. Comput Biol Chem. 2016 Oct;64:126-133. doi: 10.1016/j.compbiolchem.2016.05.009.
Epub 2016 Jun 4.

Systematic profiling of chemotherapeutic drug response to EGFR gatekeeper
mutation in non-small cell lung cancer.

Yao J(1), Zhao X(2), Ding X(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pneumology, The Affiliated Hospital of Nantong University,
Dongtai 224200, China. (2)Department of Oncology, The Affiliated Hospital of
Nantong University, Dongtai 224200, China. Electronic address:
xiaojuanzzhao@sina.cn. (3)Department of Pharmacy, The Affiliated Hospital of
Nantong University, Dongtai 224200, China.

The epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) targeted therapy has been established
as a routine strategy for treating non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). However,
the gatekeeper mutation T790M in EGFR active site can confer generic resistance
to tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs), largely limiting the clinical applications 
of chemotherapeutic drugs in NSCLC. Here, a combined method of computational
analysis and growth inhibition assay was described to systematically investigate 
the molecular response profile of wild-type-sparing and mutant-resistant
inhibitors to the EGFR T790M mutation. The profile is highly consistent with
previous clinical observations; three first-line chemotherapeutic drugs
Gefitinib, Erlotinib and Lapatinib are established with acquired resistance upon 
the mutation. In addition, it was found that the alkaloid compound K252a, a
Staurosporine analog isolated from Nocardiopisis sp., can selectively target the 
EGFR T790M mutant over wild-type kinase (23-fold selectivity), suggesting that
the compound is good lead candidate for development of T790M mutant-selective
inhibitors. Structural analysis revealed that the mutation-resulting Met790
residue does not induce steric hindrance to the EGFR T790M-K252a complex system, 
while a number of hydrophobic forces, van der Waals contacts and S⋯π interactions
are observed between the aromatic rings of K252a and the sulfhydryl group of
Met790, contributing considerable stabilization energy to the system.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.compbiolchem.2016.05.009 
PMID: 27341162  [PubMed - in process]


145. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol. 2016 Aug;78(2):377-82. doi:
10.1007/s00280-016-3097-4. Epub 2016 Jun 23.

Pharmacokinetic parameters of gefitinib predict efficacy and toxicity in patients
with advanced non-small cell lung cancer harboring EGFR mutations.

Mizoguchi K(1,)(2), Nakamura Y(3,)(4), Sano K(5), Sato S(6), Ikegami Y(5),
Motoshima K(1), Takemoto S(1), Ogawara D(1), Senju H(1), Sugasaki N(7), Ikeda
T(1), Yamaguchi H(1), Nakatomi K(1), Fukuda M(8), Izumikawa K(2), Mukae H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Second Department of Internal Medicine, Nagasaki University School of
Medicine, Nagasaki, Japan. (2)Department of Infectious Diseases, Unit of
Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, Nagasaki University Graduate School of
Biomedical Sciences, Nagasaki, Japan. (3)Second Department of Internal Medicine, 
Nagasaki University School of Medicine, Nagasaki, Japan. yi-nakamu@umin.ac.jp.
(4)Department of Medical Oncology, Division of Thoracic Oncology, Tochigi Cancer 
Center, 4-9-13 Yohnan, Utsunomiya, Japan. yi-nakamu@umin.ac.jp. (5)Department of 
Drug Metabolism and Disposition, Meiji Pharmaceutical University, Tokyo, Japan.
(6)Clinical Research Center, Nagasaki University Hospital, Nagasaki, Japan.
(7)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Nagasaki Prefecture Shimabara Hospital,
Shimabara, Japan. (8)Clinical Oncology Center, Nagasaki University Hospital,
Nagasaki, Japan.

PURPOSE: The relationship between plasma concentration and antitumor activity of 
gefitinib was assessed in patients with advanced non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC) harboring epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutations.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Plasma trough levels of gefitinib were measured on days 2
(D2) and 8 (D8) by high-performance liquid chromatography in 31 patients. Plasma 
concentrations of gefitinib were also measured 10 h after the first
administration in 21 of these patients to calculate the elimination half-life of 
gefitinib.
RESULTS: The median trough levels were: 197 ng/ml 10 h from the first
administration of gefitinib; 113 ng/ml on D2; and 358 ng/ml on D8. The median
D8/D2 ratio was 2.709, and the median elimination half-life was 15.7 h. The
median progression-free survival (PFS) was 273 days, and the median overall
survival (OS) was 933 days. A high D8/D2 ratio was significantly correlated with 
better PFS, though the plasma trough levels on D2 and D8 were not significantly
related to PFS. The elimination half-life was not a significant factor for PFS,
but it was significantly correlated with high-grade adverse events.
Pharmacokinetic parameters were not significantly correlated with OS.
CONCLUSIONS: A high D8/D2 ratio, but not elimination half-life, might be a
predictor of better PFS in patients with NSCLC harboring EGFR mutations treated
with gefitinib. On the other hand, long elimination half-life was related to
high-grade adverse events in these patients. Clinical Trial Registration
UMIN000001066.

DOI: 10.1007/s00280-016-3097-4 
PMID: 27339148  [PubMed - in process]


146. Appl Immunohistochem Mol Morphol. 2016 Jun 13. [Epub ahead of print]

The Expression Pattern of p120-Catenin is Associated With Acquired Resistance to 
Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor Tyrosine Kinase Inhibitors in Non-Small Cell
Lung Cancer.

Liu Y(1), Wang S, Dong QZ, Liu N, Han Y, Zhang XP, Fan CF, Wang EH.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of *Pathology, The First Affiliated Hospital and College of Basic 
Medical Sciences †Medical Microbiology and Parasitology, College of Basic Medical
Sciences of China Medical University, Shenyang, P.R. China.

BACKGROUND: Previous research connects p120-catenin (p120ctn) with epidermal
growth factor receptor (EGFR) signaling pathways, which presents a potential role
for p120ctn in EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor (EGFR-TKIs) resistance. However, a 
direct correlation between the expression pattern of p120ctn in solid tumors and 
the therapeutic effect of EGFR-TKIs has not yet been demonstrated.
METHODS AND RESULTS: In this study, the expression pattern of p120ctn was
examined in patients with the EGFR gene mutation in lung adenocarcinoma, and
p120ctn was found to have different patterns of expression even in the same
mutation type. The therapeutic effect of EGFR-TKIs was investigated in these
patients, and patients with an abnormal expression of p120ctn were found to be
more likely to have drug resistance. A gefitinib-resistant lung cancer cell line 
was established and alterations in the p120ctn expression pattern were also
observed in vitro.
CONCLUSIONS: Therefore, this study demonstrates that the expression pattern of
p120ctn is associated with acquired resistance to EGFR-TKIs in lung cancer,
providing information toward addressing the problem of drug resistance in
patients with non-small cell lung cancer.

DOI: 10.1097/PAI.0000000000000381 
PMID: 27299185  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


147. Oncotarget. 2016 Jul 19;7(29):45687-45701. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.9920.

miR-26a desensitizes non-small cell lung cancer cells to tyrosine kinase
inhibitors by targeting PTPN13.

Xu S(1,)(2), Wang T(3), Yang Z(4), Li Y(1,)(5), Li W(1,)(6), Wang T(7), Wang
S(7), Jia L(7), Zhang S(4), Li S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Huashan Hospital, Fudan University,
Shanghai, China. (2)Department of Respiratory Medicine, 9th Hospital of Xi'an,
Xi'an, China. (3)Department of Neurology, Shaanxi Provincial People's Hospital,
Xi'an, China. (4)Department of Applied Physics, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an,
China. (5)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Shaanxi Provincial Second People's 
Hospital, Xi'an, China. (6)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Shaanxi Provincial
People's Hospital, Xi'an, China. (7)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology, Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an, China.

Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)-targeted tyrosine kinase inhibitors
(TKIs) have emerged as first-line drugs for non-small cell lung cancers (NSCLCs).
However, the resistance to TKIs represents the key limitation for their
therapeutic efficacy. We found that miR-26a was upregulated in
gefitinib-refractory NSCLCs; miR-26a is downstream of EGFR signaling and directly
targets and silences protein tyrosine phosphatase non-receptor type 13 (PTPN13)
to maintain the activation of Src, a dephosphorylation substrate of PTPN13, thus 
reinforcing EGFR pathway in a regulatory circuit. miR-26a inhibition
significantly improved NSCLC responses to gefitinib. These data revealed a novel 
mechanism of NSCLC resistance to TKI treatment.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.9920 
PMCID: PMC5216753
PMID: 27285768  [PubMed - in process]


148. Onco Targets Ther. 2016 May 19;9:2961-73. doi: 10.2147/OTT.S96341. eCollection
2016.

Non-small-cell lung cancer cells combat epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine
kinase inhibition through immediate adhesion-related responses.

Wang HY(1), Hsu MK(2), Wang KH(3), Tseng CP(4), Chen FC(2), Hsu JT(5).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biotechnology and Pharmaceutical Research, National Health
Research Institutes (NHRI), Zhunan, Miaoli County, Republic of China; Institute
of Molecular Medicine and Bioengineering, National Chiao Tung University (NCTU), 
Hsinchu, Taiwan, Republic of China. (2)Division of Biostatistics and
Bioinformatics, Institute of Population Health Sciences, National Health Research
Institutes (NHRI), Zhunan, Miaoli County, Republic of China; Department of
Biological Science and Technology, National Chiao Tung University (NCTU),
Hsinchu, Taiwan, Republic of China. (3)Institute of Biotechnology and
Pharmaceutical Research, National Health Research Institutes (NHRI), Zhunan,
Miaoli County, Republic of China. (4)Institute of Molecular Medicine and
Bioengineering, National Chiao Tung University (NCTU), Hsinchu, Taiwan, Republic 
of China; Department of Biological Science and Technology, National Chiao Tung
University (NCTU), Hsinchu, Taiwan, Republic of China. (5)Institute of
Biotechnology and Pharmaceutical Research, National Health Research Institutes
(NHRI), Zhunan, Miaoli County, Republic of China; Department of Biological
Science and Technology, National Chiao Tung University (NCTU), Hsinchu, Taiwan,
Republic of China.

BACKGROUND: Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase inhibitors
(TKIs), such as gefitinib, erlotinib, and afatinib, have greatly improved
treatment efficacy in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients with
drug-sensitive EGFR mutations. However, in some TKI responders, the benefits of
such targeted therapies are limited by the rapid development of resistance, and
strategies to overcome this resistance are urgently needed. Studies of drug
resistance in cancer cells typically involve long term in vitro induction to
obtain stably acquired drug-resistant cells followed by elucidation of resistance
mechanisms, but the immediate responses of cancer cells upon drug treatment have 
been ignored. The aim of this study was to investigate the immediate responses of
NSCLC cells upon treatment with EGFR TKIs.
RESULTS: Both NSCLC cells, ie, PC9 and H1975, showed immediate enhanced
adhesion-related responses as an apoptosis-countering mechanism upon first-time
TKI treatment. By gene expression and pathway analysis, adhesion-related pathways
were enriched in gefitinib-treated PC9 cells. Pathway inhibition by small-hairpin
RNAs or small-molecule drugs revealed that within hours of EGFR TKI treatment,
NSCLC cells used adhesion-related responses to combat the drugs. Importantly, we 
show here that the Src family inhibitor, dasatinib, dramatically inhibits cell
adhesion-related response and greatly enhances the cell-killing effects of EGFR
TKI (gefitinib for the PC9 cells; afatinib for the H1975 cells) in NSCLC cells,
which would otherwise escape the TKI-induced apoptosis.
CONCLUSION: Results from this study indicate that NSCLC cells can employ the
adhesion response as a survival pathway to survive under EGFR-targeted therapy.
Simultaneous targeting of EGFR signaling and adhesion pathways would further
boost the efficacy of EGFR-targeted therapy in NSCLC.

DOI: 10.2147/OTT.S96341 
PMCID: PMC4881734
PMID: 27284246  [PubMed]


149. Oncotarget. 2016 Aug 2;7(31):49384-49396. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.9891.

PA-MSHA in combination with EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor: A new strategy to
overcome the drug resistance of non-small cell lung cancer cells.

Zhao XM(1), Pan SY(2), Huang QL(2), Lu YN(2), Wu XH(1), Chang JH(1), Liu ZB(3),
Cai XW(4,)(5), Liu Q(4), Wang JL(1), Fu XL(4,)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Fudan University Shanghai Cancer Center,
Department of Oncology, Shanghai Medical College, Fudan University, Shanghai,
China. (2)Department of Medicine, Beijing Wanter Biopharmaceutical Co., Ltd,
Huairou Yanqi Economic-Technical Development Area, Beijing, China. (3)Breast
Surgery, Fudan University Shanghai Cancer Center, Department of Oncology,
Shanghai Medical College, Fudan University, Shanghai, China. (4)Radiation
Oncology, Fudan University Shanghai Cancer Center, Department of Oncology,
Shanghai Medical College, Fudan University, Shanghai, China. (5)Department of
Radiation Oncology, Shanghai Chest Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University,
Shanghai, China.

The inhibition of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) signaling by Gefitinib 
provides a promising treatment strategy for non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC);
however, drug resistance to Gefitinib and other tyrosine kinase inhibitors
presents a major issue. Using NSCLC cell lines with differential EGFR status, we 
examined the potency of PA-MSHA (Pseudomonas aeruginosa-mannose-sensitive
hemagglutinin) in combination with Gefitinib on proliferation, apoptosis, cell
cycle arrest, EGFR signaling and tumor growth. PC-9, A549, and NCI-H1975 cells
were treated with PA-MSHA, Gefetinib, or PA-MSHA plus Gefetinib at different
concentrations and times. The effects of the drugs on proliferation, cell cycle
distribution and apoptosis were evaluated. The activation of EGFR and apoptotic
signaling-related molecules was evaluated by Western blotting in the presence or 
absence of EGFR siRNA. Tumor growth and pathway signaling activation was assessed
by xenografts in nude mice. A time-dependent and concentration-dependent
cytotoxic effect of PA-MSHA was observed in all NSCLC cells tested. The
combination of PA-MSHA plus Gefitinib enhanced the growth inhibition, sub-G1
content and apoptosis over that observed with either agent alone. Furthermore,
the combination of PA-MSHA plus Gefitinib resulted in caspase-3/caspase-9
cleavage and increased inhibition of EGFR-dependent activation of AKT and ERK
phosphorylation. Combination treatment was more effective in reducing tumor size 
and EGFR activation than either agent alone. These data suggest that PA-MSHA and 
Gefitinib function additively to suppress the proliferative effects of NSCLC
cells of differential EGFR status. The combination of PA-MSHA and Gefitinib
provides a potential new strategy to conquer drug resistance for
anti-EGFR-targeted therapy of NSCLC.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.9891 
PMCID: PMC5226515
PMID: 27283902  [PubMed - in process]


150. J Drug Target. 2016 Jun 29:1-6. [Epub ahead of print]

Sequential treatment strategy for malignant pleural effusion in non-small cell
lung cancer with the activated epithelial grow factor receptor mutation.

Lin JB(1), Lai FC(1), Li X(1), Tu YR(2), Lin M(2), Qiu ML(1), Luo RG(1), Liu
B(1), Lin JW(2).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Thoracic Surgery , First Affiliated Hospital, Fujian Medical
University , Fuzhou City , People's Republic of China ; (2)b Lung Cancer Center, 
First Affiliated Hospital, Fujian Medical University , Fuzhou City , People's
Republic of China.

With the advent of molecularly targeted therapy, it is necessary to reconsider
the strategy for malignant pleural effusion in non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
with epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutations. The aim of this study was
to evaluate the efficacy of a two-line sequential treatment strategy in this
patient subgroup. First-line treatment was gefitinib (250 mg/day) until disease
progression. Second-line treatment was thoracoscopic talc pleurodesis followed by
chemotherapy. Primary endpoints were the overall response and progression-free
survival rates after first-line treatment, and the overall survival rate after
first- and second-line treatment. Secondary endpoints were the success rate of
thoracoscopic talc pleurodesis and gefitinib toxicity. Among the 76 patients
enrolled, 61 (80%) were female and the median age was 62 years. The overall
response rate after first-line treatment was 92.1% and median progression-free
survival was 15 months. The success rate for thoracoscopic talc pleurodesis in 33
patients was 94%. Median follow-up was 35 months. Median overall survival was 39 
months. The 1- and 3-year overall survival rates were 86.4% and 46.1%,
respectively. The two-line sequential treatment strategy enhanced survival. These
preliminary findings provide an insight into novel therapeutic models for
malignant pleural effusion in NSCLC harbouring EGFR mutations.

DOI: 10.1080/1061186X.2016.1200590 
PMID: 27282915  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


151. Oncotarget. 2016 Jul 12;7(28):43315-43323. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.9703.

The impact of intermittent versus continuous exposure to EGFR tyrosine kinase
inhibitor on selection of EGFR T790M-mutant drug-resistant clones in a lung
cancer cell line carrying activating EGFR mutation.

Lee Y(1,)(2), Choi YR(2), Kim KY(2), Shin DH(2).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Lung Cancer, National Cancer Center, Goyang, Republic of Korea.
(2)Lung Cancer Branch, Research Institute and Hospital, National Cancer Center,
Goyang, Republic of Korea.

Drug-resistant cell lines are essential tools for investigating the mechanisms of
resistance to molecular-targeted anti-cancer drugs. However, little is known
about how to establish clinically relevant drug-resistant cell lines. Our study
examined the impact of a drug-free period on the establishment of a cell line
with clinically relevant resistance to molecular-targeted drugs. We used PC9
cells, a lung cancer cell line carrying EGFR mutation, because this is a
validated target for EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKI). PC9 cells were
intermittently or continuously exposed to increasing concentrations of gefitinib 
(0.01 μM to 1.0 μM) and the emergence of the most common acquired resistance
mutation in EGFR, T790M, was determined. T790M was detected at a 25-fold lower
drug concentration in cells continuously exposed to gefitinib (PC9/GRc) than in
cells intermittently exposed to gefitinib (PC9/GRi) (0.04 μM vs 1.0 μM,
respectively). The mutation frequencies at those drug concentrations were 19.8%
and 8.0% in PC9/GRc and PC9/GRi cells, respectively. After drug-free culture for 
8 weeks, resistance to gefitinib decreased in the PC9/GRi cells but not in the
PC9/GRc cells. In the PC9/GRc cells, the frequency of the T790M mutation was
consistently about 20% from 0.04 μM to 1.0 μM of gefitinib. In the PC9/GRc cells,
the T790M mutation was detected in all single-cell clones, at frequencies ranging
from 7.0% to 37.0%, with a median of 19.5% (95% confidence interval,
17.3%-20.9%). In conclusion, compared with intermittent drug exposure, continuous
exposure might select better minor drug-resistant clones when creating cell lines
resistant to molecular-targeted drugs.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.9703 
PMCID: PMC5190025
PMID: 27270313  [PubMed - in process]


152. BMC Cancer. 2016 Jun 6;16:354. doi: 10.1186/s12885-016-2392-0.

Epidermal growth factor signals regulate dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase
expression in EGFR-mutated non-small-cell lung cancer.

Tominaga T(1), Tsuchiya T(1), Mochinaga K(1), Arai J(1), Yamasaki N(1), Matsumoto
K(1), Miyazaki T(1), Nagasaki T(1), Nanashima A(2), Tsukamoto K(3), Nagayasu
T(4).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Surgical Oncology, Department of Surgery, Nagasaki University
Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, 1-7-1 Sakamoto, Nagasaki, Nagasaki,
852-8501, Japan. (2)Department of Surgery, Miyazaki University School of
Medicine, 5200 Kihara, Miyazaki, Miyazaki, 889-1692, Japan. (3)Department of
Pharmacotherapeutics, Nagasaki University Graduate School of Biomedical Science, 
1-14 Bunkyo, Nagasaki, Nagasaki, 852-8521, Japan. (4)Division of Surgical
Oncology, Department of Surgery, Nagasaki University Graduate School of
Biomedical Sciences, 1-7-1 Sakamoto, Nagasaki, Nagasaki, 852-8501, Japan.
nagayasu@nagasaki-u.ac.jp.

BACKGROUND: It has been shown that epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)
mutation status is associated with 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) sensitivity in
non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC). However, the relationship between EGFR
mutation status and dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase (DPD), a 5-FU degrading
enzyme, is unknown.
METHODS: We elucidated the crosstalk among the EGFR signal cascade, the DPD gene 
(DPYD), and DPD protein expression via the transcription factor Sp1 and the
effect of EGFR mutation status on the crosstalk.
RESULTS: In the PC9 (exon19 E746-A750) study, EGF treatment induced up-regulation
of both Sp1 and DPD; gefitinib, an EGFR-tyrosine kinase inhibitor (EGFR-TKI), and
mithramycin A, a specific Sp-1 inhibitor, suppressed them. Among EGFR-mutated
(PC9, HCC827; exon19 E746-A750 and H1975; exon21 L858R, T790M, gefitinib
resistant) and -non-mutated (H1437, H1299) cell lines, EGF administration
increased DPYD mRNA expression only in mutated cells (p < 0.05). Accordingly,
gefitinib inhibited DPD protein expression only in PC9 and HCC827 cells, and
mithramycin A inhibited it in EGFR-mutated cell lines, but not in wild-type. FU
treatment decreased the level of cell viability more in gefitinib-treated
EGFR-TKI sensitive cell lines. Further, combination treatment of FU and
mithramycin A suppressed cell viability even in a gefitinib resistant cell line.
CONCLUSIONS: The EGFR signal cascade regulates DPD expression via Sp1 in EGFR
mutant cells. These results might be a step towards new therapies targeting Sp1
and DPD in NSCLC with different EGFR mutant status.

DOI: 10.1186/s12885-016-2392-0 
PMCID: PMC4896005
PMID: 27268079  [PubMed - in process]


153. Cancer Lett. 2016 Aug 28;379(1):124-33. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2016.06.002. Epub
2016 Jun 2.

Cyclosporine A sensitizes human non-small cell lung cancer cells to gefitinib
through inhibition of STAT3.

Shou J(1), You L(1), Yao J(1), Xie J(2), Jing J(3), Jing Z(1), Jiang L(1), Sui
X(1), Pan H(4), Han W(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Sir Run Run Shaw Hospital, College of
Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China. (2)Laboratory of Cancer
Biology, Institute of Clinical Science, Sir Run Run Shaw Hospital, College of
Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China. (3)Department of
Medical Oncology, Tongde Hospital of Zhejiang Province, Hangzhou, Zhejiang,
China. (4)Department of Medical Oncology, Sir Run Run Shaw Hospital, College of
Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China. Electronic address:
hongmingpan@gmail.com. (5)Department of Medical Oncology, Sir Run Run Shaw
Hospital, College of Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China.
Electronic address: hanwd@zju.edu.cn.

The epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors (EGFR-TKIs) have 
dramatically prolonged the overall survival of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
patients with EGFR-activating mutation, but the presence of primary or acquired
resistance eventually leads to therapeutic failure. Thus, how to improve the
efficacy and reverse the resistance to EGFR-TKIs remains a significant challenge.
In this study, we found that CsA significantly augmented the anti-cancer effect
of gefitinib in EGFR-TKI-sensitive and -resistant NSCLC cells. Mechanistically,
CsA promoted gefitinib-induced apoptosis through inhibition of the STAT3 pathway.
Similar with the function of CsA, siRNAs against STAT3 also enhanced
gefitinib-induced apoptosis in multiple lung cancer cells. Xenograft studies
further demonstrated that CsA promoted the anti-cancer activity of gefitinib on
lung cancer cells through inhibition of STAT3. Moreover, NSCLC patients with high
levels of phosphorylated STAT3 (Y705) showed a significantly poorer therapeutic
response to EGFR-TKIs. This study provides preclinical evidence that the
combination of CsA or a STAT3 inhibitor with EGFR-TKIs is a promising approach to
improve the efficacy of EGFR-TKIs for the treatment of patients with advanced
NSCLC.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.canlet.2016.06.002 
PMID: 27264264  [PubMed - in process]


154. J Natl Compr Canc Netw. 2016 May;14(5 Suppl):672-4.

Management of EGFR Mutation-Positive Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer.

Lilenbaum RA(1), Horn LA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Presented by Rogerio A. Lilenbaum, MD, Yale Cancer Center/Smilow Cancer
Hospital, New Haven, Connecticut, and Leora A. Horn, MD, MSc, FRCPC,
Vanderbilt-Ingram Cancer Center, Nashville, Tennessee.

For appropriate treatment selection, the updated NCCN Guidelines for Non-Small
Cell Lung Cancer (NSCLC) recommend broad molecular profiling for all patients
with nonsquamous disease. Three different tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) are
recommended as first-line treatment of EGFR mutation-positive NSCLC: gefitinib,
erlotinib, and afatinib. Most patients whose disease responds will still
experience progression, and the type of disease progression drives management.
Systemic progression requires switching TKI treatment, whereas patients with
oligoprogression and central nervous system progression may have their new
lesions treated but continue on their TKI. A new third-generation TKI has been
approved and others are currently under development, and new combinations of
these drugs with a VEGFR inhibitor offer promise to improve outcomes.

Copyright © 2016 by the National Comprehensive Cancer Network.


PMID: 27226511  [PubMed - in process]


155. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2016 May 25;(5):CD010383. doi:
10.1002/14651858.CD010383.pub2.

First-line treatment of advanced epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutation
positive non-squamous non-small cell lung cancer.

Greenhalgh J(1), Dwan K, Boland A, Bates V, Vecchio F, Dundar Y, Jain P, Green
JA.

Author information: 
(1)Liverpool Reviews and Implementation Group, University of Liverpool,
Sherrington Building, Ashton Street, Liverpool, UK, L69 3GE.

BACKGROUND: Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutation positive (M+)
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is emerging as an important subtype of lung
cancer comprising 10% to 15% of non-squamous tumours. This subtype is more common
in women than men and is less associated with smoking.
OBJECTIVES: To assess the clinical effectiveness of single -agent or combination 
EGFR therapies used in the first-line treatment of people with locally advanced
or metastatic EGFR M+ NSCLC compared with other cytotoxic chemotherapy (CTX)
agents used alone or in combination, or best supportive care (BSC). The primary
outcome was overall survival. Secondary outcomes included progression-free
survival, response rate, toxicity, and quality of life.
SEARCH METHODS: We conducted electronic searches of the the Cochrane Register of 
Controlled Trials (CENTRAL) (2015, Issue 6), MEDLINE (1946 to 1 June 2015),
EMBASE (1980 to 1 June 2015), and ISI Web of Science (1899 to 1 June 2015). We
also searched the conference abstracts of the American Society for Clinical
Oncology and the European Society for Medical Oncology (1 June 2015); Evidence
Review Group submissions to the National Institute for Health and Care
Excellence; and the reference lists of retrieved articles.
SELECTION CRITERIA: Parallel randomised controlled trials comparing EGFR-targeted
agents (alone or in combination with cytotoxic agents or BSC) with cytotoxic
chemotherapy (single or doublet) or BSC in chemotherapy-naive patients with
locally advanced or metastatic (stage IIIB or IV) EGFR M+ NSCLC unsuitable for
treatment with curative intent.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Two review authors independently identified
articles, extracted data, and carried out the 'Risk of bias' assessment. We
conducted meta-analyses using a fixed-effect model unless there was substantial
heterogeneity, in which case we also performed a random-effects analysis as a
sensitivity analysis.
MAIN RESULTS: Nineteen trials met the inclusion criteria. Seven of these
exclusively recruited people with EGFR M+ NSCLC; the remainder recruited a mixed 
population and reported results for people with EGFR M+ NSCLC as subgroup
analyses. The number of participants with EGFR M+ tumours totalled 2317, of whom 
1700 were of Asian origin.Overall survival (OS) data showed inconsistent results 
between the included trials that compared EGFR-targeted treatments against
cytotoxic chemotherapy or placebo.Erlotinib was the intervention treatment used
in eight trials, gefitinib in seven trials, afatinib in two trials, and cetuximab
in two trials. The findings of one trial (FASTACT 2) did report a statistically
significant OS gain for participants treated with erlotinib plus cytotoxic
chemotherapy when compared to cytotoxic chemotherapy alone, but this result was
based on a small number of participants (n = 97). For progression-free survival
(PFS), a pooled analysis of 3 trials (n = 378) demonstrated a statistically
significant benefit for erlotinib compared with cytotoxic chemotherapy (hazard
ratio (HR) 0.30; 95% confidence interval (CI) 0.24 to 0.38).In a pooled analysis 
with 491 participants administered gefitinib, 2 trials (IPASS and NEJSG)
demonstrated a statistically significant PFS benefit of gefitinib compared with
cytotoxic chemotherapy (HR 0.39; 95% CI 0.32 to 0.48).Afatinib (n = 709) showed a
statistically significant PFS benefit when compared with chemotherapy in a pooled
analysis of 2 trials (HR 0.42; 95% CI 0.34 to 0.53).Commonly reported grade 3/4
adverse events for afatinib, erlotinib, and gefitinib monotherapy were rash and
diarrhoea. Myelosuppression was consistently worse in the chemotherapy arms,
fatigue and anorexia were also associated with some chemotherapies.No
statistically significant PFS or OS benefit for cetuximab plus cytotoxic
chemotherapy (n = 81) compared to chemotherapy alone was reported in either of
the two trials.Six trials reported on quality of life and symptom improvement
using different methodologies. For each of erlotinib, gefitinib, and afatinib, 2 
trials showed improvement in one or more indices for the tyrosine-kinase
inhibitor (TKI) compared to chemotherapy.The quality of evidence was high for the
comparisons of erlotinib and gefitinib with cytotoxic chemotherapy and for the
comparison of afatinib with cytotoxic chemotherapy.
AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: Erlotinib, gefitinib, and afatinib are all active agents in
EGFR M+ NSCLC patients, and demonstrate an increased tumour response rate and
prolonged progression-free survival compared to cytotoxic chemotherapy. We also
found a beneficial effect of the TKI compared to cytotoxic chemotherapy. However,
we found no increase in overall survival for the TKI when compared with standard 
chemotherapy. Cytotoxic chemotherapy is less effective in EGFR M+ NSCLC than
erlotinib, gefitinib, or afatinib and is associated with greater toxicity. There 
were no data supporting the use of monoclonal antibody therapy.

DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD010383.pub2 
PMID: 27223332  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Expert Opin Drug Saf. 2016 Jul;15(7):993-1000. doi:
10.1080/14740338.2016.1192605. Epub 2016 Jun 7.

Safety of gefitinib in non-small cell lung cancer treatment.

Hsiue EH(1), Lee JH(1,)(2,)(3,)(4), Lin CC(1,)(3,)(4), Yang JC(1,)(2,)(3,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Oncology , National Taiwan University Hospital , Taipei ,
Taiwan. (2)b Department of Medical Research , National Taiwan University Hospital
, Taipei , Taiwan. (3)c Graduate Institute of Oncology , National Taiwan
University College of Medicine , Taipei , Taiwan. (4)d National Taiwan University
Cancer Center , Taipei , Taiwan.

INTRODUCTION: The development of EGFR TKI and the subsequent identification of
activating EGFR mutations have dramatically changed how NSCLC is treated. With
its recent approval by the US Food and Drug Administration, gefitinib adds to the
list of recommended first-line treatments for lung cancer harboring EGFR
mutations, which hitherto includes erlotinib and afatinib.
AREAS COVERED: This review summarizes the pharmacological property, clinical
efficacy, and safety of gefitinib in major clinical trials and post-marketing
studies.
EXPERT OPINION: Gefitinib is a well-tolerated treatment for advanced NSCLC. The
most common adverse events are skin reaction and diarrhea, both of which are
generally mild, noncumulative, and manageable. Other side effects such as
interstitial lung disease and liver toxicity are less common but can be serious. 
Which EGFR TKI is the preferred first-line treatment is a matter of debate.
Gefitinib and erlotinib have comparable efficacy, whereas afatinib may exert
superior clinical activity over gefitinib. In terms of the most common toxicities
of skin reaction and diarrhea, gefitinib may be the most tolerable of the three. 
Hence, despite being the earliest EGFR TKI developed, gefitinib continues to be
one of the first-line treatments for advanced EGFR-mutated NSCLC, especially when
skin and gastrointestinal toxicity is a concern.

DOI: 10.1080/14740338.2016.1192605 
PMID: 27212579  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Clin Lung Cancer. 2016 Sep;17(5):461-465. doi: 10.1016/j.cllc.2016.04.001. Epub
2016 Apr 22.

BEVERLY: Rationale and Design of a Randomized Open-Label Phase III Trial
Comparing Bevacizumab Plus Erlotinib Versus Erlotinib Alone as First-Line
Treatment of Patients With EGFR-Mutated Advanced Nonsquamous Non-Small-Cell Lung 
Cancer.

Gridelli C(1), Rossi A(2), Ciardiello F(3), De Marinis F(4), Crinò L(5), Morabito
A(6), Morgillo F(3), Montanino A(6), Daniele G(7), Piccirillo MC(7), Normanno
N(8), Gallo C(9), Perrone F(7).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Oncology, S.G. Moscati Hospital, Avellino, Italy.
Electronic address: cgridelli@libero.it. (2)Division of Medical Oncology, S.G.
Moscati Hospital, Avellino, Italy. (3)Division of Medical Oncology and
Hematology, Second University of Naples, Naples, Italy. (4)Division of Thoracic
Oncology, European Institute of Oncology, Milan, Italy. (5)Division of Medical
Oncology, University of Perugia, Perugia, Italy. (6)Thoraco-Pulmonary Oncology,
Istituto Nazionale per lo Studio e la Cura dei Tumori "Fondazione Giovanni
Pascale"- IRCCS, Naples, Italy. (7)Clinical Trials Unit, Istituto Nazionale per
lo Studio e la Cura dei Tumori "Fondazione Giovanni Pascale"- IRCCS, Naples,
Italy. (8)Cellular Biology and Biotherapy Unit, Istituto Nazionale per lo Studio 
e la Cura dei Tumori Fondazione Giovanni Pascale, IRCCS, Naples, Italy.
(9)Medical Statistics, Second University of Naples, Naples, Italy.

BACKGROUND: About 20% of advanced non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cases harbor
somatic mutations in the tyrosine kinase domain of the epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR) gene. In these patients, the standard first-line treatments are
the EGFR-tyrosine kinase inhibitors, such as gefitinib, erlotinib, or afatinib.
Most of these patients develop resistance and relapse within about 1 year of
initiation of an EGFR-tyrosine kinase inhibitor. Consequently, it is important to
develop new combination strategies to delay this resistance. Preclinical data
have showed that EGFR and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) share a
common downstream pathway, suggesting the important role of VEGF in the
resistance to EGFR blockade. The combination of erlotinib and bevacizumab, an
anti-VEGF agent, showed very interesting clinical results.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: The bevacizumab plus erlotinib study (BEVERLY) is a
randomized, open-label, phase III trial investigating first-line erlotinib plus
bevacizumab versus erlotinib in patients with advanced NSCLC harboring activating
EGFR mutations. The co-primary endpoints are investigator-assessed
progression-free survival (PFS) and blinded, independent centrally reviewed PFS. 
The secondary endpoints include overall survival, quality of life, objective
response rate, and safety. A total of 200 patients will be randomized 1:1 to
receive oral erlotinib (150 mg daily) plus bevacizumab (15 mg/kg, intravenously, 
on day 1 of every 21-day cycle) or erlotinib alone, until objective disease
progression or unacceptable toxicity or the patient's or physician's motivated
decision to stop the treatment.
CONCLUSION: If the primary endpoint of PFS is met, the erlotinib plus bevacizumab
combination will be confirmed as the best first-line treatment for patients with 
advanced NSCLC harboring activating EGFR mutations.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cllc.2016.04.001 
PMID: 27209164  [PubMed - in process]


158. Oncotarget. 2016 Jul 26;7(30):46871-46877. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.9389.

Are TKIs favourable for the elderly with non-small-cell lung cancer?

Rossi S(1), D'Argento E(1), Schinzari G(1), Dadduzio V(1), Di Noia V(1), Cassano 
A(1), Barone C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Catholic University of Sacred Heart, Largo A. 
Gemelli, Rome, Italy.

Background: Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor (EGFR) tyrosine-kinase inhibitors
(TKIs) have changed treatment strategies for patients with advanced
non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) harbouring mutations in EGFR gene. This
retrospective analysis assessed efficacy and safety of TKIs in elderly compared
to younger patients. Patients and methods: 49 patients with advanced NSCLC and
mutations in exon 19 or 21 receiving a first-line therapy with TKIs were included
and divided into patients aged <70 years and patients aged ≥ 70 years. Primary
endpoints were progression free survival (PFS), response rate (RR) and clinical
benefit in terms of quality of life; secondary endpoint was overall survival
(OS). Results: Median PFS was significantly longer in elderly in comparison to
younger patients (12.6 and 5.6 months, respectively; p= .008). RR was 64% in
younger patients and 75% in elderly population. Eighteen out of 20(90%) elderly
patients treated with gefitinib experienced symptoms relief and upgrading of
performance status. No difference in terms of OS was found (p= .34). Conclusion: 
TKIs seem more effective in elderly than in younger patients affected by NSCLC
with an EGFR gene mutation. We hypothesize that the main difference between the
two populations is the number of medications related to concomitant comorbidities
that cause an increased plasma level of TKIs.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.9389 
PMCID: PMC5216909
PMID: 27206674  [PubMed - in process]


159. J Thorac Oncol. 2016 Apr;11(4 Suppl):S130-1. doi: 10.1016/S1556-0864(16)30278-7. 
Epub 2016 Apr 15.

168P: Real life practice of gefitinib in patients (pts) with non-small-cell lung 
cancer (NSCLC) depending on epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutation
status: Results from the prospective EPIDAURE study.

Cadranel J(1), Brambilla E(2), Morere JF(3), Rondeau V(4), Fabre E(5), Lemaire
B(6), Monnet I(7), Licour M(8), Perol M(9).

Author information: 
(1)Service de Pneumologie, Hôpital Tenon, Paris, France. (2)Département
d'Anatomie et Cytologie Pathologiques, Hopital Albert Michallon, La Tronche,
France. (3)Service Oncologie, Hopital Paul Brousse, Villejuif, France. (4)ISPED, 
INSERM U897, Universite Victor Segalen, Bordeaux, France. (5)Service Medical
Oncologie, Hopital European George Pompidou, Paris, France. (6)Service de
Pneumologie-Oncologie Thoracique, CHR Orleans, La Source, France. (7)Service de
Pneumologie, CH Intercommunal de Créteil, Créteil, France. (8)Département
Médical, AstraZeneca, Rueil-Malmaison, France. (9)Service Medical Oncologie,
Centre Léon Bérard, Lyon, France.

DOI: 10.1016/S1556-0864(16)30278-7 
PMID: 27198304  [PubMed]


160. J Thorac Oncol. 2016 Apr;11(4 Suppl):S117-8. doi: 10.1016/S1556-0864(16)30250-7. 
Epub 2016 Apr 15.

140PD: LUX-Lung 7: A Phase IIb, global, randomised, open-label trial of afatinib 
vs gefitinib as first-line treatment for patients (pts) with advanced non-small
cell lung cancer (NSCLC) harbouring activating EGFR mutations.

Park K(1), Tan EH(2), Zhang L(3), Hirsh V(4), O'Byrne K(5), Boyer M(6), Yang
J(7), Mok T(8), Kim M(9), Paz-Ares L(10).

Author information: 
(1)Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Seoul,
Republic of Korea. (2)Division of Medical Oncology, National Cancer Center,
Singapore. (3)Cancer Center, Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou, China.
(4)Department of Oncology, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada.
(5)Translational Research Institute, Princess Alexandra Hospital and Queensland
University of Technology, Brisbane, Australia. (6)Department of Medical Oncology,
Chris O'Brien Lifehouse, Camperdown, Australia. (7)Department of Oncology,
National Taiwan University Hospital and National Taiwan University, Taipei,
Taiwan. (8)Key Laboratory of South China, Department of Clinical Oncology, The
Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China. (9)Medicine TA Oncology,
Boehringer Ingelheim GmbH, Ingelheim, Germany. (10)Hospital Universitario Doce de
Octubre, and CNIO, Madrid, Spain.

DOI: 10.1016/S1556-0864(16)30250-7 
PMID: 27198277  [PubMed]


161. Mol Cancer Ther. 2016 Jul;15(7):1525-34. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-15-0938. Epub
2016 Apr 25.

The Discovery and Characterization of K-756, a Novel Wnt/β-Catenin Pathway
Inhibitor Targeting Tankyrase.

Okada-Iwasaki R(1), Takahashi Y(2), Watanabe Y(2), Ishida H(2), Saito J(2), Nakai
R(3), Asai A(4).

Author information: 
(1)R&D Division, Kyowa Hakko Kirin Co., Ltd., Shizuoka, Japan. Center for Drug
Discovery, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Shizuoka,
Shizuoka, Japan. (2)R&D Division, Kyowa Hakko Kirin Co., Ltd., Shizuoka, Japan.
(3)R&D Division, Kyowa Hakko Kirin Co., Ltd., Shizuoka, Japan.
ryuichiro.nakai@kyowa-kirin.co.jp. (4)Center for Drug Discovery, Graduate School 
of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Shizuoka, Shizuoka, Japan.

The Wnt/β-catenin pathway is a well-known oncogenic pathway. Its suppression has 
long been considered as an important challenge in treating cancer patients. Among
colon cancer patients in particular, most patients carry an adenomatous polyposis
coli (APC) mutation that leads to an aberration of Wnt/β-catenin pathway. To
discover the small molecule inhibitors of the Wnt/β-catenin pathway, we conducted
high-throughput screening in APC-mutant colon cancer DLD-1 cells using a
transcriptional reporter assay, which identified a selective Wnt/β-catenin
pathway inhibitor, K-756. K-756 stabilizes Axin and reduces active β-catenin, and
inhibits the genes downstream of endogenous Wnt/β-catenin. We subsequently
identified that K-756 is a tankyrase (TNKS) inhibitor. TNKS, which belongs to the
PARP family, poly-ADP ribosylates Axin and promotes Axin degradation via the
proteasome pathway. K-756 binds to the induced pocket of TNKS and inhibits its
enzyme activity. Moreover, PARP family enzyme assays showed that K-756 is a
selective TNKS inhibitor. K-756 inhibited the cell growth of APC-mutant
colorectal cancer COLO 320DM and SW403 cells by inhibiting the Wnt/β-catenin
pathway. An in vivo study showed that the oral administration of K-756 inhibited 
the Wnt/β-catenin pathway in colon cancer xenografts in mice. To further explore 
the therapeutic potential of K-756, we also evaluated the effects of K-756 in
non-small cell lung cancer cells. Although a single treatment of K-756 did not
induce antiproliferative activity, when K-756 was combined with an EGFR inhibitor
(gefitinib), it showed a strong synergistic effect. Therefore, K-756, a novel
selective TNKS inhibitor, could be a leading compound in the development of
anticancer agents. Mol Cancer Ther; 15(7); 1525-34. ©2016 AACR.

©2016 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-15-0938 
PMID: 27196752  [PubMed - in process]


162. Cancer Res Treat. 2017 Jan;49(1):10-19. doi: 10.4143/crt.2016.058. Epub 2016 May 
3.

A Phase II Study of Poziotinib in Patients with Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor 
(EGFR)-Mutant Lung Adenocarcinoma Who Have Acquired Resistance to EGFR-Tyrosine
Kinase Inhibitors.

Han JY(1), Lee KH(2), Kim SW(3), Min YJ(4), Cho E(5), Lee Y(1), Lee SH(1), Kim
HY(1), Lee GK(1), Nam BH(1), Han H(6), Jung J(6), Lee JS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Lung Cancer, National Cancer Center, Goyang, Korea. (2)Department
of Internal Medicine, Chungbuk National University Hospital, Cheongju, Korea.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, Asan Medical Center, University of Ulsan
College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea. (4)Department of Internal Medicine, Ulsan
University Hospital, Ulsan, Korea. (5)Department of Internal Medicine, Gachon
University Gil Medical Center, Incheon, Korea. (6)Clinical Research Team, Hanmi
Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., Seoul, Korea.

PURPOSE: We examined the efficacy of poziotinib, a second-generation epidermal
growth factor receptor (EGFR)-tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) in patients with
lung adenocarcinoma with activating EGFR mutations, who developed acquired
resistance (AR) to EGFR-TKIs.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: This single-arm phase II study included EGFR-mutant lung
adenocarcinoma with AR to erlotinib or gefitinib based on the Jackman criteria.
Patients received poziotinib 16 mg orally once daily in a 28-day cycle. The
primary endpoint was progression-free survival (PFS). Prestudy tumor biopsies and
blood samples were obtained to determine resistance mechanisms.
RESULTS: Thirty-nine patients were treated. Tumor genotyping was determined in 37
patients; 19 EGFR T790M mutations and two PIK3CA mutations were detected in the
prestudy tumors, and seven T790M mutations were detected in the plasma assay.
Three (8%; 95% confidence interval [CI], 2 to 21) and 17 (44%; 95% CI, 28 to 60) 
patients had partial response and stable disease, respectively. The median PFS
and overall survival were 2.7 months (95% CI, 1.8 to 3.7) and 15.0 months (95%
CI, 9.5 to not estimable), respectively. A longer PFS was observed for patients
without T790M or PIK3CA mutations in tumor or plasma compared to those with these
mutations (5.5 months vs. 1.8 months, p=0.003). The most frequent grade 3 adverse
events were rash (59%), mucosal inflammation (26%), and stomatitis (18%). Most
patients required one (n=15) or two (n=15) dose reductions.
CONCLUSION: Low activity of poziotinib was detected in patients with EGFR-mutant 
non-small cell lung cancer who developed AR to gefitinib or erlotinib,
potentially because of severe-toxicityimposed dose limitation.

DOI: 10.4143/crt.2016.058 
PMCID: PMC5266390
PMID: 27188206  [PubMed - in process]


163. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2016 Oct;1860(10):2178-90. doi:
10.1016/j.bbagen.2016.05.011. Epub 2016 May 11.

Epidermal growth factor receptor inhibitor cancer drug gefitinib modulates cell
growth and differentiation of acute myeloid leukemia cells via histamine
receptors.

Yadav M(1), Singh AK(1), Kumar H(1), Rao G(1), Chakravarti B(2), Gurjar A(1),
Dogra S(3), Kushwaha S(1), Vishwakarma AL(4), Yadav PN(3), Datta D(1), Tripathi
AK(5), Chattopadhyay N(6), Trivedi AK(1), Sanyal S(7).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biochemistry, CSIR-Central Drug Research Institute, Lucknow
226031, UP, India. (2)Department of Molecular Medicine, Sanjay Gandhi Post
Graduate Institute of Medical Sciences, Raebareli Road, Lucknow 226014, UP,
India. (3)Division of Pharmacology, CSIR-Central Drug Research Institute, Lucknow
226031, UP, India. (4)Division of Sophisticated and Analytical Instrument
Facility, CSIR-Central Drug Research Institute, Lucknow 226031, UP, India.
(5)Department of Clinical Hematology and Medical Oncology, King George's Medical 
University, Lucknow 226003, Uttar Pradesh, India. (6)Division of Endocrinology,
CSIR-Central Drug Research Institute, Lucknow 226031, UP, India. (7)Division of
Biochemistry, CSIR-Central Drug Research Institute, Lucknow 226031, UP, India.
Electronic address: sanyal@cdri.res.in.

BACKGROUND: Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) inhibitor gefitinib (Iressa) 
is used for treating non-small cell lung cancer. Gefitinib also induces
differentiation in acute myeloid leukemia (AML) cell lines and patient samples
lacking EGFR by an unknown mechanism. Here we dissected the mechanism of
gefitinib action responsible for its EGFR-independent effects.
METHODS: Signaling events were analyzed by homogenous time-resolved fluorescence 
and immunoblotting. Cellular proliferation and differentiation were assessed by
ATP measurement, trypan blue exclusion, 5-bromo-2'-deoxyuridine incorporation and
flow-cytometry. Gefitinib and G protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) interactions were
assessed by β-arrestin recruitment, luciferase and radioligand competition
assays. Role of histamine receptors (HR) in gefitinib actions were assessed by HR
knockdown or pharmacological modulation. EGFR and HR interaction was assessed by 
co-immunoprecipitation.
RESULTS: Gefitinib reduced cyclic AMP content in both AML and EGFR-expressing
cells and induced ERK phosphorylation in AML cells. Dibutyryl-cAMP or PD98059
suppressed gefitinib-induced AML cell cytostasis and differentiation. Gefitinib
bound to and modulated HRs with subtype selectivity. Pharmacological or genetic
modulations of H2 and H4 HRs (H2R and H4R) not only suppressed gefitinib-induced 
cytostasis and differentiation of AML cells but also blocked EGFR and ERK1/2
inhibition in MDA-MB-231 cells. Moreover, in MDA-MB-231 cells gefitinib enhanced 
EGFR interaction with H4R that was blocked by H4R agonist 4-methyl histamine
(4MH).
CONCLUSION: HRs play critical roles in anti-cancer effects of gefitinib in both
EGFR-deficient and EGFR-rich environments.
GENERAL SIGNIFICANCE: We furnish fresh insights into gefitinib functions which
may provide new molecular clues to its efficacy and safety issues.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbagen.2016.05.011 
PMID: 27180173  [PubMed - in process]


164. Clin Drug Investig. 2016 Aug;36(8):683-6. doi: 10.1007/s40261-016-0411-1.

Osimertinib (AZD9291) and CNS Response in Two Radiotherapy-Naïve Patients with
EGFR-Mutant and T790M-Positive Advanced Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer.

Ricciuti B(1), Chiari R(2), Chiarini P(3), Crinò L(2), Maiettini D(4), Ludovini
V(2), Metro G(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Santa Maria della Misericordia Hospital,
Azienda Ospedaliera di Perugia, via Dottori 1, 06156, Perugia, Italy.
biagio.ricciuti@gmail.com. (2)Department of Medical Oncology, Santa Maria della
Misericordia Hospital, Azienda Ospedaliera di Perugia, via Dottori 1, 06156,
Perugia, Italy. (3)Department of Neuroradiology, Santa Maria della Misericordia
Hospital, Azienda Ospedaliera di Perugia, Perugia, Italy. (4)Department of
Diagnostic Imaging, University of Perugia, Perugia, Italy.

The discovery of sensitizing epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutations as
a predictive marker of sensitivity to first-generation EGFR tyrosine kinase
inhibitors (TKIs) has dramatically changed the paradigm of care for advanced
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients. Unfortunately, the majority of
patients with EGFR-mutant NSCLC treated with EGFR-TKIs develop acquired
resistance within 14-16 months. T790M mutation recently emerged as a major
determinant of acquired resistance to gefitinib and erlotinib. Osimertinib
(AZD9291) is a novel mono-anilino-pyrimidine third-generation EGFR TKI targeting 
both sensitizing and T790M EGFR-mutation which showed promising results in
T790M-positive NSCLC. Here we report two cases of gefitinib- or
erlotinib-pretreated NSCLCs with a T790M mutation-positive (as assessed on plasma
through the therascreen EGFR test) disease and untreated, asymptomatic central
nervous system metastases that responded to treatment with osimertinib.

DOI: 10.1007/s40261-016-0411-1 
PMID: 27177916  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Oncol Rep. 2016 Jul;36(1):551-8. doi: 10.3892/or.2016.4780. Epub 2016 Apr 28.

Overexpression of PAD4 suppresses drug resistance of NSCLC cell lines to
gefitinib through inhibiting Elk1-mediated epithelial-mesenchymal transition.

Duan Q(1), Pang C(1), Chang N(2), Zhang J(3), Liu W(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Xijing Hospital, The Fourth Military Medical
University, Xi'an, Shaanxi 710032, P.R. China. (2)Department of Respiratory
Medicine, Xijing Hospital, The Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an, Shaanxi
710032, P.R. China. (3)Institute of Gene Diagnosis, State Key Laboratory of
Cancer Biology, School of Pharmacology, The Fourth Military Medical University,
Xi'an, Shaanxi 710032, P.R. China.

It is reported that epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) could induce
resistance in tumor cells, and knockdown of peptidylarginine deiminase IV (PAD4) 
induces the activity of EMT. However, the role of PAD4 in gefitinib‑acquired
resistance in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) remains unclear. In this study, 
we aimed to investigate the role of PAD4 in the resistance of NSCLC to gefitinib.
The cells resistant to gefitinib were established in accordance with the
literature, and were derived from NSCLC cell lines HCC827 and H1650. Real-time
quantitative PCR and western blot results showed that PAD4 was obviously
downregulated in the cells resistant to gefitinib. Overexpression of PAD4
distinctly inhibited gefitinib resistance, whereas PAD4 downregulation had the
opposite effect. Further data indicated that PAD4 upregulation could restrain EMT
activity via controlling the expression of ETS-domain containing protein (Elk1). 
Conversely, inhibition of PAD4 showed the reverse function compared with PAD4
upregulation. Above all, our study showed that overexpression of PAD4 constrains 
the activity of EMT via suppressing Elk1 expression, and inhibits resistance of
NSCLC to gefitinib.

DOI: 10.3892/or.2016.4780 
PMID: 27176594  [PubMed - in process]


166. BMC Bioinformatics. 2016 May 11;17(1):211. doi: 10.1186/s12859-016-1066-x.

A gene-signature progression approach to identifying candidate small-molecule
cancer therapeutics with connectivity mapping.

Wen Q(1), Kim CS(1,)(2), Hamilton PW(3), Zhang SD(4,)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Cancer Research and Cell Biology (CCRCB), Queen's University
Belfast, Belfast, UK. (2)Scientific Computing Department, STFC Daresbury
Laboratory, Daresbury, Warrington, UK. (3)Centre for Cancer Research and Cell
Biology (CCRCB), Queen's University Belfast, Belfast, UK. P.Hamilton@qub.ac.uk.
(4)Centre for Cancer Research and Cell Biology (CCRCB), Queen's University
Belfast, Belfast, UK. s.zhang@qub.ac.uk. (5)Northern Ireland Centre for
Stratified Medicine, University of Ulster, C-TRIC Building, Altnagelvin Hospital 
campus, Glenshane Road, BT47 6SB, Derry/Londonderry, UK. s.zhang@qub.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: Gene expression connectivity mapping has gained much popularity
recently with a number of successful applications in biomedical research
testifying its utility and promise. Previously methodological research in
connectivity mapping mainly focused on two of the key components in the
framework, namely, the reference gene expression profiles and the connectivity
mapping algorithms. The other key component in this framework, the query gene
signature, has been left to users to construct without much consensus on how this
should be done, albeit it has been an issue most relevant to end users. As a key 
input to the connectivity mapping process, gene signature is crucially important 
in returning biologically meaningful and relevant results. This paper intends to 
formulate a standardized procedure for constructing high quality gene signatures 
from a user's perspective.
RESULTS: We describe a two-stage process for making quality gene signatures using
gene expression data as initial inputs. First, a differential gene expression
analysis comparing two distinct biological states; only the genes that have
passed stringent statistical criteria are considered in the second stage of the
process, which involves ranking genes based on statistical as well as biological 
significance. We introduce a "gene signature progression" method as a standard
procedure in connectivity mapping. Starting from the highest ranked gene, we
progressively determine the minimum length of the gene signature that allows
connections to the reference profiles (drugs) being established with a preset
target false discovery rate. We use a lung cancer dataset and a breast cancer
dataset as two case studies to demonstrate how this standardized procedure works,
and we show that highly relevant and interesting biological connections are
returned. Of particular note is gefitinib, identified as among the candidate
therapeutics in our lung cancer case study. Our gene signature was based on gene 
expression data from Taiwan female non-smoker lung cancer patients, while there
is evidence from independent studies that gefitinib is highly effective in
treating women, non-smoker or former light smoker, advanced non-small cell lung
cancer patients of Asian origin.
CONCLUSIONS: In summary, we introduced a gene signature progression method into
connectivity mapping, which enables a standardized procedure for constructing
high quality gene signatures. This progression method is particularly useful when
the number of differentially expressed genes identified is large, and when there 
is a need to prioritize them to be included in the query signature. The results
from two case studies demonstrate that the approach we have developed is capable 
of obtaining pertinent candidate drugs with high precision.

DOI: 10.1186/s12859-016-1066-x 
PMCID: PMC4864913
PMID: 27170106  [PubMed - in process]


167. Yakugaku Zasshi. 2016;136(5):699-703. doi: 10.1248/yakushi.15-00262-3.

Molecular Understanding of the Acquisition of Resistance to Anti-cancer Drugs
Associated with the Exacerbation of Cancer.

Kuzumaki N(1), Narita M, Ikegami D, Narita M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Hoshi University, School of Pharmacy and
Pharmaceuteutical Sciences.

Gefitinib and erlotinib target the ATP cleft in the tyrosine kinase EGFR, which
is overexpressed in 40-80 percent of non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and many 
other epithelial cancers. However, the application of gefitinib is ultimately
limited by the emergence of mutations and other molecular mechanisms conferring
drug resistance. Furthermore, it has been considered that acquired resistance to 
gefitinib is associated with a clinically significant risk of accelerated disease
progression. We previously established a new gefitinib-resistant NSCLC cell line,
HCC827GR, which harbors the T790M mutation. Using HCC827GR, we found that the
inhibition of adenosine A2a receptors of NSCLC regulated cancer proliferation and
exacerbation, indicating that adenosine A2a receptors may be new targets for a
novel strategy in NSCLC therapy. These findings suggest that multilayered
crosstalk between G-protein coupled receptors (GPCRs) and EGFR may play an
important role in regulating downstream signaling molecules that are implicated
in the development of gefitinib-resistant NSCLC.

DOI: 10.1248/yakushi.15-00262-3 
PMID: 27150922  [PubMed - in process]


168. Rev Mal Respir. 2016 Nov;33(9):804-807. doi: 10.1016/j.rmr.2016.02.007. Epub 2016
Apr 27.

[Relevance of circulating tumor DNA in lung cancer: A case report].

[Article in French]

Amrane K(1), Le Gac G(2), Descourt R(3), Quere G(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institut de cancérologie et d'hématologie, hôpital Augustin-Morvan, CHRU de
Brest, 2, avenue du Maréchal-Foch, 29000 Brest, France. Electronic address:
aamranekarim@gmail.com. (2)Plateforme de génétique moléculaire des cancers,
laboratoire de génétique moléculaire et histocompatibilité, CHRU de Brest, 29000 
Brest, France. (3)Institut de cancérologie et d'hématologie, hôpital
Augustin-Morvan, CHRU de Brest, 2, avenue du Maréchal-Foch, 29000 Brest, France.

INTRODUCTION: The identification of an activating mutation of the gene encoding
the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is a predictive factor of
effectiveness of tyrosine kinase EGFR inhibitors (TKIs). In advanced stages of
the disease, however, this identification is difficult due to the invasiveness of
the biopsy and the small size of tumor samples. In that context, liquid biopsies 
could be useful.
CLINICAL CASE: We report the case of a 79-year-old woman suffering from
metastatic lung cancer. The molecular analysis of bronchial biopsy for the EGFR
gene was not informative due to the low quantity and the poor quality of the
extracted DNA. The poor condition of the patient and her refusal to tissue
sampling did not allow us to practice another invasive biopsy. The analysis of
the tumor DNA circulating (cDNA) allowed to detect exon 19 deletion and to
propose her an TKI with in the outcome sustained response.
CONCLUSION: Circulating DNA analysis allows the identification of activating
mutations of the EGFR gene in pulmonary adenocarcinomas. It is useful for
weakened patients and in case of failure or inability of tumor biopsies.
Initiation of EGFR TKI is possible on the basis of this result, as stated in the 
marketing authorization of gefitinib.

Copyright © 2016 SPLF. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmr.2016.02.007 
PMID: 27132215  [PubMed - in process]


169. Pathol Oncol Res. 2016 Oct;22(4):763-8. doi: 10.1007/s12253-016-0067-4. Epub 2016
Apr 28.

Study of Gefitinib and Pemetrexed as First-Line Treatment in Patients with
Advanced Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer Harboring EGFR Mutation.

An C(1), Zhang J(2), Chu H(1), Gu C(3), Xiao F(3), Zhu F(1), Lu R(1), Shi H(1),
Zhang H(1), Yi X(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, The Third People's Hospital of Nantong, 
Jiangsu, China. (2)Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Changhai Hospital of
Shanghai, Shanghai, China. (3)Department of Pathology, The Third People's
Hospital of Nantong, Jiangsu, China. (4)Department of Human Anatomy, Medical
College, Nantong University, 19 Qixiu Road, Nantong, Jiangsu Province, 226001,
China. ntuyixin@foxmail.com.

To evaluate the efficacy and safety of a combination regimen of gefitinib and
pemetrexed as first-line chemotherapy in advanced EGFR-mutated non-small cell
lung cancer (NSCLC) patients. Patients and methods Patients with advanced
non-squamous NSCLC harboring asensitive EGFR mutation were included in this study
and randomly divided into gefitinib + placebo group and gefitinib + pemetrexed
group. Pemetrexed or placebo was administered on day 1 at a dose of 500 mg/m(2), 
and gefitinib was sequentially administered on days 2 ~ 16. This treatment
regimen was repeated every 3 weeks until disease progression. All investigators
and participants were masked to treatment allocation. The overall response rate
(ORR) and disease control rate (DCR) of gefitinib + pemetrexed group were higher 
than that of gefitinib + placebo group but only the difference of DCR between two
groups was statistically significant (P < 0.05). The median progression-free
survival (PFS) of gefitinib + placebo group and gefitinib + pemetrexed group were
14.0 months vs. 18 months respectively and the difference was statistically
significant (P < 0.05). The 2-year PFS rates of gefitinib + pemetrexed group
(20.00 %) was higher than that of gefitinib + placebo group (8.89 %) and the
difference was statistically significant (P < 0.05). The median overall survival 
(OS) of gefitinib + placebo group and gefitinib + pemetrexed group were
32.0 months vs. 34 months respectively and the difference was not statistically
significant (P > 0.05). The 3-year OS rates of gefitinib + pemetrexed group
(44.44 %) was higher than that of gefitinib + placebo group (35.56 %) but the
difference was not statistically significant (P > 0.05). Major grade 3 or 4
hematological toxicities included neutropenia, leukopenia and anemia. The main
grade 3 or 4 non-hematological toxicities were infection, increased alanine
aminotransferase (ALT) and aspartate aminotransferase (AST) levels, fatigue,
diarrhea and pneumonitis. The difference of toxicities between two groups was not
statistically significant (P > 0.05). The combination regimen of
gefitinib + pemetrexed used in this study showed a higher ORR and DCR, longer
median PFS and acceptable toxicity.

DOI: 10.1007/s12253-016-0067-4 
PMID: 27126186  [PubMed - in process]


170. Med Sci Monit. 2016 Apr 29;22:1435-41.

Anticancer Effects of Paris Saponins by Apoptosis and PI3K/AKT Pathway in
Gefitinib-Resistant Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer.

Zhu X(1), Jiang H(2), Li J(3), Xu J(4), Fei Z(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Zhejiang Hospital, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China
(mainland). (2)Department of Oncology, Zhejiang Hospital, Hangzhou, Zhejiang,
China (mainland). (3)Department of Chinese Medicine and Rehabilitation, The
Second Affiliated Hospital of Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou,
Zhejiang, China (mainland). (4)Department of Surgery, Huashan Luxeme Medical
Cosmetology Hospital, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China (mainland). (5)Department of
Oncology, The First Clinical Medical Institute, Wenzhou Medical University,
Wenzhou, Zhejiang, China (mainland).

BACKGROUND Paris saponins have been studied for their anticancer effects in
various cancer types, but the mechanisms underlying the cytotoxic effects,
especially in EGFR-TKI-resistant cells, are still unclear. We explored the
potential mechanism of the antitumor effects of PSI, II, VI, VII in
EGFR-TKI-resistant cells and attempted to develop PSI, II, VI, VII as a systemic 
treatment strategy for EGFR-TKI-resistant lung cancer. MATERIAL AND METHODS
Growth inhibition was detected by MTT assay. The apoptosis assay was detected
using annexin-V/PI and Hoechst staining. The level of PI3K, pAKT, Bax, Bcl-2,
caspase-3, and caspase-9 protein expression were detected using Western blot
analysis. RESULTS The results revealed that PSI, II, VI, VII inhibited the
proliferation of PC-9-ZD cells. Furthermore, PSI, II, VI, VII induced significant
cell apoptosis. The levels of PI3K, pAKT, Bcl-2 protein decreased, while the Bax,
caspase-3, and caspase-9 protein was increased by PSI, II, PSVI, PSVII treatment 
and resulted in increased sensitivity to gefitinib in PC-9-ZD cells. CONCLUSIONS 
The underlying mechanism of Paris saponins may be related to targeting the
PI3K/AKT pathways to cause apoptosis. Our results suggest a therapeutic potential
of Paris saponins in clinical settings for gefitinib-resistant NSCLC.


PMCID: PMC4917328
PMID: 27125283  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Mol Clin Oncol. 2016 May;4(5):873-877. Epub 2016 Mar 9.

Effect of acid suppressants on the efficacy of tyrosine kinase inhibitors in
patients with epidermal growth factor receptor-mutated non-small-cell lung
cancer.

Miyazaki K(1), Sato S(1), Kodama T(1), Tamura T(2), Kagohashi K(3), Satoh H(3),
Hizawa N(2).

Author information: 
(1)Ryugasaki Saiseikai General Hospital, Ryugasaki, Ibaraki 135-0033, Japan.
(2)Faculty of Medicine, Institute of Clinical Medicine, University of Tsukuba,
Tsukuba 305-8575, Japan. (3)Division of Respiratory Medicine, Mito Medical
Center, University of Tsukuba Hospital, University of Tsukuba, Mito, Ibaraki
310-0015, Japan.

This retrospective study was conducted to evaluate whether oral acid suppressant 
(AS) therapy is associated with decreased efficacy of gefitinib and erlotinib,
particularly in patients with mutated epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR). A 
total of 46 consecutive patients with pathologically confirmed non-small-cell
lung cancer (NSCLC), who were treated with tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) in
two tertiary hospitals between September, 2005 and May, 2013, were
retrospectively analyzed. Of the 46 patients, 11 received AS treatment. As
regards age, gender, smoking history, performance status, histology of lung
cancer, clinical stage, body surface area (BSA) and type of EGFR mutation, there 
were no statistically significant differences between patients with and those
without AS treatment. There was no statistically significant difference in
progression-free survival (PFS) or overall survival (OS) between the two groups
of patients (P=0.296 and 0.613, respectively). As regards the relative dose of
TKI/BSA and survival in patients with and those without AS treatment, there were 
no statistically significant differences in PFS and OS between the two groups of 
patients. Our study indicates that AS treatment may not compromise TKI efficacy
(gefitinib or erlotinib) in NSCLC patients with mutated EGFR. Prospective studies
and large-scale confirmation studies investigating the effect of AS
co-administration with TKIs in patients with mutated EGFR may be meaningful in
clinical practice.

DOI: 10.3892/mco.2016.810 
PMCID: PMC4840557
PMID: 27123299  [PubMed]


172. Mol Clin Oncol. 2016 May;4(5):774-778. Epub 2016 Feb 16.

Elevated levels of plasma lactate dehydrogenase is an unfavorable prognostic
factor in patients with epidermal growth factor receptor mutation-positive
non-small cell lung cancer, receiving treatment with gefitinib or erlotinib.

Inomata M(1), Hayashi R(1), Tanaka H(1), Shimokawa K(1), Tokui K(1), Taka C(1),
Okazawa S(1), Kambara K(1), Ichikawa T(1), Yamada T(1), Miwa T(1), Kashii T(2),
Matsui S(3), Tobe K(1).

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Toyama, Toyama 930-0194, Japan. (2)Department of Medical Oncology, Toyama
University Hospital, Toyama 930-0194, Japan. (3)Health Administration Center,
University of Toyama, Toyama 930-0194, Japan.

Treatment with epidermal growth factor receptor-tyrosine kinase inhibitors
(EGFR-TKIs) has been shown to prolong survival in patients with EGFR
mutation-positive non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). The present study performed
a retrospective analysis to investigate the association between the plasma
lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) levels and survival in patients with EGFR
mutation-positive NSCLC receiving treatment with EGFR-TKIs. The medical charts of
patients with EGFR mutation-positive NSCLC who were receiving treatment with
EGFR-TKIs at Toyama University Hospital between 2007 and 2014 were assessed. The 
data from 65 patients were included in the analysis. Patients with higher plasma 
LDH levels exhibited shorter progression-free survival (6.2 vs. 13.2 months;
P<0.01) and overall survival (10.5 vs. 36.1 months; P<0.01) periods compared with
patients with lower plasma LDH levels. A Cox proportional hazards model
identified that the plasma LDH level was associated with the progression-free
survival (P=0.05) and overall survival (P<0.01). An association was demonstrated 
between the pretreatment plasma LDH level and the survival in patients with EGFR 
mutation-positive NSCLC receiving treatment with EGFR-TKIs. Close observation is 
required in EGFR mutation-positive NSCLC patients exhibiting high plasma LDH
levels following the initiation of treatment with EGFR-TKIs.

DOI: 10.3892/mco.2016.779 
PMCID: PMC4840529
PMID: 27123277  [PubMed]


173. Ned Tijdschr Geneeskd. 2016;160:A9615.

[Living with incurable cancer].

[Article in Dutch]

Buiting HM(1), Linn SC, Smorenburg CH, de Kanter W.

Author information: 
(1)Antoni van Leeuwenhoek, Amsterdam.

Anti-cancer treatments for various subtypes of cancer have significantly
improved. As a result, the number of cancer patients who cannot be completely
cured but may live for a considerable period of time is growing. A 72-year-old
woman was diagnosed with metastatic EGFR-mutated non-small-cell lung cancer. She 
received anti-tumour treatment with gefitinib for almost two years and
experienced only limited side effects. She was anxious about not knowing her
prognosis but after visiting a psychologist she feels as if she can continue
life. A 46-year-old woman started to experience symptoms of depression two years 
after treatment for metastatic breast cancer. A visit to a psycho-oncologist
proved to be very helpful. She does not want to know her prognosis and is
particularly happy that everything is going well at present. These two cases
illustrate that patients living longer with incurable cancer may experience
specific dilemmas. We make several recommendations for the care of this group of 
patients.


PMID: 27122068  [PubMed - in process]


174. Oncol Rep. 2016 Jul;36(1):365-75. doi: 10.3892/or.2016.4770. Epub 2016 Apr 26.

Combined use of PI3K and MEK inhibitors synergistically inhibits lung cancer with
EGFR and KRAS mutations.

Jiang ZB(1), Huang J(2), Xie C(1), Li X(1), Liu L(2), He J(2), Pan H(2), Huang
L(2), Fan XX(1), Yao XJ(1), Xie Y(1), Li N(1), Liu L(1), He JX(2), Leung EL(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Quality Research in Chinese Medicine/Macau Institute
For Applied Research in Medicine and Health, Macau University of Science and
Technology, Taipa, Macau SAR, P.R. China. (2)State Key Laboratory of Respiratory 
Disease, Guangzhou Institute of Respiratory Disease, Department of Thoracic
Surgery of the First Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou Medical University,
Guangzhou 510120, P.R. China.

EGFR and KRAS mutations are the two most common driver mutations in non-small
cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Molecular target-based therapy using small molecules
such as gefitinib has been used for inhibiting EGFR with good initial responses; 
however, drug resistance is common when using a mono-targeting strategy. At
present, KRAS remains an undruggable target. As such, the development of new
drugs targeting the downstream of KRAS and EGFR and their crosstalk pathways is
critically needed to effectively treat NSCLC. The present study aimed to
elucidate the anticancer effects of PI3K (BKM120) and MEK (PD1056309) inhibitors 
on NSCLC cell lines with KRAS or EGFR mutations. Inhibition of the EGFR and KRAS 
downstream P13K pathway using BKM120 significantly inhibited the growth of NSCLC 
cell lines with either EGFR or KRAS mutations. In addition, significant cell
cycle arrest and induction of apoptosis were observed following BKM120 treatment.
Notably, although the A549 and H358 NSCLC cell lines harbor the same KRAS
mutation, A549 cells were less sensitive than H358 cells in the response to
BKM120 treatment. Similarly, PC-9 and H1650 cells harbor the same EGFR mutation, 
however, H1650 was less sensitive to BKM120. Different sensitivity between NSCLC 
cell lines with the same oncogenic mutation suggests that multiple crosstalk
pathways exit. Combined usage of BKM120 and PD1056309 synergistically enhanced
apoptosis in the A549 cells and mildly enhanced apoptosis in the H1650 and H358
cells, suggesting the crosstalk of the MEK pathway with the P13K/Akt pathways in 
these cell lines. Overall, our findings suggest that inhibition of EGFR and KRAS 
downstream with a P13K/Akt inhibitor could be useful for treating NSCLC. However,
for NSCLC exhibiting crosstalk with other survival pathways, such as the MEK
pathway, combination treatment is required.

DOI: 10.3892/or.2016.4770 
PMID: 27121230  [PubMed - in process]


175. Oncotarget. 2016 Jun 14;7(24):36311-36320. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.8904.

Targeted sequencing identifies genetic alterations that confer primary resistance
to EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor (Korean Lung Cancer Consortium).

Lim SM(1,)(2), Kim HR(1), Cho EK(3), Min YJ(4), Ahn JS(5), Ahn MJ(5), Park K(5), 
Cho BC(1), Lee JH(6), Jeong HC(6), Kim EK(6), Kim JH(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Medical Oncology, Yonsei Cancer
Center, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea. (2)Department of
Internal Medicine, Division of Medical Oncology, CHA Bundang Medical Center, CHA 
University, Seongnam, Korea. (3)Department of Internal Medicine, Gachon
University Gil Medical Center, Incheon, Korea. (4)Department of Oncology, Asan
Medical Center, University of Ulsan college of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(5)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Department of Medicine, Samsung Medical
Center, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Seoul, Korea. (6)Department
of Internal Medicine, CHA Bundang Medical Center, CHA University, Seongnam,
Korea.

BACKGROUND: Non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients with activating epidermal
growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutations may exhibit primary resistance to EGFR
tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI). We aimed to examine genomic alterations
associated with de novo resistance to gefitinib in a prospective study of NSCLC
patients.
Patients and methods: One-hundred and fifty two patients with activating EGFR
mutations were included in this study and 136 patients' tumor sample were
available for targeted sequencing of genomic alterations in 22 genes using the
Colon and Lung Cancer panel (Ampliseq, Life Technologies).
Results: All 132 patients with EGFR mutation were treated with gefitinib for
their treatment of advanced NSCLC. Twenty patients showed primary resistance to
EGFR TKI, and were classified as non-responders. A total of 543 somatic
single-nucleotide variants (498 missense, 13 nonsense) and 32 frameshift
insertions/deletions, with a median of 3 mutations per sample. TP53 was most
commonly mutated (47%) and mutations in SMAD4 was also common (19%), as well as
DDR2 (16%), PIK3CA (15%), STK11 (14%), and BRAF (7%). Genomic mutations in the
PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway were commonly found in non-responders (45%) compared to
responders (27%), and they had significantly shorter progression-free survival
and overall survival compared to patients without mutations (2.1 vs. 12.8 months,
P=0.04, 15.7 vs. not reached, P<0.001). FGFR 1-3 alterations, KRAS mutations and 
TP53 mutations were more commonly detected in non-responders compared to
responders.
Conclusions: Genomic mutations in the PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway were commonly
identified in non-responders and may confer resistance to EGFR TKI. Screening
lung adenocarcinoma patients with clinical cancer gene test may aid in selecting 
out those who show primary resistance to EGFR TKI (NCT01697163).

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.8904 
PMCID: PMC5095002
PMID: 27121209  [PubMed - in process]


176. Oncol Rep. 2016 Jun;35(6):3460-70. doi: 10.3892/or.2016.4741. Epub 2016 Apr 13.

Zoledronic acid increases the antitumor effect of gefitinib treatment for
non-small cell lung cancer with EGFR mutations.

Feng C(1), Liu X(1), Li X(1), Guo F(1), Huang C(1), Qin Q(1), Wang Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Oncology, Cancer Center, State Key Laboratory of
Biotherapy, West China Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu, Sichuan 610041,
P.R. China.

Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients with epithelial growth factor
receptor (EGFR) mutations and bone metastases are often concurrently administered
tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) and bisphosphonates. Yet, the effects and
mechanisms of these agents are unclear. In the present study, we aimed to
ascertain whether zoledronic acid (ZA) increases the antitumor effects of
gefitinib treatment on NSCLC with EGFR mutations and the related mechanisms of
action. The effects of ZA and gefitinib on NSCLC tumor cells with EGFR mutations 
(HCC827, HCC827 GR and H1975) in regards to proliferation, apoptosis, cell cycle 
and signaling pathways were detected. ZA increased the antitumor effects of
gefitinib on NSCLC with EGFR activating mutations and TKI resistance in vitro.
Gefitinib caused cell cycle arrest in the G0/G1 phase, ZA induced S phase
accumulation and the effect of the combined treatment was neutralization.
Combined treatment obviously inhibited STAT3 and/or p‑STAT3 protein expression
compared with treatment with each single drug in vitro and in vivo, and it also
significantly inhibited TKI resistance NSCLC tumor growth in vivo. In conclusion,
ZA increased the antitumor effects of gefitinib on NSCLC with EGFR activating
mutations and TKI resistance by regulating the cell cycle, inducing
caspase-3 expression and inhibiting STAT3 expression.

DOI: 10.3892/or.2016.4741 
PMID: 27109760  [PubMed - in process]


177. Neoplasia. 2016 Apr;18(4):199-212. doi: 10.1016/j.neo.2016.02.005. Epub 2016 Mar 
22.

A Potent Derivative of Indolizino[6,7-b]Indole for Treatment of Human Non-Small
Cell Lung Cancer Cells.

Chen CW(1), Wu MH(2), Chen YF(1), Yen TY(3), Lin YW(2), Chao SH(2), Tala S(2),
Tsai TH(3), Su TL(2), Lee TC(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biopharmaceutical Sciences, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei
11221, Taiwan; Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Academia Sinica, Taipei 11529,
Taiwan. (2)Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Academia Sinica, Taipei 11529,
Taiwan. (3)Institute of Traditional Medicine, National Yang-Ming University,
Taipei 11221, Taiwan. (4)Institute of Biopharmaceutical Sciences, National
Yang-Ming University, Taipei 11221, Taiwan; Institute of Biomedical Sciences,
Academia Sinica, Taipei 11529, Taiwan; Institute of Pharmacology, National
Yang-Ming University, Taipei 11221, Taiwan. Electronic address:
bmtcl@ibms.sinica.edu.tw.

The therapeutic effect in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients is limited 
because of intrinsic and acquired resistance. Thus, an unmet need exists for the 
development of new drugs to improve the therapeutic efficacy in NSCLC patients.
In this study, the novel small molecule indolizino[6,7-b]indole derivative
BO-1978 was selected to evaluate its therapeutic effects on NSCLC and its
preclinical toxicity in animal models. An in vitro cytotoxicity assay revealed
that BO-1978 significantly suppressed the growth of various NSCLC cell lines with
or without mutations in epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR). Mechanistically,
we demonstrated that BO-1978 exhibited multiple modes of action, including
inhibition of topoisomerase I/II and induction of DNA cross-linking. Treatment of
NSCLC cells with BO-1978 caused DNA damage, disturbed cell cycle progression, and
triggered apoptotic cell death. Furthermore, BO-1978 significantly suppressed the
growth of EGFR wild-type and mutant NSCLC tumors in xenograft tumor and
orthotopic lung tumor models with negligible body weight loss. The combination of
BO-1978 with gefitinib further suppressed EGFR mutant NSCLC cell growth in
xenograft tumor and orthotopic lung tumor models. Preclinical toxicity studies
showed that BO-1978 administration did not cause apparent toxicity in mice. Based
on its significant therapeutic efficacy and low drug toxicity, BO-1978 is a
potential therapeutic agent for treatment of NSCLC.

Copyright © 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neo.2016.02.005 
PMCID: PMC4840272
PMID: 27108383  [PubMed - in process]


178. Korean J Intern Med. 2016 Apr 21. [Epub ahead of print]

WITHDRAWN:Clinical efficacy of erlotinib, a salvage treatment for non-small cell 
lung cancer patients following gefitinib failure.

Cho KM(1,)(2), Keam B(1,)(3), Kim TM(1,)(3), Lee SH(1,)(3), Kim DW(1,)(3), Heo
DS(1,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul,
Korea. (2)Department of Internal Medicine, Kyung Hee University School of
Medicine, Seoul, Korea. (3)Cancer Research Institute, Seoul National University
College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

Ahead of Print article withdrawn by publisher.

DOI: 10.3904/kjim.2014.259 
PMID: 27097770  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


179. Pharmacogenomics J. 2016 Apr 19. doi: 10.1038/tpj.2016.31. [Epub ahead of print]

Determinants of Gefitinib toxicity in advanced non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC): a pharmacogenomic study of metabolic enzymes and transporters.

Ma Y(1), Xin S(2), Huang M(2), Yang Y(3), Zhu C(2), Zhao H(1), Zhang Y(1), Chen
L(2), Zhao Y(3), Li J(2), Zhuang W(2), Zhu X(2), Zhang L(3), Wang X(2).

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Trial Center, State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China,
Collaborative Innovation Center for Cancer Medicine, Sun Yat-Sen University
Cancer Center, Guangzhou, China. (2)Institute of Clinical Pharmacology, School of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou, China. (3)Department 
of Medical Oncology, State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China,
Collaborative Innovation Center for Cancer Medicine, Sun Yat-Sen University
Cancer Center, Guangzhou, China.

Skin rash, diarrhea and hepatotoxicity are the most common toxicities of
Gefitinib, an epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase inhibitor. 
The present study investigated the effects of genetic polymorphisms of drug
target, metabolizing enzymes and transporters on Gefitinib toxicities. Thirty
single-nucleotide polymorphisms, including EGFR, cytochromes P450 and ATP-binding
cassette (ABC), were genotyped by matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization
time-of-flight platform in 59 non-small cell lung cancer patients treated with
Gefitinib. Correlation analyses were performed to evaluate their effects on
Gefitinib-induced toxicities. ABCB1 rs1128503 TT genotype was a significant
high-risk determinant of both skin rash and diarrhea, with 15.78- and 10.78-fold 
of incident risk increased, respectively. (odds ratio (OR)=15.78, 95% confidence 
interval (CI) 2.01-124.1, P=0.0087; OR=10.78, 95% CI 1.54-75.40, P=0.0166 vs
non-TT genotypes). Patients with ABCB1 rs1128503 TT genotype had greater risk of 
skin rash and diarrhea. Therefore, polymorphism analyses of ABCB1 might be
beneficial to optimize Gefitinib treatment.The Pharmacogenomics Journal advance
online publication, 19 April 2016; doi:10.1038/tpj.2016.31.

DOI: 10.1038/tpj.2016.31 
PMID: 27089937  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


180. Lancet Oncol. 2016 May;17(5):577-89. doi: 10.1016/S1470-2045(16)30033-X. Epub
2016 Apr 12.

Afatinib versus gefitinib as first-line treatment of patients with EGFR
mutation-positive non-small-cell lung cancer (LUX-Lung 7): a phase 2B,
open-label, randomised controlled trial.

Park K(1), Tan EH(2), O'Byrne K(3), Zhang L(4), Boyer M(5), Mok T(6), Hirsh V(7),
Yang JC(8), Lee KH(9), Lu S(10), Shi Y(11), Kim SW(12), Laskin J(13), Kim DW(14),
Arvis CD(15), Kölbeck K(16), Laurie SA(17), Tsai CM(18), Shahidi M(19), Kim
M(20), Massey D(19), Zazulina V(19), Paz-Ares L(21).

Author information: 
(1)Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Seoul,
South Korea. Electronic address: kpark@skku.edu. (2)National Cancer Centre,
Singapore, Singapore. (3)Princess Alexandra Hospital and Queensland University of
Technology, Brisbane, QLD, Australia. (4)State Key Laboratory of Oncology in
South China, Collaborative Innovation Center for Cancer Medicine, Sun Yat-Sen
University Cancer Center, Guangzhou, China. (5)Chris O'Brien Lifehouse,
Camperdown, NSW, Australia. (6)Key Laboratory of South China, Department of
Clinical Oncology, The Chinese University of Hong Kong Sha Tin, Hong Kong.
(7)McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada. (8)National Taiwan University
Hospital and National Taiwan University Cancer Center, Taipei, Taiwan.
(9)Chungbuk National University Hospital, Cheongju, Chungbuk, South Korea.
(10)Shanghai Chest Hospital, Shanghai, China. (11)Cancer Hospital, Chinese
Academy of Medical Sciences & Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, China;
Beijing Key Laboratory of Clinical Study on Anticancer Molecular Targeted Drugs, 
Beijing, China. (12)Asan Medical Center, Seoul, South Korea. (13)BC CancerAgency,
Vancouver, BC, Canada. (14)Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul, South
Korea. (15)Centre François Baclesse, Oncology, Caen, France. (16)Karolinska
University Hospital, Solna, Stockholm, Sweden. (17)The Ottawa Hospital Cancer
Centre, Ottawa, ON, Canada. (18)Taipei Veterans General Hospital and National
Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan. (19)Boehringer Ingelheim Ltd UK, Bracknell,
Berkshire, UK. (20)Boehringer Ingelheim GmbH, Ingelheim, Germany. (21)Hospital
Universitario Doce de Octubre and CNIO, Madrid Spain.

Comment in
    Ann Transl Med. 2016 Aug;4(15):294.
    Transl Lung Cancer Res. 2016 Aug;5(4):446-9.

BACKGROUND: The irreversible ErbB family blocker afatinib and the reversible EGFR
tyrosine kinase inhibitor gefitinib are approved for first-line treatment of EGFR
mutation-positive non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC). We aimed to compare the
efficacy and safety of afatinib and gefitinib in this setting.
METHODS: This multicentre, international, open-label, exploratory, randomised
controlled phase 2B trial (LUX-Lung 7) was done at 64 centres in 13 countries.
Treatment-naive patients with stage IIIB or IV NSCLC and a common EGFR mutation
(exon 19 deletion or Leu858Arg) were randomly assigned (1:1) to receive afatinib 
(40 mg per day) or gefitinib (250 mg per day) until disease progression, or
beyond if deemed beneficial by the investigator. Randomisation, stratified by
EGFR mutation type and status of brain metastases, was done centrally using a
validated number generating system implemented via an interactive voice or
web-based response system with a block size of four. Clinicians and patients were
not masked to treatment allocation; independent review of tumour response was
done in a blinded manner. Coprimary endpoints were progression-free survival by
independent central review, time-to-treatment failure, and overall survival.
Efficacy analyses were done in the intention-to-treat population and safety
analyses were done in patients who received at least one dose of study drug. This
ongoing study is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, number NCT01466660.
FINDINGS: Between Dec 13, 2011, and Aug 8, 2013, 319 patients were randomly
assigned (160 to afatinib and 159 to gefitinib). Median follow-up was 27·3 months
(IQR 15·3-33·9). Progression-free survival (median 11·0 months [95% CI 10·6-12·9]
with afatinib vs 10·9 months [9·1-11·5] with gefitinib; hazard ratio [HR] 0·73
[95% CI 0·57-0·95], p=0·017) and time-to-treatment failure (median 13·7 months
[95% CI 11·9-15·0] with afatinib vs 11·5 months [10·1-13·1] with gefitinib; HR
0·73 [95% CI 0·58-0·92], p=0·0073) were significantly longer with afatinib than
with gefitinib. Overall survival data are not mature. The most common
treatment-related grade 3 or 4 adverse events were diarrhoea (20 [13%] of 160
patients given afatinib vs two [1%] of 159 given gefitinib) and rash or acne (15 
[9%] patients given afatinib vs five [3%] of those given gefitinib) and liver
enzyme elevations (no patients given afatinib vs 14 [9%] of those given
gefitinib). Serious treatment-related adverse events occurred in 17 (11%)
patients in the afatinib group and seven (4%) in the gefitinib group. Ten (6%)
patients in each group discontinued treatment due to drug-related adverse events.
15 (9%) fatal adverse events occurred in the afatinib group and ten (6%) in the
gefitinib group. All but one of these deaths were considered unrelated to
treatment; one patient in the gefitinib group died from drug-related hepatic and 
renal failure.
INTERPRETATION: Afatinib significantly improved outcomes in treatment-naive
patients with EGFR-mutated NSCLC compared with gefitinib, with a manageable
tolerability profile. These data are potentially important for clinical decision 
making in this patient population.
FUNDING: Boehringer Ingelheim.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S1470-2045(16)30033-X 
PMID: 27083334  [PubMed - in process]


181. Int J Oncol. 2016 Jun;48(6):2608-18. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2016.3488. Epub 2016 Apr
15.

Oridonin inhibits gefitinib-resistant lung cancer cells by suppressing
EGFR/ERK/MMP-12 and CIP2A/Akt signaling pathways.

Xiao X(1), He Z(1), Cao W(2), Cai F(1), Zhang L(1), Huang Q(1), Fan C(1), Duan
C(1), Wang X(3), Wang J(4), Liu Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Basic Medical Sciences, Hubei University of Medicine, Shiyan, Hubei 
442000, P.R. China. (2)School of Life Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing
100084, P.R. China. (3)Translational Medical Center, Suizhou Central Hospital,
Hubei University of Medicine, Suizhou, Hubei 441300, P.R. China. (4)School of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Hubei University of Medicine, Shiyan, Hubei 442000, P.R.
China.

Oridonin (Ori), a diterpenoid compound extracted from traditional medicinal
herbs, elicits antitumor effects on many cancer types. However, whether Ori can
be used in gefitinib-resistant non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cells remains
unclear. This study investigated the antitumor activity and underlying mechanisms
of Ori. Results demonstrated that this compound dose-dependently inhibited the
proliferation, invasion, and migration of the gefitinib-resistant NSCLC cells
in vitro. Ori also significantly downregulated the phosphorylation of EGFR, ERK, 
Akt, expression levels of matrix metalloproteinase-12 (MMP-12), and the cancerous
inhibitor of protein phosphatase 2A (CIP2A). In addition, Ori upregulated protein
phosphatase 2A (PP2A) activity of gefitinib-resistant NSCLC cells. Ori combined
with docetaxel synergistically inhibited these cells. Ori also inhibited tumor
growth in murine models. Immunohistochemistry results further revealed that Ori
downregulated phospho-EGFR, MMP-12, and CIP2A in vivo. These findings indicated
that Ori can inhibit the proliferation, invasion, and migration of
gefitinib-resistant NSCLC cells by suppressing EGFR/ERK/MMP-12 and CIP2A/PP2A/Akt
signaling pathways. Thus, Ori may be a novel effective candidate to treat
gefitinib-resistant NSCLC.

DOI: 10.3892/ijo.2016.3488 
PMID: 27082429  [PubMed - in process]


182. J Thorac Dis. 2016 Mar;8(3):E217-20. doi: 10.21037/jtd.2016.02.21.

Afatinib in first-line setting for NSCLC harbouring common EGFR mutations: new
light after the preliminary results of LUX-Lung 7?

Passaro A(1), Pochesci A(1), Spitaleri G(1), Catania C(1), Noberasco C(1), Del
Signore E(1), de Marinis F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Thoracic Oncology, European Institute of Oncology, Milan, Italy.

The development of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase
inhibitors (TKIs) changed dramatically the history of non-small cell lung cancer 
(NSCLC) harboring EGFR sensitive mutations. Several randomized prospective trials
confirmed the superiority of these target agents about survival and response rate
when comparing with platinum-based chemotherapy. Knowledge about EGFR mutations
increased gradually during the development of target agents and different
clinical trials. EGFR mutations cannot be considered all equal, but different
entities should be considered in our clinical practice: exon 19 deletions, exon
21 mutation (L858R) and uncommon mutation (exon 20, exon 18 and double mutation).
Nowadays, we dispose of three different EGFR TKIs (afatinib, erlotinib and
gefitinib) approved for the treatment for first-line treatment of patients di
NSCLC carrying EGFR, that was compared only by indirect analysis, producing data 
not always clear and convincing. This research highlight is an overview of data
about EGFR TKIs in first-line setting, focusing on differences about exon 19
deletions and L585R mutation in patients treated with different TKIs. In
addition, we report the preliminary results of the first head-to-head randomized 
clinical trial between two different EGFR TKIs, the LUX-Lung 7 (LL7) that
compared afatinib and gefitinib showing interesting results.

DOI: 10.21037/jtd.2016.02.21 
PMCID: PMC4805786
PMID: 27076973  [PubMed]


183. Mol Clin Oncol. 2016 Apr;4(4):628-630. Epub 2016 Jan 29.

Successful pemetrexed-containing chemotherapy for epidermal growth factor
receptor mutation-positive adenosquamous cell carcinoma of the lung: A case
report.

Watanabe H(1), Tamura T(1), Kagohashi K(1), Kawaguchi M(2), Kurishima K(3), Satoh
H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Respiratory Medicine, Mito Medical Center, University of Tsukuba, 
Mito, Ibaraki 310-0015, Japan. (2)Division of Respiratory Medicine, Faculty of
Medicine, University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8575, Japan. (3)Division of
Respiratory Medicine, Tsukuba Medical Center, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8558, Japan.

Pemetrexed-containing chemotherapy has shown promise in the treatment of
non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC). However, although adenosquamous cell lung
cancer (ASCLC) is a type of NSCLC, the availability of studies investigating its 
response to pemetrexed-containing chemotherapy is limited. A 66-year-old woman
was referred to Mito Medical Center, University of Tsukuba with hemoptysis and a 
chest computed tomography (CT) scan revealed a large cavitary mass in the lower
lobe of the left lung. The patient underwent left lower lobectomy and mediastinal
lymph node dissection. The tumor was staged as pT2bN2M0. An epidermal growth
factor receptor (EGFR) exon 19 deletion was identified in the adenocarcinomatous 
as well as the squamous cell carcinomatous components. Despite gefitinib therapy 
for pulmonary metastases, the patient developed cavitary metastases in both
lungs. Therefore, treatment with pemetrexed-containing chemotherapy was
initiated. A chest CT scan revealed significant regression of the metastatic
lesions in both lungs, with thinning of the walls. The patient remains well and
recurrence-free 19 months after the initiation of pemetrexed-containing
chemotherapy. Therefore, the clinical response of EGFR mutation-positive ASCLC to
pemetrexed-containing chemotherapy was promising, suggesting pemetrexed to be one
of the key drugs for this subset of ASCLC patients.

DOI: 10.3892/mco.2016.756 
PMCID: PMC4812476
PMID: 27073680  [PubMed]


184. Oncol Lett. 2016 Apr;11(4):2757-2762. Epub 2016 Mar 9.

Gefitinib as first line therapy in Malaysian patients with EGFR mutation-positive
non-small-cell lung cancer: A single-center retrospective study.

Abdullah MM(1), Bhat A(2), Mohamed AK(1), Ching FY(1), Ahmed N(2), Gantotti S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Oncology and Radiotherapy, Subang Jaya Medical Centre, 
Subang Jaya 47500, Selangor, Malaysia. (2)Indegene Lifesystems Pvt. Ltd.,
Nagavara, Karnataka 560045, Bangalore, India.

The present retrospective, single-center study evaluated the objective response
rate (ORR) and progression-free survival (PFS) of epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR) mutation-positive Malaysian patients with advanced lung
adenocarcinoma treated with gefitinib. During May 2008 to July 2013, 33 patients 
with Stage IV, EGFR mutation-positive non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) were
identified and received gefitinib (250 mg) as first line treatment. The primary
and secondary end points were ORR, PFS and safety, respectively. A total of 18
(54.5%) and 2 (6.1%) patients achieved partial response (PR) and complete
response (CR) to gefitinib therapy, respectively, yielding an ORR of 60.6% (95%
CI, 42.1-77.1%). Patients with exon 20 or 21 mutations (n=6, 66.7%) tended to
have better ORR compared with exon 19 (n=22, 59.1%). The median PFS was 8.9
months in Malaysian patients with EGFR mutation-positive NSCLC, treated with
gefitinib. The majority of treatment-related toxicity was mild in nature. The
most frequently reported adverse events included dry skin (39.4%), skin rash
(27.2%), and dermatitis acneiform (15.2%). In conclusion, Malaysian patients with
locally advanced and metastatic EGFR mutation-positive NSCLC responded favorably 
to gefitinib therapy in terms of ORR, median PFS, and tolerability, the results
of which were consistent with those of the IPASS study conducted in an Asian
population. Considering the efficacy and safety profile of gefitinib, it is a
favorable option for the first-line treatment of Malaysian patients with EGFR
mutation-positive NSCLC. However, future long-term studies in a larger population
of Malaysian patients are required to support whether the prolonged PFS conferred
by gefitinib will translate into prolonged overall survival.

DOI: 10.3892/ol.2016.4322 
PMCID: PMC4812101
PMID: 27073548  [PubMed]


185. Thorac Cancer. 2016 Mar;7(2):251-3. doi: 10.1111/1759-7714.12263. Epub 2015 May
5.

Pharmacokinetic analysis of gefitinib in a patient with advanced non-small cell
lung cancer undergoing hemodialysis.

Luo J(1), Ni L(1), Wang M(1), Zhong W(1), Xiao Y(1), Zheng K(2), Hu P(3).

Author information: 
(1)Respiratory Department Peking Union Medical College Hospital Chinese Academy
of Medical Sciences & Peking Union Medical College Beijing China. (2)Department
of Nephrology Peking Union Medical College Hospital Chinese Academy of Medical
Sciences & Peking Union Medical College Beijing China. (3)Clinical Pharmacology
Research Center Peking Union Medical College Hospital Peking Union Medical
College Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences Beijing China.

Patients undergoing hemodialysis (HD) are frequently elderly with poor
performance status and usually cannot withstand chemotherapy because of its
toxicities. We report a case of an elderly woman with chronic renal failure
undergoing HD who was diagnosed with advanced non-small cell lung cancer and
treated with orally administered gefitinib. We analyzed the pharmacokinetic data 
of gefitinib in this patient and found that that gefitinib was safe under these
conditions.

DOI: 10.1111/1759-7714.12263 
PMCID: PMC4773293
PMID: 27042230  [PubMed]


186. J Med Invest. 2016;63(1-2):149-51. doi: 10.2152/jmi.63.149.

Safe and successful treatment with afatinib in three postoperative non-small cell
lung cancer patients with recurrences following gefitinib/erlotinib-induced
hepatotoxicity.

Toba H(1), Sakiyama S, Takizawa H, Tangoku A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic and Endocrine Surgery and Oncology, Institute of Health
Biosciences, University of Tokushima Graduate School.

BACKGROUND: Gefitinib and/or erlotinib-induced hepatotoxicity sometimes lead to
treatment failure in EGFR mutation-positive patients with non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC), even though the therapeutic effect is evident.
CASES: Here, we report three postoperative NSCLC patients with recurrences who
experienced severe hepatotoxicity while receiving gefitinib and/or erlotinib
treatment but could be safely switched to afatinib treatment.
CONCLUSION: Afatinib could be a well-tolerated EGFR-TKI that could be chosen for 
its relatively low hepatotoxicity, which is attributable to its having a
different metabolic mechanism compared to other EGFR-TKIs.

DOI: 10.2152/jmi.63.149 
PMID: 27040072  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol. 2016 May;77(5):1005-9. doi:
10.1007/s00280-015-2910-9. Epub 2016 Mar 31.

Development of a skin rash within the first week and the therapeutic effect in
afatinib monotherapy for EGFR-mutant non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC): Okayama 
Lung Cancer Study Group experience.

Kudo K(1), Hotta K(2,)(3), Bessho A(4), Nogami N(5), Kozuki T(5), Kuyama S(6),
Inoue K(7), Harita S(8), Okada T(8), Gemba K(9), Fujii M(10), Takigawa N(11), Oda
N(1), Tanimoto M(12), Kiura K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Okayama University Hospital, Okayama,
Japan. (2)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Okayama University Hospital,
Okayama, Japan. khotta@okayama-u.ac.jp. (3)Department of Hematology and Oncology,
Okayama University Hospital, 2-5-1, Shikatacho, Kitaku, Okayama, 700-8558, Japan.
khotta@okayama-u.ac.jp. (4)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Japanese Red Cross
Okayama Hospital, Okayama, Japan. (5)Department of Thoracic Oncology and
Medicine, NHO Shikoku Cancer Center, Matsuyama, Japan. (6)Department of
Respiratory Medicine, NHO Iwakuni Medical Center, Iwakuni, Japan. (7)Department
of Respiratory Medicine, Ehime Prefectural Central Hospital, Matsuyama, Japan.
(8)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Chugoku Central Hospital, Fukuyama, Japan.
(9)Department of Respiratory Medicine, NHO Fukuyama Medical Center, Fukuyama,
Japan. (10)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Japanese Red Cross Kobe Hospital, 
Kobe, Japan. (11)Department of General Internal Medicine 4, Kawasaki Medical
School, Okayama, Japan. (12)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Okayama
University Hospital, 2-5-1, Shikatacho, Kitaku, Okayama, 700-8558, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors
(EGFR-TKIs) are now key agents in treating EGFR-mutant non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC). The efficacy of gefitinib or erlotinib monotherapy can be predicted by
the development of a skin rash. However, it has not been fully evaluated if this 
is the case with afatinib monotherapy.
METHODS: We retrospectively studied 49 consecutive patients with EGFR-mutant
NSCLC who received afatinib therapy between 2009 and 2015. The relationship of
several toxicities with tumor response was examined.
RESULTS: Grade 2, or more severe, common adverse events (AEs) included skin rash 
in 17 patients (35 %), diarrhea in 19 (39 %) and mucositis in 15 (31 %). Of
these, the number of patients who developed ≥Grade 2 AEs during the first week
after the initiation of afatinib therapy was: five patients had skin rash (10 %),
12 patients had diarrhea (25 %) and four patients had mucositis (8 %). As for an 
objective response, 21 (43 %) of the 49 had a partial response. Associating the
AEs with the antitumor effect, those who had a ≥Grade 2 skin rash within the
first week tended to have a greater tumor response compared with those without a 
rash (80 vs. 39 %; p = 0.077).
CONCLUSION: Our small study demonstrated that the early development of a skin
rash might be associated with the response to afatinib monotherapy.

DOI: 10.1007/s00280-015-2910-9 
PMID: 27029623  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Oncotarget. 2016 Apr 26;7(17):24585-95. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.8358.

Exosomes derived from gefitinib-treated EGFR-mutant lung cancer cells alter
cisplatin sensitivity via up-regulating autophagy.

Li XQ(1), Liu JT(1,)(2), Fan LL(1), Liu Y(1), Cheng L(1), Wang F(1), Yu HQ(1),
Gao J(2), Wei W(3), Wang H(1), Sun GP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Anhui Medical
University, Hefei, Anhui, China. (2)Department of Pharmacy, The First Affiliated 
Hospital of Anhui Medical University, Hefei, Anhui, China. (3)Institute of
Clinical Pharmacology, Anhui Medical University, Hefei, Anhui, China.

Several clinical trials indicate that concurrent administration of tyrosine
kinase inhibitors (TKIs, such as gefitinib or erlotinib) with chemotherapy agents
fails to improve overall survival in advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) 
patients. However, the precise mechanisms underlying the antagonistic effects
remain unclear. In the present study, we investigated the role of exosomes in the
antagonistic effects of concurrent administration of chemotherapy and TKIs.
Exosomes derived from gefitinib-treated PC9 cells (Exo-GF) decreased the
antitumor effects of cisplatin, while exosomes derived from cisplatin-treated PC9
cells (Exo-DDP) did not significantly affect the antitumor effects of gefitinib. 
Additionally, inhibition of exosome secretion by GW4869 resulted in a modest
synergistic effect when cisplatin and gefitinib were co-administered.
Furthermore, Exo-GF co-incubation with cisplatin increased autophagic activity
and reduced apoptosis, as demonstrated by an upregulation of LC3-II and Bcl-2
protein levels and downregulation of p62 and Bax protein levels. Thus, the
antagonistic effects of gefitinib and cisplatin were mainly attributed to Exo-GF,
which resulted in upregulated autophagy and increased cisplatin resistance. These
results suggest that inhibition of exosome secretion may be a helpful strategy to
overcome the antagonistic effects when TKIs and chemotherapeutic agents are
co-administered. Before administering chemotherapy, introducing a washout period 
to completely eliminate TKI-related exosomes, may be a better procedure for
administering chemotherapy and TKIs.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.8358 
PMCID: PMC5029725
PMID: 27029054  [PubMed - in process]


189. Onco Targets Ther. 2016 Mar 9;9:1291-302. doi: 10.2147/OTT.S80635. eCollection
2016.

Role of gefitinib in the targeted treatment of non-small-cell lung cancer in
Chinese patients.

Li MJ(1), He Q(1), Li M(1), Luo F(1), Guan YS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Center of Oncology, West China Hospital of Sichuan
University, Chengdu, People's Republic of China.

Non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is the most common type of lung cancer.
Conventional treatment options have limited efficacy because most cases are in
the advanced stage at the time of diagnosis. In recent years, gefitinib, an
epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor, has shown its good
antitumor activities in treating NSCLC in a number of studies. This paper reviews
its role in the targeted treatment of NSCLC in Chinese patients.

DOI: 10.2147/OTT.S80635 
PMCID: PMC4790503
PMID: 27022285  [PubMed]


190. J Clin Oncol. 2016 Sep 20;34(27):3248-57. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2015.63.4154. Epub
2016 Mar 28.

Randomized Phase III Study Comparing Gefitinib With Erlotinib in Patients With
Previously Treated Advanced Lung Adenocarcinoma: WJOG 5108L.

Urata Y(1), Katakami N(2), Morita S(2), Kaji R(2), Yoshioka H(2), Seto T(2),
Satouchi M(2), Iwamoto Y(2), Kanehara M(2), Fujimoto D(2), Ikeda N(2), Murakami
H(2), Daga H(2), Oguri T(2), Goto I(2), Imamura F(2), Sugawara S(2), Saka H(2),
Nogami N(2), Negoro S(2), Nakagawa K(2), Nakanishi Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)Yoshiko Urata, Miyako Satouchi, and Shunichi Negoro, Hyogo Cancer Center,
Akashi; Nobuyuki Katakami and Reiko Kaji, Institute of Biomedical Research and
Innovation; Daichi Fujimoto, Kobe City Medical Center General Hospital, Kobe;
Satoshi Morita, Kyoto University Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto; Hiroshige
Yoshioka, Kurashiki Central Hospital, Kurashiki; Takashi Seto, National Kyushu
Cancer Center; Yoichi Nakanishi, Kyushu University, Graduate School of Medical
Sciences, Fukuoka; Yasuo Iwamoto and Masashi Kanehara, Hiroshima City Hospital,
Hiroshima; Norihiko Ikeda, Tokyo Medical University, Tokyo; Haruyasu Murakami,
Shizuoka Cancer Center, Shizuoka; Haruko Daga, Osaka City General Hospital; Fumio
Imamura, Osaka Medical Center for Cancer and Cardiovascular Diseases, Osaka; Isao
Goto, Osaka Medical College, Takatsuki; Hideo Saka, National Hospital
Organization Nagoya Medical Center; Tetsuya Oguri, Nagoya City University
Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Nagoya; Shunichi Sugawara, Sendai Kousei
Hospital, Sendai; Naoyuki Nogami, National Hospital Organization Shikoku Cancer
Center, Matsuyama; and Kazuhiko Nakagawa, Kinki University Faculty of Medicine,
Osaka-Sayama, Japan. urata@hp.pref.hyogo.jp. (2)Yoshiko Urata, Miyako Satouchi,
and Shunichi Negoro, Hyogo Cancer Center, Akashi; Nobuyuki Katakami and Reiko
Kaji, Institute of Biomedical Research and Innovation; Daichi Fujimoto, Kobe City
Medical Center General Hospital, Kobe; Satoshi Morita, Kyoto University Graduate 
School of Medicine, Kyoto; Hiroshige Yoshioka, Kurashiki Central Hospital,
Kurashiki; Takashi Seto, National Kyushu Cancer Center; Yoichi Nakanishi, Kyushu 
University, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Fukuoka; Yasuo Iwamoto and
Masashi Kanehara, Hiroshima City Hospital, Hiroshima; Norihiko Ikeda, Tokyo
Medical University, Tokyo; Haruyasu Murakami, Shizuoka Cancer Center, Shizuoka;
Haruko Daga, Osaka City General Hospital; Fumio Imamura, Osaka Medical Center for
Cancer and Cardiovascular Diseases, Osaka; Isao Goto, Osaka Medical College,
Takatsuki; Hideo Saka, National Hospital Organization Nagoya Medical Center;
Tetsuya Oguri, Nagoya City University Graduate School of Medical Sciences,
Nagoya; Shunichi Sugawara, Sendai Kousei Hospital, Sendai; Naoyuki Nogami,
National Hospital Organization Shikoku Cancer Center, Matsuyama; and Kazuhiko
Nakagawa, Kinki University Faculty of Medicine, Osaka-Sayama, Japan.

PURPOSE: The epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase has been an 
important target for non-small-cell lung cancer. Several EGFR tyrosine kinase
inhibitors (TKIs) are currently approved, and both gefitinib and erlotinib are
the most well-known first-generation EGFR-TKIs. This randomized phase III study
was conducted to investigate the difference between these two EGFR-TKIs.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Previously treated patients with lung adenocarcinoma were
randomly assigned to receive gefitinib or erlotinib. This study aimed to
investigate the noninferiority of gefitinib compared with erlotinib. The primary 
end point was progression-free survival (PFS).
RESULTS: Five hundred sixty-one patients were randomly assigned, including 401
patients (71.7%) with EGFR mutation. All baseline factors (except performance
status) were balanced between the arms. Median PFS and overall survival times for
gefitinib and erlotinib were 6.5 and 7.5 months (hazard ratio [HR], 1.125; 95%
CI, 0.940 to 1.347; P = .257) and 22.8 and 24.5 months (HR, 1.038; 95% CI, 0.833 
to 1.294; P = .768), respectively. The response rates for gefitinib and erlotinib
were 45.9% and 44.1%, respectively. Median PFS times in EGFR mutation-positive
patients receiving gefitinib versus erlotinib were 8.3 and 10.0 months,
respectively (HR, 1.093; 95% CI, 0.879 to 1.358; P = .424). The primary grade 3
or 4 toxicities were rash (2.2% for gefitinib v 18.1% for erlotinib) and alanine 
aminotransferase (ALT)/aspartate aminotransferase (AST) elevation (6.1%/13.0% for
gefitinib v 2.2%/3.3% for erlotinib).
CONCLUSION: The study did not demonstrate noninferiority of gefitinib compared
with erlotinib in terms of PFS in patients with lung adenocarcinoma according to 
the predefined criteria.

© 2016 by American Society of Clinical Oncology.

DOI: 10.1200/JCO.2015.63.4154 
PMID: 27022112  [PubMed - in process]


191. PLoS One. 2016 Mar 25;11(3):e0151846. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0151846.
eCollection 2016.

Trial-Based Cost-Utility Analysis of Icotinib versus Gefitinib as Second-Line
Therapy for Advanced Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer in China.

Zhang C(1,)(2), Zhang H(3), Shi J(3), Wang D(3), Zhang X(4), Yang J(4), Zhai
Q(4), Ma A(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of International Pharmaceutical Business, China Pharmaceutical
University, Nanjing, Jiangsu Province, China. (2)Department of Pharmacy, Nanjing 
Jiangning Hospital, Nanjing, Jiangsu Province, China. (3)Department of Blood
Transfusion, Nanjing Jiangning Hospital, Nanjing, Jiangsu Province, China.
(4)Department of Respiratory, Nanjing Jiangning Hospital, Nanjing, Jiangsu
Province, China.

BACKGROUND: Our objective is to compare the cost-utility of icotinib and
gefitinib for the second-line treatment of advanced non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC) from the perspective of the Chinese healthcare system.
METHODS: Model technology was applied to assess the data of randomized clinical
trials and the direct medical costs from the perspective of the Chinese
healthcare system. Five-year quality-adjusted life years (QALYs) and incremental 
cost-utility ratios (ICURs) were calculated. One-way and probabilistic
sensitivity analyses (PSA) were performed.
RESULTS: Our model suggested that the median progression-free survival (PFS) was 
4.2 months in the icotinib group and 3.5 months in the gefitinib group while they
were 4.6 months and 3.4 months, respectively, in the trials. The 5-year QALYs was
0.279 in the icotinib group and 0.269 in the gefitinib group, and the according
medical costs were $10662.82 and $13127.57. The ICUR/QALY of icotinib versus
gefitinib presented negative in this study. The most sensitive parameter to the
ICUR was utility of PFS, ranging from $-1,259,991.25 to $-182,296.61; accordingly
the icotinib treatment consistently represented a dominant cost-utility strategy.
CONCLUSIONS: The icotinib strategy, as a second-line therapy for advanced NSCLC
patients in China, is the preferred strategy relative to gefitinib because of the
dominant cost-utility. In addition, icotinib shows a good curative effect and
safety, resulting in a strong demand for the Chinese market.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0151846 
PMCID: PMC4807816
PMID: 27015267  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Expert Opin Drug Saf. 2016 Jun;15(6):837-51. doi: 10.1517/14740338.2016.1170116. 
Epub 2016 Apr 12.

Safety profiles of first-line therapies for metastatic non-squamous
non-small-cell lung cancer.

Losanno T(1), Gridelli C(2).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Experimental Medicine , University 'Sapienza' , Rome , Italy. 
(2)b Division of Medical Oncology , S.G. Moscati Hospital , Avellino , Italy.

INTRODUCTION: Lung cancer still represents the leading cause of death for cancer.
About the 70% of diagnosis are in advanced-stage. Non-small-cell lung cancer
(NSCLC) represents the 85% of all diagnosed lung cancers and non-squamous
histology represents the 40% of all NSCLC. First-line therapies increase
survival, control symptoms and improve quality of life, compared with best
supportive care. It is crucial to choose a treatment with a low impact on
patient's life considering the related toxicities.
AREAS COVERED: Adverse events (AEs) of first-line therapies for non-squamous
NSCLC are here reviewed and discussed, from evidences in clinical trials
conducting to drugs approval.
EXPERT OPINION: For advanced disease, palliation and preserving patients QoL are 
still the primary goal of treatment. Therefore, differing toxicity profiles are
often a deciding factor in first-line and also maintenance setting for
non-squamous NSCLC. Special attention is necessary to renal function and drugs'
nephrotoxicity. Moreover, it is to consider the specific AEs of drugs classes:
hypertension, bleeding, and proteinuria, for anti-VEGF therapy; skin toxicity,
diarrhea, interstitial lung disease for TKIs; vision disorders, and
hepatotoxicity for ALK-inhibitor. It is important to select patients for a
treatment on the basis of their comorbidities and the presence of risk factors.

DOI: 10.1517/14740338.2016.1170116 
PMID: 27007279  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Biomed Res Int. 2016;2016:5807346. doi: 10.1155/2016/5807346. Epub 2016 Feb 24.

Combining Whole-Brain Radiotherapy with Gefitinib/Erlotinib for Brain Metastases 
from Non-Small-Cell Lung Cancer: A Meta-Analysis.

Zheng MH(1), Sun HT(2), Xu JG(3), Yang G(3), Huo LM(3), Zhang P(4), Tian JH(5),
Yang KH(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, First Clinical Medical College of Lanzhou
University, Lanzhou 730000, China; Evidence-Based Medicine Center of Lanzhou
University, Lanzhou 730000, China; Key Laboratory of Evidence-Based Medicine and 
Knowledge Translation of Gansu Province, Lanzhou 730000, China. (2)Department of 
Neurosurgery, Affiliated Hospital, Medical College of Chinese People's Armed
Police, Tianjin 300162, China. (3)Department of Neurosurgery, First Clinical
Medical College of Lanzhou University, Lanzhou 730000, China. (4)Evidence-Based
Medicine Center of Lanzhou University, Lanzhou 730000, China. (5)Evidence-Based
Medicine Center of Lanzhou University, Lanzhou 730000, China; Key Laboratory of
Evidence-Based Medicine and Knowledge Translation of Gansu Province, Lanzhou
730000, China.

BACKGROUND: To comprehensively assess the efficacy and safety of whole-brain
radiotherapy (WBRT) combined with gefitinib/erlotinib for treatment of brain
metastases (BM) from non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC).
METHODS: Databases including PubMed, EMBASE.com, Web of Science, and Cochrane
Library were searched from inception to April 12, 2015. Studies on randomized
controlled trials (RCTs) and case-control trials comparing WBRT combined with
gefitinib/erlotinib versus WBRT alone for BM from NSCLC were included. Literature
selection, data extraction, and quality assessment were performed independently
by two trained reviewers. RevMan 5.3 software was used to analyze data.
RESULTS: A total of 7 trials involving 622 patients were included. Compared with 
WBRT alone or WBRT plus chemotherapy, WBRT plus gefitinib/erlotinib could
significantly improve response rate (OR = 2.16, 95% CI: 1.35-3.47; P = 0.001),
remission rate of central nervous system (OR = 6.06, 95% CI: 2.57-14.29; P <
0.0001), disease control rate (OR = 3.34, 95% CI: 1.84-6.07; P < 0.0001), overall
survival (HR = 0.72, 95% CI: 0.58-0.89; P = 0.002), and 1-year survival rate (OR 
= 2.43, 95% CI: 1.51-3.91; P = 0.0002). In adverse events (III-IV), statistically
significant differences were not found, except for rash (OR = 7.96, 95% CI:
2.02-31.34; P = 0.003) and myelosuppression (OR = 0.19, 95% CI: 0.07-0.51; P =
0.0010).
CONCLUSIONS: WBRT plus gefitinib/erlotinib was superior to WBRT alone and well
tolerated in patients with BM from NSCLC.

DOI: 10.1155/2016/5807346 
PMCID: PMC4783530
PMID: 27006948  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. J Thorac Oncol. 2016 Jul;11(7):1051-63. doi: 10.1016/j.jtho.2016.03.006. Epub
2016 Mar 19.

Combination of Gefitinib and Pemetrexed Prevents the Acquisition of TKI
Resistance in NSCLC Cell Lines Carrying EGFR-Activating Mutation.

La Monica S(1), Madeddu D(1), Tiseo M(2), Vivo V(3), Galetti M(4), Cretella D(1),
Bonelli M(1), Fumarola C(1), Cavazzoni A(1), Falco A(1), Gervasi A(5), Lagrasta
CA(5), Naldi N(2), Barocelli E(3), Ardizzoni A(6), Quaini F(1), Petronini PG(1), 
Alfieri R(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of Parma, Parma, 
Italy. (2)Medical Oncology Unit, University Hospital of Parma, Parma, Italy.
(3)Department of Pharmacy, University of Parma, Parma, Italy. (4)Department of
Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of Parma, Parma, Italy; Italian
Workers' Compensation Authority Research Centre, University of Parma, Parma,
Italy. (5)Department of Biomedical, Biotechnological, and Translational Sciences,
University of Parma, Parma, Italy. (6)Division of Medical Oncology,
Sant'Orsola-Malpighi University Hospital, Bologna, Italy. (7)Department of
Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of Parma, Parma, Italy. Electronic
address: roberta.alfieri@unipr.it.

INTRODUCTION: Development of resistance to epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR) tyrosine kinase inhibitors is a clinical issue in patients with epidermal 
growth factor receptor gene (EGFR)-mutated non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC).
The aim of this study was to investigate the potential of combining gefitinib and
pemetrexed in preventing the acquisition of resistance to EGFR tyrosine kinase
inhibitors in NSCLC cell lines harboring EGFR exon 19 deletion.
METHODS: The effect of different combinatorial schedules of gefitinib and
pemetrexed on cell proliferation, cell cycle, apoptosis, and acquisition of
gefitinib resistance in PC9 and HCC827 NSCLC cell lines and in PC9 xenograft
models was investigated.
RESULTS: Simultaneous treatment with gefitinib and pemetrexed enhanced cell
growth inhibition and cell death and prevented the appearance of gefitinib
resistance mediated by T790M mutation or epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition
(EMT) in PC9 and HCC827 cells, respectively. In PC9 cells and in PC9 xenografts
the combination of gefitinib and pemetrexed, with different schedules, prevented 
gefitinib resistance only when pemetrexed was the first treatment, given alone or
together with gefitinib. Conversely, when gefitinib alone was administered first 
and pemetrexed sequentially alternated, a negative interaction was observed and
no prevention of gefitinib resistance was documented. The mechanisms of
resistance that developed in vivo included T790M mutation and EMT. The induction 
of EMT was a feature of tumors treated with gefitinib when given before
pemetrexed, whereas T790M was recorded only in tumors treated with gefitinib
alone.
CONCLUSIONS: The combination of gefitinib and pemetrexed is effective in
preventing gefitinib resistance; the application of intermittent treatments
requires that gefitinib not be administered before pemetrexed.

Copyright © 2016 International Association for the Study of Lung Cancer.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jtho.2016.03.006 
PMID: 27006151  [PubMed - in process]


195. Molecules. 2016 Mar 18;21(3):374. doi: 10.3390/molecules21030374.

Compound Library Screening Identified Cardiac Glycoside Digitoxin as an Effective
Growth Inhibitor of Gefitinib-Resistant Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer via
Downregulation of α-Tubulin and Inhibition of Microtubule Formation.

Zhang YZ(1), Chen X(2), Fan XX(3), He JX(4), Huang J(5), Xiao DK(6), Zhou YL(7), 
Zheng SY(8), Xu JH(9), Yao XJ(10), Liu L(11), Leung EL(12).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Quality Research in Chinese Medicine/Macau Institute
for Applied Research in Medicine and Health, Macau University of Science and
Technology, Taipa, Macau SAR, China. mmmiazh@gmail.com. (2)State Key Laboratory
of Quality Research in Chinese Medicine/Macau Institute for Applied Research in
Medicine and Health, Macau University of Science and Technology, Taipa, Macau
SAR, China. aurora329@163.com. (3)State Key Laboratory of Quality Research in
Chinese Medicine/Macau Institute for Applied Research in Medicine and Health,
Macau University of Science and Technology, Taipa, Macau SAR, China.
fxx022@163.com. (4)Department of Thoracic Surgery, The 1st Affiliated Hospital of
Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou Institute of Respiratory Disease, State
Key Laboratory of Respiratory Disease, Guangzhou 510120, China. hejx@vip.163.com.
(5)Department of Thoracic Surgery, The 1st Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou
Medical University, Guangzhou Institute of Respiratory Disease, State Key
Laboratory of Respiratory Disease, Guangzhou 510120, China. kingmal17@126.com.
(6)Department of Thoracic Surgery, The 1st Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou
Medical University, Guangzhou Institute of Respiratory Disease, State Key
Laboratory of Respiratory Disease, Guangzhou 510120, China. oneplusten@126.com.
(7)State Key Laboratory of Quality Research in Chinese Medicine/Macau Institute
for Applied Research in Medicine and Health, Macau University of Science and
Technology, Taipa, Macau SAR, China. ylzhou@must.edu.mo. (8)State Key Laboratory 
of Quality Research in Chinese Medicine/Macau Institute for Applied Research in
Medicine and Health, Macau University of Science and Technology, Taipa, Macau
SAR, China. steven4238@hotmail.com. (9)State Key Laboratory of Quality Research
in Chinese Medicine/Macau Institute for Applied Research in Medicine and Health, 
Macau University of Science and Technology, Taipa, Macau SAR, China.
ntxjhui@gmail.com. (10)State Key Laboratory of Quality Research in Chinese
Medicine/Macau Institute for Applied Research in Medicine and Health, Macau
University of Science and Technology, Taipa, Macau SAR, China. xjyao@must.edu.mo.
(11)State Key Laboratory of Quality Research in Chinese Medicine/Macau Institute 
for Applied Research in Medicine and Health, Macau University of Science and
Technology, Taipa, Macau SAR, China. lliu@must.edu.mo. (12)State Key Laboratory
of Quality Research in Chinese Medicine/Macau Institute for Applied Research in
Medicine and Health, Macau University of Science and Technology, Taipa, Macau
SAR, China. lhleung@must.edu.mo.

Non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) dominates over 85% of all lung cancer cases.
Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) activating mutation is a common situation
in NSCLC. In the clinic, molecular-targeting with Gefitinib as a tyrosine kinase 
inhibitor (TKI) for EGFR downstream signaling is initially effective. However,
drug resistance frequently happens due to additional mutation on EGFR, such as
substitution from threonine to methionine at amino acid position 790 (T790M). In 
this study, we screened a traditional Chinese medicine (TCM) compound library
consisting of 800 single compounds in TKI-resistance NSCLC H1975 cells, which
contains substitutions from leucine to arginine at amino acid 858 (L858R) and
T790M mutation on EGFR. Attractively, among these compounds there are 24
compounds CC50 of which was less than 2.5 μM were identified. We have further
investigated the mechanism of the most effective one, Digitoxin. It showed a
significantly cytotoxic effect in H1975 cells by causing G2 phase arrest, also
remarkably activated 5' adenosine monophosphate-activated protein kinase (AMPK). 
Moreover, we first proved that Digitoxin suppressed microtubule formation through
decreasing α-tubulin. Therefore, it confirmed that Digitoxin effectively
depressed the growth of TKI-resistance NSCLC H1975 cells by inhibiting
microtubule polymerization and inducing cell cycle arrest.

DOI: 10.3390/molecules21030374 
PMID: 26999101  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Mini Rev Med Chem. 2016;16(14):1134-66.

Review on EGFR Inhibitors: Critical Updates.

Singh D, Attri BK, Gill RK, Bariwal J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Satiate Resaerch & Anatech Pvt. Ltd., HSIIDC, Barwala, Panchkula-134118,
Haryana, India. jitender.bariwal@gmail.com.

Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor (EGFR) is a transmembrane glycoprotein that
constitutes one of the four members of ErbB family of tyrosine kinase receptors. 
Activation of EGFR leads to autophosphorylation of receptor tyrosine kinase that 
initiates a cascade of downstream signaling pathways involved in regulating
cellular proliferation, differentiation, and survival. EGFR is abnormally
activated by various mechanisms like receptor overexpression, mutation,
ligand-dependent receptor dimerization, ligand-independent activation and is
associated with the development of variety of human cancers. EGFR inhibition is
one of the key targets for cancer chemotherapy. Approval of tyrosine kinase
inhibitors such as erlotinib, gefitinib, and lapatinib for the treatment of
non-small cell lung cancer led to tremendous development of novel EGFR inhibitors
in the last decade. Diverse class of chemical compounds from the synthetic origin
has been extensively studied. This review highlights the various classes of
synthetically derived molecules which have been reported in the last few years as
potential EGFR and EGFR/ErbB-2 dual inhibitors. A brief synthetic methodology to 
access these compounds has been highlighted along with the SAR. We strongly
believe that this review will provide a platform to the synthetic chemists and
biologists to design and synthesize new and potent compounds that inhibit EGFR
and ErbB-2.


PMID: 26996617  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2016 Apr 22;473(1):125-32. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2016.03.064. Epub 2016 Mar 17.

Oct4 plays a crucial role in the maintenance of gefitinib-resistant lung cancer
stem cells.

Kobayashi I(1), Takahashi F(2), Nurwidya F(1), Nara T(3), Hashimoto M(3),
Murakami A(1), Yagishita S(1), Tajima K(1), Hidayat M(1), Shimada N(4), Suina
K(1), Yoshioka Y(1), Sasaki S(1), Moriyama M(5), Moriyama H(5), Takahashi K(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Juntendo University, Graduate School of
Medicine, Tokyo, Japan; Research Institute for Diseases of Old Ages, Juntendo
University, Graduate School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan. (2)Department of
Respiratory Medicine, Juntendo University, Graduate School of Medicine, Tokyo,
Japan; Research Institute for Diseases of Old Ages, Juntendo University, Graduate
School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan. Electronic address: fumiyuki@dol.hi-ho.ne.jp.
(3)Department of Molecular and Cellular Parasitology, Juntendo University,
Graduate School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan. (4)Department of Respiratory Medicine,
Juntendo University, Graduate School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan; Research
Institute for Diseases of Old Ages, Juntendo University, Graduate School of
Medicine, Tokyo, Japan; Leading Center for the Development and Research of Cancer
Medicine, Juntendo University, Graduate School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.
(5)Pharmaceutical Research and Technology Institute, Kinki University, School of 
Medicine, Osaka, Japan.

Several recent studies have suggested that cancer stem cells (CSCs) are involved 
in resistance to gefitinib in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Oct4, a member 
of the POU-domain transcription factor family, has been shown to be involved in
CSC properties of various cancers. We previously reported that Oct4 and the
putative lung CSC marker CD133 were highly expressed in gefitinib-resistant
persisters (GRPs) in NSCLC cells, and GRPs exhibited characteristic features of
the CSCs phenotype. The aim of this study was to elucidate the role of Oct4 in
the resistance to gefitinib in NSCLC cells with an activating epidermal growth
factor receptor (EGFR) mutation. NSCLC cell lines, PC9, which express the EGFR
exon 19 deletion mutation, were transplanted into NOG mice, and were treated with
gefitinib in vivo. After 14-17 days of gefitinib treatment, the tumors still
remained; these tumors were referred to as gefitinib-resistant tumors (GRTs).
PC9-GRTs showed higher expression of Oct4 and CD133. To investigate the role of
Oct4 in the maintenance of gefitinib-resistant lung CSCs, we introduced the Oct4 
gene into PC9 and HCC827 cells carrying an activating EGFR mutation by lentiviral
infection. Transfection of Oct4 significantly increased CD133-positive GRPs and
the number of sphere formation, reflecting the self-renewal activity, of PC9 and 
HCC827 cells under the high concentration of gefitinib in vitro. Furthermore,
Oct4-overexpressing PC9 cells (PC9-Oct4) significantly formed tumors at 1 × 10
cells/injection in NOG mice as compared to control cells. In addition, PC9-Oct4
tumors were more resistant to gefitinib treatment as compared to control cells in
vivo. Finally, immunohistochemical analysis revealed that Oct4 was highly
expressed in tumor specimens of EGFR-mutant NSCLC patients with acquired
resistance to gefitinib. Collectively, these findings suggest that Oct4 plays a
pivotal role in the maintenance of lung CSCs resistant to gefitinib in EGFR
mutation-positive NSCLC.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2016.03.064 
PMID: 26996130  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Rinsho Byori. 2015 Nov;63(11):1310-5.

[Companion Diagnostics for Solid Tumors].

[Article in Japanese]

Watanabe A.

Companion diagnostics (CoDx) will likely continue to rapidly increase in number
and application to disease areas including solid tumors, for example EGFR for
gefitinib and ALK fusion gene for crizotinib in non-small-cell lung cancer; KRAS 
against the use of cetuximab and panitumumab in colorectal cancer; HER2 for
trastuzumab in breast cancer. CoDx are an indispensable part of personalized
medicine and pharmacogenomics. In CoDx development, there are still many
challenges, such as the business model promoting cooperation between diagnostics 
and pharmaceutical companies, and also the regulations related to CoDx. The FDA
notice on the development of CoDx in 2011 recommended the co-development of a new
drug and CoDx as the best practice, and the Ministry of Health, Labour and
Welfare in Japan also issued a statement in 2013. In addition, the recent
discovery of many novel variants in the DNA sequence, advances in sequencing and 
genomic technology, and improved analytic methods have enabled the impact of
germline and somatic mutations to be determined using multiplex diagnosis. The
complex challenges to develop CoDx necessitate a close collaboration among
academic institutions, regulatory authorities, and pharmaceutical companies.
[Review].


PMID: 26995877  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Oncotarget. 2016 Jun 14;7(24):35803-35812. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.8130.

The comparison of outcomes from tyrosine kinase inhibitor monotherapy in second- 
or third-line for advanced non-small-cell lung cancer patients with wild-type or 
unknown EGFR status.

Bronte G(1), Franchina T(2), Alù M(3), Sortino G(1), Celesia C(1), Passiglia
F(1), Savio G(3), Laudani A(3), Russo A(2), Picone A(2), Rizzo S(1), De Tursi
M(4), Gambale E(4), Bazan V(1), Natoli C(4), Blasi L(3), Adamo V(2), Russo A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgical, Oncological and Oral Sciences, University of Palermo, 
Palermo, Italy. (2)Medical Oncology Unit-AOOR Papardo-Piemonte, Messina and
Department of Human Pathology, University of Messina, Messina, Italy. (3)Medical 
Oncology Unit, A.R.N.A.S. Civico, Palermo, Italy. (4)Department of Medical, Oral 
and Biotechnological Sciences, University "G. D'Annunzio", Chieti, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Second-line treatment for advanced non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
patients includes monotherapy with a third-generation cytotoxic drug (CT) or a
tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI). These options are the actual standard for EGFR
wild-type (WT) status, as patients with EGFR mutations achieve greater benefit by
the use of TKI in first-line treatment. Some clinical trials and meta-analyses
investigated the comparison between CT and TKI in second-line, but data are
conflicting.
METHODS: We designed a retrospective trial to gather information about TKI
sensitivity in comparison with CT. We selected from clinical records patients
treated with at least 1 line of CT and at least 1 line of TKI. We collected data 
about age, sex, performance status, comorbidity, smoking status, histotype,
metastatic sites, EGFR status, treatment schedule, better response and
time-to-progression (TTP) for each line of treatment and overall survival (OS).
RESULTS: 93 patients met selection criteria. Mean age 66,7 (range: 46-84). M/F
ratio is 3:1. 39 EGFR-WT and 54 EGFR-UK. All patients received erlotinib or
gefitinib as second-line treatment or erlotinib as third-line treatment. No TTP
differences were observed for both second-line (HR:0,91; p = 0,6333) and
third-line (HR:1.1; p = 0,6951) treatment (TKI vs CT). A trend of a benefit in OS
in favor of 3rd-line TKI (HR:0,68; p = 0,11).
CONCLUSIONS: This study explores the role of TKIs in EGFR non-mutated NSCLC
patients. OS analysis highlights a trend to a benefit in patients who received
TKI in third-line, even if this result is statistically non-significant. Further 
analysis are needed to find an explanation for this observation.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.8130 
PMCID: PMC5094963
PMID: 26993607  [PubMed - in process]


200. Sci Rep. 2016 Mar 18;6:23368. doi: 10.1038/srep23368.

Genetic Association of Curative and Adverse Reactions to Tyrosine Kinase
Inhibitors in Chinese advanced Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer patients.

Ruan Y(1), Jiang J(1), Guo L(2), Li Y(3), Huang H(4,)(5), Shen L(1), Luan M(1),
Li M(1), Du H(1), Ma C(1), He L(1), Zhang X(6), Qin S(1,)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Bio-X Institutes, Key Laboratory for the Genetics of Developmental and
Neuropsychiatric Disorders (Ministry of Education), Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, Shanghai 200030, China. (2)The Fourth Hospital of Jinan City, Taishan
Medical College, Jinan, China. (3)Centre for Genomic Sciences, the University of 
Hong Kong, Hong Kong, SAR, China. (4)Analytic and Translational Genetics Unit,
Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA 02142, U.S.A. (5)Broad Institute of Harvard and MIT,
Cambridge, MA 02142, U.S.A. (6)Department of Pharmacy, Shanghai pulmonary
Hospital, Tongji University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China. (7)Shanghai Key 
Laboratory of Psychotic Disorders, Shanghai Mental Health Center, Shanghai Jiao
Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.

Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) Tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) is an
effective targeted therapy for advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) but
also causes adverse drug reactions (ADRs) e.g., skin rash and diarrhea. SNPs in
the EGFR signal pathway, drug metabolism/ transport pathways and miRNA might
contribute to the interpersonal difference in ADRs but biomarkers for therapeutic
responses and ADRs to TKIs in Chinese population are yet to be fully
investigated. We recruited 226 Chinese advanced NSCLC patients who received TKIs 
erlotinib, gefitinib and icotinib hydrochloride and systematically studied the
genetic factors associated with therapeutic responses and ADRs. Rs884225 (T > C) 
in EGFR 3' UTR was significantly associated with lower risk of ADRs to erlotinib 
(p value = 0.0010, adjusted p value = 0.042). A multivariant interaction four-SNP
model (rs884225 in EGFR 3'UTR, rs7787082 in ABCB1 intron, rs38845 in MET intron
and rs3803300 in AKT1 5'UTR) was associated with ADRs in general and the more
specific drug induced skin injury. The SNPs associated with both therapeutic
responses and ADRs indicates they might share a common genetic basis. Our study
provided potential biomarkers and clues for further research of biomarkers for
therapeutic responses and ADRs in Chinese NSCLC patients.

DOI: 10.1038/srep23368 
PMCID: PMC4796893
PMID: 26988277  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Int J Oncol. 2016 May;48(5):1895-906. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2016.3426. Epub 2016 Mar
7.

Ephedrae herba stimulates hepatocyte growth factor-induced MET endocytosis and
downregulation via early/late endocytic pathways in gefitinib-resistant human
lung cancer cells.

Nishimura Y(1), Hyuga S(2), Takiguchi S(3), Hyuga M(4), Itoh K(5), Hanawa T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pharmaceutical Cell Biology, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Kyushu University, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan. (2)Department of Clinical
Research, Oriental Medicine Research Center of Kitasato University, Tokyo
108-8642, Japan. (3)Institute for Clinical Research, National Kyushu Cancer
Center, Fukuoka 811-1395, Japan. (4)Division of Biological Chemistry and
Biologicals, National Institute of Health Sciences, Tokyo 158-8501, Japan.
(5)Department of Biology, Osaka Medical Center for Cancer and Cardiovascular
Diseases, Osaka 537-8511, Japan.

The MET tyrosine kinase receptor and its ligand, hepatocyte growth factor (HGF), 
are known to be overexpressed in a variety of malignant tumor cells, and are
implicated in the development of gefitinib-resistance in human non-small cell
lung cancer (NSCLC) cells. Ephedrae herba was previously reported to prevent
HGF-induced cancer cell motility by directly suppressing HGF/MET signaling
through the inhibition of MET tyrosine kinase, and treatment with its extract
also considerably reduced MET protein levels. To further investigate the
mechanism underlying the Ephedrae herba-induced inhibition of MET phosphorylation
as well as its degradation and subsequent disappearance, we examined the effect
of Ephedrae herba on HGF-stimulated MET endocytosis and downregulation via
early/late endocytic pathways in an NSCLC cell line. Using immunofluorescence
microscopy, we found that pretreatment of cells with Ephedrae herba extract
dramatically changed the intracellular distribution of plasma membrane-associated
MET, and that the resultant MET staining was distributed throughout the
cytoplasm. Pretreatment of the cells with Ephedrae herba extract also led to the 
rapid loss of MET and phosphorylated (p)-MET in HGF-stimulated cells. In
contrast, inefficient endocytic delivery of MET and p-MET from early to late
endosomes was observed in the absence of Ephedrae herba extract, since
considerable amounts of the internalized MET accumulated in the early endosomes
and were not delivered to lysosomes up to 1 h after HGF-stimulation. Furthermore,
large amounts of MET and p-MET that had accumulated in late endosomes of Ephedrae
herba-pretreated cells after HGF stimulation were observed along with bafilomycin
A1. Therefore, we inferred that degradation of MET occurred in the late
endosome/lysosome pathway. Moreover, western blot analysis revealed the
accelerated degradation of MET and p-MET proceeds in cells pretreated with
Ephedrae herba extract. Collectively, our results suggest that some components of
Ephedrae herba have a novel role in promoting HGF-stimulated MET and p-MET
endocytosis followed by its downregulation, likely mediated by the early/late
endocytic pathways.

DOI: 10.3892/ijo.2016.3426 
PMID: 26983447  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Clin Cancer Res. 2016 Mar 15;22(6):1307-12. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-15-2266.

FDA Approval of Gefitinib for the Treatment of Patients with Metastatic EGFR
Mutation-Positive Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer.

Kazandjian D(1), Blumenthal GM(2), Yuan W(3), He K(3), Keegan P(2), Pazdur R(2).

Author information: 
(1)Office of Hematology and Oncology Products, Center for Drug Evaluation and
Research, FDA, Silver Spring, Maryland. Dickran.kazandjian@fda.hhs.gov. (2)Office
of Hematology and Oncology Products, Center for Drug Evaluation and Research,
FDA, Silver Spring, Maryland. (3)Office of Biostatistics, Center for Drug
Evaluation and Research, FDA, Silver Spring, Maryland.

On July 13, 2015, the FDA approved gefitinib (Iressa; AstraZeneca UK Limited) for
the treatment of patients with metastatic non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
whose tumors have EGFR exon 19 deletions or exon 21 (L858R) substitution
mutations as detected by an FDA-approved test. Concurrently, a labeling expansion
of the therascreen EGFR RGQ PCR Kit (Qiagen) as a companion diagnostic test was
approved. The approval was based on the results of a multicenter, single-arm,
open-label clinical study of 106 treatment-naïve patients with metastatic EGFR
mutation-positive NSCLC who received gefitinib, 250 mg daily, until disease
progression or intolerable toxicity. The major efficacy outcome was RECIST v1.1
objective response rate (ORR). The blinded independent central review (BICR) ORR 
was 50% [95% confidence interval (CI), 41-59] with a median duration of response 
(DoR) of 6.0 months. Efficacy results were supported by a retrospective
exploratory analysis of a subset of a randomized, multicenter, open-label trial
on 1,217 patients with metastatic NSCLC. Of the patients randomized, 186 (15%)
were retrospectively determined to be EGFR positive and evaluable for a BICR
assessment. The HR for progression-free survival (PFS) was 0.54 (95% CI,
0.38-0.79), favoring gefitinib over platinum-doublet chemotherapy. The most
common (≥20%) adverse reactions were skin reactions, increased aspartate and
alanine aminotransferase, proteinuria, and diarrhea. Approximately 5% of patients
discontinued treatment due to an adverse reaction. Given the safety profile and
clinically meaningful ORR, DoR, and PFS, the benefit-risk analysis was deemed
favorable for FDA approval.

©2016 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-15-2266 
PMID: 26980062  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Jpn J Clin Oncol. 2016 May;46(5):462-7. doi: 10.1093/jjco/hyw014. Epub 2016 Mar
13.

Characteristics and overall survival of EGFR mutation-positive non-small cell
lung cancer treated with EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors: a retrospective
analysis for 1660 Japanese patients.

Inoue A(1), Yoshida K(2), Morita S(3), Imamura F(4), Seto T(5), Okamoto I(6),
Nakagawa K(7), Yamamoto N(8), Muto S(9), Fukuoka M(10).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Palliative Medicine, Tohoku University School of Medicine,
Sendai akinoue@idac.tohoku.ac.jp. (2)Department of Thoracic Oncology, National
Cancer Center Hospital, Tokyo. (3)Department of Biomedical Statistics and
Bioinformatics, Kyoto University Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto.
(4)Department of Thoracic Oncology, Osaka Medical Center for Cancer and
Cardiovascular Diseases, Osaka. (5)Department of Thoracic Oncology, National
Kyushu Cancer Center, Fukuoka. (6)Research Institute for Diseases of the Chest,
Graduate School of Medical Science, Kyushu University, Fukuoka. (7)Department of 
Medical Oncology, Kinki University, Faculty of Medicine, Higashiosaka. (8)Third
Department of Internal Medicine, Wakayama Medical University, Wakayama.
(9)AstraZeneca K.K., Osaka. (10)Department of Medical Oncology, Izumi Municipal
Hospital, Osaka, Japan.

BACKGROUND: The Japan Guidelines of Lung Cancer Therapy recommend epidermal
growth factor receptor-tyrosine kinase inhibitors as a first-line therapy for
advanced/recurrent non-small cell lung cancer patients with epidermal growth
factor receptor mutation. Although survival periods in recent reports of
epidermal growth factor receptor-tyrosine kinase inhibitor treatment have been
getting longer, the reasons why are unclear. We investigated the survival,
prognostic factors and real-world treatment of non-small cell lung cancer
patients with epidermal growth factor receptor mutation in clinical practice.
METHODS: Non-small cell lung cancer patients (n = 1660) who started first-line
treatment from January 2008 to December 2012 were enrolled. Patients were
diagnosed with epidermal growth factor receptor mutation-positive
advanced/recurrent non-small cell lung cancer by histology or cytology samples.
The primary objective was to estimate overall survival. The secondary objectives 
were to determine prognostic factors, real-world treatment patterns and efficacy 
of gefitinib treatment. We calculated the treatment exposure rate for each
treatment category using the following formula: exposure rate = person-years for 
the treatment category/total person-years × 100.
RESULTS: The median overall survival was 30.8 months. Sex, age, histology,
epidermal growth factor receptor mutation type, clinical stage and performance
status affected overall survival. The exposure rates for all epidermal growth
factor receptor-tyrosine kinase inhibitors, gefitinib and platinum-doublet
chemotherapy were 62.1, 46.4 and 8.5% respectively. Overall 56.1% of patients
were administered gefitinib as first-line therapy, and 39.0% were treated with ≥2
epidermal growth factor receptor-tyrosine kinase inhibitor regimens. The median
progression-free survival in the first-line gefitinib group was 11.4 months.
Factors affecting prognosis were sex, histology, clinical stage and performance
status.
CONCLUSION: Epidermal growth factor receptor-tyrosine kinase inhibitors,
especially gefitinib, are major components of the treatment regimens for
epidermal growth factor receptor mutation-positive non-small cell lung cancer.
Switching and re-challenging with epidermal growth factor receptor-tyrosine
kinase inhibitors were also practiced in Japan.

© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press.

DOI: 10.1093/jjco/hyw014 
PMCID: PMC4874470
PMID: 26977054  [PubMed - in process]


204. Am J Clin Oncol. 2016 Mar 10. [Epub ahead of print]

EGFR Exon 19 Deletion is Associated With Favorable Overall Survival After
First-line Gefitinib Therapy in Advanced Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer Patients.

Choi YW(1), Jeon SY, Jeong GS, Lee HW, Jeong SH, Kang SY, Park JS, Choi JH, Koh
YW, Han JH, Sheen SS.

Author information: 
(1)*Department of Hematology-Oncology †Department of Pathology ‡Department of
Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Ajou University School of Medicine, Suwon, 
Korea.

OBJECTIVES: Exon 19 deletion and L858R mutation in exon 21 of the epidermal
growth factor receptor (EGFR) are both common mutations that predict a good
response to EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors in non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC). However, the existence of clinically significant difference in
sensitivity to EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors among different EGFR mutation
subtypes is still a matter of debate.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The outcome of 60 EGFR mutation-positive advanced NSCLC
patients who received first-line gefitinib therapy (250 mg/d) was retrospectively
analyzed according to EGFR mutation subtypes.
RESULTS: The median progression-free survival (PFS) and overall survival (OS)
after the initiation of gefitinib therapy for all patients was 11 and 26 months, 
respectively. Univariate analysis showed that patients with exon 19 deletion
(n=28) had significantly longer median PFS (20 vs. 8 mo, P=0.004) and OS (36 vs. 
22 mo, P=0.001) compared with those with L858R mutation (n=25) and uncommon or
dual mutations (n=7). Multivariate analysis revealed that exon 19 deletion
(P=0.007) was an independent prognostic factor of favorable PFS, with an
independent association with poor PFS of male sex (P=0.049). Exon 19 deletion was
also independently associated with favorable OS (P<0.0001), whereas male sex
(P=0.004) and primary metastatic disease (P=0.032) were independent prognostic
factors of poor OS.
CONCLUSIONS: The EGFR exon 19 deletion was associated with favorable PFS and OS
in patients receiving first-line gefitinib treatment. The EGFR mutation subtype
should be considered when making treatment decision or designing clinical trials 
for chemotherapy-naive, EGFR mutation-positive advanced NSCLC patients.

DOI: 10.1097/COC.0000000000000282 
PMID: 26967328  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


205. Medicine (Baltimore). 2016 Mar;95(9):e3008. doi: 10.1097/MD.0000000000003008.

Pulmonary Toxicities of Gefitinib in Patients With Advanced Non-Small-Cell Lung
Cancer: A Meta-Analysis of Randomized Controlled Trials.

Hong D(1), Zhang G, Zhang X, Lian X.

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Pharmacy (DH, GZ, XZ), The First Affiliated Hospital of
College of Medicine, Zhejiang University; and Central Laboratory (XL), The First 
Affiliated Hospital of College of Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China.

Gefitinib is a selective tyrosine kinase inhibitor of the epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR) used to treat adults with EGFR mutation-positive non-small-cell
lung cancer (NSCLC). Clinical benefits of gefitinib administration in NSCLC
patients have been observed in clinical practice, but the extent of the pulmonary
toxicity of gefitinib in patients with advanced NSCLC remains unclear. The aim of
this systematic review was to evaluate the overall incidence and risk of
gefitinib-related pulmonary toxicity in advanced NSCLC patients. Relevant trials 
were identified from the databases of Pubmed, Embase, Cochrane Library, and the
clinicaltrials.gov of the U.S. National Institutes of Health. The outcomes
included the overall incidence, odds ratios (ORs), and 95% confidence intervals
(CIs). Fixed-effects models were used in the statistical analyses according to
the heterogeneity of the included studies. According to the data from the
included trials, the overall incidence of high-grade hemoptysis, pneumonia,
pneumonitis, and interstitial lung disease (ILD) was 0.49% (95% CI: 0.24%-0.99%),
2.33% (95% CI: 1.47%-3.66%), 2.24% (95% CI: 1.34%-3.72%), and 1.43% (95% CI:
0.98%-2.09%), respectively. The pooled ORs of high-grade hemoptysis, pneumonia,
pneumonitis, and ILD were 1.73 (95% CI: 0.46-6.52; P = 0.42), 0.99 (95% CI:
0.66-1.49; P = 0.95), 4.70 (95% CI: 1.48-14.95; P = 0.0087), and 2.64 (95% CI:
1.22-5.69; P = 0.01), respectively. Gefitinib was associated with a significantly
increased risk of high-grade/fatal ILD and pneumonitis compared with the
controls, whereas the risk of other high-grade pulmonary events (pneumonia and
hemoptysis) was not significant. Careful surveillance of gefitinib-related
pulmonary toxicity is critical for the safe use of this drug.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000003008 
PMCID: PMC4782910
PMID: 26945426  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Clin Lung Cancer. 2016 Sep;17(5):412-418. doi: 10.1016/j.cllc.2016.01.006. Epub
2016 Feb 5.

Clinical Impact of Gastric Acid-Suppressing Medication Use on the Efficacy of
Erlotinib and Gefitinib in Patients With Advanced Non-Small-Cell Lung Cancer
Harboring EGFR Mutations.

Zenke Y(1), Yoh K(2), Matsumoto S(2), Umemura S(2), Niho S(2), Ohmatsu H(2), Goto
K(2), Ohe Y(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Oncology, National Cancer Center Hospital East,
Kashiwa, Chiba, Japan; Juntendo University Graduate School of Medicine, Tokyo,
Japan. Electronic address: yzenke@east.ncc.go.jp. (2)Department of Thoracic
Oncology, National Cancer Center Hospital East, Kashiwa, Chiba, Japan.
(3)Department of Thoracic Oncology, National Cancer Center Hospital East,
Kashiwa, Chiba, Japan; Juntendo University Graduate School of Medicine, Tokyo,
Japan.

BACKGROUND: Gastric acid-suppressing medications (AS), namely, proton pump
inhibitors and histamine-2 receptor antagonists, increase gastric pH, which may
reduce the absorption of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine
kinase inhibitors-erlotinib and gefitinib.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: From 2008 to 2011, 130 consecutive patients with advanced
non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) harboring EGFR mutations were treated with
either erlotinib or gefitinib at our institution. The clinical characteristics of
the patients were reviewed, and the efficacy and toxicity of erlotinib and
gefitinib were compared for patients receiving and not receiving AS.
RESULTS: Among the 130 patients, 47 received AS (AS users group), while the
remaining 83 patients did not (AS non-users group). The overall response rate
(ORR) and median progression-free survival (PFS) in the subject population was
60% and 10 months, respectively. In the AS users and non-users groups, the ORR
was 64% and 63% (P = .92), while the median PFS was 8.7 and 10.7 months (P =
.13), respectively. No significant difference in either ORR or PFS was observed
between the 2 groups. With regard to the toxicity, the frequencies of rash (83%
vs. 86%; P = .60) and diarrhea (34% vs. 29%; P = .55) were similar for both
groups. A multivariate analysis identified that AS use was not a significant
factor for either PFS or OS.
CONCLUSION: Concurrent use of AS did not affect the efficacy or toxicity of
erlotinib and gefitinib in patients with advanced NSCLC harboring EGFR mutations.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cllc.2016.01.006 
PMID: 26944770  [PubMed - in process]


207. PLoS One. 2016 Mar 4;11(3):e0149370. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0149370.
eCollection 2016.

Blockade of Hedgehog Signaling Synergistically Increases Sensitivity to Epidermal
Growth Factor Receptor Tyrosine Kinase Inhibitors in Non-Small-Cell Lung Cancer
Cell Lines.

Bai XY(1), Zhang XC(1), Yang SQ(1), An SJ(1), Chen ZH(1), Su J(1), Xie Z(1), Gou 
LY(1,)(2), Wu YL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonary Oncology, Guangdong Lung Cancer Institute, Guangdong
General Hospital & Guangdong Academy of Medical Science, Guangzhou 510080, China.
(2)Southern Medical University, Guangzhou 510515, China.

Aberrant activation of the hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway has been implicated in
the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and cancer stem-like cell (CSC)
maintenance; both processes can result in tumor progression and treatment
resistance in several types of human cancer. Hh cooperates with the epidermal
growth factor receptor (EGFR) signaling pathway in embryogenesis. We found that
the Hh signaling pathway was silenced in EGFR-TKI-sensitive non-small-cell lung
cancer (NSCLC) cells, while it was inappropriately activated in
EGFR-TKI-resistant NSCLC cells, accompanied by EMT induction and ABCG2
overexpression. Upregulation of Hh signaling through extrinsic SHH exposure
downregulated E-cadherin expression and elevated Snail and ABCG2 expression,
resulting in gefitinib tolerance (P < 0.001) in EGFR-TKI-sensitive cells.
Blockade of the Hh signaling pathway using the SMO antagonist SANT-1 restored
E-cadherin expression and downregulate Snail and ABCG2 in EGFR-TKI-resistant
cells. A combination of SANT-1 and gefitinib markedly inhibited tumorigenesis and
proliferation in EGFR-TKI-resistant cells (P < 0.001). These findings indicate
that hyperactivity of Hh signaling resulted in EGFR-TKI resistance, by EMT
introduction and ABCG2 upregulation, and blockade of Hh signaling synergistically
increased sensitivity to EGFR-TKIs in primary and secondary resistant NSCLC
cells. E-cadherin expression may be a potential biomarker of the suitability of
the combined application of an Hh inhibitor and EGFR-TKIs in EGFR-TKI-resistant
NSCLCs.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0149370 
PMCID: PMC4778934
PMID: 26943330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Expert Rev Anticancer Ther. 2016;16(4):383-90. doi:
10.1586/14737140.2016.1162103. Epub 2016 Mar 21.

The safety and efficacy of osimertinib for the treatment of EGFR T790M mutation
positive non-small-cell lung cancer.

Gao X(1), Le X(1), Costa DB(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Medicine, Division of Hematology/Oncology, Beth Israel
Deaconess Medical Center , Harvard Medical School , Boston , MA , USA.

First- and second-generation epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine
kinase inhibitors (TKIs) are the evidence-based first-line treatment for
metastatic non-small-cell lung cancers (NSCLCs) that harbor sensitizing EGFR
mutations (i.e. exon 19 deletions or L858R). However, acquired resistance to EGFR
TKI monotherapy occurs invariably within a median time frame of one year. The
most common form of biological resistance is through the selection of tumor
clones harboring the EGFR T790M mutation, present in >50% of repeat biopsies. The
presence of the EGFR T790M mutation negates the inhibitory activity of gefitinib,
erlotinib, and afatinib. A novel class of third-generation EGFR TKIs has been
identified by probing a series of covalent pyrimidine EGFR inhibitors that bind
to amino-acid residue C797 of EGFR and preferentially inhibit mutant forms of
EGFR versus the wild-type receptor. We review the rapid clinical development and 
approval of the third-generation EGFR TKI osimertinib for treatment of NSCLCs
with EGFR-T790M.

DOI: 10.1586/14737140.2016.1162103 
PMCID: PMC4940973 [Available on 2017-04-01]
PMID: 26943236  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Int J Oncol. 2016 May;48(5):1855-67. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2016.3401. Epub 2016 Feb
19.

miR-223 reverses the resistance of EGFR-TKIs through IGF1R/PI3K/Akt signaling
pathway.

Han J(1), Zhao F(1), Zhang J(2), Zhu H(3), Ma H(4), Li X(1), Peng L(1), Sun J(1),
Chen Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Institute of PLA, Xinqiao Hospital, Third Military Medical University, 
Chongqing 400037, P.R. China. (2)Department of Oncology, 401 Hospital of the
People's Liberation Army, Qingdao, Shandong 266071, P.R. China. (3)Department of 
Oncology, Guizhou Provincial People's Hospital, Guiyang, Guizhou 550002, P.R.
China. (4)Department of Oncology, Affiliated Hospital of Zunyi Medical College,
Zunyi, Guizhou 563000, P.R. China.

Acquired resistance to epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase
inhibitors (TKIs), such as gefitinib and erlotinib, is a critical issue for the
treatment of EGFR mutant-positive non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Recent
evidence supports the role of microRNA-223 (miR‑223) in modulating
chemotherapeutic drug sensitivity, but its role in the resistance to EGFR-TKIs in
NSCLC remains unclear. To this end, we investigated the involvement of miR‑223 in
erlotinib resistance, using two pairs of TKI-sensitive or resistant cell lines,
PC9 vs PC9/ER, and HCC827 vs HCC827/ER, as well as PC9/CD133+, which are lung
cancer stem-like cells derived from PC9 cells. Downregulation of miR‑223
expression in PC9/ER and PC9/CD133+ cells was detected, and the reverse
correlation of miR-233 and insulin-like growth factor 1 receptor (IGF1R) in these
cells was also revealed. Next, levels of IGF1R mRNA and p-Akt were significantly 
reduced in miR‑223 stably transfected PC9/ER and PC9/CD133+ cells. However, the
sensitivity of PC9/ER and PC9/CD133+ cells to erlotinib was partially restored,
after overexpression of miR‑223 in those cells. Similar results were also
observed in vivo. Furthermore, miR‑223-mediated inhibition of the IGF1R/PI3K/Akt 
signaling pathway may have been reversed by the agonist of IGF1R in miR‑223
transfected cells. Our findings indicated that downregulation of miR‑223, which
can induce activation of the IGF1R/phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)/Akt
pathway in PC9/ER and PC9/CD133+ cells, may be responsible for the resistance of 
PC9/ER and PC9/CD133+ cells to erlotinib, suggesting that miR‑223 is a potential 
therapeutic target for overcoming EGFR-TKIs resistance.

DOI: 10.3892/ijo.2016.3401 
PMCID: PMC4809653
PMID: 26936292  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Oncotarget. 2016 Apr 12;7(15):20093-108. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.7713.

Optimized selection of three major EGFR-TKIs in advanced EGFR-positive non-small 
cell lung cancer: a network meta-analysis.

Zhang Y(1,)(2,)(3), Sheng J(1,)(2,)(3), Yang Y(1,)(2,)(3), Fang W(1,)(2,)(3),
Kang S(2,)(3,)(4), He Y(5), Hong S(1,)(2,)(3), Zhan J(1,)(2,)(3), Zhao
Y(1,)(2,)(3), Xue C(1,)(2,)(3), Ma Y(1,)(2,)(3), Zhou T(1,)(2,)(3), Ma
S(1,)(2,)(3), Gao F(1,)(2,)(3), Qin T(1,)(2,)(3), Hu Z(1,)(2,)(3), Tian
Y(1,)(2,)(3), Hou X(1,)(2,)(3), Huang Y(1,)(2,)(3), Zhou N(1,)(2,)(3), Zhao
H(1,)(2,)(3), Zhang L(1,)(2,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center,
Guangzhou, China. (2)State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Guangzhou, 
China. (3)Collaborative Innovation Center for Cancer Medicine, Guangzhou, China. 
(4)Department of Anesthesiology, Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center, Guangzhou,
China. (5)Lau Luen Hung Private Medical Center, The First Affiliated Hospital of 
Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China.

BACKGROUND: To answer which epidermal growth factor receptor-tyrosine kinase
inhibitor (EGFR-TKI) is the best choice for advanced non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC) EGFR mutants.
RESULTS: 16 phase III randomized trials involving 2962 advanced NSCLC EGFR
mutants were enrolled. Multiple treatment comparisons showed different EGFR-TKIs 
shared equivalent curative effect in terms of all outcome measures among the
overall, chemo-naïve and previously treated patients. Rank probabilities showed
that erlotinib and afatinib had potentially better efficacy compared with
gefitinib in both of the overall and chemo-naïve patients. Potentially survival
benefit of erlotinib was also observed in previously treated patients compared
with gefitinib. Additionally, EGFR-TKI showed numerically greater survival
benefit in 19 Del compared with chemotherapy, while it was opposite in 21 L858R. 
Furthermore, afatinib, erlotinib and gefitinib had high, moderate and low risk of
rash & diarrhea, respectively, while the occurrence of elevated liver
transaminase was more common in gefitinib.
METHODS: Data of objective response rate (ORR), disease control rate (DCR),
progression-free survival (PFS), overall survival (OS) and adverse events were
extracted from included studies. Efficacy and toxicity of all included treatments
were integrated by network meta-analyses.
CONCLUSION: Our study indicated a high efficacy-high toxicity pattern of
afatinib, a high efficacy-moderate toxicity pattern of erlotinib and a medium
efficacy-moderate toxicity pattern of gefitinib. Recommended EGFR-TKI should be
suggested according to patients' tolerability and therapeutic efficacy in
clinical practice. Moreover, the treatment for advanced EGFR-positive NSCLC might
be different between 19 Del and 21 L858R.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.7713 
PMCID: PMC4990517
PMID: 26933807  [PubMed - in process]


211. Case Rep Ophthalmol. 2016 Feb 4;7(1):74-8. doi: 10.1159/000444047.

Anterior Uveitis Caused by Ocular Side Effects of Afatinib: A Case Report.

Todokoro D(1), Itakura H(2), Ibe T(3), Kishi S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Gunma University Graduate School of Medicine, and
Departments of, Maebashi Red Cross Hospital, Maebashi, Japan. (2)Ophthalmology,
Maebashi Red Cross Hospital, Maebashi, Japan. (3)General Thoracic Surgery,
Maebashi Red Cross Hospital, Maebashi, Japan.

Afatinib is a second-generation epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) inhibitor
that has been shown to be effective against EGFR-mutated non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC) resistant to conventional EGFR inhibitors such as gefitinib and
erlotinib. Although ocular side effects of gefitinib and erlotinib have been
reported, those for afatinib have yet to be definitively established. This report
presents details on the first case of unilateral iridocyclitis associated with
the side effects of afatinib therapy. A 75-year-old Japanese male ex-smoker with 
EGFR-mutated NSCLC underwent afatinib therapy for multiple metastases. At 2
weeks, bilateral conjunctivitis developed. Topical medication and a 1-week
afatinib washout period resulted in the improvement of the conjunctivitis.
However, 3 days after the resumption of afatinib, the patient developed
unilateral granulomatous anterior uveitis in his right eye. Best-corrected visual
acuity (BCVA) measurement indicated a decimal visual acuity of 0.2, while the
slit-lamp findings were characterized by granulomatous inflammation, keratic
precipitates, Koeppe nodules and posterior synechiae. There was no evidence
suggesting other intraocular inflammatory disease or metastatic tumor. The left
eye was intact. The use of topical medication including steroids and a washout of
afatinib resulted in a gradual subsiding of the anterior uveitis. After
resolution of the anterior uveitis, oral afatinib was resumed. BCVA of the right 
eye finally recovered to a decimal acuity of 1.0. Ophthalmologists should be
aware of the possibility that side effects associated with afatinib could cause
granulomatous anterior uveitis.

DOI: 10.1159/000444047 
PMCID: PMC4772633
PMID: 26933433  [PubMed]


212. Case Rep Oncol. 2016 Jan 15;9(1):45-50. doi: 10.1159/000443605.

RRx-001-Induced Tumor Necrosis and Immune Cell Infiltration in an EGFR
Mutation-Positive NSCLC with Resistance to EGFR Tyrosine Kinase Inhibitors: A
Case Report.

Brzezniak C(1), Schmitz BA(1), Peterson PG(1), Degesys A(1), Oronsky BT(2),
Scicinski JJ(2), Caroen SZ(2), Carter CA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Walter Reed National Military Medical Center, Bethesda, Md., USA.
(2)EpicentRx, Inc., Mountain View, Calif., USA.

We present the case of a 49-year-old male with metastatic epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR) mutation-positive adenocarcinoma of the lung that continues to
outlive stage IV diagnosis of non-small cell lung cancer after treatment with
RRx-001, an experimental anticancer agent with epigenetic and immunologic
activity, in the context of a phase II clinical trial called TRIPLE THREAT.
Currently, no adequate treatment options exist for patients with EGFR
mutation-positive tumors who have failed a 1st-generation tyrosine kinase
inhibitor (erlotinib or gefitinib) treatment and do not develop a resistant
mutation. Biopsy of a large pancreatic metastasis after RRx-001 demonstrated
extensive necrosis with CD3+ and CD8+ immune cell infiltration that appears to
correlate with prolonged survival despite end-stage disease. These results
suggest that the mode of action of RRx-001 is related to immune stimulation in
addition to epigenetic inhibition.

DOI: 10.1159/000443605 
PMCID: PMC4748757
PMID: 26933418  [PubMed]


213. Ther Adv Respir Dis. 2016 Jun;10(3):256-64. doi: 10.1177/1753465816634545. Epub
2016 Feb 28.

Afatinib in the first-line treatment of epidermal-growth-factor-receptor
mutation-positive non-small cell lung cancer: a review of the clinical evidence.

Ke EE(1), Wu YL(2).

Author information: 
(1)Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, People's Republic of China.
Guangdong General Hospital and Guangdong Academy of Medical Sciences, Guangdong
Lung Cancer Institute, Guangzhou, Guangdong, People's Republic of China.
(2)Guangdong General Hospital and Guangdong Academy of Medical Sciences,
Guangdong Lung Cancer Institute, Guangzhou, Guangdong 510080, People's Republic
of China syylwu@live.cn.

First-line afatinib significantly improved progression-free survival,
patient-reported outcomes, and quality of life compared with chemotherapy
regimens in patients with advanced epidermal-growth-factor-receptor (EGFR)
mutation-positive non-small cell lung cancer, based on results of the LUX-Lung 3 
and LUX-Lung 6 trials. When the analysis of these trials was restricted to
patients with common EGFR mutations only (exon 19 deletions and L858R), the
advantage over chemotherapy was even more pronounced. A significant overall
survival advantage was firstly demonstrated versus chemotherapy in patients with 
non-small cell lung cancer-harboring EGFR exon 19 deletion (del19) mutations.
First-line afatinib was also effective in patients with certain uncommon EGFR
mutation and patients with central nervous system metastasis. So far, these data 
are not sufficient to conclude that afatinib is better than first-generation EGFR
inhibitors. In addition, the toxicity profile of afatinib was somewhat worse than
that observed with either erlotinib or gefitinib. In the absence of direct
comparisons, for each patient the choice among the available EGFR inhibitors
should take into account all the clinically relevant endpoints, including disease
control, survival prolongation, tolerability, and quality of life.

© The Author(s), 2016.

DOI: 10.1177/1753465816634545 
PMID: 26929305  [PubMed - in process]


214. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2016;17(2):785-9.

Low-dose Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor (EGFR)- Tyrosine Kinase Inhibition of
EGFR Mutation-positive Lung Cancer: Therapeutic Benefits and Associations Between
Dosage, Efficacy and Body Surface Area.

Hirano R(1), Uchino J, Ueno M, Fujita M, Watanabe K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Fukuoka University School of Medicine,
Fukuoka, Japan E-mail : junjiuchino@gmail.com.

A key drug for treatment of EGFR mutation-positive non-small cell lung cancer is 
epidermal growth factor receptor-tyrosine kinase inhibitor (EGFR-TKI). While the 
dosage of many general anti-tumor drugs is adjusted according to the patient body
surface area, one uniform dose of most TKIs is recommended regardless of body
size. In many cases, dose reduction or drug cessation is necessary due to adverse
effects. Disease control, however, is frequently still effective, even after dose
reduction. In this study, we retrospectively reviewed the characteristics of 26
patients at Fukuoka University Hospital between January 2004 and January 2015 in 
whom the EGFR-TKI dose was reduced with respect to progression free survival and 
overall survival. There were 10 and 16 patients in the gefitinib group and the
erlotinib group, respectively. The median progression-free survival in the
gefitinib group and the erlotinib group was 22.4 months and 14.1 months,
respectively, and the median overall survival was 30.5 months and 32.4 months,
respectively. After stratification of patients by body surface area, the overall 
median progression-free survival was significantly more prolonged in the low body
surface area (<1.45 m2) group (25.6 months) compared to the high body surface
area (>1.45 m2) group (9.7 months) (p=0.0131). These results indicate that
low-dose EGFR-TKI may sufficiently control disease without side effects in lung
cancer patients with a small body size.


PMID: 26925681  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Arch Med Sci. 2016 Feb 1;12(1):107-11. doi: 10.5114/aoms.2016.57586. Epub 2016
Feb 2.

Treatment and prognosis after progression in long-term responders to
EGFR-tyrosine kinase inhibitor in advanced non-small cell lung cancer.

Song Z(1), Zhang Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemotherapy, Zhejiang Cancer Hospital, Hangzhou, China; Key
Laboratory Diagnosis and Treatment Technology on Thoracic Oncology, Zhejiang
Province, Hangzhou, China.

INTRODUCTION: The aim of this study was to investigate the treatment and
prognosis of advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients after failure
of long-term treatment with epidermal growth factor receptor-tyrosine kinase
inhibitor (EGFR-TKI).
MATERIAL AND METHODS: We retrospectively analyzed all NSCLC patients with
EGFR-TKI (gefitinib or erlotinib) treatment at our institution between 2011 and
2013 who progressed after at least stable disease on erlotinib or gefitinib for
more than 6 months. Survival curves were plotted using the Kaplan-Meier method.
The Cox proportional hazard model was used for multivariate analysis.
RESULTS: In total, 521 patients were administered EGFR-TKI. Of these, 298
patients received EGFR-TKI with progression-free survival less than 6 months
(group A), and the other 223 patients more than 6 months (group B). There was a
significant difference in overall survival (OS) between group A and group B (7.2 
months vs. 5.0 months, p < 0.0001). The median OS for group B patients was 5.0
months. Among the 223 patients in group B, 38 patients received chemotherapy with
continued EGFR-TKI after failure of prior gefitinib or erlotinib treatment, 92
with chemotherapy alone and 93 with best supportive care. Patients who continued 
gefitinib or erlotinib had a significantly longer OS (median: 7.5 months),
followed by chemotherapy (5.5 months) and best supportive care (4.0 months) (p < 
0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: The prognosis of advanced NSCLC patients after failure of long-term 
treatment with EGFR-TKI was poor. Chemotherapy with continued EGFR-TKI beyond
progression of long-term responders was feasible and led to prolonged OS in
advanced NSCLC patients.

DOI: 10.5114/aoms.2016.57586 
PMCID: PMC4754371
PMID: 26925125  [PubMed]


216. J Thorac Dis. 2016 Jan;8(1):98-115. doi: 10.3978/j.issn.2072-1439.2016.01.28.

Targeted drugs for unselected patients with advanced non-small-cell lung cancer: 
a network meta-analysis.

Sheng M(1), Zhao Y(1), Wang F(1), Li S(1), Wang X(1), Shou T(1), Luo Y(1), Tang
W(1).

Author information: 
(1)1 Laboratory of Molecular Genetics of Aging & Tumor, Medical Faculty, Kunming 
University of Science and Technology, Kunming 650500, China ; 2 First People's
Hospital of Yunnan Province, Kunming 650032, China.

BACKGROUND: Currently, targeted therapy has shown encouraging treatment benefits 
in selected patients with advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). However,
the comparative benefits of targeted drugs and chemotherapy (CT) treatments in
unselected patients are not clear. We therefore conduct a network meta-analysis
to assess the relative efficacy and safety of these regimens.
METHODS: PubMed, EMBASE, Cochrane Library and abstracts from major scientific
meetings were searched for eligible literatures. The odds ratio (OR) for
objective response rate (ORR) and safety was used for pooling effect sizes.
Bayesian network meta-analysis was conducted to calculate the efficacy and safety
of all included treatments. All tests of statistical significance were two sided.
RESULTS: A total of 13,060 patients from 24 randomized controlled trials (RCT)
were assessed. The targeted agents included bevacizumab (Bev), gefitinib (Gef),
erlotinib (Erl) and cetuximab (Cet). Network meta-analysis showed that Bev + CT
had a statistically significantly higher incidence of ORR relative to the other
six different treatments, including placebo (OR =6.47; 95% CI, 3.85-10.29), Erl
(OR =2.81; 95% CI, 2.08-3.70), CT (OR =1.92; 95% CI, 1.61-2.28), Gef (OR =1.40;
95% CI, 1.10-1.75), Erl + CT (OR =1.46; 95% CI, 1.17-1.80) and Gef + CT (OR
=1.75; 95% CI, 1.36-2.22), whereas placebo and Erl were associated with
statistically significantly lower incidence of ORR. Trend analyses of rank
probability revealed that Bev + CT had the highest probability of being the best 
treatment arm in term of ORR, followed by Cet + CT. Meanwhile, Cet + CT showed
significant severer rash and thrombocytopenia compared with Bev + CT. Gef was
probable to be the rank 3 for ORR but was associated with relatively low risk for
grade ≥3 toxicities.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study suggested that Bev + CT may offer better ORR in the
treatment of unselected patients with advanced NSCLC. Future studies will be
needed to investigate whether the increase of ORR with targeted drugs would be
translated into survival benefits.

DOI: 10.3978/j.issn.2072-1439.2016.01.28 
PMCID: PMC4740157
PMID: 26904218  [PubMed]


217. Lung Cancer. 2016 Mar;93:69-76. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2016.01.005. Epub 2016 Jan
11.

Association of pharmacokinetics and pharmacogenomics with safety and efficacy of 
gefitinib in patients with EGFR mutation positive advanced non-small cell lung
cancer.

Hirose T(1), Fujita K(2), Kusumoto S(3), Oki Y(3), Murata Y(3), Sugiyama T(3),
Ishida H(4), Shirai T(3), Nakashima M(3), Yamaoka T(2), Okuda K(3), Ohmori T(2), 
Sasaki Y(4).

Author information: 
(1)Depatment of Respirology, National Hospital Organization, Tokyo National
Hospital, Kiyose, Tokyo, Japan; Division of Respiratory Medicine and Allergology,
Showa University School of Medicine, Kiyose, Tokyo, Japan. Electronic address:
thirose-shw@umin.ac.jp. (2)Institute of Molecular Oncology, Showa University,
Kiyose, Tokyo, Japan. (3)Division of Respiratory Medicine and Allergology, Showa 
University School of Medicine, Kiyose, Tokyo, Japan. (4)Division of Medical
Oncology, Showa University School of Medicine, Shinagawa, Tokyo, Japan.

OBJECTIVES: Gefitinib is a potent epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)
tyrosine kinase inhibitor and is a key drug for patients with EGFR
mutation-positive advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). The
pharmacokinetics of orally administered gefitinib varies greatly among patients. 
We prospectively evaluated the association of pharmacokinetics and
pharmacogenomics with the safety and efficacy of gefitinib in patients with EGFR 
mutation-positive advanced NSCLC.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Pharmacokinetics was evaluated with samples of peripheral
blood obtained on day 1 before treatment and 1, 3, 5, 8, and 24h after gefitinib 
(250 mg per day) was administered and on days 8 and 15 as the trough values. The 
plasma concentration of gefitinib was analyzed with high-performance liquid
chromatography. The genotypes of ABCG2, ABCB1, CYP3A4, CYP3A5, and CYP2D6 genes
were analyzed with direct sequencing.
RESULTS: The subjects were 35 patients (21 women; median age, 72 years; range, 53
to 90 years) with stage IV adenocarcinoma harboring EGFR mutations. The median
peak plasma concentration (Cmax) was 377 (range, 168-781)ng/mL. The median area
under the curve (AUC) of the plasma concentration of gefitinib from 0 to 24h was 
4893 (range, 698-13991) ng/mL h. The common adverse events were skin toxicity
(68% of patients), diarrhea (46%), and liver injury (63%). One patient died of
drug-induced interstitial lung disease (ILD). The overall response rate was 82.9%
(95% confidence interval, 66.4%-93.4%). The median progression-free survival time
was 10 months, and the median survival time was 25 months. The pharmacokinetics
and pharmacogenomics were not associated with significantly different toxicities,
response rates, or survival times with gefitinib. However, the AUC and Cmax were 
highest and the trough value on day 8 was the second highest in one patient who
died of drug-induced ILD.
CONCLUSION: Elevated gefitinib exposure might be associated with drug-induced
ILD.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2016.01.005 
PMID: 26898617  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Lung Cancer. 2016 Mar;93:35-42. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2015.12.007. Epub 2015 Dec
30.

Cigarette smoke extract exposure induces EGFR-TKI resistance in EGFR-mutated
NSCLC via mediating Src activation and EMT.

Li D(1), Zhang L(1), Zhou J(2), Chen H(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, The First Affiliated
Hospital of Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing 400016, China. (2)Department 
of Respiratory Medicine, Chongqing Three Gorges Central Hospital, Chongqing
404000, China. (3)Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, The First
Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing 400016, China.
Electronic address: hopehong2003@126.com.

OBJECTIVES: The study aims to explore the molecular basis for the poor response
of epithelial growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors (EGFR-TKIs) in
EGFR mutated non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients with smoking history.
Novel agent overcoming EGFR-TKI resistance had also been investigated.
METHODS: The impact of cigarette smoke extract (CSE) on gefitinib sensitive PC-9 
cells was evaluated using quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR), western blot,
CCK-8 assays, immunofluorescence staining, matrigel invasion assays and wound
healing assays.
RESULTS: Western blot and qRT-PCR presented that CSE stimulated the up-regulation
of Vimentin and down-regulation of E-cadherin in PC-9 cells in concentration-and 
time-dependent manners through modulating Src phosphorylation. N-acetylcysteine
(NAC) was capable of decreasing Src phosphorylation, abrogating changes of
epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) markers instigated by CSE.
Immunofluorescence staining found that PC-9 cells displayed features of
mesenchymal cells after CSE exposure, while PP2 and NAC could recover these
changes. CCK-8 assays showed that CSE could increase the IC50 of PC-9 cells,
while PP2 and NAC could abort the elevation of IC50 caused by CSE. Matrigel
invasion assays and wound healing assays showed that CSE could increase the
invasion and migration ability of PC-9 cells, which could be suppressed by NAC
and PP2.
CONCLUSION: CSE exposure induced EGFR-TKI resistance via mediating Src activation
and EMT in NSCLC. NAC may alleviate smoking induced EGFR-TKI resistance through
inhibiting Src activation and EMT reversal. NAC may be a promising adjuvant to
reinforce the effect of EGFR-TKI.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2015.12.007 
PMID: 26898612  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Oncol Lett. 2016 Feb;11(2):1413-1417. Epub 2015 Dec 31.

Effect of hydrothorax EGFR gene mutation and EGFR-TKI targeted therapy on
advanced non-small cell lung cancer patients.

Zhou BO(1), Nie J(1), Yang W(1), Huang C(1), Huang YE(1), Zhao H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, People's Hospital of China Three Gorges 
University, The First People's Hospital of Yichang, Yichang, Hubei 443000, P.R.
China. (2)Department of Nephrology, People's Hospital of China Three Gorges
University, The First People's Hospital of Yichang, Yichang, Hubei 443000, P.R.
China.

Lung cancer is a malignancy with the highest incidence of morbidity and mortality
worldwide. The lack of effective detection methods leads to the ineffectiveness
of convetional therapy. The aim of the current study was to analyze the
hydrothorax epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutation in patients with
advanced non-small lung cancer (NSCLC) and malignant pleural effusion. A new
method for clinical treatment was developed through a comparison of the
difference of EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor (EGFR-TKI)-targeted therapy. Between
January 2013 and January 2015, 68 cases diagnosed with advanced non-small lung
cancer and malignant pleural effusion, were enrolled in the study. Previous
first-line chemotherapeutic treatment schemes had been unsuccessful. EGFR 19 and 
EGFR 21 sites were detected for all the patients. Platinum-based drugs were
provided for patients with wild-type EGFR. These patients served as the control
group and underwent four cycles of treatments, with each cycle lasting 3 weeks.
TKI medicine Gefitinib (Iressa™) was administered to patients with mutant EGFR
tid, po, for a duration of 4-8 months. These patients served as the experimental 
group. There were 41 cases of EGFR mutations, of which 13 cases had EGFR 19 site 
mutations, 16 cases EGFR 21 site mutations, and the remaining 12 cases had 2 site
mutations. EGFR mutations were not significant for gender, age, tumor type, stage
and diameter (P>0.05). The results showed that the six-month survival rate,
progression-free survival time (PFS), objective response rate (RP) and disease
control rate (DCR) in the experimental group were higher than those in the
control group. The drug side-effects in the experimental group indicated no
statistical differences compared to the control group (P>0.05). The incidence of 
EGFR mutation was higher in patients with advanced non-small lung cancer and
malignant pleural effusion. Targeted therapy improved the survival rate and was
deemed to be a safe and effective method for patients with EGFR mutations.

DOI: 10.3892/ol.2015.4066 
PMCID: PMC4734265
PMID: 26893752  [PubMed]


220. Cancer Manag Res. 2016 Feb 4;8:11-20. doi: 10.2147/CMAR.S85173. eCollection 2016.

EGFR testing and clinical management of advanced NSCLC: a Galician Lung Cancer
Group study (GGCP 048-10).

Vázquez S(1), Casal J(2), Afonso Afonso FJ(3), Fírvida JL(4), Santomé L(5), Barón
F(6), Lázaro M(7), Pena C(7), Amenedo M(8), Abdulkader I(9), González-Arenas
C(10), Fachal L(11), Vega A(11).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Oncology Department, Lucus Augusti University Hospital, Lugo, Spain.
(2)Medical Oncology Department, University Hospital Complex of Vigo, Pontevedra, 
Spain. (3)Medical Oncology Department, University Hospital Complex of Ferrol,
Ferrol, Spain. (4)Medical Oncology Department, University Hospital Complex of
Ourense, Ourense, Spain. (5)Medical Oncology Department Povisa Hospital, Vigo,
Spain. (6)Medical Oncology Department, University Hospital Complex of Santiago de
Compostela, Santiago de Compostela, Spain. (7)Medical Oncology Department,
Hospital Complex of Pontevedra, Pontevedra, Spain. (8)Medical Oncology
Department, Oncology Center of Galicia, A Coruña, Spain. (9)Anatomical Pathology 
Department, University Hospital Complex of Santiago de Compostela, Santiago de
Compostela, Spain. (10)AstraZeneca, Madrid, Santiago de Compostela, Spain.
(11)Galician Public Foundation of Genomic Medicine-SERGAS, Santiago de Compostela
Clinic Hospital, Santiago de Compostela, Spain.

PURPOSE: This study aimed to assess the incidence of mutations in the epidermal
growth factor receptor (EGFR) gene in non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients
in the Galician region of Spain and the clinical management and outcome of
patients carrying EGFR mutations.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: All newly diagnosed advanced or metastatic NSCLC patients
were screened for EGFR mutations in matched tumor samples (tissue or cytology
specimens) and serum samples.
RESULTS: Of 198 patients screened for EGFR mutations in tumor samples, 184 had
evaluable data and, of these, 25 (13.6%) had EGFR mutations (84% sensitizing
mutations). EGFR mutation was found in serum in 14 (8.1%) patients (of 174
evaluable). Compared to matched tumor tissue, serum EGFR mutation testing
specificity and sensitivity were 99% and 52%, respectively. All but two patients 
received gefitinib. Median progression-free survival and overall survival were 10
(95% confidence interval: 4.8-15.3) months and 17.8 (95% confidence interval:
13.9-21.6) months, respectively, in patients carrying sensitizing mutations.
CONCLUSION: The incidence of EGFR mutations in Galicia is consistent with
previous data in Spain. Our results also support the feasibility of EGFR testing 
to guide treatment decision making using tumor tissue or cytology samples, or
serum samples if tumor specimens are unavailable. These findings also confirm
that first-line gefitinib is an active treatment option in Caucasians with EGFR
mutation-positive NSCLC.

DOI: 10.2147/CMAR.S85173 
PMCID: PMC4745839
PMID: 26893581  [PubMed]


221. Mol Diagn Ther. 2016 Apr;20(2):191-8. doi: 10.1007/s40291-016-0189-0.

therascreen® EGFR RGQ PCR Kit: A Companion Diagnostic for Afatinib and Gefitinib 
in Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer.

Syed YY(1).

Author information: 
(1)Springer, Private Bag 65901, Mairangi Bay 0754, Auckland, New Zealand.
demail@springer.com.

therascreen(®) EGFR RGQ PCR Kit is a real-time polymerase chain reaction test kit
for the qualitative detection of exon 19 deletions and L858R mutation of the
human EGFR gene in formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC) tissue. The US FDA has approved the kit for selecting patients with NSCLC
for treatment with afatinib or gefitinib. The test has good analytical
sensitivity and specificity. It requires only two 5 µm tissue sections, is easy
to use, provides automated interpretation of results and can be performed in <8
h. There is good concordance between EGFR mutation test results obtained with
this kit and several other assays. The clinical utility of the kit has been
validated in phase 3 or 4 trials in which NSCLC patients with EGFR mutations as
detected by the kit had greater clinical benefits with afatinib or gefitinib than
with standard chemotherapy.

DOI: 10.1007/s40291-016-0189-0 
PMID: 26891729  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Int J Mol Sci. 2016 Feb 15;17(2):237. doi: 10.3390/ijms17020237.

Implications of MicroRNAs in the Treatment of Gefitinib-Resistant Non-Small Cell 
Lung Cancer.

Sin TK(1,)(2), Wang F(3), Meng F(4), Wong SC(5), Cho WC(6), Siu PM(7), Chan
LW(8), Yung BY(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health Technology and Informatics, The Hong Kong Polytechnic
University, Hung Hom, Kowloon, Hong Kong, China. Ka.Wai.Thomas.Sin@uth.tmc.edu.
(2)Department of Integrative Biology and Pharmacology, The University of Texas
Health Science Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA. Ka.Wai.Thomas.Sin@uth.tmc.edu.
(3)Department of Health Technology and Informatics, The Hong Kong Polytechnic
University, Hung Hom, Kowloon, Hong Kong, China. wangff0223@163.com.
(4)Department of Health Technology and Informatics, The Hong Kong Polytechnic
University, Hung Hom, Kowloon, Hong Kong, China. fei.meng@polyu.edu.hk.
(5)Department of Health Technology and Informatics, The Hong Kong Polytechnic
University, Hung Hom, Kowloon, Hong Kong, China. cesar.wong@polyu.edu.hk.
(6)Department of Clinical Oncology, The Queen Elizabeth Hospital, Kowloon, Hong
Kong, China. chocs@ha.org.hk. (7)Department of Health Technology and Informatics,
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hung Hom, Kowloon, Hong Kong, China.
parco.siu@polyu.edu.hk. (8)Department of Health Technology and Informatics, The
Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hung Hom, Kowloon, Hong Kong, China.
wing.chi.chan@polyu.edu.hk. (9)Department of Health Technology and Informatics,
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hung Hom, Kowloon, Hong Kong, China.
ben.yung@polyu.edu.hk.

Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) represents about 85% of the reported cases of 
lung cancer. Acquired resistance to targeted therapy with epidermal growth factor
receptor-tyrosine kinase inhibitors (EGFR-TKIs), such as gefitinib, is not
uncommon. It is thus vital to explore novel strategies to restore sensitivity to 
gefitinib. Provided that microRNAs (miRNAs) negatively regulate their gene
targets at the transcriptional level, it is speculated that miRNA mimetics may
reduce the expression, activity and signal transduction of EGFR so that
sensitization of tumour sites to gefitinib-induced cytotoxicity can be achieved. 
Indeed, a growing body of evidence has shown that the manipulation of endogenous 
levels of miRNA not only attenuates the EGFR/PI3K/Akt phosphorylation cascade,
but also restores apoptotic cell death in in vitro models of
experimentally-induced gefitinib resistance and provoked tumour
regression/shrinkage in xenograft models. These data are in concordant with the
clinical data showing that the differential expression profiles of miRNA in
tumour tissues and blood associate strongly with drug response and overall
survival. Furthermore, another line of studies indicate that the chemopreventive 
effects of a variety of natural compounds may involve miRNAs. The present review 
aims to discuss the therapeutic capacity of miRNAs in relation to recent
discoveries on EGFR-TKI resistance, including chronic drug exposure and
mutations.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms17020237 
PMCID: PMC4783968
PMID: 26891293  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Exp Ther Med. 2016 Jan;11(1):197-200. Epub 2015 Nov 19.

Atypical skin reaction in a patient treated with gefitinib for advanced lung
cancer: A case report and review of the literature.

Ferrazzi A(1), Russo I(1), Pasello G(2), Alaibac M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Dermatology Unit, Department of Medicine, University of Padua, Padua I-35121, 
Italy. (2)Unit of Medical Oncology, Veneto Institute of Oncology IOV-IRCCS, Padua
I-35128, Italy.

Gefitinib is a selective epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase
inhibitor utilized for the treatment of advanced non-small cell lung carcinoma.
The most commonly reported adverse event during gefitinib therapy is skin rash,
particularly a papulopustular acne-like eruption. Cutaneous toxicities can affect
treatment compliance and the quality of life of the patient. The present study
reports a case of gefitinib-induced atypical skin reaction in a 73-year-old woman
with advanced non-small cell lung cancer, who developed a squamous-crusted
eruption on her face after 4 weeks of oral treatment with gefitinib at a dose of 
250 mg/day. The patient was treated with 100 mg minocyclin (2 tablets/day,
orally) and with ryfamicin topically. A complete resolution of the lesions was
observed 2 weeks later. The present case report explored the pathogenesis of this
skin manifestation, focusing on the underlying immunological mechanisms. A review
of the literature concerning skin reactions to gefitinib was also conducted.

DOI: 10.3892/etm.2015.2881 
PMCID: PMC4726852
PMID: 26889239  [PubMed]


224. Int J Clin Exp Med. 2015 Dec 15;8(12):22300-9. eCollection 2015.

Assessment and prognostic analysis of EGFR mutations or/and HER2 overexpression
in Uygur's Non-small Cell Lung Cancer.

Shen H(1), Du G(2), Liu Z(3), Bao J(4), Yu Q(5), Jia C(6), Liang X(6), Shan L(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, The Sixth Division Hospital, Xinjiang Production and
Construction Corps Wujiaqu, China. (2)Department of Endocrinology, The First
Affiliated Hospital of Xinjiang Medical University Urumqi, China. (3)Department
of Endocrinology, The Eastern Section of Linyi People's Hospital Linyi, China.
(4)Department of Central Laboratory, The First Affiliated Hospital of Xinjiang
Medical University Urumqi, China. (5)Department of Internal Medicine, The
Affiliated Tumor Hospital of Xinjiang Medical University Urumqi, China.
(6)Xinjiang Medical University Urumqi, China. (7)Department of Medicine, The
Affiliated Tumor Hospital of Xinjiang Medical University Urumqi, China.

AIM: The epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutations and human epidermal
growth factor receptor HER-2/neu (HER2) have been established roles in the signal
transduction pathways leading to cell growth and differentiation. The present
study focus on the significance of EGFR mutations combined with HER2
overexpression on survival outcomes in Non-small Cell Lung Cancer patients in
Uygur population.
METHODS: A total of 111 consecutive Uygurods: A total of 111 consecutive Cell
Lung Cancer under went lung Cell Lung biopsy or surgery at the Affiliated Tumor
Hospital of Xin Jiang Medical University between March 2009 and January 2013 were
included in this retrospective study. All the patients included had received
gefitinib 250 mg once daily. The HER2 expression were evaluated by
immunohistochemical staining with score of membranous staining being 0 = none, 1 
= weak, 2 = 10-30% cells, 3≥30% cells stained, and Real-time PCR techniques were 
conducted to detect mutations of EGFR through 21 kinds of human EGFR gene
mutation detection kits. A retrospective review of the medical records was
analyzed to determine the correlation between the presence of EGFR mutations
combined with HER2 overexpression and clinicopathological factors.
RESULTS: The overall rate of EGFR mutation was 10.81% (n = 12), which mainly
involved exons 19 (83.33%, n = 10), 21 (16.67%, n = 2). The overall rate of HER2 
overexpression was 21.62% (n = 24). EGFR mutation combined with HER2
overexpression analysis was performed in 111 patients, with an overall rate of
5.41% (n = 6). Median progression-free survival and overall survival were
significantly longer in the EGFR mutations group than in the wild type group
(PFS: 10.0±1.5 versus 3.8±1.4 months, P = 0.000; OS: 27.3±2.9 versus 19.1±4.7
months, P = 0.000). The ORR in patients with HER2 overexpression was 29.17%, and 
13.80% in those patients with HER2 negative, but no significant difference (P =
0.121). The median PFS and OS in HER2 positive group showed no significant
difference compared with HER2 negative group (PFS: 4.7±1.2 months versus 3.9±1.6 
months, P = 0.085; OS: 20.5±2.4 versus 19.2±2.6 months, P = 0.094). As regarding 
to ORR, PFS and OS, EGFR mutations combined with HER2 overexpression patients
showed no superior efficacy to gefitinib treatment compared with EGFR mutations
combined with HER2 negative.
CONCLUSION: In Uygur population, progression-free survivals were improved in
Non-small Cell Lung Cancer with EGFR mutations. HER2 overexpression provided a
poor prognostic factor in Non-small Cell Lung Cancer.


PMCID: PMC4729993
PMID: 26885207  [PubMed]


225. Mol Cancer Ther. 2016 Jun;15(6):1387-96. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-15-0089. Epub
2016 Feb 16.

Targeting Adenine Nucleotide Translocase-2 (ANT2) to Overcome Resistance to
Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor Tyrosine Kinase Inhibitor in Non-Small Cell Lung
Cancer.

Jang JY(1), Kim YG(1), Nam SJ(2), Keam B(3), Kim TM(3), Jeon YK(2), Kim CW(4).

Author information: 
(1)Tumor Immunity Medical Research Center, Cancer Research Center, Seoul National
University College of Medicine, Seoul, South Korea. Tumor Microenvironment Global
Core Research Center, Seoul National University, Seoul, South Korea. (2)Tumor
Immunity Medical Research Center, Cancer Research Center, Seoul National
University College of Medicine, Seoul, South Korea. Tumor Microenvironment Global
Core Research Center, Seoul National University, Seoul, South Korea. Department
of Pathology, Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul National University
College of Medicine, Seoul, South Korea. (3)Department of Internal Medicine,
Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul National University College of
Medicine, Seoul, South Korea. (4)Tumor Immunity Medical Research Center, Cancer
Research Center, Seoul National University College of Medicine, Seoul, South
Korea. Tumor Microenvironment Global Core Research Center, Seoul National
University, Seoul, South Korea. Department of Pathology, Seoul National
University Hospital, Seoul National University College of Medicine, Seoul, South 
Korea. cwkim@snu.ac.kr.

EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor (EGFR-TKI) therapy has achieved favorable clinical
outcomes in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients with EGFR mutations.
However, patients eventually develop resistance to EGFR-TKIs by several
mechanisms. Adenine nucleotide translocase-2 (ANT2) is an oncogenic mitochondrial
membrane-associated protein. We investigated the therapeutic potential of ANT2
inhibition to EGFR-TKI resistance in NSCLC using gefitinib-sensitive (PC9 and
HCC827) and gefitinib-resistant (H1975 and HCC827/GR) NSCLC cell lines. ANT2 was 
inhibited by transfecting cells with an ANT2-specific shRNA. ANT2 expression was 
elevated in the H1975 and HCC827/GR cells compared with the PC9 and HCC827 cells.
ANT2 upregulation in gefitinib-resistant cells was associated with increased SP1 
binding to the ANT2 promoter. ANT2-specific shRNA decreased NSCLC cell viability.
Moreover, ANT2-specific shRNA sensitized the H1975 and HCC827/GR cells to
gefitinib, accompanied by HSP90 and EGFR downregulation. ANT2-specific shRNA also
inactivated the PI3K/Akt signaling pathway in the H1975 and HCC827/GR cells,
which was mediated by the suppression of miR-221/222 levels and by the subsequent
restoration of PTEN. In EGFR-TKI-treated NSCLC patients, ANT2 expression was
higher in patients exhibiting poor responses compared with patients showing
excellent responses. Furthermore, ANT2 expression increased in tumor tissues
biopsied after acquiring gefitinib resistance compared with tissues before
gefitinib treatment. These findings suggest that ANT2 overexpression contributes 
to EGFR-TKI resistance in NSCLC and that ANT2 targeting may be considered a novel
strategy for overcoming this resistance. Mol Cancer Ther; 15(6); 1387-96. ©2016
AACR.

©2016 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-15-0089 
PMID: 26883272  [PubMed - in process]


226. Oncol Lett. 2016 Jan;11(1):535-542. Epub 2015 Nov 18.

Integrin β1-mediated acquired gefitinib resistance in non-small cell lung cancer 
cells occurs via the phosphoinositide 3-kinase-dependent pathway.

Deng QF(1), Su BO(2), Zhao YM(2), Tang L(2), Zhang J(2), Zhou CC(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Shanghai Pulmonary Hospital, Tongji University School 
of Medicine, Shanghai 200433, P.R. China; Department of Oncology, School of
Medicine, Soochow University, Suzhou 215007, P.R. China. (2)Central Laboratory,
Shanghai Pulmonary Hospital, Tongji University, Shanghai 200433, P.R. China.
(3)Department of Oncology, Shanghai Pulmonary Hospital, Tongji University School 
of Medicine, Shanghai 200433, P.R. China.

The present study aimed to explore the role of integrin β1 and the relevant
signaling pathways in acquired gefitinib resistance in non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC). The inhibitory effects of gefitinib, with or without LY294002, on
cellular proliferation were evaluated by 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)
2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide assay. Cell cycle progression and apoptosis were 
analyzed by flow cytometry, while western blotting was used to evaluate the
expression of EGFR, phosphorylated (phospho)-EGFR, protein kinase B (Akt),
phospho-Akt, extracellular signal-regulated kinase (Erk) and phospho-Erk. The
gene expression profiles of PC9 and PC9/G cells were determined by DNA
microarray. Integrin β1 was knocked down in PC9/G cells by transiently
transfected short interfering RNA (siRNA). A scrambled siRNA sequence was used as
a control. Apoptosis of transfected cells was determined by Annexin
V-phycoerythrin-Cy5/propidium iodide staining. Sequencing products were amplified
by nested PCR. The resistant index of PC9/G cells to gefitinib was ~138- to
256-fold higher than that of PC9 cells, and this resistance was accompanied by
significant increase in integrin β1 expression in PC9/G cells. Knockdown of
integrin β1 with short hairpin RNA in PC9/G cells markedly inhibited
proliferation and enhanced apoptosis in response to gefitinib, restoring the
sensitivity of PC9/G cells gefitinib. Phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K)/Akt
activation was observed in PC9/G cells in the presence of gefitinib and the
sensitivity of PC9/G cells to gefitinib was also able to be restored by PI3K/Akt 
pathway inhibitor LY294002. Finally, knockdown of integrin β1 significantly
reduced the levels of phospho-Akt. These findings suggest that integrin β1
signaling via the PI3K/Akt pathway may be a significant mechanism underlying
gefitinib resistance, and may potentially present an alternative therapeutic
target for the treatment of NSCLC unresponsive to EGFR inhibitors.

DOI: 10.3892/ol.2015.3945 
PMCID: PMC4727211
PMID: 26870244  [PubMed]


227. Oncol Lett. 2016 Jan;11(1):393-398. Epub 2015 Nov 5.

Epidermal growth factor receptor exon 20 p.S768I mutation in non-small cell lung 
carcinoma: A case report combined with a review of the literature and
investigation of clinical significance.

Improta G(1), Pettinato A(2), Gieri S(3), Scandurra G(4), Skovrider-Ruminski
W(5), Høgdall E(5), Fraggetta F(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Clinical Research and Advanced Diagnostics, Cancer Referral
Centre of Basilicata, National Institute for Research and Treatment, Rionero in
Vulture, Potenza I-85028, Italy. (2)Pathology Unit, Cannizzaro Hospital, Catania 
I-95126, Italy. (3)Laboratory of Oncologic Technologies, Institute of Bioimaging 
and Molecular Physiology, National Research Council, Cefalù, Palermo I-90015,
Italy. (4)Oncology Unit, Cannizzaro Hospital, Catania I-95126, Italy.
(5)Molecular Unit, Pathology Department, Herlev Hospital, Herlev 2730, Denmark.

Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) plays a significant role in non-small
cell lung cancer (NSCLC), the most prevalent form of lung cancer worldwide.
Therefore, EGFR may be a useful molecular target for personalized therapy
utilizing tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs). Somatic activating EGFR mutations
may be used to identify tumors sensitive to the effects of small-molecule
EGFR-TKIs (gefitinib and erlotinib), and alternative, less frequently observed
mutations, including the majority of mutations identified within exon 20, may be 
associated with a lack of response to TKIs. However, due to the comparative
rarity of EGFR exon 20 mutations, clinical information concerning the association
between EGFR exon 20 mutations and responsiveness to TKIs has been limited within
the relevant literature, particularly for certain rare mutations, including
p.S768I. The current study reports the case of a patient with NSCLC harboring a
p.S768I mutation in the EGFR gene [a substitution at codon 768 of exon 20
(c.2303G>T, p.S768I)], as well as a mutation at codon 719, exon 18 (p.G719A). The
relevant literature concerning this rare EGFR somatic mutation is also reviewed.

DOI: 10.3892/ol.2015.3863 
PMCID: PMC4727163
PMID: 26870223  [PubMed]


228. Oncol Lett. 2016 Jan;11(1):3-8. Epub 2015 Nov 10.

Molecular-targeted therapy for elderly patients with advanced non-small cell lung
cancer.

Antonelli G(1), Libra M(2), Panebianco V(3), Russo AE(1), Vitale FV(1), Colina
P(1), D'Angelo A(1), Rossello R(1), Ferraù F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, San Vincenzo Hospital, Taormina, Messina
I-98039, Italy. (2)Laboratory of Translational Oncology and Functional Genomics, 
Section of General Pathology and Oncology, Department of Biomedical Sciences,
University of Catania, Catania I-95124, Italy. (3)Department of Surgical
Oncology, San Vincenzo Hospital, Taormina, Messina I-98039, Italy.

Lung cancer is the most common cause of cancer-related mortality in men and
women. Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) represents close to 90% of all lung
cancers. When diagnosed, >50% of patients are >65 years old. Through an improved 
understanding of the molecular mechanisms involved in lung oncogenesis,
molecular-targeted approaches have become an essential element for the treatment 
of patients with NSCLC. As the toxicity profiles of the techniques are definitely
more favorable compared with chemotherapy, they are particularly attractive for
use in elderly patients, who are potentially more susceptible to the toxicity of 
systemic oncological therapies. However, studies on the activity of
molecular-targeted agents in this aged patient setting are much more limited
compared with those in their younger counterparts. In the present review, the
literature on molecular-targeted therapy for elderly patients with advanced NSCLC
is discussed. It is concluded that bevacizumab should be reserved only for highly
select elderly patients with advanced NSCLC when the clinician deems it useful in
the face of acceptable toxicities. In elderly patients with advanced epidermal
growth factor receptor mutation-positive NSCLC, erlotinib and gefitinib appear to
repeat the same favorable performance as that documented on a larger scale in the
overall population of patients with activating mutations. A good toxicity profile
is also confirmed for active molecules on different pathways, such as crizotinib.

DOI: 10.3892/ol.2015.3901 
PMCID: PMC4727120
PMID: 26870160  [PubMed]


229. Oncotarget. 2016 Jun 14;7(24):35741-35752. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.7140.

Transtinib, a potent tyrosine kinase inhibitor inhibits L858R/T790M mutant NSCLC 
cell lines and xenografts.

Hu P(1,)(2), Han DX(1), Ruan RS(1,)(2), Zheng LM(1), Chou SH(3), Tzeng CM(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Translational Medicine Research Center, School of Pharmaceutical Science,
Xiamen University, Xiamen, P.R. China. (2)Key Laboratory for Cancer T-Cell
Theranostics and Clinical Translation (CTCTCT), Xiamen, P.R. China. (3)Department
of Life Science, Fu-Jen Catholic University, Xinzhuang District, New Taipei City,
Taiwan.

Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients with activating epidermal growth
factor receptor (EGFR) mutations initially respond well to the EGFR tyrosine
kinase inhibitors (TKIs) erlotinib and gefitinib. However, clinical efficacy is
limited by the development of resistance. In most cases, this resistance is in
the form of the T790M mutation. Here, we report the design, synthesis and
biochemical evaluation of a novel series of irreversible EGFR tyrosine kinase
inhibitors (EGFR-TKIs) that are derived from the anilinoquinazoline scaffold.
Guided by molecular modeling, this series of analogs was evolved to target a
cysteine residue in the ATP binding site via covalent bond formation and to
achieve high levels of anti-tumor activity in cell cultures and in xenografts.
The most promising compound 13c ((E) -N - (4 - (4 - (3-fluorobenzyloxy) -3-
chlorophenylamino) -7-ethoxyquinazolin-6-yl) -3- ((S)
-pyrrolidin-2-yl)acrylamide, which we named Transtinib) displayed strong
anti-proliferative activity against the H1975 and A431 cell lines with IC50
values of 34 nM and 62 nM, respectively. In xenograft models, Transtinib
significantly decreases tumor size for a prolonged period of time. These results 
suggest that Transtinib is a potential cancer therapeutic drug lead for the
inhibition of mutant EGFR to overcome the development of resistance.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.7140 
PMCID: PMC5094958
PMID: 26848869  [PubMed - in process]


230. Cancer Sci. 2016 Apr;107(4):461-8. doi: 10.1111/cas.12905. Epub 2016 Mar 28.

Oncogene swap as a novel mechanism of acquired resistance to epidermal growth
factor receptor-tyrosine kinase inhibitor in lung cancer.

Mizuuchi H(1), Suda K(1), Murakami I(2), Sakai K(3), Sato K(1), Kobayashi Y(1),
Shimoji M(1), Chiba M(1), Sesumi Y(1), Tomizawa K(1), Takemoto T(1), Sekido Y(4),
Nishio K(3), Mitsudomi T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Thoracic Surgery, Department of Surgery, Kinki University Faculty 
of Medicine, Osaka-Sayama, Japan. (2)Department of Respiratory Medicine,
Higashi-Hiroshima Medical Center, Higashi-Hiroshima, Japan. (3)Department of
Genome Biology, Kinki University Faculty of Medicine, Osaka-Sayama, Japan.
(4)Division of Molecular Oncology, Aichi Cancer Center Research Institute,
Nagoya, Japan.

Mutant selective epidermal growth factor receptor-tyrosine kinase inhibitors
(EGFR-TKIs), such as rociletinib and AZD9291, are effective for tumors with T790M
secondary mutation that become refractory to first-generation EGFR-TKI. However, 
acquired resistance to these prospective drugs is anticipated considering the
high adaptability of cancer cells and the mechanisms remain largely obscure.
Here, CNX-2006 (tool compound of rociletinib) resistant sublines were established
by chronic exposure of HCC827EPR cells harboring exon 19 deletion and T790M to
CNX-2006. Through the analyses of these resistant subclones, we identified two
resistant mechanisms accompanied by MET amplification. One was bypass signaling
by MET amplification in addition to T790M, which was inhibited by the combination
of CNX-2006 and MET-TKI. Another was loss of amplified EGFR mutant allele
including T790M while acquiring MET amplification. Interestingly, MET-TKI alone
was able to overcome this resistance, suggesting that oncogenic dependence
completely shifted from EGFR to MET. We propose describing this phenomenon as an 
"oncogene swap." Furthermore, we analyzed multiple lesions from a patient who
died of acquired resistance to gefitinib, then found a clinical example of an
oncogene swap in which the EGFR mutation was lost and a MET gene copy was gained.
In conclusion, an "oncogene swap" from EGFR to MET is a novel resistant mechanism
to the EGFR-TKI. This novel mechanism should be considered in order to avoid
futile inhibition of the original oncogene.

© 2016 The Authors. Cancer Science published by John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd 
on behalf of Japanese Cancer Association.

DOI: 10.1111/cas.12905 
PMCID: PMC4832847
PMID: 26845230  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Eur J Med Chem. 2016 Mar 3;110:195-203. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmech.2016.01.045. Epub
2016 Jan 26.

Novel 4-anilinoquinazoline derivatives featuring an 1-adamantyl moiety as potent 
EGFR inhibitors with enhanced activity against NSCLC cell lines.

Yu H(1), Li Y(2), Ge Y(1), Song Z(1), Wang C(1), Huang S(1), Jin Y(1), Han X(1), 
Zhen Y(1), Liu K(3), Zhou Y(4), Ma X(5).

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmacy, Dalian Medical University, Dalian 116044, PR China.
(2)Respiratory Department, The First Affiliated Hospital of Dalian Medical
University, Dalian 116011, PR China. (3)College of Pharmacy, Dalian Medical
University, Dalian 116044, PR China. Electronic address: kexinliu@dlmedu.edu.cn. 
(4)Department of Dermatology and Skin Science, University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, BC V5Z 4E8, Canada. Electronic address: youwen.zhou@ubc.ca. (5)College
of Pharmacy, Dalian Medical University, Dalian 116044, PR China. Electronic
address: xiaodong.ma@139.com.

With the aim of overcoming gefitinib resistance, a series of novel quinazoline
derivatives bearing an adamantyl group on the aniline ring were synthesized as
potent epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) inhibitors. Most of these
analogues are comparable to gefitinib in their ability to inhibit non-small cell 
lung cancer (NSCLC) cell lines, and several also exhibited significantly enhanced
anti-tumor potency. Specifically, compound 3d, with an IC50 value of 2.06 μM
against A431 cells with the wild-type EGFR and of 0.009 μM against the
gefitinib-sensitive cells, displayed approximately 5-fold higher potency than the
lead compound to inhibit the cells harboring the EGFR(T790M) mutant. In addition,
the molecular simulation and Western blot analysis results also indicated that
these compounds effectively interfered with the EGFR(T790M) activity, and may
serve as a new alternative structure to develop more effective antitumor agents.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejmech.2016.01.045 
PMID: 26829280  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Cancer Sci. 2016 Apr;107(4):444-51. doi: 10.1111/cas.12899. Epub 2016 Mar 16.

Enhanced gefitinib-induced repression of the epidermal growth factor receptor
pathway by ataxia telangiectasia-mutated kinase inhibition in non-small-cell lung
cancer cells.

Misumi K(1,)(2), Sun J(1), Kinomura A(1), Miyata Y(2), Okada M(2), Tashiro
S(1,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular Biology, Research Institute for Radiation Biology and
Medicine, Hiroshima University, Hiroshima, Japan. (2)Department of Surgical
Oncology, Research Institute for Radiation Biology and Medicine, Hiroshima
University, Hiroshima, Japan. (3)Research Center for the Mathematics on Chromatin
Live Dynamics, Hiroshima University, Higashi-Hiroshima, Japan.

The epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase signaling pathways
regulate cellular activities. The EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors (EGFR-TKIs)
repress the EGFR pathway constitutively activated by somatic EGFR gene mutations 
and have drastically improved the prognosis of non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
patients. However, some problems, including resistance, remain to be solved.
Recently, combination therapy with EGFR-TKIs and cytotoxic agents has been shown 
to improve the prognosis of NSCLC patients. To enhance the anticancer effects of 
EGFR-TKIs, we examined the cross-talk of the EGFR pathways with ataxia
telangiectasia-mutated (ATM) signaling pathways. ATM is a key protein kinase in
the DNA damage response and is known to phosphorylate Akt, an EGFR downstream
factor. We found that the combination of an ATM inhibitor, KU55933, and an
EGFR-TKI, gefitinib, resulted in synergistic cell growth inhibition and induction
of apoptosis in NSCLC cell lines carrying the sensitive EGFR mutation. We also
found that KU55933 enhanced the gefitinib-dependent repression of the
phosphorylation of EGFR and/or its downstream factors. ATM inhibition may
facilitate the gefitinib-dependent repression of the phosphorylation of EGFR
and/or its downstream factors, to exert anticancer effects against NSCLC cells
with the sensitive EGFR mutation.

© 2016 The Authors. Cancer Science published by John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd 
on behalf of Japanese Cancer Association.

DOI: 10.1111/cas.12899 
PMCID: PMC4832868
PMID: 26825989  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Med Oncol. 2016 Mar;33(3):22. doi: 10.1007/s12032-016-0735-y. Epub 2016 Jan 28.

The P21-activated kinase expression pattern is different in non-small cell lung
cancer and affects lung cancer cell sensitivity to epidermal growth factor
receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors.

Liu Y(1), Wang S(2), Dong QZ(3), Jiang GY(3), Han Y(3), Wang L(3), Wang EH(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The First Affiliated Hospital and College of Basic
Medical Sciences of China Medical University, Shenyang, 110001, People's Republic
of China. liuyanglovebee@163.com. (2)Department of Medical Microbiology and
Parasitology, College of Basic Medical Sciences of China Medical University,
Shenyang, 110001, People's Republic of China. (3)Department of Pathology, The
First Affiliated Hospital and College of Basic Medical Sciences of China Medical 
University, Shenyang, 110001, People's Republic of China.

Exploring methods for increasing epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase
inhibitor (EGFR-TKI) sensitivity has become a major focus in non-small cell lung 
cancer (NSCLC). Major downstream effectors of the Rho family small guanosine
triphosphatases, P21-activated kinases (PAKs) activate the main signaling
pathways downstream of EGFR and thus promote tumor cell proliferation. In this
study, we explored the expression pattern of phosphorylated PAKs in NSCLC and
their potential value as drug targets for treating cancer. The expression and
prognostic significance of phosphorylated group I and II PAKs were evaluated in
182 patients with NSCLC. Immunohistochemical analysis revealed low group I PAK
expression in normal lung tissues and increased expressed in the cytoplasm,
particularly in lung squamous cell carcinoma. Abnormal group I PAK expression was
associated with lymph node metastases and high tumor-node-metastases (TNM) stage 
in NSCLC patients and correlated with poor prognosis. We used group I PAK
inhibitor (IPA3) to specifically decrease group I PAK activity in human lung
cancer cell lines. Decreased group I PAK activity inhibited cell proliferation
and combined IPA3 and EGFR-TKI (gefitinib) treatment inhibited cell proliferation
in an obvious manner. Together, our results revealed the PAK expression pattern
in NSCLC, and a role for group I PAK in cell proliferation, which provides
evidence that decreased PAK activity may have a potential application as a
molecular targeted therapy in advanced NSCLC.

DOI: 10.1007/s12032-016-0735-y 
PMID: 26820570  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Thorac Cancer. 2016 Jan;7(1):61-5. doi: 10.1111/1759-7714.12275. Epub 2015 May
20.

Body mass index and exon 19 mutation as factors predicting the therapeutic
efficacy of gefitinib in patients with epidermal growth factor receptor
mutation-positive non-small cell lung cancer.

Sun H(1), Sun X(2), Zhai X(1), Guo J(3), Liu Y(1), Ying J(4), Wang Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology Cancer Institute (Hospital) Chinese Academy of 
Medical Sciences & Peking Union Medical College Beijing China. (2)Department of
Pathology Rushan County People's Hospital Rushan China. (3)Hexian Affiliated
Memorial Hospital Southern Medical University Guangzhou China. (4)Department of
Pathology, Cancer Institute (Hospital) Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences &
Peking Union Medical College Beijing China.

BACKGROUND: Many randomized clinical trials have demonstrated that epidermal
growth factor receptor-tyrosine kinase inhibitors (EGFR-TKIs) are advantageous
over standard chemotherapy, either as front-line treatment or as further
management of patients with EGFR mutation-positive non-small-cell lung cancer
(NSCLC). However, which subgroup of these patients could benefit more from
EGFR-TKIs needs to be further explored. In the present study, we explored the
predictive factors in such cohorts of patients who received gefitinib.
METHODS: The study included 95 patients with EGFR mutation-positive advanced
NSCLC who received gefitinib treatment. Multivariate analysis of progression-free
survival (PFS) was performed using classification and regression tree (CART)
analysis to assess the effect of specific variables on PFS in subgroups of
patients with similar clinical features.
RESULTS: The median PFS in patients with EGFR mutation-positive advanced NSCLC
who received gefitinib treatment was 13.3 months (95% confidence interval
9.4-17.2). CART analysis showed an initial split on body mass index (BMI);
subsequently, three terminal subgroups were formed. The median PFS in the three
subsets ranged from 8.2 to 15.2 months, in which the subgroup with a BMI less
than or equal to 20.8 kg/m(2) had the longest PFS (15.2 months). In addition, PFS
in the EGFR exon 19 mutation group was better than in the other mutation site
group (10.3 vs. 8.2 months).
CONCLUSIONS: BMI and exon 19 mutation may be predictors of PFS in patients with
EGFR mutation-positive advanced NSCLC who receive gefitinib treatment. Both
active EGFR mutation and patient-specific factors may be used to predict the
therapeutic efficacy of EGFR-TKIs.

DOI: 10.1111/1759-7714.12275 
PMCID: PMC4718134
PMID: 26816540  [PubMed]


235. Clin Lung Cancer. 2016 Mar;17(2):150-60. doi: 10.1016/j.cllc.2015.12.004. Epub
2015 Dec 17.

First-Line Pemetrexed Plus Cisplatin Followed by Gefitinib Maintenance Therapy
Versus Gefitinib Monotherapy in East Asian Never-Smoker Patients With Locally
Advanced or Metastatic Nonsquamous Non-Small-cell Lung Cancer: Quality of Life
Results From a Randomized Phase III Trial.

Boye M(1), Wang X(2), Srimuninnimit V(3), Kang JH(4), Tsai CM(5), Orlando M(6),
Puri T(7), Kim JS(8), Rajan N(9), Yang JC(10).

Author information: 
(1)Global Patient Outcomes and Real World Evidence, Eli Lilly and Company, Lilly 
Corporate Center, Indianapolis, IN. (2)Eli Lilly and Company, Shanghai, China.
(3)Division of Medical Oncology, Faculty of Medicine, Siriraj Hospital, Mahidol
University, Bangkok, Thailand. (4)Division of Medical Oncology, Department of
Internal Medicine, Seoul St. Mary's Hospital, College of Medicine, The Catholic
University of Korea, Seoul, Republic of Korea. (5)Division of Thoracic Oncology, 
Department of Chest Medicine, Taipei Veterans General Hospital and Department of 
Medicine, School of Medicine, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(6)Eli Lilly Interamerica Inc., Buenos Aires, Argentina. (7)Eli Lilly and
Company, Gurgaon, India. (8)Eli Lilly and Company, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(9)Eli Lilly Australia, West Ryde, NSW, Australia. (10)Department of Oncology,
National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan. Electronic address:
chihyang@ntu.edu.tw.

BACKGROUND: The efficacy results from an open-label, randomized, multicenter
study found no significant difference in progression-free survival between
pemetrexed plus cisplatin followed by maintenance gefitinib (PC/G) and gefitinib 
monotherapy (G) in patients with advanced nonsquamous non-small-cell lung cancer 
(NSCLC) and unknown epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutation status
(hazard ratio favored PC/G). The present report describes the quality of life
(QoL) results from that trial.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Chemotherapy-naive, East Asian, light ex-smokers or
never-smokers with advanced nonsquamous NSCLC and unknown EGFR mutation status (n
= 236) were randomly assigned (1:1) to PC/G or G. EGFR mutation status was
subsequently determined for 74 patients. The symptoms and QoL were assessed using
the Lung Cancer Symptom Scale (LCSS). The time to worsening of symptoms (TWS) was
analyzed using the Kaplan-Meier method.
RESULTS: In the overall population, the TWS was generally longer in the G group
(n = 109) than in the PC/G group (n = 109) for the LCSS symptoms classified as
treatment-related (loss of appetite, fatigue) and tumor-related (cough, dyspnea, 
hemoptysis, pain). In the subgroup of patients with wild-type EGFR, the TWS was
generally longer in the PC/G group (n = 13) than in the G group (n = 8) for the
tumor-related LCSS symptoms.
CONCLUSION: In this study population clinically selected to respond to gefitinib,
the LCSS scores were more favorable in the G group than in the PC/G group.
Patients with wild-type EGFR tended to show greater improvement in tumor-related 
LCSS symptoms with chemotherapy than with gefitinib alone. These LCSS outcomes
provide further evidence that patients with wild-type EGFR might not benefit from
first-line treatment of advanced NSCLC with gefitinib.

Copyright © 2016 Eli Lilly and Company. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cllc.2015.12.004 
PMID: 26809984  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Gan To Kagaku Ryoho. 2016 Jan;43(1):91-4.

[Successful Treatment of Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer with Afatinib after
Gefitinib-Induced Hepatotoxicity].

[Article in Japanese]

Imai A(1), Hachiya T, Ikuyama Y, Sonehara K, Fujimori A, Shiba H, Atobe O.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Pharmacy, Japanese Red Cross Society Suwa Hospital.

A 71-year-old man was referred to our hospital for treatment of non-small-cell
lung cancer (adenocarcinoma of the lungs, with multiple bone metastases,
cT1bN0M1b, harboring an EGFR mutation [exon 19 deletion]). Gefitinib was
administered as daily oral doses of 250 mg. After 18 days, gefitinib was
discontinued because of hepatotoxicity (Grade 3). Forty days later, afatinib was 
administered as daily oral doses of 40 mg. Within 1 year, the primary tumor and
bone metastases achieved a partial response without hepatotoxicity. We suggest
that afatinib is an effective and well-tolerated treatment option for patients
with hepatotoxicity under gefitinib treatment.


PMID: 26809532  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Zhongguo Fei Ai Za Zhi. 2016 Jan;19(1):24-9. doi:
10.3779/j.issn.1009-3419.2016.01.03.

[Mechanism of TRIM24 to Regulate Resistance of Gefitinib in NSCLC cells].

[Article in Chinese; Abstract available in Chinese from the publisher]

Li H(1), Wang Q(1), Bao H(1), Zhang H(1), Zhuang Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, College of Basic Medical Science, Xuzhou Medical
College, Xuzhou 221000, China.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase
inhibitor (EGFR-TKI) resistance significantly limits its use in clinical
practice. Study found that TRIM24 was overexpressed in non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC) tissues and regulate cell growth, cell cycle and apoptosis in lung cell
lines. The aim of this study is to explore the mechanism of TRIM24 to regulate
resistance of Gefitinib in NSCLC cells.
METHODS: MTT and apoptosis were used to detect the change of cell grow and cell
apoptosis with down-expression TRIM24 and ShTRIM24 with presence of Gefitinib.
Meanwhile, Western blot was used to detect the expression of protein related to
apoptosis and AKT signal path.
RESULTS: TRIM24 interference could improve the effect of gefitinib on cell growth
inhibition and upregulate the cell apoptosis in A549 cell. Down-regulated of
endogenous TRIM24 and ShTRIM24 with Gifitinib could also reduce the protein
related apoptosis, such as p-BAD and Bcl-2, and the protein PIK3CA related AKT
signal path in A549 cell.
CONCLUSIONS: TRIM24 could regulate required resistance to Gefitinib via Akt
pathway in NSCLC.

Publisher: 背景与目的 表皮生长因子受体酪氨酸激酶抑制剂（epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine
kinase inhibitor,
EGFR-TKI）的原发和继发性耐药已成为其在临床肺癌治疗中的拦路虎，在肺癌组织中研究发现TRIM24呈高表达状态，在肺癌细胞中能调控细胞增殖、周期和细胞凋亡，本
研究旨在进一步探讨TRIM24调控肺癌细胞吉非替尼耐药的分子机制。方法
应用MTT方法和流式细胞仪检测干扰TRIM24及干扰TRIM24后加入吉非替尼对肺癌细胞系增殖能力及凋亡率的抑制率的变化，同时应用Western
blot方法检测凋亡相关基因的变化及AKT信号通路中蛋白的表达。结果
在A549细胞中使用干扰TRIM24可以提高吉非替尼对肿瘤增殖能力的抑制率，增加吉非替尼诱导的凋亡水平，同时干扰TRIM24及干扰TRIM24加入吉非替尼后促凋亡
相关基因p-BAD、Bcl-2和AKT及AKT信号通路相关蛋白PIK3CA均出现降低。结论
TRIM24能够调控肺癌细胞吉非替尼耐药，并且通过AKT信号通路引起肺癌细胞EGFR-TKI耐药。.
DOI: 10.3779/j.issn.1009-3419.2016.01.03 
PMID: 26805734  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. J Chromatogr B Analyt Technol Biomed Life Sci. 2016 Feb 1;1011:215-22. doi:
10.1016/j.jchromb.2016.01.006. Epub 2016 Jan 8.

Simultaneous determination of gefitinib and its major metabolites in mouse plasma
by HPLC-MS/MS and its application to a pharmacokinetics study.

Zheng N(1), Zhao C(2), He XR(2), Jiang ST(2), Han SY(3), Xu GB(1), Li PP(4).

Author information: 
(1)Key laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Translational Research (Ministry of
Education), Beijing 100142, PR China; National Drug Clinical Trial Center, Peking
University Cancer Hospital & Institute, Beijing 100142, PR China. (2)Key
laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Translational Research (Ministry of Education), 
Beijing 100142, PR China; Department of Integration of Chinese and Western
Medicine, Peking University Cancer Hospital & Institute, Beijing 100142, PR
China. (3)Key laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Translational Research (Ministry
of Education), Beijing 100142, PR China; Department of Integration of Chinese and
Western Medicine, Peking University Cancer Hospital & Institute, Beijing 100142, 
PR China. Electronic address: shuyanhan@bjmu.edu.cn. (4)Key laboratory of
Carcinogenesis and Translational Research (Ministry of Education), Beijing
100142, PR China; Department of Integration of Chinese and Western Medicine,
Peking University Cancer Hospital & Institute, Beijing 100142, PR China.
Electronic address: lppma123@sina.com.

Gefitinib (Iressa) is the first oral EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor and it brings
benefits to non-small cell lung cancer patients with EGFR mutation. In this
study, a simple, rapid and credible high performance liquid chromatography-tandem
mass spectrometry method was established and validated for the simultaneous
quantification of gefitinib and its main metabolites M523595, M537194, M387783
and M608236 in NSCLC tumor-bearing mouse plasma. Sample extraction was done by
protein precipitation using acetonitrile containing dasatinib as the internal
standard. The chromatography run time was 6min using an Agilent RRHD SB-C18
column with a gradient of acetonitrile and water (0.1% formic acid, v/v). The
mass analysis was performed by a triple quadrupole mass spectrometry in positive 
multiple reaction monitoring mode. The calibration range was 0.5-100ng/mL for
M608236 and 1-200ng/mL for other analytes with the correlation coefficients
(r(2))≥0.99. For quality control samples, inter- and intra-assay precision was
less than 15% and accuracies ranged from 92.6% to 107.58% for all analytes. The
extraction recoveries were in the range of 86-105% and no significant matrix
effect was observed. This simple and reproducible high-throughput method was
successfully applied to the pharmacokinetic study of gefitinib and its major
metabolites in mouse.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jchromb.2016.01.006 
PMID: 26795401  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Oncotarget. 2016 Feb 16;7(7):8332-40. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.6671.

Assessment of cytology based molecular analysis to guide targeted therapy in
advanced non-small-cell lung cancer.

Li W(1), Zhang Z(1), Guo L(1), Qiu T(1), Ling Y(1), Cao J(1), Guo H(1), Zhao
H(1), Li L(1), Ying J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Cancer Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences 
and Peking Union Medical College, National Cancer Center, Beijing, China.

To investigate the use of molecular testing on cytological specimens in selecting
advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients who are adequate for
targeted treatment, a total of 137 NSCLC cases were analyzed by fluorescence in
situ hybridization (FISH) for anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) rearrangements,
and Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), kirsten rat sarcoma viral oncogene
homolog (KRAS) mutations were evaluated by quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR)
platform combining amplification refractory mutation system (ARMS) primers and
TaqMan probes. Cytological specimens included 91 fine-needle aspirates, 5
fibreoptic bronchoscopic derived samples and 41 pleural effusions. Among 137
NSCLCs analyzed for ALK FISH, 16 (11.7%, of 137) were detected to harbor ALK
rearrangement. FISH positive cases were all defined as adenocarcinoma (ADC)
histologic subtype and the FNA samples showed the highest ALK positive rate
(13.2%, 12/91). Of the 9 ALK FISH positive patients who received crizotinib
treatment, 8 (88.9%) patients exhibited tumor regression. In addition, 60 (44.8%,
of 134) cases were found to harbor EGFR mutations and 22 patients with EGFR
sensitive mutations who received gefitinib or erlotinib treatment showed a median
PFS of 16.0 months. Mutations of KRAS occurred in 8 (6.0%, of 134) cases and this
was mutually exclusive from EGFR mutation. Our results demonstrated that ALK FISH
and EGFR, KRAS mutational analysis on cytological specimens are sensitive methods
for screening advanced stage NSCLC patients who are adequate for targeted
treatment.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.6671 
PMCID: PMC4884996
PMID: 26789109  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Oncol Lett. 2015 Dec;10(6):3385-3392. Epub 2015 Sep 24.

EML4-ALK translocation is associated with early onset of disease and other
clinicopathological features in Chinese female never-smokers with non-small-cell 
lung cancer.

Ren W(1), Zhang BO(2), Ma J(3), Li W(4), Lan J(5), Men H(4), Zhang Q(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, The First Affiliated Hospital of Henan
University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Jinshui, Zhengzhou, Henan 450000,
P.R. China; Department of Histology and Embryology, College of Basic Medicine,
Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, Henan 450052, P.R. China. (2)Department of
Pathology, Affiliated Hospital of Academy of Military Medical Sciences, Fengtai, 
Beijing 100071, P.R. China. (3)The Affiliated Tumor Hospital of Zhengzhou
University, Henan Cancer Hospital, Zhengzhou, Henan 450008, P.R. China.
(4)Department of Pathology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou
University, Zhengzhou, Henan 450052, P.R. China. (5)Department of Pathology, The 
First People's Hospital of Yancheng, Yancheng, Jiangsu 224006, P.R. China.
(6)Department of Histology and Embryology, College of Basic Medicine, Zhengzhou
University, Zhengzhou, Henan 450052, P.R. China.

Non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) with echinoderm microtubule-associated
protein-like 4-anaplastic lymphoma kinase (EML4-ALK) translocation is resistant
to epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs),
including gefitinib and erlotinib, but responds to the ALK-TKI crizotinib.
Characterization of EML4-ALK translocation may provide invaluable information to 
facilitate disease diagnosis and improve the outcome of customized treatment.
Although the occurrence of EML4-ALK translocation is likely to be affected by the
smoking habits and gender of patients, the translocation has not been
characterized extensively in female never-smokers with NSCLC. Therefore, 280
female never-smokers that were diagnosed with NSCLC were enrolled in the present 
study, and characteristics of EML4-ALK translocation, including the frequency,
were determined in these NSCLC patients. EML4-ALK fusion variants were detected
using Multiplex one-step reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction and
subsequently confirmed by DNA sequencing and Vysis ALK Break Apart fluorescence
in situ hybridization analysis. The EML4-ALK fusion variants were detected in 21 
carcinoma tissue specimens, accounting for 7.5% of the enrolled patients. Out of 
these patients with EML4-ALK fusion variants, EML4-ALK fusion variant 1 was
identified in 12 patients, indicating that variant 1 is the most common type of
EML4-ALK fusion gene in the present cohort of patients. ALK mRNA was aberrantly
expressed in all the tissues with EML4-ALK translocation, but not in the
carcinoma tissues without EML4-ALK translocation. In addition, the EML4-ALK
translocation was more frequently found in younger patients. The median age of
patients with EML4-ALK translocation was 50.95±2.29 years, which was
significantly younger (P<0.01) than the median age of the patients without
EML4-ALK translocation (57.15±0.56). The EML4-ALK translocation was detected
exclusively in undifferentiated tumors that were graded as poorly- or
moderately-differentiated carcinomas and suspected to be more malignant compared 
with well-differentiated tumors. In summary, the present study found that 7.5% of
patients with NSCLC that are female never-smokers harbor EML4-ALK translocations,
which are associated with the aberrant expression of ALK mRNA, early onset of
disease and undifferentiated carcinomas.

DOI: 10.3892/ol.2015.3740 
PMCID: PMC4665761
PMID: 26788139  [PubMed]


241. Int J Oncol. 2016 Mar;48(3):937-44. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2016.3331. Epub 2016 Jan 11.

miR-200/ZEB axis regulates sensitivity to nintedanib in non-small cell lung
cancer cells.

Nishijima N(1), Seike M(1), Soeno C(1), Chiba M(1), Miyanaga A(1), Noro R(1),
Sugano T(1), Matsumoto M(1), Kubota K(1), Gemma A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonary Medicine and Oncology, Graduate School of Medicine,
Nippon Medical School, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8603, Japan.

Nintedanib (BIBF1120) is a multi-targeted angiokinase inhibitor and has been
evaluated in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis and advanced non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC) patients in clinical studies. In the present study, we evaluated
the antitumor effects of nintedanib in 16 NSCLC cell lines and tried to identify 
microRNA (miRNA) associated with sensitivity to nintedanib. No correlations
between FGFR, PDGFR and VEGFR family activation and sensitivity to nintedanib
were found. The difference in miRNA expression profiles between 5
nintedanib-sensitive and 5 nintedanib-resistant cell lines was evaluated by miRNA
array and quantitative RT-PCR analysis (qRT-PCR). Expression of miR-200b,
miR-200a and miR-141 belonging to the miR-200 family which contributes to
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), was significantly lower in 5
nintedanib-resistant than in 5 nintedanib-sensitive cell lines. We examined the
protein expression of EMT markers in these 10 NSCLC cell lines. E-cadherin
expression was lower, and vimentin and ZEB1 expression were higher in 5
nintedanib-resistant cell lines. PC-1 was the most sensitive of the NSCLC cell
lines to nintedanib. We established nintedanib-resistant PC-1 cells (PC-1R) by
the stepwise method. PC-1R cells also showed decreased expression of miR-200b,
miR-141 and miR-429 and increased expression of ZEB1 and ZEB2. We confirmed that 
induction of miR-200b or miR-141 enhanced sensitivity to nintedanib in
nintedanib-resistant A549 and PC1-R cells. In addition, we evaluated the response
to gefitinib in combination with nintedanib after TGF-β1 exposure of A549 cells. 
Nintedanib was able to reverse TGF-β1-induced EMT and resistance to gefitinib
caused by miR-200b and miR-141 upregulation and ZEB1 downregulation. These
results suggested that the miR-200/ZEB axis might be predictive biomarkers for
sensitivity to nintedanib in NSCLC cells. Furthermore, nintedanib combined with
gefitinib might be a novel therapeutic strategy for NSCLC cells with EMT
phenotype and resistance to gefitinib.

DOI: 10.3892/ijo.2016.3331 
PMCID: PMC4750530
PMID: 26783187  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Acad Radiol. 2016 Mar;23(3):329-36. doi: 10.1016/j.acra.2015.11.005. Epub 2016
Jan 8.

Volumetric Tumor Response and Progression in EGFR-mutant NSCLC Patients Treated
with Erlotinib or Gefitinib.

Nishino M(1), Dahlberg SE(2), Fulton LE(3), Digumarthy SR(4), Hatabu H(5),
Johnson BE(6), Sequist LV(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiology, Brigham and Women's Hospital and Dana-Farber Cancer
Institute, Harvard Medical School, 450 Brookline Ave., Boston, MA 02215.
Electronic address: Mizuki_Nishino@DFCI.HARVARD.EDU. (2)Department of
Biostatistics and Computational Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston,
Massachusetts. (3)Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts. (4)Department of Radiology, Massachusetts 
General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts. (5)Department of
Radiology, Brigham and Women's Hospital and Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard
Medical School, 450 Brookline Ave., Boston, MA 02215. (6)Department of Medical
Oncology and Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital and Dana-Farber
Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts.

RATIONALE AND OBJECTIVES: The aims of this study were to investigate the
association between 8-week tumor volume decrease and survival in an independent
cohort of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)-mutant advanced non-small cell 
lung cancer (NSCLC) patients treated with first-line erlotinib or gefitinib, and 
to assess the rate of their volumetric tumor growth after the volume nadir.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: In patients with advanced NSCLC harboring sensitizing EGFR
mutations treated with first-line erlotinib or gefitinib, computed tomography
(CT) tumor volumes of dominant lung lesions were analyzed for (1) the association
with survival, and (2) the volumetric tumor growth rate after the volume nadir.
RESULTS: In 44 patients with the 8-week follow-up CT, the 8-week tumor volume
decrease (%) was significantly associated with longer overall survival when
fitted as a continuous variable in a Cox model (P = 0.01). The growth rate of the
logarithm of tumor volume (logeV), obtained using a linear mixed-effects model
adjusting for time since baseline, was 0.096/month (SE: 0.013/month; 95%
confidence interval [CI]: 0.071-0.12/month), which was similar to the rate of
0.12/month (SE: 0.015/month; 95%CI: 0.090-0.15/month) observed in the previous
report.
CONCLUSIONS: The 8-week tumor volume decrease was validated as a marker for
longer survival in the independent cohort of EGFR-mutant NSCLC patients treated
with first-line erlotinib or gefitinib. The volumetric tumor growth rate after
the nadir in this cohort was similar to that of the previous cohort, indicating
the reproducibility of the observation among different patient cohorts.

Copyright © 2015 The Association of University Radiologists. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.acra.2015.11.005 
PMCID: PMC4744559 [Available on 2017-03-01]
PMID: 26776293  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Oncogene. 2016 Aug 18;35(33):4345-57. doi: 10.1038/onc.2015.499. Epub 2016 Jan
18.

Enhanced MAPK signaling drives ETS1-mediated induction of miR-29b leading to
downregulation of TET1 and changes in epigenetic modifications in a subset of
lung SCC.

Taylor MA(1), Wappett M(1), Delpuech O(1), Brown H(2), Chresta CM(1).

Author information: 
(1)AstraZeneca, R&D Oncology iMed, Alderley Park, Macclesfield, UK.
(2)Personalised Healthcare and Biomarkers, AstraZeneca, Alderley Park,
Macclesfield, UK.

Non-small-cell lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer death worldwide and is 
comprised of several histological subtypes, the two most common being
adenocarcinoma (AC) and squamous cell carcinoma (SCC). Targeted therapies have
successfully improved response rates in patients with AC tumors. However, the
majority of SCC tumors lack specific targetable mutations, making development of 
new treatment paradigms for this disease challenging. In the present study, we
used iterative non-negative matrix factorization, an unbiased clustering method, 
on mRNA expression data from the cancer genome atlas (TCGA) and a panel of 24 SCC
cell lines to classify three disease segments within SCC. Analysis of gene set
enrichment and drug sensitivity identified an immune-evasion subtype that showed 
increased sensitivity to nuclear factor-κB and mitogen-activated protein kinase
(MAPK) inhibition, a replication-stress associated subtype that showed increased 
sensitivity to ataxia telangiectasia inhibition, and a neuroendocrine-associated 
subtype that showed increased sensitivity to phosphoinositide 3-kinase and
fibroblast growth factor receptor inhibition. Additionally, each of these
subtypes exhibited a unique microRNA expression profile. Focusing on the
immune-evasion subtype, bioinformatic analysis of microRNA promoters revealed
enrichment for binding sites for the MAPK-driven ETS1 transcription factor.
Indeed, we found that knockdown of ETS1 led to upregulation of eight microRNAs
and downregulation of miR-29b in the immune-evasion subtype. Mechanistically, we 
found that miR-29b targets the DNA-demethylating enzyme, TET1, for downregulation
resulting in decreased 5-hmC epigenetic modifications. Moreover, inhibition of
MAPK signaling by gefitinib led to decreased ETS1 and miR-29b expression with a
corresponding increase in TET1 expression and increase in 5-hmC. Collectively,
our work identifies three subtypes of lung SCC that differ in drug sensitivity
and shows a novel mechanism of miR-29b regulation by MAPK-driven ETS1 expression 
which leads to downstream changes in TET1-mediated epigenetic modifications.

DOI: 10.1038/onc.2015.499 
PMCID: PMC4994018
PMID: 26776158  [PubMed - in process]


244. Ann Pathol. 2016 Jan;36(1):63-72. doi: 10.1016/j.annpat.2015.11.002. Epub 2016
Jan 6.

[News about targeted therapies in non-small-cell lung cancer in 2015 (except
immuno-therapy)].

[Article in French]

Hamard C(1), Ruppert AM(2), Lavole A(3), Rozensztajn N(3), Antoine M(4), Cadranel
J(2), Wislez M(5).

Author information: 
(1)GRC 04 UPMC, hôpital Tenon, Assistance Publique-hôpitaux de Paris, 4, rue de
la Chine, 75970 Paris cedex 20, France. (2)GRC 04 UPMC, hôpital Tenon, Assistance
Publique-hôpitaux de Paris, 4, rue de la Chine, 75970 Paris cedex 20, France;
Service de pneumologie, hôpital Tenon, Assistance Publique-hôpitaux de Paris, 4, 
rue de la Chine, 75970 Paris cedex 20, France. (3)Service de pneumologie, hôpital
Tenon, Assistance Publique-hôpitaux de Paris, 4, rue de la Chine, 75970 Paris
cedex 20, France. (4)Service de pneumologie, hôpital Tenon, Assistance
Publique-hôpitaux de Paris, 4, rue de la Chine, 75970 Paris cedex 20, France;
Service d'anatomie-pathologique, hôpital Tenon, Assistance Publique-hôpitaux de
Paris, 4, rue de la Chine, 75970 Paris cedex 20, France. (5)GRC 04 UPMC, hôpital 
Tenon, Assistance Publique-hôpitaux de Paris, 4, rue de la Chine, 75970 Paris
cedex 20, France; Service de pneumologie, hôpital Tenon, Assistance
Publique-hôpitaux de Paris, 4, rue de la Chine, 75970 Paris cedex 20, France.
Electronic address: marie.wislez@tnn.aphp.fr.

Recently, developments of therapies that target abnormally activated signaling
pathways are increasing for patients with non-small cell lung cancer. EGFR
mutations are found in about 10% of lung cancers, especially in adenocarcinoma,
women and non-smokers. Three EGFR inhibitors (erlotinib, gefitinib and afatinib) 
received a European marketing authorization for up to first line treatment of
EGFR mutated NSCLC. Effectiveness of EGFR inhibitors is higher than conventional 
chemotherapy. Third generation EGFR inhibitors (rociletinib, AZD9291) are
effective for patients who develop a resistance mutation such as T790M resistance
mutation; they obtained temporary authorization for use in France in 2015. The
EML4-ALK translocation is found in about 5% of NSCLC and more particularly in
adenocarcinoma of young non-smoking patients. Crizotinib is a new therapeutic
standard in ALK translocated NSCLC in second line. Ceritinib is a 2nd generation 
ALK inhibitor which received a European marketing authorization for up to
treatment of ALK translocated NSCLC after progression with crizotinib. INCA
supports ACSé program evaluating the efficacy of crizotinib in NSCLC amplified
for MET or translocated for ROS1 and ACSé program evaluating the efficacy of
vemurafenib in tumors non melanoma mutated V600E BRAF. The role of other
biomarkers such as KRAS, BRAF, HER2 and PI3KCA mutations remains to be defined in
NSCLC.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.annpat.2015.11.002 
PMID: 26775573  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Oncotarget. 2016 Feb 9;7(6):6748-64. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.6826.

TOPK promotes lung cancer resistance to EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors by
phosphorylating and activating c-Jun.

Li Y(1), Yang Z(2,)(3), Li W(1), Xu S(1,)(4), Wang T(5), Wang T(6), Niu M(1),
Zhang S(2), Jia L(6), Li S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Xijing Hospital, Fourth
Military Medical University, Xi'an, China. (2)Department of Applied Physics,
School of Science, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, China. (3)Engineering
Research Center of Forest Bio-preparation, Ministry of Education, Northeast
Forestry University, Harbin, China. (4)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Xi'an
Ninth Hospital, Xi'an, China. (5)Department of Neurology, Shaanxi Provincial
People's Hospital, Xi'an, China. (6)State Key Laboratory of Cancer Biology,
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Fourth Military Medical
University, Xi'an, China.

Tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) targeting the epidermal growth factor receptor 
(EGFR) have shown promising clinical efficacy in non-squamous non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC); however, resistance is frequently observed in malignant cells,
operating through a mechanism that remains largely unknown. The present study
shows that T-lymphokine-activated killer cell-originated protein kinase (TOPK) is
upregulated in NSCLC and excessively activated in TKI-refractory cells. TOPK
dictates the responsiveness of lung cancers to the EGFR-targeted TKI gefitinib
through the transcription factor AP-1 component c-Jun. TOPK binds directly to and
phosphorylates c-Jun, which consequently activates the transcription of AP-1
target genes, including CCND1 and CDC2. TOPK silencing sensitizes
EGFR-TKI-resistant lung cancer cells to gefitinib and increases gefitinib
efficacy in preclinical lung adenocarcinoma xenograft models. These findings
represent a novel mechanism of lung cancer resistance to TKIs and suggest that
TOPK may have value both as a predictive biomarker and as a therapeutic target:
TOPK-targeted therapy may synergize with EGFR-targeted therapy in lung cancers.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.6826 
PMCID: PMC4872746
PMID: 26745678  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Respir Med Case Rep. 2015 Jun 25;16:32-4. doi: 10.1016/j.rmcr.2015.06.006.
eCollection 2015.

Unexpected responses to EGFR inhibition in NSCLC.

Stella GM(1), Valizia C(1), Zorzetto M(1), Inghilleri S(1), Valentini A(2), Dore 
R(2), Colombo S(3), Valentino F(4), Orlandoni G(5), Morbini P(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Laboratory of Biochemistry and Genetics,
Pneumology Unit, University and Fondazione IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo, Pavia,
Italy. (2)Institute of Radiology, Fondazione IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo, Pavia,
Italy. (3)Department of Hemato-oncology, Radiation Therapy, Fondazione IRCCS
Policlinico San Matteo, Pavia, Italy. (4)Department of Hemato-oncology, Medical
Oncology, Fondazione IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo, Pavia, Italy.
(5)Cardiothoracic Surgery Unit, Fondazione IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo, Pavia,
Italy. (6)Department of Molecular Medicine, Section of Pathology, University of
Pavia and Foundation IRCCS Policlinico S. Matteo, Pavia, Italy.

The presence of activating mutations of the epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR)-gene identifies a distinct and clinically relevant molecular subset of
non-small-cell lung cancer. It is now well demonstrated that EGFR tyrosine kinase
inhibitors (TKIs) gefitinib and erlotinib are superior to standard chemotherapy
in this subset of tumors. Nevertheless, in many cases, responses are not durable 
and last for 6-12 months due to the occurrence of secondary or acquired
resistance. Here we present three cases of EGFR-mutant lung adenocarcinomas
(ADC), that showed an unexpected response to anti-EGFR small molecules. The first
patient presented a continued 89 month-long response to erlotinib in a tumor
recurred after surgery and conventional chemotherapy. In the other cases,
subclinically persistent tumor in the lung tissue was documented histologically
in lung resections performed after partial response to TKI treatment. The
persistence of interstitial and endolymphatic tumor cells after TKI treatment
might explain the common observation of tumor relapse after TKI discontinuation, 
and sustain the decision to continue treatment in responsive patients as in our
first case.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmcr.2015.06.006 
PMCID: PMC4681892
PMID: 26744648  [PubMed]


247. J Thorac Oncol. 2016 Mar;11(3):370-9. doi: 10.1016/j.jtho.2015.11.008. Epub 2015 
Dec 25.

First-Line Pemetrexed plus Cisplatin followed by Gefitinib Maintenance Therapy
versus Gefitinib Monotherapy in East Asian Never-Smoker Patients with Locally
Advanced or Metastatic Nonsquamous Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer: Final Overall
Survival Results from a Randomized Phase 3 Study.

Yang JC(1), Srimuninnimit V(2), Ahn MJ(3), Lin CC(4), Kim SW(5), Tsai CM(6), Mok 
T(7), Orlando M(8), Puri T(9), Wang X(10), Park K(3).

Author information: 
(1)National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan. Electronic address:
chihyang@ntu.edu.tw. (2)Siriraj Hospital, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand. 
(3)Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Seoul,
Republic of Korea. (4)National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.
(5)Asan Medical Center, University of Ulsan College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic 
of Korea. (6)Taipei Veterans General Hospital and National Yang-Ming University, 
Shi-Pai, Taipei, Taiwan. (7)Prince of Wales Hospital, Sha Tin, Hong Kong. (8)Eli 
Lilly Interamerica Inc., Buenos Aires, Argentina. (9)Eli Lilly and Company,
Gurgaon, Haryana, India. (10)Eli Lilly and Company, Shanghai, China.

INTRODUCTION: The primary analysis of this open-label, randomized, multicenter
phase 3 study revealed no significant difference in progression-free survival
between pemetrexed plus cisplatin followed by maintenance gefitinib (PC/G) and
gefitinib monotherapy (G) in patients with advanced nonsquamous non-small cell
lung cancer (NSCLC) and unknown epidermal growth factor receptor gene (EGFR)
mutation status; however, the hazard ratio favored PC/G. This report describes
the final overall survival (OS) results.
METHODS: Chemonaive, East Asian light ex-smokers/never-smokers with advanced
nonsquamous NSCLC and unknown EGFR mutation status were randomized (1:1) to PC/G 
(n = 118) or G (n = 118). EGFR mutation status was retrospectively determined for
76 patients, 52 (68.4%) of whom had EGFR-mutated tumors (exon 19 deletions in 26 
and L858R point mutation in 24). OS was analyzed by the Kaplan-Meier method. The 
study was registered at ClinicalTrials.gov (NCT01017874).
RESULTS: Median OS was similar in the PC/G (26.9 months) and G (27.9 months)
groups (hazard ratio = 0.94, 95% confidence interval: 0.68-1.31, p = 0.717).
Median OS was longer with PC/G than with G in patients with EGFR wild-type tumors
(28.4 versus 8.9 months) and longer with G than with PC/G in patients with
EGFR-mutated tumors (45.7 versus 32.4 months), especially those with exon 19
deletions. Second-line postdiscontinuation therapy was common and included
chemotherapy (PC/G, 41 of 118 [34.7%]; G, 73 of 118 [61.9%]) and rechallenge with
an EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor (PC/G, 27 of 118 [22.9%]; G, 9 of 118 [7.6%]).
CONCLUSIONS: The progression-free survival and OS results from this study further
demonstrate the importance of determining EGFR mutation status to select the most
appropriate first-line treatment for patients with advanced NSCLC.

Copyright © 2015 International Association for the Study of Lung Cancer.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jtho.2015.11.008 
PMID: 26725183  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. BMC Res Notes. 2016 Jan 2;9:2. doi: 10.1186/s13104-015-1834-0.

Total regression of brain metastases in non-small cell lung cancer patients
harboring EGFR mutations treated with gefitinib without radiotherapy: two case
reports.

Chonan M(1), Narita N(2), Tominaga T(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Iwaki Kyoritsu Hospital, 16 Kusehara, Uchigo
Mimaya-machi, Iwaki, Fukushima, 973-8555, Japan. masashiko37@yahoo.co.jp.
(2)Department of Neurosurgery, Kesennuma City Hospital, Kesennuma, Miyagi, Japan.
nnarita@mbr.nifty.com. (3)Department of Neurosurgery, Tohoku University School of
Medicine, Sendai, Miyagi, Japan. tomi@nsg.med.tohoku.ac.jp.

BACKGROUND: Gefitinib is an epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase
inhibitor. Clinical trials have reported its effectiveness in the treatment of
brain metastases from non-small cell lung cancer by overcoming the blood-brain
barrier. Gefitinib is generally regarded as a relatively safe agent, and several 
reports have described its efficacy in patients with epidermal growth factor
receptor mutation-positive non-small cell lung cancer and a poor performance
status.
CASE PRESENTATION: We herein described two patients with brain metastasis from
non-small cell lung cancer who achieved the total regression of metastasis with
the administration of gefitinib. A 70-year-old Japanese woman was referred to our
hospital with a severe cough. Brain magnetic resonance imaging revealed a
metastatic lesion in the left temporal lobe. The tumor was positive for an
epidermal growth factor receptor L858R mutation in exon 21 using the peptide
nucleic acid-locked nucleic acid polymerase chain reaction clamp method. She was 
treated with 250 mg gefitinib per day, and, 1 month later, the primary lesion and
brain metastasis had totally resolved. A 58-year-old Japanese woman was referred 
to our hospital with nausea and headache. Brain magnetic resonance imaging
revealed a metastatic lesion in the left cerebellar hemisphere and meningeal
dissemination. The tumor was positive for the epidermal growth factor receptor
L858R mutation in exon 21. She was treated with 250 mg gefitinib per day, and, 3 
weeks later, the primary lesion, brain metastasis, and meningeal dissemination
had completely resolved.
CONCLUSION: We successfully treated two lung cancer patients with brain
metastasis using gefitinib. Gefitinib therapy may be a suitable treatment for
brain metastasis in lung cancer with an epidermal growth factor receptor
mutation, particularly in elderly patients with a poor performance status.

DOI: 10.1186/s13104-015-1834-0 
PMCID: PMC4698324
PMID: 26724810  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. J Thorac Oncol. 2016 Apr;11(4):556-65. doi: 10.1016/j.jtho.2015.12.103. Epub 2015
Dec 25.

Five-Year Survival in EGFR-Mutant Metastatic Lung Adenocarcinoma Treated with
EGFR-TKIs.

Lin JJ(1), Cardarella S(2), Lydon CA(3), Dahlberg SE(4), Jackman DM(5), Jänne
PA(5), Johnson BE(6).

Author information: 
(1)Lowe Center for Thoracic Oncology, Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber
Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts; Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts. (2)Lowe Center for Thoracic Oncology, Department of Medical
Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts; Department of
Medicine, Rhode Island Hospital, Providence, Rhode Island. (3)Lowe Center for
Thoracic Oncology, Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, 
Boston, Massachusetts. (4)Department of Biostatistics, Dana-Farber Cancer
Institute, Boston, Massachusetts. (5)Lowe Center for Thoracic Oncology,
Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston,
Massachusetts; Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts; Department of
Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts. (6)Lowe Center for
Thoracic Oncology, Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, 
Boston, Massachusetts; Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts;
Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts. Electronic
address: bejohnson@partners.org.

Comment in
    Transl Lung Cancer Res. 2016 Dec;5(6):727-730.

INTRODUCTION: Activating mutations in the epidermal growth factor receptor gene
(EGFR) predict for prolonged progression-free survival in patients with advanced 
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) treated with EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors
(EGFR-TKIs) versus chemotherapy. Long-term survival outcomes, however, remain
undefined. The objective of this study was to determine the 5-year survival in
these patients and identify clinical factors associated with overall survival
(OS).
METHODS: Patients with EGFR-mutant metastatic lung adenocarcinoma who had been
treated with erlotinib or gefitinib at Dana-Farber Cancer Institute between 2002 
and 2009 were included. OS was analyzed.
RESULTS: Among 137 patients, median progression-free survival and OS were 12.1
months (95% CI: 10.2-13.5) and 30.9 months (95% CI: 28.2-35.7), respectively.
Twenty patients (14.6%) were 5-year survivors. In multivariate analysis, exon 19 
deletions (hazard ratio [HR] = 0.63, 95% CI: 0.44-0.91, p = 0.01), absence of
extrathoracic (HR = 0.62, 95% CI: 0.41-0.93, p = 0.02) or brain metastasis (HR = 
0.48, 95% CI: 0.30-0.77, p = 0.002), and not a current smoker (HR = 0.23, 95% CI:
0.09-0.59, p = 0.002) were associated with prolonged OS. Age; sex; stage at
diagnosis; liver, bone, or adrenal metastasis; specific TKI; and line of TKI
therapy were not associated with OS.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest that the rate of 5-year survival among patients
with EGFR-mutant metastatic lung adenocarcinoma treated with erlotinib or
gefitinib is 14.6%. Exon 19 deletions and absence of extrathoracic or brain
metastasis are associated with prolonged survival. On the basis of our findings, 
clinicians can gain an enhanced estimation of long-term outcomes in this
population.

Copyright © 2015 International Association for the Study of Lung Cancer.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jtho.2015.12.103 
PMCID: PMC4979601
PMID: 26724471  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Onco Targets Ther. 2015 Dec 18;9:13-20. doi: 10.2147/OTT.S94108. eCollection
2016.

Epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors with conventional
chemotherapy for the treatment of non-small cell lung cancer.

Gao Y(1), Song P(1), Li H(1), Guo H(1), Jia H(2), Zhang B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Shandong Cancer Hospital and Institute, Jinan,
Shandong Province, People's Republic of China. (2)Department of Medical Oncology,
Shandong Cancer Hospital and Institute, Jinan, Shandong Province, People's
Republic of China.

We report a Chinese male patient with advanced stage lung squamous cell carcinoma
who developed brain metastases after responding to treatment comprising six
cycles of conventional chemotherapy with docetaxel and cisplatin. The patient was
then treated with oral erlotinib (150 mg/day) and whole-brain radiation therapy
followed by four cycles of docetaxel and carboplatin chemotherapy. The patient
then received gefitinib (250 mg/day) as a maintenance therapy until the end of
the follow-up period. In this patient, progression-free survival, defined as the 
interval from the initiation of first-line chemotherapy to the cessation of
erlotinib due to progressive disease or death from any cause, was 3 months.
Overall survival, defined as the interval from the initiation of first-line
chemotherapy to death from any cause, was 75 months. Erlotinib was well tolerated
in combination with whole-brain radiation therapy and a favorable objective
response rate was observed. Furthermore, targeted drug treatment warrants
consideration in patients with a negative epidermal growth factor receptor
mutation status and male patients with a history of smoking.

DOI: 10.2147/OTT.S94108 
PMCID: PMC4690645
PMID: 26719713  [PubMed]


251. Clin Lung Cancer. 2016 Jul;17(4):245-252.e1. doi: 10.1016/j.cllc.2015.11.012.
Epub 2015 Nov 30.

Serum Neuron-Specific Enolase Levels Predict the Efficacy of First-Line Epidermal
Growth Factor Receptor (EGFR) Tyrosine Kinase Inhibitors in Patients With
Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer Harboring EGFR Mutations.

Suh KJ(1), Keam B(2), Kim M(1), Park YS(1), Kim TM(3), Jeon YK(4), Kim DW(3),
Chung DH(4), Kim YW(1), Heo DS(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul,
Korea. (2)Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul National University Hospital,
Seoul, Korea; Cancer Research Institute, Seoul National University College of
Medicine, Seoul, Korea. Electronic address: bhumsuk@snu.ac.kr. (3)Department of
Internal Medicine, Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul, Korea; Cancer
Research Institute, Seoul National University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea. 
(4)Department of Pathology, Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul, Korea.

OBJECTIVES: Our study aimed to determine the predictive and prognostic values of 
the serum neuron-specific enolase (NSE) level in patients who had non-small cell 
lung cancer (NSCLC) harboring epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutations
and who had been treated with EGFR-tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We retrospectively analyzed 151 patients who had NSCLC
harboring EGFR mutations and had received either gefitinib or erlotinib as
first-line treatment between 2005 and 2014. The serum NSE level was measured
before initiation of EGFR-TKI treatment.
RESULTS: Of the 151 patients, 92 (60.9%) had elevated NSE levels (> 16.3 ng/mL). 
Patients with elevated NSE levels showed significantly shorter progression-free
survival (PFS) after EGFR-TKI treatment than those with normal NSE levels (median
PFS, 10.5 months vs. 15.4 months; P = .034). Multivariate analysis demonstrated
that elevated NSE levels (hazard ratio [HR], 1.656; P = .017), CNS metastasis at 
diagnosis (HR, 1.567; P = .037), and male gender (HR, 1.840; P = .005) were
independent predictive factors for short PFS. A significant difference in overall
survival (OS) was observed between patient groups with elevated and normal NSE
levels (median OS, 17.0 months vs. 29.1 months; P < .001), and serum NSE level
remained an independent prognostic factor for OS in multivariate analysis (HR,
2.671; P < .001).
CONCLUSION: Patients with elevated serum NSE levels have significantly shorter
PFS and OS. The NSE level is both a predictive marker of EGFR-TKI treatment and a
prognostic marker in EGFR-mutant NSCLC patients.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cllc.2015.11.012 
PMID: 26719155  [PubMed - in process]


252. Int J Oncol. 2016 Jan;48(1):45-54. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2015.3237. Epub 2015 Nov 9.

Macrolides sensitize EGFR-TKI-induced non-apoptotic cell death via blocking
autophagy flux in pancreatic cancer cell lines.

Mukai S(1), Moriya S(2), Hiramoto M(2), Kazama H(2), Kokuba H(3), Che XF(2),
Yokoyama T(4), Sakamoto S(5), Sugawara A(6), Sunazuka T(6), Ōmura S(6), Handa
H(7), Itoi T(1), Miyazawa K(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Tokyo Medical University,
Tokyo, Japan. (2)Department of Biochemistry, Tokyo Medical University, Tokyo,
Japan. (3)Laboratory of Electron Microscopy, Tokyo Medical University, Tokyo,
Japan. (4)Department of Clinical Oncology, Tokyo Medical University, Tokyo,
Japan. (5)Department of Biological Information, Graduate School of Bioscience and
Biotechnology, Tokyo Institute of Technology, Yokohama, Japan. (6)Kitasato
Institute for Life Sciences and Graduate School of Infection Control Sciences,
Kitasato University, Tokyo, Japan. (7)Department of Nanoparticle Translational
Research, Tokyo Medical University, Tokyo, Japan.

Pancreatic cancer is one of the most difficult types of cancer to treat because
of its high mortality rate due to chemotherapy resistance. We previously reported
that combined treatment with gefitinib (GEF) and clarithromycin (CAM) results in 
enhanced cytotoxicity of GEF along with endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress loading
in non-small cell lung cancer cell lines. An epidermal growth factor receptor
tyrosine kinase inhibitor (EGFR-TKI) such as GEF induces autophagy in a
pro-survival role, whereas CAM inhibits autophagy flux in various cell lines.
Pronounced GEF-induced cytotoxicity therefore appears to depend on the efficacy
of autophagy inhibition. In the present study, we compared the effect on
autophagy inhibition among such macrolides as CAM, azithromycin (AZM), and EM900,
a novel 12-membered non-antibiotic macrolide. We then assessed the enhanced
GEF-induced cytotoxic effect on pancreatic cancer cell lines BxPC-3 and PANC-1.
Autophagy flux analysis indicated that AZM is the most effective autophagy
inhibitor of the three macrolides. CAM exhibits an inhibitory effect but less
than AZM and EM900. Notably, the enhancing effect of GEF-induced cytotoxicity by 
combining macrolides correlated well with their efficient autophagy inhibition.
However, this pronounced cytotoxicity was not due to upregulation of apoptosis
induction, but was at least partially mediated through necroptosis. Our data
suggest the possibility of using macrolides as 'chemosensitizers' for EGFR-TKI
therapy in pancreatic cancer patients to enhance non-apoptotic tumor cell death
induction.

DOI: 10.3892/ijo.2015.3237 
PMCID: PMC4734605
PMID: 26718641  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Respir Investig. 2016 Jan;54(1):14-9. doi: 10.1016/j.resinv.2015.07.001. Epub
2015 Aug 30.

Diagnostic significance of cerebrospinal fluid EGFR mutation analysis for
leptomeningeal metastasis in non-small-cell lung cancer patients harboring an
active EGFR mutation following gefitinib therapy failure.

Sasaki S(1), Yoshioka Y(2), Ko R(3), Katsura Y(3), Namba Y(3), Shukuya T(3), Kido
K(4), Iwakami S(5), Tominaga S(2), Takahashi K(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Juntendo University Urayasu Hospital,
2-1-1 Tomioka, Urayasu-shi, Chiba 279-0021, Japan. Electronic address:
ssasaki@juntendo-urayasu.jp. (2)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Juntendo
University Urayasu Hospital, 2-1-1 Tomioka, Urayasu-shi, Chiba 279-0021, Japan.
(3)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Juntendo University, Graduate School of
Medicine, Tokyo, Japan. (4)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Juntendo
University Nerima Hospital, Tokyo, Japan. (5)Department of Respiratory Medicine, 
Juntendo University Shizuoka Hospital, Shizuoka, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase inhibitors
(TKIs) have been successfully used to treat patients with non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC) harboring EGFR mutations. However, despite an initial excellent
response, recurrence within one or two years is common. Diagnosis and treatment
of leptomeningeal metastasis (LM), a form of NSCLC recurrence, remains
particularly difficult. Here, we analyzed the EGFR mutation status of
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) directly using real-time polymerase chain reaction
(PCR) and evaluated the efficacy of therapy with erlotinib, an EGFR TKI.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Seven NSCLC patients harboring activating EGFR mutations
who had developed LM during or after therapy with gefitinib, an EGFR TKI, were
retrospectively analyzed. CSF was obtained and subjected to cytological
examination and EGFR mutation analysis, including detection of the
resistance-associated T790M mutation, using real-time PCR.
RESULTS: In all seven cases, the EGFR mutation detected in the CSF was the same
as that detected in the primary tumor (sensitivity, 100%). Conversely, cytology
results were positive in only two patients (sensitivity, 28.6%). No additional
T790M mutations were detected. Erlotinib was efficacious in all cases, and
improved performance status was achieved for five of the seven patients. The
effect of erlotinib treatment was temporary, however, with time to treatment
failure (TTF) ranging from 29 to 278 days (median, 65 days) and the interval
between commencement of erlotinib treatment and death ranging from 45 to 347 days
(median, 168 days).
CONCLUSIONS: Analysis of EGFR mutations in CSF using a highly sensitive real-time
PCR assay is a potentially powerful diagnostic method for LM.

Copyright © 2015 The Japanese Respiratory Society. Published by Elsevier B.V. All
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.resinv.2015.07.001 
PMID: 26718140  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Clin Lung Cancer. 2016 Jul;17(4):263-270.e2. doi: 10.1016/j.cllc.2015.11.006.
Epub 2015 Dec 1.

Change in PD-L1 Expression After Acquiring Resistance to Gefitinib in EGFR-Mutant
Non-Small-Cell Lung Cancer.

Han JJ(1), Kim DW(2), Koh J(3), Keam B(1), Kim TM(1), Jeon YK(3), Lee SH(1),
Chung DH(3), Heo DS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul,
Korea; Cancer Research Institute, Seoul National University College of Medicine, 
Seoul, Korea. (2)Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul National University
Hospital, Seoul, Korea; Cancer Research Institute, Seoul National University
College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea. Electronic address: kimdw@snu.ac.kr.
(3)Department of Pathology, Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul, Korea.

INTRODUCTION: Therapies targeting programmed cell death-1 (PD-1) and its ligand
(PD-L1) have been successful in a subset of patients with non-small-cell lung
cancer (NSCLC). PD-L1 expression in tumor tissues has been suggested as a
predictive and prognostic marker. We examined the change in PD-L1 expression
after gefitinib in patients with EGFR-mutant NSCLC.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Paired tumor tissues were collected before and after
gefitinib from 18 patients. PD-L1 expression on the tumor and immune cells was
defined by the H-score of immunohistochemical staining (range, 0-300). The
correlations between the change in PD-L1 expression and clinicopathologic
characteristics were analyzed.
RESULTS: PD-L1 expression on tumor cells showed an increase in the median H-score
from 25 to 40 (P = .067). Of the 18 patients, 7 (38.9%) had a marked increase in 
the median H-score (range, 80-180; group A) and 11 (61.1%) had no change in the
median H-score (0 for both scores; group B). In groups A and B, the median
progression-free survival for gefitinib was 13 and 12 months (P = .594), and the 
median overall survival was "not reached" and 38 months (P = .073), respectively.
MET positivity by immunohistochemistry in biopsies after gefitinib therapy was
significantly associated with group A (P = .028). The PD-L1 H-score by
immunohistochemistry, but not by tumor cells, showed correlations with other
immune cells; FOXP3(+) expression in biopsies before gefitinib use, and PD-1(+)
and CD3(+) in biopsies after gefitinib therapy, respectively.
CONCLUSION: PD-L1 expression in tumor cells markedly increased in a subset of
patients after gefitinib treatment. Thus, rebiopsy should be considered when
using PD-L1 expression as a biomarker.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cllc.2015.11.006 
PMID: 26707383  [PubMed - in process]


255. Zhongguo Fei Ai Za Zhi. 2015 Dec;18(12):734-9. doi:
10.3779/j.issn.1009-3419.2015.12.04.

[Clinical Observation of Icotinib Hydrochloride for Advanced Non-small Cell Lung 
Cancer Patients with EGFR Status Identified].

[Article in Chinese; Abstract available in Chinese from the publisher]

Li X(1), Qin N(1), Wang J(1), Yang X(1), Zhang X(1), Lv J(1), Wu Y(1), Zhang
H(1), Nong J(1), Zhang Q(1), Zhang S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Beijing Chest Hospital, Capital Medical
University, Beijing 101149, China.

BACKGROUND: Icotinib is the first self-developed small molecular drug in China
for targeted therapy of lung cancer. Compared to the other two commercially
available epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase inhibitors,
gefitinib and erlotinib, icotinib is similar to them in chemical structure,
mechanism of activity and therapeutic effects. To explore the efficacy and side
effects of icotinib hydrochloride in the treatment of the advanced non-small cell
lung cancer (NSCLC) patients with EGFR mutation and wild-type.
METHODS: Patients with advanced NSCLC who were treated with icotinib
hydrochloride in Beijing Chest Hospital were retrospective analyzed from March
2009 to December 2014.
RESULTS: The clinical data of 124 patients (99 with EGFR mutation and 25 with
wild type) with advanced NSCLC were enrolled in this study. The patients' overall
objective response rate (ORR) was 51.6 % and the disease control rate (DCR) was
79.8%; The patients with EGFR mutation, ORR was 63.6%, DCR was 93.9%. The ORR was
4.0% and the DCR was 24.0% in the wild-type patients. Median progression-free
survival (PFS) with icotinib treatment in EGFR mutation patients was 10.5 months 
and 1.0 month in wild-type patients. The major adverse events were mild skin rash
(30.6%) and diarrhea (16.1%).
CONCLUSIONS: Monotherapy with icotinib hydrochloride is effective and tolerable
for the advanced NSCLC EGFR mutation patients. 

Publisher: 背景与目的 盐酸埃克替尼（icotinib
hydrochloride）是我国第一个具有自主知识产权的小分子靶向抗癌新药，与吉非替尼和厄洛替尼相比，在化学结构、分子作用机理、疗效等方面相似。本研究观察盐酸埃
克替尼治疗表皮生长因子受体突变状态明确的晚期非小细胞肺癌（non-small cell lung cancer, NSCLC）的疗效和毒副反应。方法
回顾性分析2009年3月-2014年12月间北京胸科医院收治的晚期NSCLC患者，表皮生长因子受体（epidermal growth factor
receptor, EGFR）突变状态已知，均口服盐酸埃克替尼治疗，评价其疗效和毒副反应。结果
124例组织学证实的晚期NSCLC患者，其中EGFR突变型99例，野生型25例。全组客观有效率（objective response rate,
ORR）为51.6%，疾病控制率（disease control rate, DCR）为79.8%。突变型和野生型患者的ORR：63.6% vs
4.0%，DCR：93.9% vs 24.0%，两者均有统计学差异（P<0.000,1）。突变型和野生型患者的无进展生存期（progression-free
survival,
PFS）（分别为10.5个月和1.0个月）（P<0.000,1）。治疗相关的毒副反应主要为皮疹38例（30.6%），腹泻20例（16.1%）。结论
盐酸埃克替尼治疗EGFR突变的晚期NSCLC疗效肯定，耐受性好。.
DOI: 10.3779/j.issn.1009-3419.2015.12.04 
PMID: 26706949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Nihon Ronen Igakkai Zasshi. 2015;52(4):421-4. doi: 10.3143/geriatrics.52.421.

[A case of cardiac tamponade due to malignant pericarditis with lung
adenocarcinoma, effectively treated with pericardial drainage and pemetrexed plus
cisplatin chemotherapy].

[Article in Japanese]

Yoshida K(1), Teramoto S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Hitachi, Ltd. Hitachinaka General Hospital.

A 68-year-old man was diagnosed with non small cell lung cancer in May 2013.
Although the patient was negative for EGFR mutation, he wished to undergo
treatment with gefitinib and erlotinib as first-line therapy. However, one year
later, he was admitted to our hospital because of cardiac tamponade due to
malignant pericarditis. He received pericardial drainage, after which his
condition was stabilized. He was diagnosed with lung adenocarcinoma by cytology
of pericardial effusion and treated with pemetrexed plus cisplatin as second-line
therapy. Thereafter, the malignant effusion was decreased and the primary lesion 
was regressed. He received six courses of chemotherapy, however, brain metastases
and bone metastases appeared. The brain metastases were controlled with gamma
knife radiosurgery and he received carboptatin-paclitaxel plus bevacizumab as
third-line therapy. The patient is currently receiving chemotherapy without any
recurrence of malignant pericarditis or cardiac tamponade.

DOI: 10.3143/geriatrics.52.421 
PMID: 26700783  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Am J Transl Res. 2015 Oct 15;7(10):2026-35. eCollection 2015.

Cigarette smoking impairs the response of EGFR-TKIs therapy in lung
adenocarcinoma patients by promoting EGFR signaling and epithelial-mesenchymal
transition.

Liu M(1), Zhou C(1), Zheng J(2).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Respiratory Disease, Guangzhou Institute of
Respiratory Disease, The First Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou Medical
University Guangzhou 510120, China. (2)Department of Paediatrics & Adolescent
Medicine, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, The University of Hong Kong Hong Kong 
SAR 000000, China.

Cigarette smoking represents for the highest risk-factor for non-small cell lung 
cancer (NSCLC), and a growing body of evidence suggested that smoking was
associated with a high recurrence and poor therapeutic response of NSCLC as well.
On the other hand, epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)-tyrosine kinase
inhibitors (TKIs), such as gefitinib, has been proved to be an efficient and safe
strategy for treating NSCLC. Although accumulating clinical data suggested that
smoking history might influence the therapeutic effects of EGFR-TKIs even in
NSCLC patients harboring sensitive EGFR mutation, the exact effects of cigarette 
smoking on the efficacy of EGFR-TKIs treatment in NSCLC patients remain
exclusive. In this study, we firstly identified the adverse effect of smoking
exposure on the efficacy of EGFR-TKIs treatment against lung adenocarcinoma in
mutation-positive patients by retrospective analysis of clinical data. The
hypo-responsiveness of smoking patients on the therapy was accompanied with
persistent activation of EGFR-downstream signal molecules ERK1/2 and AKT, which
could not be inhibited by gefitinib and thus lead to the failure of EGFR-TKIs
treatment. Based on our in vitro data, it was also found that long-term cigarette
smoking extract (CSE) exposure induced epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT),
which might also contribute to acquired resistance to EGFR-TKIs. Taken together, 
our findings suggested that cigarette smoking negatively regulated the clinical
outcome of EGFR-TKIs therapy in lung adenocarcinoma patients, which was
correlated with the activation of EGFR signaling and the induction of EMT.


PMCID: PMC4656779
PMID: 26692946  [PubMed]


258. Clin Cancer Res. 2016 May 1;22(9):2139-45. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-15-1653.
Epub 2015 Dec 14.

A Phase Ib/II Study of Afatinib in Combination with Nimotuzumab in Non-Small Cell
Lung Cancer Patients with Acquired Resistance to Gefitinib or Erlotinib.

Lee JY(1), Sun JM(1), Lim SH(1), Kim HS, Yoo KH(1), Jung KS(1), Song HN(1), Ku
BM(2), Koh J(2), Bae YH(2), Lee SH(1), Ahn JS(1), Park K(1), Ahn MJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Department of Medicine, Samsung Medical
Center, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Seoul, Korea. (2)Samsung
Biomedical Research Institute, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University
School of Medicine, Seoul, Korea. (3)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Department 
of Medicine, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, 
Seoul, Korea. silkahn@skku.edu.

PURPOSE: In this phase Ib/II study, we aimed to assess the safety and efficacy of
afatinib plus nimotuzumab (N) in advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
patients with acquired resistance to gefitinib or erlotinib.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: In phase Ib stage, patients received afatinib (40 mg or 30
mg once daily) plus nimotuzumab (100 mg or 200 mg once weekly) for 28-day cycles 
to determine the recommended phase II dose (RPIID). The safety and efficacy of
RPIID dose was evaluated in phase II stage.
RESULTS: In total, 50 patients were enrolled (13 to phase Ib and 37 to phase II).
In the first dose-finding cohort (afatinib 40 mg plus nimotuzumab 100 mg), one
patient experienced dose-limiting toxicity (DLT) of grade 3 diarrhea and in the
subsequent cohort (afatinib 40 mg plus nimotuzumab 200 mg), two DLTs (grade 3
diarrhea and grade 3 neutropenia) occurred in 2 of 6 patients. Accordingly, RPIID
was determined as afatinib 40 mg plus nimotuzumab 100 mg. In 44 patients treated 
with RPIID, 7 (16%) patients had grade 3 toxicities; skin rash (7%), diarrhea
(5%), acne (2%), and fatigue (2%). The overall response rate was 23% and the
median duration of response was 4.3 months (range, 0.7-16.2 months). The median
progression-free survival and overall survival were 4.0 months [95% confidence
interval (CI), 2.3-5.7 months] and 11.7 months (95% CI, 9.4-14.0 months),
respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: Combination treatment of afatinib and nimotuzumab demonstrated an
acceptable safety profile and encouraging antitumor activity in advanced NSCLC
patients with acquired resistance to gefitinib or erlotinib. Larger phase III
trial is warranted to confirm its efficacy and safety. Clin Cancer Res; 22(9);
2139-45. ©2015 AACR.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-15-1653 
PMID: 26667485  [PubMed - in process]


259. JAMA Dermatol. 2016 Mar;152(3):340-2. doi: 10.1001/jamadermatol.2015.4448.

Comparison of Skin Toxic Effects Associated With Gefitinib, Erlotinib, or
Afatinib Treatment for Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer.

Chen KL(1), Lin CC(2), Cho YT(1), Yang CW(1), Sheen YS(1), Tsai HE(3), Chu CY(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, National Taiwan University Hospital, National
Taiwan University College of Medicine, Taipei. (2)Department of Oncology,
National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei3Department of Urology, National
Taiwan University College of Medicine, Taipei. (3)Department of Surgery, National
Taiwan University Hospital Hsin-Chu Branch, Hsin-Chu City.

DOI: 10.1001/jamadermatol.2015.4448 
PMID: 26649681  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Ann Oncol. 2016 Mar;27(3):417-23. doi: 10.1093/annonc/mdv597. Epub 2015 Dec 8.

Afatinib beyond progression in patients with non-small-cell lung cancer following
chemotherapy, erlotinib/gefitinib and afatinib: phase III randomized LUX-Lung 5
trial.

Schuler M, Yang JC, Park K, Kim JH, Bennouna J, Chen YM, Chouaid C, De Marinis F,
Feng JF, Grossi F, Kim DW, Liu X, Lu S, Strausz J, Vinnyk Y, Wiewrodt R, Zhou C, 
Wang B, Chand VK, Planchard D; LUX-Lung 5 Investigators.

Collaborators: Ou SH, Planchard D, Park K, Schuler M, Yang J, Chand V, Rohr K,
Bagnes C, Martin CM, Recondo G, Zarba JJ, Blajman C, Richardet M, McLachlan SA,
Parente P, Underhill C, Crombie C, Mainwaring P, Greil R, Humblet Y, Bustin F,
Carestia L, Galdermans D, Lambrechts M, Delval L, Vercauter P, Zhou C, Wang J,
Huang C, Lin X, Wu Y, Liu X, Cheng Y, Qin S, Feng J, Huang J, Zhang Y, Lu S,
Zereu M, Garicochea B, Zadra CA, Riska H, Alanko T, Cadranel J, Chouaid C,
Zalcman G, Sibilot DM, Perol M, Planchard D, Bennouna J, Fournel P, Gervais R,
Rotarski M, Coudert B, Schuler M, Thomas M, Wehler T, Faehling M, Keilholz U,
Laack E, von Pawel J, Huber R, Dickgreber N, Wiewrodt R, Mark Z, Tehenes S,
Strausz J, Sarosi V, Prabhash K, Jain M, Venkatesan S, Sharma L, Dadhich H,
Nagarkar RV, Onn A, Gottfried M, Stemmer S, Migliorino MR, Grossi F, Bidoli P,
Bearz A, Gridelli C, Milandri C, Platania M, Ceresoli GL, Cruciani G, Gutierrez
Delgado F, Gonzalez Perez JL, Luna GA, Padilla Baca O, Aerts J, Stigt J,
Dingemans AM, Herder G, Gans S, Salas Sánchez JF, Alvarez Barreda RL, Rodriguez
Pantigoso W, Mejia Palomino OL, Jaskiewicz P, Kazarnowicz A, Serwatowski P,
Szczesna A, Jassem J, Lubennikov V, Karaseva N, Orlov S, Ragulin Y, Garrido P,
González Larriba JL, Camps C, García Campelo R, Lianes P, Cobo M, Felip E, Kim
DW, Kim SW, Park K, Kim JH, Han JY, Kim YC, Yang CH, Hsia TC, Chen YM, Tsai YH,
Chang GC, Tsao TC, Su WC, Huang MS, Ho CL, Hsieh RK, Vinnyk Y, Popovych O,
Ponomarova O, Bondarenko I, Polishchuk I, Shah R, Mitra S, Popat S, Spicer J, Toy
E, Popat S, Talbot T, Brown E, Upadhyay S, Summers Y, Gurtler J, Meza L, Thropay 
J.

Comment in
    Ann Oncol. 2016 Mar;27(3):367-8.
    Ann Transl Med. 2016 Oct;4(Suppl 1):S31.

BACKGROUND: Afatinib has demonstrated clinical benefit in patients with
non-small-cell lung cancer progressing after treatment with erlotinib/gefitinib. 
This phase III trial prospectively assessed whether continued irreversible
ErbB-family blockade with afatinib plus paclitaxel has superior outcomes versus
switching to chemotherapy alone in patients acquiring resistance to
erlotinib/gefitinib and afatinib monotherapy.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Patients with relapsed/refractory disease following ≥1 line
of chemotherapy, and whose tumors had progressed following initial disease
control (≥12 weeks) with erlotinib/gefitinib and thereafter afatinib (50 mg/day),
were randomized 2:1 to receive afatinib plus paclitaxel (40 mg/day; 80
mg/m(2)/week) or investigator's choice of single-agent chemotherapy. The primary 
end point was progression-free survival (PFS). Other end points included
objective response rate (ORR), overall survival (OS), safety and patient-reported
outcomes.
RESULTS: Two hundred and two patients with progressive disease following clinical
benefit from afatinib were randomized to afatinib plus paclitaxel (n = 134) or
single-agent chemotherapy (n = 68). PFS (median 5.6 versus 2.8 months, hazard
ratio 0.60, P = 0.003) and ORR (32.1% versus 13.2%, P = 0.005) significantly
improved with afatinib plus paclitaxel. There was no difference in OS. Global
health status/quality of life was maintained with afatinib plus paclitaxel over
the entire treatment period. The median treatment duration was 133 and 51 days
with afatinib plus paclitaxel and single-agent chemotherapy, respectively; 48.5% 
of patients receiving afatinib plus paclitaxel and 30.0% of patients receiving
single-agent chemotherapy experienced drug-related grade 3/4 adverse events.
Treatment-related adverse events were consistent with those previously reported
with each agent.
CONCLUSION: Afatinib plus paclitaxel improved PFS and ORR compared with
single-agent chemotherapy in patients who acquired resistance to
erlotinib/gefitinib and progressed on afatinib after initial benefit. LUX-Lung 5 
is the first prospective trial to demonstrate the benefit of continued ErbB
targeting post-progression, versus switching to single-agent chemotherapy.
TRIAL REGISTRATION NUMBER: NCT01085136 (clinicaltrials.gov).

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the European
Society for Medical Oncology.

DOI: 10.1093/annonc/mdv597 
PMCID: PMC4769992
PMID: 26646759  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Sci Rep. 2015 Dec 7;5:17499. doi: 10.1038/srep17499.

BIM and mTOR expression levels predict outcome to erlotinib in EGFR-mutant
non-small-cell lung cancer.

Karachaliou N(1), Codony-Servat J(2), Teixidó C(2), Pilotto S(3), Drozdowskyj
A(4), Codony-Servat C(2), Giménez-Capitán A(2), Molina-Vila MA(2),
Bertrán-Alamillo J(2), Gervais R(5), Massuti B(6), Morán T(7), Majem M(8), Felip 
E(9), Carcereny E(7), García-Campelo R(10), Viteri S(1), González-Cao M(1),
Morales-Espinosa D(1), Verlicchi A(11), Crisetti E(12), Chaib I(7), Santarpia
M(13), Luis Ramírez J(7), Bosch-Barrera J(14), Felipe Cardona A(15), de Marinis
F(16), López-Vivanco G(17), Miguel Sánchez J(18), Vergnenegre A(19), Sánchez
Hernández JJ(20), Sperduti I(21), Bria E(3), Rosell R(1,)(2,)(7,)(22,)(23).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto Oncológico Dr Rosell, Quiron-Dexeus University Hospital, Barcelona, 
Spain. (2)Pangaea Biotech, Barcelona, Spain. (3)Department of Medical Oncology,
University of Verona, Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria Integrata, Verona, Italy.
(4)Pivotal, Madrid, Spain. (5)Centre François Baclesse, Caen, France. (6)Hospital
General de Alicante, Alicante, Spain. (7)Catalan Institute of Oncology, Hospital 
Germans Trias i Pujol, Badalona, Spain. (8)Hospital de Sant Pau, Barcelona,
Spain. (9)Hospital Vall d'Hebron, Barcelona, Spain. (10)Complexo Hospitalario
Universitario La Coruña, Spain. (11)Ospedale Santa Maria delle Croci, Ravenna,
Italy. (12)Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences, Institute of Respiratory 
Diseases, University of Foggia, Italy. (13)Medical Oncology Unit, Human Pathology
Department, University of Messina, Italy. (14)Catalan Institute of Oncology,
Hospital Josep Trueta, Girona, Spain. (15)Clinical and Traslational Oncology
Group, Institute of Oncology, Clínica del Country, Bogotá, Colombia.
(16)Direttore, Divisione di Oncologica Toracica, Istituto Europeo di
Oncologia-IEO, Milano, Italy. (17)Chief, Medical Oncology Service, Hospital de
Cruces, Barakaldo, Vizcaya, Spain. (18)Medical Oncology Service, Hospital de la
Princesa, Madrid, Spain. (19)Hôpital du Cluzeau, Limoges, France. (20)Unidad de
Investigación en Salud Pública CIDICS-UANL. (21)Biostatistics, Regina Elena
National Cancer Institute, Rome. (22)Molecular Oncology Research (MORe)
Foundation, Barcelona, Spain. (23)Germans Trias i Pujol Health Sciences Institute
and Hospital, Campus Can Ruti.

BIM is a proapoptotic protein that initiates apoptosis triggered by EGFR tyrosine
kinase inhibitors (TKI). mTOR negatively regulates apoptosis and may influence
response to EGFR TKI. We examined mRNA expression of BIM and MTOR in 57 patients 
with EGFR-mutant NSCLC from the EURTAC trial. Risk of mortality and disease
progression was lower in patients with high BIM compared with low/intermediate
BIM mRNA levels. Analysis of MTOR further divided patients with high BIM
expression into two groups, with those having both high BIM and MTOR experiencing
shorter overall and progression-free survival to erlotinib. Validation of our
results was performed in an independent cohort of 19 patients with EGFR-mutant
NSCLC treated with EGFR TKIs. In EGFR-mutant lung adenocarcinoma cell lines with 
high BIM expression, concomitant high mTOR expression increased IC50 of gefitinib
for cell proliferation. We next sought to analyse the signalling pattern in cell 
lines with strong activation of mTOR and its substrate P-S6. We showed that mTOR 
and phosphodiesterase 4D (PDE4D) strongly correlate in resistant EGFR-mutant
cancer cell lines. These data suggest that the combination of EGFR TKI with mTOR 
or PDE4 inhibitors could be adequate therapy for EGFR-mutant NSCLC patients with 
high pretreatment levels of BIM and mTOR.

DOI: 10.1038/srep17499 
PMCID: PMC4671004
PMID: 26639561  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Anticancer Res. 2015 Dec;35(12):6957-61.

Comparison of Gefitinib Versus Chemotherapy in Patients with Non-small Cell Lung 
Cancer with Exon 19 Deletion.

Watanabe S(1), Inoue A(2), Nukiwa T(3), Kobayashi K(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine and Infectious Disease, Niigata University 
Graduate School of Medical and Dental Sciences, Asahimachi-dori, Niigata, Japan
satoshi7@med.niigata-u.ac.jp. (2)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Tohoku
University, Aobaku, Sendai, Japan. (3)Japan Anti-Tuberculosis Association,
Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo, Japan. (4)Respiratory Medicine, Saitama International Medical 
Center, Hidaka City, Saitama, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Second-generation epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase
inhibitor (EGFR-TKI) afatinib as first-line treatment has been demonstrated to
improve overall survival (OS) in patients with non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
harboring an exon 19 deletion (del19) of EGFR compared to platinum-doublet
chemotherapy. However, it is unclear whether first-generation EGFR-TKIs improve
OS in patients with del19 in the first-line treatment.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We performed a post-hoc analysis of patients with del19 or 
L858R mutation of EGFR who received gefitinib in the NEJ002 study, which compared
gefitinib to carboplatin-paclitaxel.
RESULTS: A total of 58 patients and 57 patients with del19 EGFR received
gefitinib and carboplatin-paclitaxel, respectively. No OS differences were
observed between patients receiving gefitinib and carboplatin-paclitaxel
irrespective of del19 (29.3 months vs. 29.7 months, p=0.53) or L858R (28.4 months
vs. 25.1 months, p=0.45).
CONCLUSION: In contrast to afatinib, it is suggested that first-line gefitinib
does not improve OS in patients with del19 of EGFR compared with platinum-doublet
chemotherapy.

Copyright© 2015 International Institute of Anticancer Research (Dr. John G.
Delinassios), All rights reserved.


PMID: 26637922  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Sci Rep. 2015 Dec 4;5:17730. doi: 10.1038/srep17730.

Resveratrol overcomes gefitinib resistance by increasing the intracellular
gefitinib concentration and triggering apoptosis, autophagy and senescence in
PC9/G NSCLC cells.

Zhu Y(1), He W(1), Gao X(1), Li B(1), Mei C(1), Xu R(1), Chen H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Tongji Medical College of Huazhong University of
Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei 430030, P.R. China.

Gefitinib (Gef) provides clinical benefits to non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) 
patients with activating EGFR mutations. However, acquired resistance (AR) is a
major obstacle to effective Gef therapy. This study demonstrated that resveratrol
(Res) could synergize with Gef to inhibit the proliferation of Gef-resistant
NSCLC cells. The underlying mechanisms of synergism were investigated, and the
results showed that cotreatment with Gef and Res could inhibit EGFR
phosphorylation by increasing intracellular Gef accumulation through the
impairment of Gef elimination from PC9/G cells. Consistently, CYP1A1 and ABCG2
expression were inhibited. Meanwhile, the cotreatment significantly induced cell 
apoptosis, autophagy, cell cycle arrest and senescence accompanied by increased
expression of cleaved caspase-3, LC3B-II, p53 and p21. Further studies revealed
that autophagy inhibition enhanced apoptosis and abrogated senescence while
apoptosis inhibition had no notable effect on cell autophagy and senescence
during cotreatment with Gef and Res. These results indicated that in addition to 
apoptosis, senescence promoted by autophagy contributes to the antiproliferation 
effect of combined Gef and Res on PC9/G cells. In conclusion, combined treatment 
with Gef and Res may represent a rational strategy to overcome AR in NSCLC cells.

DOI: 10.1038/srep17730 
PMCID: PMC4669414
PMID: 26635117  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Anticancer Drugs. 2016 Mar;27(3):245-50. doi: 10.1097/CAD.0000000000000323.

Observation of hepatotoxicity during long-term gefitinib administration in
patients with non-small-cell lung cancer.

Wang J(1), Wu Y, Dong M, He X, Wang Z, Li J, Wang Y.

Author information: 
(1)aDepartment of Medical Oncology, Cancer Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical
Sciences (CAMS) and Peking Union Medical College (PUMC), Beijing bDepartment of
Medical Oncology, Nanyang Central Hospital, Nanyang, Henan, China.

To observe drug-induced hepatotoxicity by long-term gefitinib administration in
the treatment of non-small-cell lung cancer. The data of 101 patients with
locally advanced or metastatic non-small-cell lung cancer, for which gefitinib
had been used orally for 3 months or longer, were retrospectively analyzed. The
median duration of gefitinib administration was 14 months (3-60 months). Forty
patients (39.6%) developed abnormal hepatic function, among whom 30 patients
(29.7%) had grade I hepatotoxicity, six patients (5.9%) had grade II, and four
patients (4.0%) had grade III, respectively. The median time from starting
gefitinib oral therapy to developing liver dysfunction was 4 months (1-23 months)
for the entire cohort. The incidence of hepatotoxicity in the group with a
duration of more than 14 months was much higher than that in the group with a
duration of less than 14 months (52.0 vs. 27.5%, P=0.012). In thirty-two patients
(32/40), abnormal liver function resolved with hepatoprotective treatment,
whereas eight patients (8/40) had persistent grade I hepatotoxicity until the
last follow-up. Our study showed that long-term gefitinib-induced hepatotoxicity 
was a common adverse event, especially for the cohort with a duration of longer
than 14 months. In most patients with hepatotoxicity, normal liver function was
restored and discontinuation of gefitinib was not necessary.

DOI: 10.1097/CAD.0000000000000323 
PMCID: PMC4736296
PMID: 26633888  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Transl Lung Cancer Res. 2015 Oct;4(5):576-83. doi:
10.3978/j.issn.2218-6751.2015.10.01.

Management of hyperglycemia from epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine
kinase inhibitors (TKIs) targeting T790M-mediated resistance.

Villadolid J(1), Ersek JL(1), Fong MK(1), Sirianno L(1), Story ES(1).

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Pharmacy, 2 Department of Solid Tumor Oncology and
Investigational Therapeutics, 3 Department of Solid Tumor Oncology, 4 Endocrine
Center, Levine Cancer Institute, Carolinas HealthCare System, Charlotte, NC
28204, USA.

Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutations in non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC) patients are associated with sensitivity to small molecule tyrosine
kinase inhibitors (TKIs) such as erlotinib, gefitinib, and afatinib. Although
studies show an increased progression free survival (PFS) with use of EGFR TKIs
in the first-line setting, most patients will develop resistance to therapy after
the first 8-16 months. T790M is an acquired resistance mutation reported in
60-70% of patients who initially responded to a prior EGFR TKI. Recently, EGFR
TKIs targeting T790M have been developed to overcome resistance with positive
results in PFS and objective response rate in patients who have had disease
progression on at least one TKI. Two EGFR TKIs targeting T790M, AZD9291 and
rociletinib, are new active treatment options for NSCLC but differ in adverse
effect profiles. Dose-limiting hyperglycemia has been reported with rociletinib
and has required dose reduction, an oral antihyperglycemic, or both, without
discontinuation of therapy. This suggests that patients may be effectively
treated chronically for hyperglycemia associated with EGFR TKIs targeting T790M, 
however, guidelines for treatment of hyperglycemia in this setting have not been 
published. We discuss mechanisms of hyperglycemia associated with TKIs and
initial management of hyperglycemia, including benefits and limitations of oral
antihyperglycemic options, adjustment of therapy based on grade of hyperglycemia,
and recommendations for follow-up glucose monitoring.

DOI: 10.3978/j.issn.2218-6751.2015.10.01 
PMCID: PMC4630529
PMID: 26629426  [PubMed]


266. Int J Clin Exp Med. 2015 Sep 15;8(9):16064-70. eCollection 2015.

Curative effect analysis of different treatments for gefitinib-resistance
advanced non-small cell lung cancer patients.

Shi H(1), Zhang X(2), Wang F(3), Liu D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Taian City Central Hospital No. 29 Longtan
Road, Taian 271000, Shandong Province, China. (2)Department of Thoracic Surgery, 
Taian City Central Hospital No. 29 Longtan Road, Taian 271000, Shandong Province,
China. (3)Department of Magnetic Resonance Imaging, Taian City Central Hospital
No. 29 Longtan Road, Taian 271000, Shandong Province, China.

OBJECTIVE: Gefitinib is effective epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine
kinase inhibitors (EGFR-TKI) for advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
patients, but with the drug use, inevitable gefitinib-resistance and severe
complications were observed and resulted in failure treatments. The purpose of
the present study was to investigate the curative effect of different treatment
of navelbine plus cisplatin in combination with gefitinib and gefitinib single on
gefitinib-resistance advanced NSCLC patients.
METHODS: Total Of 120 patients acquired gefitinib-resistance NSCLC patients
treated in Taian City Central Hospital of Shandong province from May, 2010 to
June, 2014 were incorporated in our study according to the inclusion and
exclusion criteria. The patients were divided into chemotherapeutical group and
gefitinib group and the mean follow-up was 12 months (6-39 months), the
information of patients was recorded as gender, age, smoking, complications,
hepatic metastasis, bone metastasis, brain metastasis and acquired chemotherapy
or not. Chi-square test and t-test were performed to analyzed collection data,
Log-rank was analyzed significance of survival time among groups and Cox
regression was evaluated independent risk factors of survival analysis.
RESULTS: The survival time of chemotherapy group was significantly longer than
gefitinib group; the survival time among the two groups was 29.06 and 15.23
months (P<0.05), respectively. Multivariate Cox regression analyzed that lesion's
metastasis (hepatic metastasis, bone metastasis and brain metastasis) and
acquired chemotherapy were independent risk factors influence on patients overall
survival time; gender, age, smoking, complications had no significance influence 
on survival time between the two groups.
CONCLUSION: Lesion's metastasis and acquired chemotherapy were independent risk
factors influence on patients' overall survival time and the survival time of
chemotherapy group was significantly longer than gefitinib group.


PMCID: PMC4659002
PMID: 26629113  [PubMed]


267. Tumour Biol. 2016 May;37(5):6331-6. doi: 10.1007/s13277-015-4480-1. Epub 2015 Dec
1.

Overexpression of Sphk2 is associated with gefitinib resistance in non-small cell
lung cancer.

Liu W(1), Ning J(2), Li C(1), Hu J(1), Meng Q(1), Lu H(1), Cai L(3).

Author information: 
(1)The Fourth Department of Medical Oncology, Harbin Medical University Cancer
Hospital, Haping Road 150, Harbin, 150040, People's Republic of China. (2)The
Thoracic Surgery Department, Harbin Medical University Cancer Hospital, Harbin,
150040, People's Republic of China. (3)The Fourth Department of Medical Oncology,
Harbin Medical University Cancer Hospital, Haping Road 150, Harbin, 150040,
People's Republic of China. caili@ems.hrbmu.edu.cn.

Lung cancer is the major cause of cancer-related death worldwide, and 80 % of
them are non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cases. Recent studies have shown that
sphingosine kinase 2 (SphK2) could promote tumor progression; however, whether
SphK2 could affect the chemoresistance of NSCLC to chemotherapy remains unclear. 
To determine whether SphK2 serves as a potential therapeutic target of NSCLC, we 
utilized small interference RNA (siRNA) to knock down SphK2 expression in human
NSCLC cells and analyzed their phenotypic changes. The data demonstrated that
knockdown of SphK2 led to decreased proliferation and enhanced chemosensitivity
and apoptosis to gefitinib in NSCLC cells. In this study, we describe the
findings that overexpression of SphK2 promotes chemoresistance in NSCLC cells.
Inhibition of SphK2 might be considered as a strategy in NSCLC treatment with
gefitinib.

DOI: 10.1007/s13277-015-4480-1 
PMID: 26628299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Mol Clin Oncol. 2015 Sep;3(5):1123-1128. Epub 2015 Jul 21.

EGFR and K-RAS mutations and ERCC1, TUBB3, TYMS, RRM1 and EGFR mRNA expression in
non-small cell lung cancer: Correlation with clinical response to gefitinib or
chemotherapy.

Guo N(1), Zhang W(2), Zhang B(2), Li Y(2), Tang J(2), Li S(2), Zhao Y(2), Zhao
Y(2), Xia H(2), Yu C(2).

Author information: 
(1)Medical School of Chinese PLA General Hospital, Beijing 100853, P.R. China ;
Department of Thoracic-Cardio Surgery, First Affiliated Hospital of PLA General
Hospital, Beijing 100048, P.R. China. (2)Department of Thoracic-Cardio Surgery,
First Affiliated Hospital of PLA General Hospital, Beijing 100048, P.R. China.

Personalizing medicines has refined the traditional treatments for non-small-cell
lung cancer (NSCLC). In the present study, efforts towards personalizing delivery
of care based on the status of EGFR and K-RAS mutations, and mRNA expression
levels of ERCC1, TUBB3, TYMS, RRM1 and EGFR by choosing appropriate treatments
for 52 patients with NSCLC were discussed. Among these 52 NSCLC patients, there
were 14 patients treated with gefitinib. Ten patients with EGFR exon 21 point
mutations or exon 19 deletions had better treatment outcomes following gefitinib 
treatment (71.4%). There were 38 patients treated with platinum-based
chemotherapy. Docetaxel-platinum based chemotherapy was chosen as the first-line 
treatment when the patients had low or median ERCC1/TUBB3 expression and
gemcitabine-platinum based chemotherapy was chosen when the patients had low or
median ERCC1/RRM1 expression. In total, 26 cases had mRNA expression levels of
ERCC1/TUBB3 or ERCC1/RRM1 that could be used to predict the treatment outcomes of
chemotherapy (68.4%). The present results indicated that the mutation status of
EGFR, as well as the mRNA expression levels of ERCC1, TUBB3 and RRM1, could be
used as predictors of the response to gefitinib or chemotherapy.

DOI: 10.3892/mco.2015.611 
PMCID: PMC4535032
PMID: 26623063  [PubMed]


269. Oncol Lett. 2015 Oct;10(4):2652-2656. Epub 2015 Aug 6.

Synergistic interaction between MEK inhibitor and gefitinib in EGFR-TKI-resistant
human lung cancer cells.

Li S(1), Chen S(1), Jiang Y(1), Liu J(1), Yang X(1), Quan S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Tumor Rehabilitation, First Hospital, Wenzhou Medical
University, Wenzhou, Zhejiang 325000, P.R. China.

With the increasing use of epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase
inhibitor (EGFR-TKIs) in patients with advanced non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC), acquired resistance has become a major clinical problem. A combination
of different signaling pathway inhibitors is a promising strategy to overcome
this. In the present study, the mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase 1/2
inhibitor, AZD6244, was used in combination with gefitinib to investigate the
efficacy of this treatment in NSCLC cell lines, particularly in
gefitinib-resistant cells. The EGFR-TKI-sensitive PC-9 (mutant EGFR/wild-type
K-Ras) and EGFR-TKI-resistant A549 (wild-type EGFR/mutant K-Ras) human NSCLC cell
lines were treated with AZD6244 alone, gefitinib alone or the combination of the 
two drugs, and the effects were evaluated using cell proliferation assays, with
alterations in signaling pathways analyzed by western blotting. It was found that
the growth inhibitory effect of combination treatment with gefitinib and AZD6244 
was greater than that of gefitinib alone in the EGFR-TKI-resistant A549 cells.
Treatment of A549 cells with gefitinib alone reduced the expression level of the 
activated form of Akt, and the combination of the two drugs showed stronger
inhibition of phosphorylated-Akt and phosphorylated-extracellular
signal-regulated kinases. The data showed that the combination of AZD6244 and
gefitinib exhibited dose-dependent synergism in gefitinib-resistant NSCLC cells. 
Thus, a preclinical rationale exists for the use of AZD6244 to enhance the
efficacy of gefitinib in patients with EGFR-TKI-resistant NSCLC.

DOI: 10.3892/ol.2015.3577 
PMCID: PMC4580034
PMID: 26622906  [PubMed]


270. Oncol Lett. 2015 Oct;10(4):2063-2066. Epub 2015 Aug 12.

Combined therapy with EGFR TKI and gambogic acid for overcoming resistance in
EGFR-T790M mutant lung cancer.

Wang C(1), Wang W(2), Wang C(2), Tang Y(2), Tian H(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Qi Lu Hospital, Shandong University, Jinan,
Shandong 250012, P.R. China ; Department of Thoracic Surgery, Yantai Yuhuangding 
Hospital, Yantai, Shandong 264000, P.R. China. (2)Department of Thoracic Surgery,
Yantai Yuhuangding Hospital, Yantai, Shandong 264000, P.R. China. (3)Department
of Thoracic Surgery, Qi Lu Hospital, Shandong University, Jinan, Shandong 250012,
P.R. China.

Although patients with non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) experience an initial
response to the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase inhibitor
gefitinib, those individuals with activating mutations in EGFR develop
resistance. Gambogic acid (GA), a polyprenylated xanthone, has strong antitumor
activities. In the present study, the therapeutic efficacy of gefitinib with GA
was evaluated in a gefitinib-resistant NSCLC model. The NCI-H1975 cell line with 
EGFR-T790M mutation was subcutaneously injected into immunocompromised mice. The 
mice were randomly assigned to receive treatment with gefitinib, GA, gefitinib
plus GA, or vehicle for 4 weeks, then all mice were sacrificed and their tumor
tissues were subjected to caspase activity detection and western blot analysis.
Gefitinib and GA alone slightly inhibited the tumor growth of NCI-H1975. However,
the combined treatment significantly enhanced their antitumor effects, without
any marked adverse events. In addition, gefitinib plus GA enhanced the level of
apoptosis in the tumor tissues. Western blot analysis also revealed that the
combination treatment reduced the phosphorylation level of AKT, MEK1/2 and
ERK1/2, while an increased expression ratio of Bax/Bcl-2 was observed. In the
current study, gefitinib in combination with GA resulted in antitumor growth in
the EGFR-T790M secondary mutation NCI-H1975 tumor model due to an enhanced
apoptotic effect. This novel therapeutic strategy may be a practical approach for
the treatment of patients who show gefitinib resistance.

DOI: 10.3892/ol.2015.3599 
PMCID: PMC4579844
PMID: 26622796  [PubMed]


271. Oncol Lett. 2015 Sep;10(3):1293-1296. Epub 2015 Jun 30.

L858R-positive lung adenocarcinoma with KRAS G12V, EGFR T790M and EGFR L858R
mutations: A case report.

Xiang X(1), Yu J(2), Lai Y(3), He W(4), Li S(3), Wang L(3), Ke Z(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Interventional Radiology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Sun
Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou, Guangdong 510080, P.R. China. (2)Department of
Private Medical Services and Healthcare Center, The First Affiliated Hospital of 
Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou, Guangdong 510080, P.R. China. (3)Department of
Pathology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou,
Guangdong 510080, P.R. China. (4)Department of Gastrointestinal Surgery, The
First Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou, Guangdong 510080,
P.R. China.

Improvement in the current understanding of the molecular basis of lung cancer at
multiple levels, including the genetic, epigenetic and protein levels, has the
potential to impact the diagnosis, prognosis and treatment of lung cancer. The
mutation status of the tyrosine kinase domain of epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR) is known to be a predictor of the response to gefitinib in lung cancer.
Furthermore, mutations in the EGFR and KRAS genes appear to be mutually
exclusive. The present study reports a rare case of a patient harboring two EGFR 
mutations (L858R and T790M) and a KRAS mutation (G12V). The development of
gefitinib resistance was detected in the subsequent treatment. The present study 
indicates that EGFR and KRAS mutational analysis should be recommended for all
patients with non-small-cell lung carcinoma.

DOI: 10.3892/ol.2015.3435 
PMCID: PMC4533255
PMID: 26622666  [PubMed]


272. Oncol Lett. 2015 Sep;10(3):1277-1280. Epub 2015 Jul 8.

Gefitinib-induced intestinal obstruction in advanced non-small cell lung
carcinoma: A case report.

Liang YC(1), Wu G(1), Cheng J(1), Yu DD(1), Wu HG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Center, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of 
Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei 430022, P.R. China.

Gefitinib is an epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) inhibitor, which is used 
to treat patients with advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) harboring EGFR
mutations. Dermatological reactions are the most common adverse events associated
with gefitinib treatment; other adverse effects, including diarrhea, nausea,
stomatitis and an asymptomatic elevation of liver enzymes have also been
reported. The present study describes a patient with intestinal obstruction who
was successfully undergoing treatment with gefitinib for primary and metastatic
neoplasms. Gefitinib-induced intestinal obstruction has not been previously
reported; therefore, careful monitoring of gastrointestinal symptoms should be
conducted throughout the course of gefitinib-treated malignancies.

DOI: 10.3892/ol.2015.3463 
PMCID: PMC4533305
PMID: 26622663  [PubMed]


273. Ther Adv Respir Dis. 2016 Apr;10(2):113-29. doi: 10.1177/1753465815617871. Epub
2015 Nov 30.

Management of advanced non-small cell lung cancers with known mutations or
rearrangements: latest evidence and treatment approaches.

Shea M(1), Costa DB(1), Rangachari D(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess
Medical Center, Harvard Medical School; Boston, MA, USA. (2)Division of
Hematology/Oncology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, 330 Brookline Avenue, 
Shapiro 9, Boston, MA 02215, USA drangach@bidmc.harvard.edu.

Precision oncology is now the evidence-based standard of care for the management 
of many advanced non-small cell lung cancers (NSCLCs). Expert consensus has
defined minimum requirements for routine testing and identification of epidermal 
growth factor (EGFR) mutations (15% of tumors harbor EGFR exon 19 deletions or
exon 21 L858R substitutions) and anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) rearrangements 
(5% of tumors) in advanced lung adenocarcinomas (ACs). Application of palliative 
targeted therapies with oral tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) in
advanced/metastatic lung ACs harboring abnormalities in EGFR (gefitinib,
erlotinib, afatinib) and ALK/ROS1/MET (crizotinib) has consistently led to more
favorable outcomes compared with traditional cytotoxic agents. In addition,
mutations leading to resistance to first-line EGFR and ALK TKIs can now be
successfully inhibited by soon to be approved third-generation EGFR TKIs
(osimertinib, rociletinib) and second-generation ALK TKIs (ceritinib, alectinib).
Notably, increasing feasibility, accessibility, and application of molecular
profiling technologies has permitted dynamic growth in the identification of
actionable driver oncogenes. Emerging genomic aberrations for which TKIs have
shown impressive results in clinical trials and expansion of drug labels for
approved agents are awaited include ROS1 rearrangements (1-2% of tumors, drug:
crizotinib) and BRAF-V600E mutations (1-3% of tumors, drugs: vemurafenib,
dafrafenib + trametinib). Evolving genomic events in which TKI responses have
been reported in smaller series include MET exon 14 skipping mutations (2-4% of
tumors, drug: crizotinib); high-level MET amplification (1-2% of tumors, drug:
crizotinib); RET rearrangements (1% of tumors, drug: cabozantinib); and ERBB2
mutations (2-3% of tumors, drug: afatinib), among others. Unfortunately, the most
common genomic event in NSCLC, KRAS mutations (25-30% of tumors), is not
targetable with approved or in development small molecule inhibitors. Here, we
review currently approved, emerging, and evolving systemic precision therapies
matched with their driver oncogenes for the management of advanced NSCLC.

© The Author(s), 2015.

DOI: 10.1177/1753465815617871 
PMID: 26620497  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Chem Biol Drug Des. 2016 Apr;87(4):635-43. doi: 10.1111/cbdd.12692. Epub 2015 Dec
29.

Novel Quinazoline Derivatives Bearing Various 4-Aniline Moieties as Potent EGFR
Inhibitors with Enhanced Activity Against NSCLC Cell Lines.

Wang C(1), Sun Y(1), Zhu X(1), Wu B(1), Wang Q(1), Zhen Y(1), Shu X(1), Liu K(1),
Zhou Y(2), Ma X(1).

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmacy, Dalian Medical University, Dalian, 116044, China.
(2)Department of Dermatology and Skin Science, University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, BC, V5Z 4E8, Canada.

A class of novel quinazoline derivatives bearing various C-4 aniline moieties was
synthesized and biologically evaluated as potent epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR) inhibitors for intervention of non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Most of
these inhibitors are comparable to gefitinib in inhibiting these cancer cell
lines, and several of them even displayed superior inhibitory activity. In
particular, analogue 5b with an IC50 of 0.10 μm against the EGFR wild-type A431
cells and 5c with an IC50 of 0.001 μm against the gefitinib-sensitive HCC827
cells (EGFR del E746-A750) was identified as highly active EGFR inhibitors. It
was also significant that the discovered analogue 2f, not only has high potency
against the gefitinib-sensitive cells (IC50 = 0.031 μm), but also possesses
remarkably improved activity against the gefitinib-resistant cells. In addition, 
the enzymatic assays and the Western blot analysis for evaluating the effects of 
the typical inhibitors indicated that these molecules strongly interfere with the
EGFR target.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

DOI: 10.1111/cbdd.12692 
PMID: 26613384  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Lung Cancer. 2015 Dec;90(3):477-83. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2015.09.025. Epub 2015
Oct 9.

RECIST progression patterns during EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor treatment of
advanced non-small cell lung cancer patients harboring an EGFR mutation.

Yoshida T(1), Yoh K(2), Niho S(2), Umemura S(2), Matsumoto S(2), Ohmatsu H(2),
Ohe Y(3), Goto K(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Oncology, National Cancer Center Hospital East,
Kashiwa, Chiba, Japan; Department of Thoracic Oncology, Aichi Cancer Center
Hospital, Nagoya, Aichi, Japan. Electronic address: t.yoshida@aichi-cc.jp.
(2)Department of Thoracic Oncology, National Cancer Center Hospital East,
Kashiwa, Chiba, Japan. (3)Department of Thoracic Oncology, National Cancer Center
Hospital East, Kashiwa, Chiba, Japan; Department of Thoracic Oncology, National
Cancer Center Hospital, Tokyo, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Progression patterns at the response evaluation criteria in solid
tumors-progressive disease (RECIST-PD) during treatment with epidermal growth
factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors (EGFR-TKIs) for advanced non-small
cell lung cancer (NSCLC) in patients harboring an EGFR mutation are clinically
heterogeneous. We evaluated the association between progression patterns during
EGFR-TKI treatment and prognosis after treatment in such patients.
METHODS: From 2008 to 2012, 160 consecutive patients with advanced NSCLC
harboring an EGFR mutation were treated with EGFR-TKIs (erlotinib or gefitinib). 
Among these, 104 who experienced RECIST-PD were retrospectively evaluated for
initial response to EGFR-TKIs, progression sites, focus of progression (solitary 
lesion or multiple lesions), symptom status at RECIST-PD evaluation, and
post-progression survival (PPS).
RESULTS: Of 104 patients, 96 (92%) had an EGFR major mutation, and 50 (48%)
received EGFR-TKIs as first-line treatment. Overall response rate and median time
to RECIST-PD on EGFR-TKIs were 68% and 8.2 months, respectively. At the time of
attaining RECIST-PD status, 44 (42%) patients were symptomatic, and 60 (58%) were
asymptomatic. Progression sites at RECIST-PD were isolated brain in 17 (16%)
patients and systemic in 87 (84%): 24 (23%) had a solitary lesion, and 80 (77%)
had multiple lesions. After RECIST-PD assessment, 40 (38%) patients continued
EGFR-TKIs, and 25 (24%) switched to cytotoxic agents; 10 (10%) received local
radiotherapy for an isolated progression site (brain 6; bone 3; lung 1). Median
PPS was 10.8 months. Multivariate analysis revealed that asymptomatic or solitary
lesion status was associated with significantly longer PPS (asymptomatic: HR
0.36, 95% CI 0.21-0.62, P<0.01; solitary progression lesion: HR 0.45, 95% CI
0.18-99, P=0.04).
CONCLUSIONS: Progression patterns at the RECIST-PD during EGFR-TKI treatment of
advanced NSCLC in patients harboring an EGFR mutation are widely diverse, and
might be associated with clinical outcome after treatment failure.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2015.09.025 
PMID: 26604031  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. PLoS One. 2015 Nov 24;10(11):e0142500. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0142500.
eCollection 2015.

The Efficacy and Safety of Icotinib in Patients with Advanced Non-Small Cell Lung
Cancer Previously Treated with Chemotherapy: A Single-Arm, Multi-Center,
Prospective Study.

Hu X(1), Zhang L(2), Shi Y(1), Zhou C(3), Liu X(4), Wang D(5), Song Y(6), Li
Q(7), Feng J(8), Qin S(9), Xv N(10), Zhou J(10), Zhang L(11), Hu C(12), Zhang
S(13), Luo R(14), Wang J(15), Tan F(16), Wang Y(16), Ding L(16), Sun Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Cancer Institute and Hospital, Chinese Academy
of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing Key Laboratory of
Clinical Study on Anticancer Molecular Targeted Drugs, Beijing, China. (2)Sun
Yat-Sen University Cancer Center, Guangzhou, China. (3)Shanghai Pulmonary
Hospital, Tongji University, Shanghai, China. (4)Department of Pulmonary
Oncology, 307 Hospital of the Academy of Military Medical Sciences, Cancer
Center, Beijing, China. (5)Third Affiliated Hospital, The Third Military Medical 
University of People's Liberation Army, Chongqing, China. (6)Nanjing Military
General Hospital, Nanjing, China. (7)Changhai Hospital, The Second Military
Medical University, Shanghai, China. (8)Jiangsu Province Cancer Hospital,
Nanjing, China. (9)Nanjing Bayi Hospital of People's Liberation Army, Nanjing,
China. (10)The First Affiliated Hospital of College of Medicine, Zhejiang
University, Hangzhou, China. (11)Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Beijing, 
China. (12)The Second Xiangya Hospital, Changsha, China. (13)Beijing Chest
Hospital, Capital Medical University, Beijing Tuberculosis and Thoracic Tumor
Research Institute, Beijing, China. (14)Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical
University, Guangzhou, China. (15)Beijing Cancer Hospital, Beijing, China.
(16)Betta Pharmaceuticals Co, Ltd, Hangzhou, China.

BACKGROUND: Icotinib is a small molecule targeting epidermal growth factor
receptor tyrosine kinase, which shows non-inferior efficacy and better safety
comparing to gefitinib in previous phase III trial. The present study was
designed to further evaluate the efficacy and safety of icotinib in patients with
advanced non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) previously treated with
platinum-based chemotherapy.
METHODS: Patients with NSCLC progressing after one or two lines of chemotherapy
were enrolled to receive oral icotinib (125 mg tablet, three times per day). The 
primary endpoint was progression-free survival. The secondary endpoints included 
overall survival, objective response rate, time to progression, quality of life
and safety.
RESULTS: From March 16, 2010 to October 9, 2011, 128 patients from 15 centers
nationwide were enrolled, in which 124 patients were available for efficacy
evaluation and 127 patients were evaluable for safety. The median
progression-free survival and time to progression were 5.0 months (95%CI 2.9-6.6 
m) and 5.4 months (95%CI 3.1-7.9 m), respectively. The objective response rate
and disease control rate were 25.8% and 67.7% respectively. Median overall
survival exceeded 17.6 months (95%CI 14.2 m-NA) according to censored data.
Further follow-up of overall survival is ongoing. The most frequent
treatment-related adverse events were rash (26%, 33/127), diarrhea (12.6%,
16/127) and elevation of transaminase (15.7%, 20/127).
CONCLUSIONS: In general, this study showed similar efficacy and numerically
better safety when compared with that in ICOGEN trial, further confirming the
efficacy and safety of icotinib in treating patients with advanced NSCLC
previously treated with chemotherapy.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov NCT02486354.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0142500 
PMCID: PMC4657981
PMID: 26599904  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Oncol Res Treat. 2015;38(11):560-9. doi: 10.1159/000441367. Epub 2015 Oct 21.

Mutation Profiling of Lung Cancers with Long-Term Response to Gefitinib Therapy.

Gautschi O(1), Stadelmann C, Aebersold-Keller F, König K, Büttner R, Heukamp LC, 
Betticher D, Baumann C, Buser K, Calderoni A, Casty A, DʼAddario G, Irlé C, Mamot
C, Morant R, Trojan A, Pellicioli E, Jehle-Schwertfeger S, Aebi S, Diebold J.

Author information: 
(1)Tumorzentrum, Luzerner Kantonsspital, Lucerne, Switzerland.

BACKGROUND: The role of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase
inhibitors (TKI) in the treatment of patients with advanced non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC) and unknown EGFR mutation status has recently been questioned.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We conducted a retrospective study of patients with unknown
EGFR mutation status and long-term response (LTR) to gefitinib in the Swiss
Iressa expanded access program (EAP). We assessed patient characteristics, and
performed Sanger sequencing and next generation sequencing on archived tumor
tissue. We hypothesized that EGFR mutations are prevalent in patients with LTR.
RESULTS: Of 430 patients in the EAP, 18 (4%) fulfilled our definition of LTR, and
16 of them had archived tumor tissue. Patient characteristics were as expected
for age, sex, and smoking history. Median duration of therapy was 38 months
(range 24-142 months). Sanger sequencing revealed EGFR exon 18-21 mutations in 6 
(38%) of the tumors. Next generation sequencing revealed no further EGFR-mutated 
cases, but reported in 15 (94%) of the tumors mutations in other genes (ALK,
BRAF, DDR2, KEAP1, MET, PTEN, STK11) previously associated with NSCLC.
CONCLUSION: Larger studies are needed to define the prognostic values of
different driver mutations in patients with NSCLC.

© 2015 S. Karger GmbH, Freiburg.

DOI: 10.1159/000441367 
PMID: 26599269  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Acta Pharm Sin B. 2015 Sep;5(5):390-401. doi: 10.1016/j.apsb.2015.07.001. Epub
2015 Jul 26.

Mechanisms of resistance to EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors.

Huang L(1), Fu L(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Oncology in Southern China, Cancer Center, Sun Yat-Sen
University, Guangzhou 510060, China.

Since the discovery that non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is driven by
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutations, the EGFR tyrosine kinase
inhibitors (EGFR-TKIs, e.g., gefitinib and elrotinib) have been effectively used 
for clinical treatment. However, patients eventually develop drug resistance.
Resistance to EGFR-TKIs is inevitable due to various mechanisms, such as the
secondary mutation (T790M), activation of alternative pathways (c-Met, HGF, AXL),
aberrance of the downstream pathways (K-RAS mutations, loss of PTEN), impairment 
of the EGFR-TKIs-mediated apoptosis pathway (BCL2-like 11/BIM deletion
polymorphism), histologic transformation, ATP binding cassette (ABC) transporter 
effusion, etc. Here we review and summarize the known resistant mechanisms to
EGFR-TKIs and provide potential targets for development of new therapeutic
strategies.

DOI: 10.1016/j.apsb.2015.07.001 
PMCID: PMC4629442
PMID: 26579470  [PubMed]


279. Anticancer Drugs. 2016 Mar;27(3):251-3. doi: 10.1097/CAD.0000000000000317.

Afatinib-refractory brain metastases from EGFR-mutant non-small-cell lung cancer 
successfully controlled with erlotinib: a case report.

Nonagase Y(1), Okamoto K, Iwasa T, Yoshida T, Tanaka K, Takeda M, Kaneda H,
Shimizu T, Tsurutani J, Nakagawa K.

Author information: 
(1)aDepartment of Medical Oncology, Kinki University Faculty of Medicine
bDepartment of Medical Oncology, Kishiwada City Hospital, Osaka, Japan.

Both afatinib and erlotinib are tyrosine kinase inhibitors that inhibit aberrant 
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) signals in non-small-cell lung cancer
(NSCLC). Afatinib is an irreversible inhibitor directed against EGFR, ErbB-2, and
ErbB-4, whereas erlotinib is a reversible inhibitor directed against EGFR only.
Although afatinib has been shown to be effective in the treatment for
erlotinib-refractory and/or gefitinib-refractory central nervous system
metastases from NSCLC, little is known about the efficacy of erlotinib for
afatinib-refractory central nervous system metastases. In the present report we
describe a case of EGFR mutation-positive NSCLC in which brain metastases
developed during first-line afatinib treatment. Whole-brain radiation therapy and
substitution of erlotinib for afatinib led to successful shrinkage of the brain
metastases. Our report highlights the potential benefit of erlotinib for the
management of brain metastases refractory over afatinib in patients with NSCLC.

DOI: 10.1097/CAD.0000000000000317 
PMID: 26575001  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. J Clin Pharm Ther. 2015 Dec;40(6):661-71. doi: 10.1111/jcpt.12332. Epub 2015 Nov 
17.

Effect of smoking status on progression-free and overall survival in non-small
cell lung cancer patients receiving erlotinib or gefitinib: a meta-analysis.

Sohn HS(1), Kwon JW(2), Shin S(3), Kim HS(4), Kim H(5).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Clinical Pharmacy, CHA University, Gyeonggi-do, Korea.
(2)College of Pharmacy, Research Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kyungpook 
National University, Daegu, Korea. (3)College of Pharmacy, Ajou University,
Suwon, Korea. (4)College of Medicine, The Catholic University of Korea, Seoul,
Korea. (5)College of Pharmacy, Sookmyung Women's University, Seoul, Korea.

WHAT IS KNOWN AND OBJECTIVE: Epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase
inhibitors (EGFR-TKIs) such as erlotinib or gefitinib are indicated for the
treatment of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). EGFR tyrosine kinase domain
mutations have been reported to be associated with EGFR-TKI response in patients 
with NSCLC. Certain patient subgroups in which EGFR somatic mutations are more
frequently observed are thought to derive more clinical benefit from EGFR-TKI
therapy. We performed a systematic review and meta-analysis to summarize the
evidence regarding the association of smoking status with overall survival (OS)
and progression-free survival (PFS) in patients with NSCLC receiving EGFR-TKI
therapy with erlotinib or gefitinib.
METHODS: Eligible studies were selected by two independent reviewers using the
inclusion and exclusion criteria predefined in the protocol. Eligible studies
included those evaluating the association of smoking status with OS and PFS in
patients with NSCLC receiving erlotinib or gefitinib. Non-clinical studies, case 
reports, non-peer-reviewed abstracts and non-relevant studies were excluded.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION: Data on OS and PFS in patients with NSCLC treated with
EGFR-TKIs were available in nine and ten trials, respectively. The OS and PFS
from both the treatment and control groups were not significantly different
between never smokers and former or current smokers (OS: odds ratio [OR], 0·80;
95% confidence interval [CI], 0·63-1·09; PFS: OR, 0·75; 95% CI, 0·49-1·14),
respectively. However, in comparison within each smoking group, EGFR-TKI
treatment led to more favourable OS and PFS in never smokers (OS: OR, 0·55; 95%
CI, 0·42-0·73; PFS: OR, 0·43; 95% CI, 0·33-0·54), compared with former or current
smokers (OS: OR, 0·89; 95% CI, 0·80-0·97; PFS: OR, 0·73; 95% CI, 0·62-0·85).
WHAT IS NEW AND CONCLUSION: Among patients with NSCLC receiving EGFR-TKI therapy 
with erlotinib or gefitinib, never smokers appear to show longer OS and PFS as
compared to former or current smokers. However, this is based on indirect
comparisons and more robust larger head-to-head trials are required for more
robust inferences.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jcpt.12332 
PMID: 26573867  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Vopr Onkol. 2015;61(4):676-80.

[Gefitinib therapy in advanced non-small cell lung cancer in patients with EGFR
mutations: cost-effectiveness analysis].

[Article in Russian]

Protsenko SA, Rudakova AV.

Therapy for advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is very complex clinical 
problem. The optimal choice of therapy demands not only the analysis of data on
clinical effectiveness, but also an assessment of cost-effectiveness of the
applied drugs. The current options for first- or second/third-line of lung cancer
treatment are tirosine kinase inhibitors (TKI)--gefitinib, erlotinib and
afatinib. According to the received results TKI first-line therapy for NSCLC in
patients with EGFR mutations is not only clinically effective but also is
economically acceptable from a position of the Russian budgetary health care. TKI
second-line therapy for NSCLC patients who fail first-line therapy also provides 
improvement of the quality of life and prolonged time to progression. Comparable 
clinical effectiveness and safety of erlotinib and gefitinib in patients with
EGFR mutations allows making drug choice on the basis of regional price
characteristics. Afatinib is highly effective both in the first- and in the
second/third-line of therapy in patients with the most frequent mutations (a
deletion in exon 19 or a point mutation L858R in exon 21) but first-line therapy 
demands an increase of financial expenses caused by substantial increase of time 
to progression and duration of therapy. Thus TKI therapy of both the first-, and 
second/third-line of patients with NSCLC with EGFR mutations is characterized by 
acceptable cost-effectiveness.


PMID: 26571844  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Curr Cancer Drug Targets. 2015;15(9):792-802.

Role of EGFR Monoclonal Antibodies in the Management of Non-small Cell Lung
Cancer.

Takeda M(1), Nakagawa K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Kinki University Faculty of Medicine, 377-2
Ohno-higashi, Osaka-Sayama, Osaka 589-8511, Japan. takedamasa2004@yahoo.co.jp.

Dysregulation of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) signaling due to
receptor overexpression or activating mutation is associated with cancer cell
proliferation, metastasis, and survival. EGFR has become an important therapeutic
target for non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), and several EGFR-targeted agents, 
such as tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) and monoclonal antibodies (mAbs), have 
been developed. The EGFR-TKIs gefitinib, erlotinib, and afatinib have been
approved for the treatment of advanced NSCLC, and sensitivity to these drugs has 
been shown to be associated with the presence of EGFR mutations. Various mAbs to 
EGFR have also been evaluated in preclinical and clinical studies. In particular,
phase III trials have shown a clinically significant survival benefit for
addition of the anti-EGFR mAbs cetuximab or necitumumab to a platinum doublet in 
chemotherapy-naïve patients with advanced NSCLC. We here summarize the results of
completed and ongoing clinical trials of EGFR-targeted mAbs for the treatment of 
NSCLC.


PMID: 26567882  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Clin Drug Investig. 2016 Jan;36(1):77-86. doi: 10.1007/s40261-015-0356-9.

Health Resource Utilization in Patients with Advanced Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer 
Receiving Chemotherapy in China.

Shi J(1), Zhu J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy, Shanghai Chest Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, Shanghai, China. shelleyshi@126.com. (2)Department of Pharmacy,
Shanghai Chest Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China.
jone_zhu@163.com.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Chemotherapy is the preferred treatment regimen for
advanced lung cancer patients. This study investigated the health resources
utilized by and medical expenses of patients with non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC) as well as the influence of various chemotherapy regimens on the final
medical costs in China. The aim of this study was to provide physicians with a
reference to use as the basis for their choice of treatment.
METHODS: Data were collected from the Shanghai Chest Hospital's medical charts
and billing database. The collected patient information included the baseline
characteristics, medical history, chemotherapy regimens, and medical costs, which
were used to estimate the health resources utilized by patients and the cost of
treatment.
RESULTS: This study included 328 patients, and the average total medical cost was
$US14,165. This cost included drugs, which accounted for as much as 78.91% of the
total cost, and chemotherapy drugs, which accounted for 51.58% of total drug
expenses. The most frequently utilized chemotherapy drug was carboplatin, and the
most expensive chemotherapy drug was erlotinib. In drug combinations, gemcitabine
was utilized most frequently, the combination of gemcitabine and paclitaxel was
the most expensive, and cisplatin was the least expensive drug. Epidermal growth 
factor receptor-positive patients were treated with targeted drug therapy
(icotinib, erlotinib, and gefitinib). The use of recombinant human endostatin was
often combined with a vinorelbine plus cisplatin regimen. Traditional Chinese
medicines were the most frequently utilized non-chemotherapy drugs, and these
drugs were also the most expensive.
CONCLUSIONS: The final cost significantly depended on the specific chemotherapy
regimen; thus, the rationale and cost of the chemotherapy regimen and adjuvant
chemotherapy should be considered in patients with advanced NSCLC.

DOI: 10.1007/s40261-015-0356-9 
PMID: 26563152  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Expert Rev Respir Med. 2016 Feb;10(2):223-34. doi: 10.1586/17476348.2016.1115723.
Epub 2015 Dec 4.

Risk of elevated transaminases in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients
treated with erlotinib, gefitinib and afatinib: a meta-analysis.

Abdel-Rahman O(1), Ahmed H(2), ElHalawani H(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Clinical Oncology Department, Faculty of Medicine , Ain Shams University ,
Cairo , Egypt. (2)b Clinical Oncology Department , Nasser Institute , Cairo ,
Egypt.

This meta-analysis has been conducted to determine the risk of elevated
transaminases associated with the use of erlotinib, gefitinib and afatinib in
patients with non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Studies eligible for our
analysis included randomized phase II and III trials of patients with NSCLC on
the three agents which describe events of elevated alanine aminotransferase (ALT)
and aspartate aminotransferase (AST). Initial database search revealed 300
relevant citations. After excluding non-eligible studies, 24 trials were
considered eligible for the analysis. The relative risk (RR) of all-grade
elevated ALT and AST was 1.82 (95% CI: 1.42-2.34; p < 0.00001) and 2.09 (95% CI: 
1.54-2.83; p < 0.00001) respectively; while for high-grade elevated ALT and AST, 
it was 9.23 (95% CI: 5.06-16.85; p < 0.00001) and 1.78 (95% CI: 0.5-6.26;
p = 0.37), respectively. Our meta-analysis has shown that there is an overall
elevated risk of elevated transaminases with the use of these agents.

DOI: 10.1586/17476348.2016.1115723 
PMID: 26558417  [PubMed - in process]


285. Contemp Oncol (Pozn). 2015;19(3):201-6. doi: 10.5114/wo.2015.52655. Epub 2015 Jul
8.

MicroRNA-7 enhances cytotoxicity induced by gefitinib in non-small cell lung
cancer via inhibiting the EGFR and IGF1R signalling pathways.

Zhao JG(1), Men WF(2), Tang J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Shengjing Hospital of China Medical University, China. (2)Department of
Thoracic surgery, Shengjing Hospital of China Medical University, China.

Gefitinib is a tyrosine kinase inhibitor that has been used for the treatment of 
non-small-cell lung carcinoma (NSCLC). The ability of miR-7 to enhance
gefitinib-induced cytotoxicity in NSCLC cells was evaluated in this study. We
found that miR-7 significantly decreased the IC50 of gefitinib and inhibited cell
growth. G0/G1 cell cycle arrest and cell apoptosis were increased after the
treatment of gefitinib coupled with miR-7 transfection. In addition, levels of
Raf1, IGF1R, and PI3K and phosphorylation levels of Akt and ERK were also
significantly decreased. Our results suggest that miR-7 may provide a novel
therapeutic target for the treatment of NSCLCs.

DOI: 10.5114/wo.2015.52655 
PMCID: PMC4631286
PMID: 26557760  [PubMed]


286. Korean J Intern Med. 2015 Nov;30(6):891-8. doi: 10.3904/kjim.2015.30.6.891. Epub 
2015 Oct 30.

Clinical efficacy of erlotinib, a salvage treatment for non-small cell lung
cancer patients following gefitinib failure.

Cho KM(1,)(2), Keam B(1,)(3), Kim TM(1,)(3), Lee SH(1,)(3), Kim DW(1,)(3), Heo
DS(1,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul,
Korea. (2)Department of Internal Medicine, Kyung Hee University School of
Medicine, Seoul, Korea. (3)Cancer Research Institute, Seoul National University
College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: The purpose of this study was to identify predictive factors for
erlotinib treatment in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients following
gefitinib failure.
METHODS: Forty-five patients with NSCLC who were treated with erlotinib following
gefitinib failure at Seoul National University Hospital between August 2005 and
November 2011 were enrolled. Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutation
status, pathologic findings and other clinical factors, including response to
tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) and progression-free survival (PFS), were
evaluated.
RESULTS: Of the 45 patients, 40 patients (88.8%) had adenocarcinoma. The
following EGFR mutations were observed: five patients with a deletion of exon 19,
six patients with an L858R mutation, three patients with wild-type EGFR, and 31
patients with unknown mutations. The response rate of erlotinib was 4.4%, and
stable disease was 42.2%. The median PFS for erlotinib was 2.6 months (95%
confidence interval, 1.4 to 3.7). Patients with a PFS ≥ 4 months during previous 
gefitinib treatment had a significantly longer PFS with erlotinib (3.3 months vs.
1.6 months, respectively; p < 0.01) than patients with PFS < 4 months with
gefitinib. According to multivariate analyses, PFS ≥ 4 months for previous
gefitinib treatment was significantly associated with prolonged PFS with
erlotinib (p = 0.04). However, the response rate of gefitinib and treatment
sequence were not associated with prolonged PFS with erlotinib (p = 0.28 and p = 
0.67, respectively).
CONCLUSIONS: Following rechallenge with the EGFR TKI erlotinib following
gefitinib failure, patients who showed prolonged PFS with gefitinib benefit from 
erlotinib. However, further prospective studies are needed to confirm these
findings.

DOI: 10.3904/kjim.2015.30.6.891 
PMCID: PMC4642019
PMID: 26552465  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Cancer Sci. 2016 Jan;107(1):45-52. doi: 10.1111/cas.12845. Epub 2015 Dec 3.

Antitumor effect of afatinib, as a human epidermal growth factor receptor
2-targeted therapy, in lung cancers harboring HER2 oncogene alterations.

Suzawa K(1), Toyooka S(1,)(2,)(3), Sakaguchi M(4), Morita M(3,)(5), Yamamoto
H(1), Tomida S(3), Ohtsuka T(1), Watanabe M(1), Hashida S(1,)(2), Maki Y(1), Soh 
J(1,)(3), Asano H(1), Tsukuda K(1), Miyoshi S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic, Breast and Endocrinological Surgery, Okayama
University Graduate School of Medicine, Dentistry and Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Okayama, Japan. (2)Department of Clinical Genomic Medicine, Okayama University
Graduate School of Medicine, Dentistry and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Okayama,
Japan. (3)Department of Biobank, Okayama University Graduate School of Medicine, 
Dentistry and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Okayama, Japan. (4)Department of Cell
Biology, Okayama University Graduate School of Medicine, Dentistry and
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Okayama, Japan. (5)Department of Biorepository Research 
and Networking, Okayama University Graduate School of Medicine, Dentistry and
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Okayama, Japan.

Human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) is a member of the HER family of 
proteins containing four receptor tyrosine kinases. It plays an important role in
the pathogenesis of certain human cancers. In non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC),
HER2 amplification or mutations have been reported. However, little is known
about the benefit of HER2-targeted therapy for NSCLCs harboring HER2 alterations.
In this study, we investigated the antitumor effect of afatinib, an irreversible 
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)-HER2 dual inhibitor, in lung cancers
harboring HER2 oncogene alterations, including novel HER2 mutations in the
transmembrane domain, which we recently identified. Normal bronchial epithelial
cells, BEAS-2B, ectopically overexpressing wild-type HER2 or mutants
(A775insYVMA, G776VC, G776LC, P780insGSP, V659E, and G660D) showed constitutive
autophosphorylation of HER2 and activation of downstream signaling. They were
sensitive to afatinib, but insensitive to gefitinib. Furthermore, we examined the
antitumor activity of afatinib and gefitinib in several NSCLC cell lines, and
investigated the association between their genetic alterations and sensitivity to
afatinib treatment. In HER2-altered NSCLC cells (H2170, Calu-3, and H1781),
afatinib downregulated the phosphorylation of HER2 and EGFR as well as their
downstream signaling, and induced an antiproliferative effect through G1 arrest
and apoptotic cell death. In contrast, HER2- or EGFR-non-dependent NSCLC cells
were insensitive to afatinib. In addition, these effects were confirmed in vivo
by using a xenograft mouse model of HER2-altered lung cancer cells. Our results
suggest that afatinib is a therapeutic option as a HER2-targeted therapy for
NSCLC harboring HER2 amplification or mutations.

© 2015 The Authors. Cancer Science published by Wiley Publishing Asia Pty Ltd on 
behalf of Japanese Cancer Association.

DOI: 10.1111/cas.12845 
PMCID: PMC4724821
PMID: 26545934  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Qual Life Res. 2016 Jun;25(6):1441-9. doi: 10.1007/s11136-015-1174-5. Epub 2015
Nov 7.

Health-related quality of life after first-line anti-cancer treatments for
advanced non-small cell lung cancer in clinical practice.

Yang SC(1,)(2), Lai WW(3), Hsiue TR(1), Su WC(1), Lin CK(4), Hwang JS(5), Wang
JD(6,)(7,)(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, National Cheng Kung University Hospital,
College of Medicine, National Cheng Kung University, 138 Sheng Li Road, Tainan,
704, Taiwan. (2)Department of Public Health, College of Medicine, National Cheng 
Kung University, 138 Sheng Li Road, Tainan, 704, Taiwan. (3)Department of
Surgery, National Cheng Kung University Hospital, College of Medicine, National
Cheng Kung University, 138 Sheng Li Road, Tainan, 704, Taiwan. (4)Department of
Environmental Health, Harvard School of Public Health, 665 Huntington Avenue,
Boston, MA, 02115, USA. (5)Institute of Statistical Science, Academia Sinica, 128
Academia Road Section 2, Taipei, 115, Taiwan. (6)Department of Internal Medicine,
National Cheng Kung University Hospital, College of Medicine, National Cheng Kung
University, 138 Sheng Li Road, Tainan, 704, Taiwan. jdwang121@gmail.com.
(7)Department of Public Health, College of Medicine, National Cheng Kung
University, 138 Sheng Li Road, Tainan, 704, Taiwan. jdwang121@gmail.com.
(8)Department of Occupational and Environmental Medicine, National Cheng Kung
University Hospital, College of Medicine, National Cheng Kung University, 138
Sheng Li Road, Tainan, 704, Taiwan. jdwang121@gmail.com.

PURPOSE: This study attempted to compare changes in the Quality-of-Life (QoL)
scores after three different first-line anti-cancer treatments for advanced
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) in a real-world clinical setting.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: From May 2011 to December 2013, we prospectively measured
the QoL scores of patients with locally advanced or metastatic NSCLC using the
World Health Organization Quality-of-Life-Brief (WHOQOL-BREF) questionnaire. Each
QoL measurement was matched by age and sex with one healthy referent from the
National Health Interview Survey. Dynamic changes in patients' QoL scores and
major determinants were repeatedly assessed by construction of a mixed-effects
model to adjust for possible confounders.
RESULTS: A total of 336 patients with 577 QoL measurements related to first-line 
anti-cancer treatments were enrolled. Performance status was the most important
predictor of QoL scores in all domains after controlling for potential
confounders. With age- and sex-matched healthy subjects as the reference,
patients treated with gemcitabine + platinum showed significantly lower scores in
multiple physical and psychological domain items in the WHOQOL-BREF. However,
pemetrexed + platinum and gefitinib/erlotinib affected patients' QoL scores in
'energy/fatigue' and 'daily activities' with smaller magnitudes, and the scores
appeared to improve after 3-4 months of treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: Patients receiving gemcitabine + platinum as first-line anti-cancer 
treatment for advanced NSCLC experienced relatively poor QoL scores throughout
treatment course. Studies to develop a real-time computerized system
automatically updating the mixed-effects model for QoL to facilitate
participatory clinical decision making by physicians, patients, and their
families merit further research.

DOI: 10.1007/s11136-015-1174-5 
PMID: 26545386  [PubMed - in process]


289. Sci Rep. 2015 Nov 6;5:16348. doi: 10.1038/srep16348.

(Z)3,4,5,4'-trans-tetramethoxystilbene, a new analogue of resveratrol, inhibits
gefitinb-resistant non-small cell lung cancer via selectively elevating
intracellular calcium level.

Fan XX(1), Yao XJ(1), Xu SW(1), Wong VK(1), He JX(2), Ding J(3), Xue WW(4),
Mujtaba T(5), Michelangeli F(5), Huang M(3), Huang J(2), Xiao DK(2), Jiang ZB(1),
Zhou YL(1), Kam RK(6), Liu L(1), Leung EL(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Quality Research in Chinese Medicine/Macau Institute
For Applied Research in Medicine and Health, Macau University of Science and
Technology, Macau (SAR), China. (2)Guangzhou Institute of Respiratory Disease,
State Key Laboratory of Respiratory Disease, The 1st Affiliated Hospital of
Guangzhou Medical College, Guangzhou, China. (3)State Key Laboratory of Drug
Research, Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academic of Sciences,
Shanghai, China. (4)Innovative Drug Research Centre, Chongqing University,
Chongqing, China. (5)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Chester,
Chester, United Kingdom. (6)Department Chemical Pathology, Faculty of Medicine,
the Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong (SAR), China.

Calcium is a second messenger which is required for regulation of many cellular
processes. However, excessive elevation or prolonged activation of calcium
signaling would lead to cell death. As such, selectively regulating calcium
signaling could be an alternative approach for anti-cancer therapy. Recently, we 
have identified an effective analogue of resveratrol,
(Z)3,4,5,4'-trans-tetramethoxystilbene (TMS) which selectively elevated the
intracellular calcium level in gefitinib-resistant (G-R) non-small-cell lung
cancer (NSCLC) cells. TMS exhibited significant inhibitory effect on G-R NSCLC
cells, but not other NSCLC cells and normal lung epithelial cells. The
phosphorylation and activation of EGFR were inhibited by TMS in G-R cells. TMS
induced caspase-independent apoptosis and autophagy by directly binding to SERCA 
and causing endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress and AMPK activation. Proteomics
analysis also further confirmed that mTOR pathway, which is the downstream of
AMPK, was significantly suppressed by TMS. JNK, the cross-linker of ER stress and
mTOR pathway was significantly activated by TMS. In addition, the inhibition of
JNK activation can partially block the effect of TMS. Taken together, TMS showed 
promising anti-cancer activity by mediating calcium signaling pathway and
inducing apoptosis as well as autophagy in G-R NSCLC cells, providing strategy in
designing multi-targeting drug for treating G-R patients.

DOI: 10.1038/srep16348 
PMCID: PMC4635386
PMID: 26542098  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Int J Cancer. 2016 Jun 1;138(11):2549-61. doi: 10.1002/ijc.29915. Epub 2015 Dec
15.

Targeted therapies for treatment of non-small cell lung cancer--Recent advances
and future perspectives.

Minguet J(1,)(2), Smith KH(1), Bramlage P(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)European Institute of Cancer Research (EICR), Carrer Del Passeig, 2, Terrassa,
08221, Spain. (2)Institute of Pharmacology and Preventive Medicine (IPPMED),
Bahnhofstr. 20, Cloppenburg, 49661, Germany.

Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is one of the most deadly cancers worldwide,
with poor prognosis once the disease has progressed past the point at which
surgery is a viable option. Whilst chemotherapy has improved survival over recent
decades, there is still great need for improvements in treatments for patients
with advanced disease. Over the last decade, a variety of such drugs have
received market approval for treating NSCLC, with a variety of others in the
pipeline. Here, we review the development of targeted therapies for the treatment
of advanced or metastatic NSCLC, including those already in clinical practice and
those in early trials. The epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) inhibitors,
gefitinib, erlotinib and afatinib; the anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK)
inhibitor, crizotinib; and the anti-vascular endothelial growth factor receptor
monoclonal antibody, bevacizumab, are already providing improved survival for
patients with NSCLC. Moreover, the discovery of EGFR mutations and ALK
rearrangements has enabled the identification of patients who are more likely to 
benefit from a specific drug. The recent approval of the immune checkpoint
inhibitor nivolumab, along with the designation of alectinib and MPDL3280A as
breakthrough therapies by the FDA, demonstrates how rapidly this area of research
is expanding. Over the last decade there has been significant progress made in
the treatment of advanced NSCLC, and the large and varied selection of drugs
currently undergoing trials provide great promise for improving the prognosis of 
this highly prevalent and deadly form of cancer.

© 2015 UICC.

DOI: 10.1002/ijc.29915 
PMID: 26537995  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. PLoS One. 2015 Nov 4;10(11):e0141795. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0141795.
eCollection 2015.

Effect of ABCG2/BCRP Expression on Efflux and Uptake of Gefitinib in NSCLC Cell
Lines.

Galetti M(1,)(2), Petronini PG(1), Fumarola C(1), Cretella D(1), La Monica S(1), 
Bonelli M(1), Cavazzoni A(1), Saccani F(1), Caffarra C(1), Andreoli R(1), Mutti
A(1,)(2), Tiseo M(3), Ardizzoni A(4), Alfieri RR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of Parma, Parma, 
Italy. (2)Italian Workers' Compensation Authority (INAIL), Research Centre at the
University of Parma, Parma, Italy. (3)Division of Medical Oncology, University
Hospital of Parma, Parma, Italy. (4)Medical Oncology Unit, S. Orsola-Malpighi
Hospital, Bologna, Italy.

BACKGROUND: BCRP/ABCG2 emerged as an important multidrug resistance protein,
because it confers resistance to several classes of cancer chemotherapeutic
agents and to a number of novel molecularly-targeted therapeutics such as
tyrosine kinase inhibitors. Gefitinib is an orally active, selective EGFR
tyrosine kinase inhibitor used in the treatment of patients with advanced non
small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) carrying activating EGFR mutations. Membrane
transporters may affect the distribution and accumulation of gefitinib in tumour 
cells; in particular a reduced intracellular level of the drug may result from
poor uptake, enhanced efflux or increased metabolism.
AIM: The present study, performed in a panel of NSCLC cell lines expressing
different ABCG2 plasma membrane levels, was designed to investigate the effect of
the efflux transporter ABCG2 on intracellular gefitinib accumulation, by
dissecting the contribution of uptake and efflux processes.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Our findings indicate that gefitinib, in lung cancer cells, 
inhibits ABCG2 activity, as previously reported. In addition, we suggest that
ABCG2 silencing or overexpression affects intracellular gefitinib content by
modulating the uptake rather than the efflux. Similarly, overexpression of ABCG2 
affected the expression of a number of drug transporters, altering the functional
activities of nutrient and drug transport systems, in particular inhibiting MPP, 
glucose and glutamine uptake.
CONCLUSIONS: Therefore, we conclude that gefitinib is an inhibitor but not a
substrate for ABCG2 and that ABCG2 overexpression may modulate the expression and
activity of other transporters involved in the uptake of different substrates
into the cells.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0141795 
PMCID: PMC4633241
PMID: 26536031  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Value Health. 2015 Nov;18(7):A459. doi: 10.1016/j.jval.2015.09.1183. Epub 2015
Oct 20.

Systematic Review Of Cost Effectiveness Of Gefitinib In The Treatment Of
Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer In China.

Hu C(1), Huang L(2), Zhao D(2), Xu L(2).

Author information: 
(1)Astrazeneca(China), Beijing, China. (2)Astrazeneca (China), Beijing, China.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jval.2015.09.1183 
PMID: 26532579  [PubMed]


293. Biomed Chromatogr. 2016 Jul;30(7):1150-4. doi: 10.1002/bmc.3642. Epub 2015 Dec 1.

Simultaneous and rapid determination of gefitinib, erlotinib and afatinib plasma 
levels using liquid chromatography/tandem mass spectrometry in patients with
non-small-cell lung cancer.

Hayashi H(1,)(2), Kita Y(1), Iihara H(1,)(2), Yanase K(3), Ohno Y(3), Hirose
C(2), Yamada M(2), Todoroki K(4), Kitaichi K(5), Minatoguchi S(3), Itoh Y(2),
Sugiyama T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Pharmacy Practice and Social Science, Gifu Pharmaceutical
University, Gifu, Japan. (2)Department of Pharmacy, Gifu University Hospital,
Gifu, Japan. (3)Second Department of Internal Medicine, Gifu University Graduate 
School of Medicine, Gifu, Japan. (4)Department of Analytical and Bio-Analytical
Chemistry, School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Shizuoka, Shizuoka,
Japan. (5)Laboratory of Pharmaceutics, Gifu Pharmaceutical University, Gifu,
Japan.

A simultaneous, selective, sensitive and rapid liquid chromatography/tandem mass 
spectrometry method was developed and validated for the quantification of
gefitinib, erlotinib and afatinib in 250 μL samples of human blood plasma.
Diluted plasma samples were extracted using a liquid-phase extraction procedure
with tert-butyl methyl ether. The three drugs were separated by high-performance 
liquid chromatography using a C18 column and an isocratic mobile phase running at
a flow rate of 0.2 mL/min for 5 min. The drugs were detected using a tandem mass 
spectrometer with electrospray ionization using imatinib as an internal standard.
Calibration curves were generated over the linear concentration range of 0.05-100
nm in plasma with a lower limit of quantification of 0.01 or 0.05 nm for all
compounds. Finally, the validated method was applied to a clinical
pharmacokinetic study in patients with nonsmall-cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
following the oral administration of afatinib. These results indicate that this
method is suitable for assessing the risks and benefits of chemotherapy in
patients with NSCLC and is useful for therapeutic drug monitoring for NSCLC
treatment. As far as we know, this is the first report on LC-MS/MS method for the
simultaneous quantification of NSCLC tyrosine kinase inhibitor plasma
concentrations including afatinib. Copyright © 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

Copyright © 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/bmc.3642 
PMID: 26525154  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Biomaterials. 2016 Jan;76:196-207. doi: 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2015.10.036. Epub 
2015 Oct 23.

siRNA delivered by EGFR-specific scFv sensitizes EGFR-TKI-resistant human lung
cancer cells.

Lu Y(1), Liu L(2), Wang Y(1), Li F(1), Zhang J(1), Ye M(1), Zhao H(3), Zhang
X(4), Zhang M(5), Zhao J(4), Yan B(4), Yang A(6), Feng H(7), Zhang R(8), Ren
X(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Xijing Hospital, Fourth Military Medical
University, 127 Changle West Road, Xi'an 710032, China. (2)Department of
Respiratory Medicine, Xijing Hospital, Fourth Military Medical University, 127
Changle West Road, Xi'an 710032, China; Department of Geriatrics, The Central
Hospital of Xianyang, 78 Renming East Road, Xianyang 712000, China. (3)The Organ 
Transplant Institute, The Fuzhou General Hospital (DongFang Hospital), Xiamen
University, 156 West Ring Road, Fuzhou 350025, China. (4)The State Key Laboratory
of Cancer Biology, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Fourth
Military Medical University, 169 Changle West Road, Xi'an 710032, China.
(5)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Naval General Hospital, 6 Fucheng Road,
Beijing 100048, China. (6)The State Key Laboratory of Cancer Biology, Department 
of Immunology, Fourth Military Medical University, 169 Changle West Road, Xi'an
710032, China. (7)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Naval General Hospital, 6
Fucheng Road, Beijing 100048, China. Electronic address: fenghs99@163.com. (8)The
State Key Laboratory of Cancer Biology, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular 
Biology, Fourth Military Medical University, 169 Changle West Road, Xi'an 710032,
China. Electronic address: ruizhang@fmmu.edu.cn. (9)Department of Respiratory
Medicine, Xijing Hospital, Fourth Military Medical University, 127 Changle West
Road, Xi'an 710032, China. Electronic address: majrenxl@fmmu.edu.cn.

The overexpression of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is closely
associated with a poor outcome in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), and EGFR is
an ideal biomarker for the targeted therapy of NSCLC. Although patients with
EGFR-activating mutations respond to EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors (EGFR-TKIs),
they eventually acquire resistance, which typically results from a secondary EGFR
mutation or the activation of other signaling pathways. Novel approaches to
overcome or prevent EGFR-TKI resistance are clinically important. In this study, 
we developed an EGFR-scFv-arginine nonamer peptide fusion protein, s-9R, as an
siRNA carrier. Here, we show that s-9R effectively and specifically delivers
EGFR-siRNAs, KRAS-siRNA and MET-siRNA into NSCLC cells and silences the
expression of target genes. The sensitivity of NSCLC cells to gefitinib was
restored after treatment with the s-9R/siRNA complex, and the apoptosis rates of 
the treated cells were significantly higher than those of the control groups.
Furthermore, the co-administration of s-9R/siRNA and gefitinib successfully
suppressed the progression of H1975 xenograft tumors and extended the life span
of tumor-bearing nude mice. Collectively, the results of this study provide not
only a new scFv derivative for delivering siRNA into EGFR-overexpressing,
TKI-resistant NSCLC cells but also a novel method for overcoming TKI resistance.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2015.10.036 
PMID: 26524539  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Oncotarget. 2015 Dec 29;6(42):44274-88. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.6236.

244-MPT overcomes gefitinib resistance in non-small cell lung cancer cells.

Zhang Y(1,)(2,)(3,)(4), Yao K(1,)(2,)(4), Shi C(1,)(3,)(4), Jiang Y(2), Liu
K(1,)(2,)(4), Zhao S(3), Chen H(1), Reddy K(1), Zhang C(1,)(2,)(5), Chang X(1),
Ryu J(1), Bode AM(1), Dong Z(2), Dong Z(1,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)The Hormel Institute, University of Minnesota, Austin, MN, USA.
(2)Pathophysiology Department, Basic Medical College, Zhengzhou University,
Henan, China. (3)The First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou University, Henan,
China. (4)The China-US (Henan) Hormel Cancer Institute, Henan, China. (5)The
Affiliated Cancer Hospital of Zhengzhou University, Henan, China.

The epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is known to play a critical role in
non-small cell lung cancer(NSCLC). Several EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors(TKIs),
such as gefitinib, have been used as effective clinical therapies for patients
with NSCLC. Unfortunately, acquired resistance to gefitinib commonly occurs after
6-12 months of treatment. The resistance is associated with the appearance of the
L858R/T790M double mutation of the EGFR. In our present study, we discovered a
compound,referred to as 244-MPT, which could suppress either gefitinib-sensitive 
or -resistant lung cancer cell growth and colony formation, and also suppressed
the kinase activity of both wildtype and double mutant (L858R/T790M) EGFR. The
underlying mechanism reveals that 244-MPT could interact with either the wildtype
or double-mutant EGFR in an ATP-competitive manner and inhibit activity.
Treatment with 244-MPT could substantially reduce the phosphorylation of EGFR and
its downstream signaling pathways, including Akt and ERK1/2 in
gefitinib-sensitive and -resistant cell lines. It was equally effective in
suppressing EGFR phosphorylation and downstream signaling in NL20 cells
transfected with wildtype, single-mutant (L858R) or mutant (L858R/T790M) EGFR.
244-MPT could also induce apoptosis in a gefitinib-resistant cell line and
strongly suppress gefitinib-resistant NSCLC tumor growth in a xenograft mouse
model. In addition, 244-MPT could effectively reduce the size of tumors in a
gefitinib-resistant NSCLC patient-derived xenograft (PDX) SCID mouse model.
Overall, 244-MPT could overcome gefitinib-resistance by directly targeting the
EGFR.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.6236 
PMCID: PMC4792556
PMID: 26517520  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Cancer Res Treat. 2016 Apr;48(2):458-64. doi: 10.4143/crt.2015.135. Epub 2015 Oct
14.

Tolerability and Outcomes of First-Line Pemetrexed-Cisplatin Followed by
Gefitinib Maintenance Therapy Versus Gefitinib Monotherapy in Korean Patients
with Advanced Nonsquamous Non-small Cell Lung Cancer: A Post Hoc Descriptive
Subgroup Analysis of a Randomized, Phase 3 Trial.

Kang JH(1), Ahn MJ(2), Kim DW(3), Cho EK(4), Kim JH(5), Shin SW(6), Wang X(7),
Kim JS(8), Orlando M(9), Park K(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Department of Medicine, Seoul St. Mary's
Hospital, Seoul, Korea. (2)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Department of
Medicine, Samsung Medical Center, Seoul, Korea. (3)Division of
Hematology-Oncology, Department of Medicine, Seoul National University Hospital, 
Seoul, Korea. (4)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Department of Medicine, Gachon 
University Gil Hospital, Incheon, Korea. (5)Division of Hematology-Oncology,
Department of Medicine, Yonsei Cancer Center, Yonsei University College of
Medicine, Seoul, Korea. (6)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Department of
Medicine, Korea University Anam Hospital, Seoul, Korea. (7)Eli Lilly and Company,
Shanghai, China. (8)Eli Lilly and Company, Seoul, Korea. (9)Eli Lilly
Interamerica Inc., Buenos Aires, Argentina.

PURPOSE: We recently reported on a randomized, open-label, phase 3 trial
comparing pemetrexed-cisplatin chemotherapy followed by gefitinib maintenance
therapy (PC/G) with gefitinib monotherapy in patients with non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC). Here, we report on a post hoc subgroup analysis of that study
assessing the demographics and disposition of the Korean patient subgroup, and
comparing the tolerability of PC/G and gefitinib monotherapy and the tumor
response with respect to epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) status.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Patients, who were ≥ 18 years, chemonaïve, Korean, light
ex-smokers/never-smokers with advanced NSCLC, were randomly assigned (1:1) to
PC/G or gefitinib monotherapy. Treatment-emergent adverse events (TEAEs) were
graded, and tumor response was measured as change in lesion sum from baseline at 
best response. The study was registered with ClinicalTrials. gov, NCT01017874.
RESULTS: Overall, 111 Korean patients were treated (PC/G, 51; gefitinib, 60).
Between-arm characteristics were balanced and similar to those of the overall
population. Treatment discontinuations due to adverse events were low (PC/G: 1,
2.0%; gefitinib: 7, 11.7%). Overall, 92 patients (82.9%) reported ≥ 1 TEAE (PC/G,
44; gefitinib, 48); few patients (PC/G, 16; gefitinib, 7) reported severe TEAEs; 
the most frequent was neutropenia (PC/G arm) and elevated alanine
aminotransferase (gefitinib arm). The lesion sum was decreased by PC/G treatment 
in most patients, regardless of EGFR mutation status, while gefitinib monotherapy
reduced the lesion sum in EGFR-positive patients but had no effect in
EGFR-negative patients.
CONCLUSION: Our results confirm that both PC/G and gefitinib were well tolerated 
in Korean patients, regardless of EGFR status; however, patients with EGFR
wild-type NSCLC may not benefit from gefitinib monotherapy.

DOI: 10.4143/crt.2015.135 
PMCID: PMC4843755
PMID: 26511807  [PubMed - in process]


297. Tuberc Respir Dis (Seoul). 2015 Oct;78(4):315-20. doi: 10.4046/trd.2015.78.4.315.
Epub 2015 Oct 1.

The Prognostic Value of the Tumor Shrinkage Rate for Progression-Free Survival in
Patients with Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer Receiving Gefitinib.

Park DI(1), Kim SY(1), Kim JO(1), Jung SS(1), Park HS(1), Moon JY(1), Chung
CU(1), Kim SS(2), Seo JH(3), Lee JE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary, Department of Internal Medicine, Chungnam National
University Hospital, Daejeon, Korea. (2)Department of Radiology, Chungnam
National University Hospital, Daejeon, Korea. (3)Department of Preventive
Medicine, Chungnam National University Hospital, Daejeon, Korea.

BACKGROUND: The efficacy of epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase
inhibitor (EGFR-TKI) therapy can be measured based on the rate of treatment
response, based on the Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors (RECIST)
criteria or progression-free survival (PFS). However, there are some patients
harboring sensitive EGFR mutations who responded poorly to EGFR-TKI therapy. In
addition, there is variability in the PFS after EGFR-TKI treatment.
METHODS: We performed a retrospective analysis of the medical records of 85
patients with non-small cell lung cancer, who had achieved a stable disease or
better response at the first evaluation of treatment response, after receiving a 
2-month course of gefitinib. We calculated the tumor shrinkage rate (TSR) by
measuring the longest and perpendicular diameter of the main mass on computed
tomography before, and 2 months after, gefitinib therapy.
RESULTS: There was a significant positive correlation between the TSR and PFS
(R=0.373, p=0.010). In addition, a simple linear regression analysis showed that 
the TSR might be an indicator for the PFS (B±standard error, 244.54±66.79;
p=0.001). On univariate analysis, the sex, histologic type, smoking history and
the number of prior chemotherapy regimens, were significant prognostic factors.
On multivariate regression analysis, both the TSR (β=0.257, p=0.029) and
adenocarcinoma (β=0.323, p=0.005) were independent prognostic factors for PFS.
CONCLUSION: Our results showed that the TSR might be an early prognostic
indicator for PFS in patients receiving EGFR-TKI therapy.

DOI: 10.4046/trd.2015.78.4.315 
PMCID: PMC4620323
PMID: 26508917  [PubMed]


298. Onco Targets Ther. 2015 Oct 13;8:2915-21. doi: 10.2147/OTT.S91627. eCollection
2015.

EGFR-TKIs in adjuvant treatment of lung cancer: to give or not to give?

Milovancev A(1), Stojsic V(1), Zaric B(1), Kovacevic T(1), Sarcev T(1), Perin
B(1), Zarogoulidis K(2), Tsirgogianni K(2), Freitag L(3), Darwiche K(3), Tsavlis 
D(2), Zissimopoulos A(4), Stratakos G(5), Zarogoulidis P(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Pulmonary Diseases of Vojvodina, Clinic for Thoracic Oncology,
Faculty of Medicine, University of Novi Sad, Serbia. (2)Pulmonary
Department-Oncology Unit, "G Papanikolaou" General Hospital, Aristotle University
of Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki, Greece. (3)Department of Interventional
Pneumology, Ruhrlandklinik, University Hospital Essen, University of
Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany. (4)Nuclear Medicine Department, Democritus
University of Thrace, Alexandroupolis, Greece. (5)Department of Interventional
Pneumology, "Sotiria" Hospital of Chest Diseases, Athens, Greece.

Epidermal growth factor receptor-tyrosine-kinase inhibitors (EGFR-TKIs) brought a
significant revolution in the treatment of non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC). In
a short period of time, EGFR-TKIs became the standard of treatment for
mutation-positive, advanced stage non-squamous NSCLC. In recent years, second-
and third-generation EGFR-TKIs are emerging, further widening the clinical use.
However, the question of EGFR-TKIs efficiency in the treatment of early stage
NSCLC still remains open. Early clinical trials failed to approve the use of
EGFR-TKIs in adjuvant setting. The majority of these early trials were performed 
in unselected NSCLC populations and without standardized biomarker
identification. One should certainly not rely solely on these results and dismiss
the use of EGFR-TKIs as adjuvant therapy. Many important questions are still
unanswered. Most important issues such as stage heterogeneity (IA-IIIA), timing
(after or concomitantly with chemotherapy), and type of administration
(monotherapy or combination) need to be answered in near future. Adjuvant TKIs in
the treatment of lung cancer might offer significant number of advancements.
Having in mind the significant duration of response observed in advance disease
setting, there could be place for prolongation of response in adjuvant setting
potentially, leading to improvement in survival. TKIs could offer less-toxic
adjuvant treatment with better efficiency than chemotherapy. However, there is a 
chronic lack of randomized controlled trials in this field, leading to inability 
to draw any scientifically sound conclusion with regard to the adjuvant
treatment. For now, the use of EGFR-TKIs outside clinical trial setting is not
recommended. The purpose of this review is to evaluate current and available
data.

DOI: 10.2147/OTT.S91627 
PMCID: PMC4610780
PMID: 26508876  [PubMed]


299. Drug Des Devel Ther. 2015 Oct 15;9:5641-53. doi: 10.2147/DDDT.S52787. eCollection
2015.

Dacomitinib in lung cancer: a "lost generation" EGFR tyrosine-kinase inhibitor
from a bygone era?

Ou SH(1), Soo RA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Chao Family Comprehensive Cancer Center, Division of Hematology/Oncology,
Department of Medicine, University of California, Irvine School of Medicine,
Orange, CA, USA. (2)National University Health System and Cancer Science
Institute of Singapore, Singapore.

EGFR tyrosine-kinase inhibitors (TKIs) have now been firmly established as the
first-line treatment for non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients harboring
activating EGFR mutations, based on seven prospective randomized Phase III
trials. However, despite significantly improved overall response rate and
improved median progression-free survival when compared to platinum-doublet
chemotherapy, EGFR-mutant NSCLC patients treated with EGFR TKIs invariably
progress due to the emergence of acquired resistances, with the gatekeeper T790M 
mutation accounting for up to 60% of the resistance mechanisms. Second-generation
irreversible EGFR TKIs were developed in part to inhibit the T790M mutation, in
addition to the common activating EGFR mutations. Dacomitinib is one such
second-generation EGFR TKI designed to inhibit both the wild-type (WT) EGFR and
EGFR T790M. Afatinib is another second-generation EGR TKI that has been now been 
approved for the first-line treatment of EGFR-mutant NSCLC patients, while
dacomitinib continues to undergo clinical evaluation. We will review the clinical
development of dacomitinib from Phase I to Phase III trials, including the two
recently published negative large-scale randomized Phase III trials (ARCHER 1009,
NCIC-BR-26). Results from another large-scale randomized trial (ARCHER 1050)
comparing dacomitinib to gefitinib as first-line treatment of advanced
treatment-naïve EGFR-mutant NSCLC patients will soon be available and will serve 
as the lynchpin trial for the potential approval of dacomitinib in NSCLC.
Meanwhile, third-generation EGFR TKIs (eg, CO-1686 [rociletinib], AZ9291,
HM61713, EGF816, and ASP8273) that preferentially and potently inhibit EGFR T790M
but not WT EGFR are in full-scale clinical development, and some of these EGFR
TKIs have received "breakthrough" designation by the US Food and Drug
Administration and will likely be approved in late 2015. Given the rapid
development of third-generation EGFR TKIs and the approval of gefitinib,
erlotinib, and afatinib as first-line treatment of EGFR-mutant NSCLC patients,
the future role of dacomitinib in the treatment of NSCLC seems to be limited.

DOI: 10.2147/DDDT.S52787 
PMCID: PMC4610796
PMID: 26508839  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Anticancer Res. 2015 Nov;35(11):5797-806.

Brain Metastases in NSCLC - are TKIs Changing the Treatment Strategy?

Dempke WC(1), Edvardsen K(2), Lu S(3), Reinmuth N(4), Reck M(4), Inoue A(5).

Author information: 
(1)AstraZeneca Global Medical Oncology, Cambridge, U.K. University Hospital of
Grosshadern (LMU Munich, Haematology and Oncology), Munich, Germany
wolfram.dempke@astrazeneca.com. (2)AstraZeneca Global Medical Oncology,
Cambridge, U.K. (3)Lung Tumor Clinical Medical Center, Shanghai, P.R. China.
(4)Lungen Clinic Grosshansdorf, Airway Research Center North (ARCN), Member of
the German Center for Lung Research (DZL), Grosshansdorf, Germany. (5)Tohoku
University Medical School, Sendai, Japan.

Non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) ranks as a leading cause of cancer-related
death globally. Brain metastases are a frequent complication of NSCLC, with
25-40% of patients developing brain metastases during the course of the disease, 
often within the first 2 years after diagnosis of the primary tumor. Improvements
in neurological symptoms and performance status have been reported with
whole-brain radiation therapy (WBRT) in combination with steroid therapy in NSCLC
patients. In addition, a survival benefit has been reported for patients with a
single brain metastasis treated with stereotactic radiosurgery, while the
clinical outcome is improved with surgery followed by WBRT versus WBRT alone.
However, due to their poor performance status, many patients with brain
metastases are not eligible for surgery or radiosurgery. Furthermore, the role of
systemic chemotherapy for the treatment of brain metastases is controversial due 
to the impenetrable nature of the blood brain barrier (BBB), with reported
response rates to chemotherapy ranging from 15-30% (overall survival [OS] 6-8
months). Response rates of brain metastases to EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor
(TKI) treatment (e.g. gefitinib, erlotinib, afatinib) in patients with NSCLC
harboring EGFR mutations reach 60-80%, with a complete response rate as high as
40%. Median OS is 15-20 months, and progression-free survival in the brain
reaches 6.6-11.7 months, demonstrating an improved clinical outcome. Metastatic
involvement of the CNS appears to be a relatively common complication in patients
with ALK-positive NSCLC and the CNS represents a dominant site of progression in 
ALK-positive patients treated with the ALK TKI crizotinib. In addition, CNS
progression on crizotinib contributes substantially to the high levels of
morbidity and mortality observed among patients with ALK-rearrangements, a
finding that is consistent with low CNS penetration of the drug.
Second-generation ALK inhibitors (ceritinib, alectinib) are well-tolerated and
demonstrate excellent intracranial activity. The various reports of dramatic and 
prolonged responses in brain metastases patients treated with EGFR and ALK TKIs
suggest that these agents may be a valid treatment option for patients with
asymptomatic brain metastases from NSCLC, especially for those with
EGFR-activating mutations or harboring ALK rearrangement. However, larger phase
III studies are required to fully define the activity of these agents and their
place in the therapeutic armamentarium of brain metastases.

Copyright© 2015 International Institute of Anticancer Research (Dr. John G.
Delinassios), All rights reserved.


PMID: 26504000  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. BMC Cancer. 2015 Oct 22;15:763. doi: 10.1186/s12885-015-1714-y.

Randomized phase II study of paclitaxel/carboplatin intercalated with gefitinib
compared to paclitaxel/carboplatin alone for chemotherapy-naïve non-small cell
lung cancer in a clinically selected population excluding patients with
non-smoking adenocarcinoma or mutated EGFR.

Choi YJ(1,)(2), Lee DH(3,)(4,)(5), Choi CM(6,)(7,)(8), Lee JS(9,)(10,)(11), Lee
SJ(12), Ahn JH(13,)(14,)(15), Kim SW(16,)(17,)(18).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Asan Medical Center, University of Ulsan College of
Medicine, 88 Olympic-ro-43-gil, Songpa-gu, Seoul, 138-736, Korea.
yoonji23@hanmail.net. (2)Division of Hemato-oncology, Department of Internal
Medicine, Korea University Anam Hospital, Seoul, Korea. yoonji23@hanmail.net.
(3)Department of Oncology, Asan Medical Center, University of Ulsan College of
Medicine, 88 Olympic-ro-43-gil, Songpa-gu, Seoul, 138-736, Korea.
leedaeho@amc.seoul.kr. (4)Asan Institute for Life Science, Asan Medical Center,
Institute for Innovative Cancer Research, Seoul, Korea. leedaeho@amc.seoul.kr.
(5)University of Ulsan College of Medicine, Ulsan, Korea. leedaeho@amc.seoul.kr. 
(6)Department of Oncology, Asan Medical Center, University of Ulsan College of
Medicine, 88 Olympic-ro-43-gil, Songpa-gu, Seoul, 138-736, Korea.
ccm@amc.seoul.kr. (7)Asan Institute for Life Science, Asan Medical Center,
Institute for Innovative Cancer Research, Seoul, Korea. ccm@amc.seoul.kr.
(8)University of Ulsan College of Medicine, Ulsan, Korea. ccm@amc.seoul.kr.
(9)Department of Oncology, Asan Medical Center, University of Ulsan College of
Medicine, 88 Olympic-ro-43-gil, Songpa-gu, Seoul, 138-736, Korea.
jayslee@amc.seoul.kr. (10)Asan Institute for Life Science, Asan Medical Center,
Institute for Innovative Cancer Research, Seoul, Korea. jayslee@amc.seoul.kr.
(11)University of Ulsan College of Medicine, Ulsan, Korea. jayslee@amc.seoul.kr. 
(12)Asan Institute for Life Science, Asan Medical Center, Institute for
Innovative Cancer Research, Seoul, Korea. sj_lee@amc.seoul.kr. (13)Department of 
Oncology, Asan Medical Center, University of Ulsan College of Medicine, 88
Olympic-ro-43-gil, Songpa-gu, Seoul, 138-736, Korea. drjiny@amc.seoul.kr.
(14)Asan Institute for Life Science, Asan Medical Center, Institute for
Innovative Cancer Research, Seoul, Korea. drjiny@amc.seoul.kr. (15)University of 
Ulsan College of Medicine, Ulsan, Korea. drjiny@amc.seoul.kr. (16)Department of
Oncology, Asan Medical Center, University of Ulsan College of Medicine, 88
Olympic-ro-43-gil, Songpa-gu, Seoul, 138-736, Korea. swkim@amc.seoul.kr. (17)Asan
Institute for Life Science, Asan Medical Center, Institute for Innovative Cancer 
Research, Seoul, Korea. swkim@amc.seoul.kr. (18)University of Ulsan College of
Medicine, Ulsan, Korea. swkim@amc.seoul.kr.

BACKGROUND: Considering cell cycle dependent cytotoxicity, intercalation of
chemotherapy and epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase
inhibitor (TKI) may be a treatment option in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). 
This randomized phase 2 study compared the efficacy of paclitaxel and carboplatin
(PC) intercalated with gefitinib (G) versus PC alone in a selected,
chemotherapy-naïve population of advanced NSCLC patients with a history of
smoking or wild-type EGFR.
METHODS: Eligible patients were chemotherapy-naïve advanced NSCLC patients with
Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group performance status of 0-2. Non-smoking
patients with adenocarcinoma or patients with activating EGFR mutation were
excluded because they could benefit from gefitinib alone. Eligible patients were 
randomized to one of the following treatment arms: PCG, P 175 mg/m(2), and C AUC 
5 administered intravenously on day 1 intercalated with G 250 mg orally on days 2
through 15 every 3 weeks for four cycles followed by G 250 mg orally until
progressive disease; or PC, same dosing schedule for four cycles only. The
primary endpoint was the objective response rate (ORR), and the secondary
endpoints included progression-free survival (PFS), overall survival (OS), and
toxicity profile.
RESULTS: A total of 90 patients participated in the study. The ORRs were 41.9 %
(95 % confidence interval (CI) 27.0-57.9 %) for the PCG arm and 39.5 % (95 % CI
25.0-55.6 %) for the PC arm (P = 0.826). No differences in PFS (4.1 vs. 4.1
months, P = 0.781) or OS (9.3 vs. 10.5 months, P = 0.827) were observed between
the PCG and PC arms. Safety analyses showed a similar incidence of drug-related
grade 3/4 toxicity. Rash and pruritus were more frequent in the PCG than in the
PC arm.
CONCLUSIONS: PCG did not improve ORR, PFS, and OS compared to PC chemotherapy
alone for NSCLC in a clinically selected population excluding non-smoking
adenocarcinoma or mutated EGFR.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: The study is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov ( NCT01196234
). Registration date is 08/09/2010.

DOI: 10.1186/s12885-015-1714-y 
PMCID: PMC4619194
PMID: 26493267  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Cancer Res. 2015 Nov 15;75(22):4937-48. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-15-1113. Epub 
2015 Oct 21.

Inhibition of Casein Kinase 1 Alpha Prevents Acquired Drug Resistance to
Erlotinib in EGFR-Mutant Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer.

Lantermann AB(1), Chen D(2), McCutcheon K(2), Hoffman G(2), Frias E(2), Ruddy
D(2), Rakiec D(2), Korn J(2), McAllister G(2), Stegmeier F(2), Meyer MJ(2),
Sharma SV(1).

Author information: 
(1)Oncology Drug Discovery, Novartis Institutes for Biomedical Research,
Cambridge, Massachusetts. sreenathsharma@hotmail.com
alexandra.lantermann@novartis.com. (2)Oncology Drug Discovery, Novartis
Institutes for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, Massachusetts.

Patients with lung tumors harboring activating mutations in the EGF receptor
(EGFR) show good initial treatment responses to the EGFR tyrosine kinase
inhibitors (TKI) erlotinib or gefitinib. However, acquired resistance invariably 
develops. Applying a focused shRNA screening approach to identify genes whose
knockdown can prevent and/or overcome acquired resistance to erlotinib in several
EGFR-mutant non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cell lines, we identified casein
kinase 1 α (CSNK1A1, CK1α). We found that CK1α suppression inhibits the NF-κB
prosurvival signaling pathway. Furthermore, downregulation of NF-κB signaling by 
approaches independent of CK1α knockdown can also attenuate acquired erlotinib
resistance, supporting a role for activated NF-κB signaling in conferring
acquired drug resistance. Importantly, CK1α suppression prevented erlotinib
resistance in an HCC827 xenograft model in vivo. Our findings suggest that
patients with EGFR-mutant NSCLC might benefit from a combination of EGFR TKIs and
CK1α inhibition to prevent acquired drug resistance and to prolong disease-free
survival.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-15-1113 
PMID: 26490646  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Zhongguo Fei Ai Za Zhi. 2015 Oct 20;18(10):599-609. doi:
10.3779/j.issn.1009-3419.2015.10.01.

[Sequence-dependent Effect of Triptolide with Gefitinib on the Proliferation and 
Apoptosis of Lung Adenocarcinoma Cell H1975].

[Article in Chinese; Abstract available in Chinese from the publisher]

Zhang X(1), Liu G(2), Liu H(1), Ma T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy, Bengbu Medical College, Bengbu 233000, China.
(2)Department of Pharmacy, the Affiliated Hospital of Chinese PLA Hospital,
Beijing 100853, China.

BACKGROUND: Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase inhibitors
(TKIs) show promising therapeutic effects in patients with advanced non-small
cell lung cancer (NSCLC). However, despite an initial response to TKIs treatment 
among responsive patients, most inevitably acquire resistance after a
progression-free period of about 10 months. The percentage of T790M in TKI
acquired-resistant patients in most studies is around 50%. The aim of this study 
is to assess the effects of the sequential administration of triptolide and
geftinib on cell proliferation and apoptosis of lung adenocarcinoma cell H1975.
METHODS: A MTT assay was used to measure cell proliferation. The potency of the
sequential administration of triptolide and geftinib were determined by
isobolograms and combination index (CI). Cell apoptosis and cycle distribution
were detected by flow cytometry. The Hoechst 33258 method was used to observe the
apoptotic morphology. Chemical colorimetric luminescence was used to measure the 
caspase activity.
RESULTS: The results of isobolograms and CI showed that the sequential
administration of triptolide following geftinib remarkably inhibited cell
proliferation and cell apoptosis compared with other sequential administration
models. The cycle distribution results indicated that sequential triptolide
administration following geftinib blocked the cells in the G2/M phase but not in 
the G0/G1 phase. The activation of the Caspase-9/Caspase-3 cascade was mainly
involved in the apoptotic pathway of lung adenocarcinoma cell H1975 in all
sequential administration models.
CONCLUSIONS: The triptolide administration following geftinib might be a new
therapeutic strategy for lung cancer with T790M mutation after having EGFR-TKIs
resistance. .

Publisher: 背景与目的 表皮生长因子受体（epidermal growth factor receptor,
EGFR）酪氨酸激酶抑制剂（tyrosine kinase inhibitors, TKIs）被用于治疗进展性晚期非小细胞肺癌（non-small cell
lung cancer,
NSCLC），然而最初接受TKIs治疗有反应的患者，大都会在10个月左右出现获得性耐药。报告称EGFR基因T790M的突变是产生获得性耐药的主要原因，比例约占50
%。本研究旨在探索雷公藤甲素（triptolide, TP）和吉非替尼序贯应用对肺腺癌细胞H1975细胞增殖和凋亡通路的作用。方法
MTT法检测细胞的增殖。等效线图法和联合指数（combination index,
CI）法评估雷公藤甲素和吉非替尼序贯作用的效价。流式细胞术检测细胞凋亡和周期分布，Hoechest
33258染色法检测凋亡形态。化学比色发光法检测Caspases的活性。结果
等效线图法和联合指数法均显示雷公藤甲素序贯吉非替尼组较其他序贯作用组明显抑制了细胞增殖，增加了细胞的凋亡。细胞周期分布实验结果显示与吉非替尼序贯雷公藤甲素组主要把
细胞抑制在G0/G1期相比较，雷公藤甲素序贯吉非替尼组主要把细胞抑制在G2/M期。在肺腺癌H1975中，所有序贯模型组都主要通过活化Caspase-9/Caspa
se-3来诱导激活细胞凋亡通路。结论 先用雷公藤甲素再用吉非替尼治疗模式可能是克服T790M突变耐药的一个新选择。.
DOI: 10.3779/j.issn.1009-3419.2015.10.01 
PMID: 26483331  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Clin Transl Oncol. 2016 Jul;18(7):722-7. doi: 10.1007/s12094-015-1424-6. Epub
2015 Oct 16.

Overexpression of Cathepsin L is associated with gefitinib resistance in
non-small cell lung cancer.

Cui F(1), Wang W(2), Wu D(2), He X(2), Wu J(3), Wang M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical University,
Guangzhou, 510515, People's Republic of China. (2)Department of Thoracic Surgery,
Sun Yat-sen Memorial Hospital of Sun Yat-sen University, No. 107 Yanjiangxi Road,
Guangzhou, 510120, People's Republic of China. (3)Pharmaceutical Department, Sun 
Yat-sen Memorial Hospital of Sun Yat-sen University, No. 107 Yanjiangxi Road,
Guangzhou, 510120, People's Republic of China. drwujy67@163.com. (4)Department of
Thoracic Surgery, Sun Yat-sen Memorial Hospital of Sun Yat-sen University, No.
107 Yanjiangxi Road, Guangzhou, 510120, People's Republic of China.
drwangxh@163.com.

Lung cancer, the most common malignancy, is still the leading cause of
cancer-related death worldwide. Non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) accounts for
80 % of all lung cancers. Recent studies showed Cathepsin L (CTSL) is
overexpressed in various cancerous tissues; however, the association between CTSL
expression and EGFR-TKI resistance remains unknown. In this study, we
investigated the expression of CTSL in lung cancer specimens and matched normal
tissues by quantitative real-time PCR and IHC. The functional role of CTSL in
resistant PC-9/GR cell line was investigated by proliferation and apoptosis
analysis compared with control PC-9 cells. Our results found that the level of
CTSL expression was higher in NSCLC tissues compared with matched normal adjacent
tissue samples, and CTSL was more highly expressed in PC-9/GR cells compared to
PC-9 cells. Knocking-down of CTSL in PC-9/GR cells could decrease cell
proliferation and potentiate apoptosis induced by gefitinib, suggesting CTSL may 
contribute to gefitinib resistance in NSCLC. CTSL might be explored as a
candidate of therapeutic target for modulating EGFR-TKI sensitivity in NSCLC.

DOI: 10.1007/s12094-015-1424-6 
PMID: 26474873  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Gan To Kagaku Ryoho. 2015 Sep;42(9):1091-3.

[An Elderly Patient with Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer Who Responded to Salvage S-1 
Monotherapy after Gefitinib Therapy].

[Article in Japanese]

Mouri A(1), Hamamoto Y, Kameyama N, Ibe T, Takeoka S, Honma C, Fukusumi M,
Kamimura M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary Medicine, Dept. of Internal Medicine, National Hospital 
Organization Disaster Medical Center.

S-1 is one of the effective chemotherapy regimens for treating non-small cell
lung cancer. We report of an elderly patient with non-small cell lung cancer who 
responded to S-1 monotherapy following gefitinib therapy. An 83-year-old woman
was diagnosed with advanced adenocarcinoma of the lungs (cT3N3M1a, Stage IV).
Considering her age, monotherapy with vinorelbine was administered as first-line 
chemotherapy. Despite the completion of four courses, she was diagnosed with
progressive disease. Thereafter, after considering her status as a non-smoking
woman, gefitinib was introduced as second-line chemotherapy, which resulted in
significant tumor size reduction.Tumor regrowth was identified 16 months later,
and gefitinib was switched to erlotinib, but the tumor kept increasing in size.S 
-1 monotherapy was introduced as fourth-line chemotherapy, and the tumor began to
decrease in size again. A partial response was obtained after 10 months, without 
serious adverse effects. Gefitinib following S-1 monotherapy resulted in
long-term tumor size control for a total of 27 months in an elderly patient with 
advanced non-small cell lung cancer.S -1 monotherapy might be one of the options 
for salvage therapy after gefitinib treatment becomes ineffective.


PMID: 26469166  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2015 Aug 1;8(8):9010-20. eCollection 2015.

Relationship between epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutation and serum
cyclooxygenase-2 Level, and the synergistic effect of celecoxib and gefitinib on 
EGFR expression in non-small cell lung cancer cells.

Li N(1), Li H(2), Su F(1), Li J(1), Ma X(1), Gong P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Shihezi University School of Medicine, The First
Affiliated Hospital Shihezi 832000, Xinjiang, P. R. China. (2)Anyang Tumor
Hospital Anyang, Henan, People's Republic of China.

Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutations occur mostly in patients with
lung adenocarcinoma; such patients are also more likely to express
cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2), indicating a possible relationship between EGFR
mutation and COX-2. The COX-2 and EGFR pathways mutually enhance their
procarcinogenic effects in different tumor types. Therefore, simultaneous EGFR
and COX-2 inhibition may be a promising therapeutic approach for patients with
lung adenocarcinoma. We obtained tissue and serum samples from patients with
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) to detect the relationship between EGFR
mutation and serum COX-2 level. Subsequently, gefitinib was combined with
celecoxib to investigate the efficacy of inhibition in vitro in two NSCLC cell
lines: HCC827 (del E746-A750) and A549 (wild-type EGFR). The cells were treated
with gefitinib or celecoxib alone or with gefitinib plus celecoxib. Cell
proliferation and apoptosis were assessed and correlated with expression of COX-2
and phosphorylated (p)-EGFR. The EGFR mutation rate of the high-COX-2 patients
was significantly higher than that in the low-COX-2 patients. Multivariate
analysis showed that high COX-2 levels were independently associated with EGFR
mutation. Celecoxib and gefitinib inhibited cell growth in both cell lines. At
sufficiently high concentrations, celecoxib plus gefitinib significantly mutually
enhanced their anti-proliferative and apoptotic effects in both cell lines. At
low concentrations, the combination had no additional effects on A549 cells.
There was increased down regulation of COX-2 and p-EGFR when both cell lines were
treated with high-concentration celecoxib plus gefitinib compared to either agent
alone. This study demonstrates that high serum COX-2 levels may indicate EGFR
mutations and that the efficacy of combined celecoxib and gefitinib is
significantly greater in NSCLC cells with EGFR mutations; at high concentrations,
the combination is efficacious in wild-type NSCLC cells.


PMCID: PMC4583875
PMID: 26464643  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. J Cancer Res Ther. 2015 Jul-Sep;11(3):653. doi: 10.4103/0973-1482.139392.

Successful treatment of non-small cell lung cancer with gefitinib after
erlotinib-induced severe eyelid erosion: Two case reports.

Asai N(1), Ohkuni Y, Yamaguchi E, Kaneko N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonology, Kameda Medical Center, Kamogawa, Chiba; Department 
of Internal Medicine, Division of Respiratory Medicine and Allergology, Aichi
Medical University School of Medicine, Aichi, Japan.

Gefitinib and erlotinib are first-generation, small, molecular inhibitors of the 
epidermal growth factor receptor-tyrosine kinase inhibitor (EGFR-TKI). Even as
these drugs have led to a paradigm shift in the treatment of advanced non-small
cell lung cancer (NSCLC), drug-induced adverse effects are commonly seen. We
experienced two cases of NSCLC patients who developed erlotinib-induced eyelid
erosion and were then successfully treated with gefitinib, without recurrence of 
toxicity or disease progression. As far as we had investigated, this is the first
report documenting the successful cases treated with gefitinib after
erlotinib-related severe eyelid erosion.

DOI: 10.4103/0973-1482.139392 
PMID: 26458639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Pharmacol Res. 2015 Dec;102:132-7. doi: 10.1016/j.phrs.2015.09.022. Epub 2015 Oct
22.

AKT inactivation causes persistent drug tolerance to EGFR inhibitors.

Tetsu O(1), Phuchareon J(2), Eisele DW(2), Hangauer MJ(3), McCormick F(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, School of Medicine,
University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA; UCSF Helen Diller Family
Comprehensive Cancer Center, School of Medicine, University of California, San
Francisco, CA, USA. Electronic address: Osamu.Tetsu@ucsf.edu. (2)Department of
Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, School of Medicine, University of
California, San Francisco, CA, USA; UCSF Helen Diller Family Comprehensive Cancer
Center, School of Medicine, University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(3)UCSF Helen Diller Family Comprehensive Cancer Center, School of Medicine,
University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA.

Drug resistance is a major obstacle to the success of EGFR-targeted therapy. We
recently studied the mechanism by which a small subset of EGFR mutant lung cancer
cells remains viable after EGFR inhibition. We found that this drug-tolerant
subpopulation develops because EGFR inhibition prevents AKT activity and thus
inactivates Ets-1 function. In this article, we discuss how changes in intrinsic 
cell signaling after EGFR inhibition open a new avenue to drug resistance in
NSCLCs, and comment on combined TKI and MEK inhibitor treatment to reduce the
probability of emergent resistance to EGFR TKIs.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.phrs.2015.09.022 
PMID: 26453958  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Talanta. 2015 Nov 1;144:20-8. doi: 10.1016/j.talanta.2015.05.017. Epub 2015 May
19.

Quantitative evaluation of berberine subcellular distribution and cellular
accumulation in non-small cell lung cancer cells by UPLC-MS/MS.

Yuan ZW(1), Leung EL(1), Fan XX(1), Zhou H(1), Ma WZ(1), Liu L(2), Xie Y(3).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Quality Research in Chinese Medicines, Macau Institute
for Applied Research in Medicine and Health, Macau University of Science and
Technology, Avenida Wai Long, Taipa, Macau. (2)State Key Laboratory of Quality
Research in Chinese Medicines, Macau Institute for Applied Research in Medicine
and Health, Macau University of Science and Technology, Avenida Wai Long, Taipa, 
Macau. Electronic address: lliu@must.edu.mo. (3)State Key Laboratory of Quality
Research in Chinese Medicines, Macau Institute for Applied Research in Medicine
and Health, Macau University of Science and Technology, Avenida Wai Long, Taipa, 
Macau. Electronic address: yxie@must.edu.mo.

Berberine, an isoquinoline alkaloid, has been demonstrated to be a safe
anti-cancer agent with multiple effects on mitochondria. Intracellular
concentration and distribution around the targeting sites are determinants of
efficacy, but subcellular distribution of berberine has not been fully elucidated
yet, which relies on the sensitive and robustness assay. In this study, a
sensitive and robust UPLC-MS/MS method has been developed and validated with
optimized extraction solvents and detection conditions. Key factors such as the
purity and integrity of isolated organelle fractions, and the effects of
isolation procedures on the subcellular concentration of berberine were
systemically evaluated. With the developed assay, we found that the intracellular
accumulations of berberine in two gefitinib resistant NSCLC cell lines H1650 and 
H1975 were 2-3 folds higher than that of normal epithelial cells BEAS-2B.
Moreover, significantly different subcellular distribution profiles in NSCLC
cancer cells from that of BEAS-2B cells with a striking increase in content in
most organelles may contribute to its selective cytotoxicity to cancer cells.
Furthermore, a predominant accumulation of berberine was observed for the first
time in microsomal fraction for all three cell lines. Therefore, this method
could be used for quantitative evaluation of subcellular distribution and
cellular accumulation of berberine and for further evaluation of the
concentration-effects relationship.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.talanta.2015.05.017 
PMID: 26452787  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Eur J Med Chem. 2015 Nov 2;104:115-26. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmech.2015.09.031. Epub
2015 Sep 30.

Novel hydrazone moiety-bearing aminopyrimidines as selective inhibitors of
epidermal growth factor receptor T790M mutant.

Qin M(1), Wang T(1), Xu B(1), Ma Z(1), Jiang N(1), Xie H(2), Gong P(3), Zhao
Y(4).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Structure-Based Drug Design and Discovery (Shenyang
Pharmaceutical University), Ministry of Education, 103 Wenhua Road, Shenyang
110016, PR China. (2)College of Bioinformatics Science and Technology, Harbin
Medical University, Harbin 150086, PR China. (3)Key Laboratory of Structure-Based
Drug Design and Discovery (Shenyang Pharmaceutical University), Ministry of
Education, 103 Wenhua Road, Shenyang 110016, PR China. Electronic address:
gongpinggp@126.com. (4)Key Laboratory of Structure-Based Drug Design and
Discovery (Shenyang Pharmaceutical University), Ministry of Education, 103 Wenhua
Road, Shenyang 110016, PR China. Electronic address: yanfangzhao@126.com.

The epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) T790M mutant is found in
approximately 50% of clinically acquired resistance to gefitinib among patients
with non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Here, a series of novel aminopyrimidines
bearing a hydrazone moiety were identified as potent and selective EGFR
inhibitors. Compounds 14a, 15g, and 15i potently inhibited all EGFR mutants
including EGFR T790M/L858R, EGFR T790M/delE746_A750, and EGFR T790M while they
showed weak effects on the wild type (WT) EGFR. In addition, these compounds
effectively suppressed proliferation of gefitinib-resistant H1975 (EGFR
T790M/L858R) cells but were less potent against A549 (WT EGFR and k-Ras mutation)
and HT-29 (non-special gene type) cells, showing a high safety index. Therefore, 
14a, 15g, and 15i might be promising candidates to overcome drug resistance
mediated by the EGFR T790M mutant.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejmech.2015.09.031 
PMID: 26451770  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Future Oncol. 2015 Nov;11(22):3069-81. doi: 10.2217/fon.15.250. Epub 2015 Oct 9.

AZD9291 in EGFR-mutant advanced non-small-cell lung cancer patients.

Remon J(1), Planchard D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Gustave Roussy, Medical Oncology Department, Villejuif, France.

Non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients whose tumors have an EGFR-activating 
mutation develop acquired resistance after a median of 9-11 months from the
beginning of treatment with erlotinib, gefitinib and afatinib. T790M mutation is 
the cause of this resistance in approximately 60% of cases. AZD9291 is an oral,
irreversible, mutant-selective EGF receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase inhibitor
(TKI) developed to have potency against EGFR mutations, including T790M mutation,
while sparing wild-type EGFR. A Phase I trial of AZD9291 in EGFR-mutant NSCLC
patients, demonstrated high activity, essentially among T790M-mutant tumors, with
a manageable tolerability profile. Ongoing Phase III trials are evaluating
AZD9291 in EGFR-mutant patients as first-line treatment compared with erlotinib
and gefitinib; and as second-line treatment compared with chemotherapy after
progression on EGFR TKI in T790M-mutant tumors. Better identification of
T790M-mutant tumors post EGFR TKI relapse and mechanisms of resistance to AZD9291
are the future challenges. This article reviews the emerging data regarding
AZD9291 in the treatment of patients with advanced NSCLC.

DOI: 10.2217/fon.15.250 
PMID: 26450446  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Drugs Aging. 2015 Nov;32(11):907-16. doi: 10.1007/s40266-015-0305-6.

Current and Emerging Options in the Management of EGFR Mutation-Positive
Non-Small-Cell Lung Cancer: Considerations in the Elderly.

Minuti G(1), D'Incecco A(1), Cappuzzo F(2).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Oncology Department, Istituto Toscano Tumori, Ospedale Civile di
Livorno, Viale Alfieri 36, 57100, Leghorn, Italy. (2)Medical Oncology Department,
Istituto Toscano Tumori, Ospedale Civile di Livorno, Viale Alfieri 36, 57100,
Leghorn, Italy. f.cappuzzo@gmail.com.

The elderly population with cancer is increasing worldwide. Currently, the median
age at lung cancer diagnosis is approximately 70 years. Clinicians are
increasingly dealing with a population of elderly non-small-cell lung cancer
patients characterised by relevant co-morbidities and ageing-related
characteristics, making treatment choice more challenging. Robust evidence
demonstrated that activating mutations in the epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR) gene are the best predictor for sensitivity to EGFR tyrosine kinase
inhibitors. Nine large phase III trials conducted in both the Asian and Caucasian
populations demonstrated that gefitinib, erlotinib and afatinib are superior to
standard platinum-based chemotherapy as front-line treatment and subgroup
analyses confirmed the superiority of erlotinib or gefitinib over chemotherapy in
the second-line setting. Although no large phase III trials have been
specifically conducted in EGFR mutation-positive (EGFR (mut+)) elderly
non-small-cell lung cancer patients, available data, coming from subgroup
analysis, retrospective series or small prospective phase II trials, replicated
in the elderly the results observed in the general population, thus suggesting
that age per se does not represent a criterion for treatment selection. In
addition, the favourable toxicity profile of EGFR-tyrosine kinase inhibitors
makes these agents the preferred option in such a group of patients, for which
concomitant medications are often required.

DOI: 10.1007/s40266-015-0305-6 
PMID: 26446154  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Thorac Cancer. 2015 Sep;6(5):636-42. doi: 10.1111/1759-7714.12267. Epub 2015 May 
21.

Survival of patients with advanced lung adenocarcinoma before and after approved 
use of gefitinib in China.

Liu YT(1), Hao XZ(1), Li JL(1), Hu XS(1), Wang Y(1), Wang ZP(1), Wang HY(1), Wang
B(1), Han XH(1), Zhang XR(1), Shi YK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Cancer Institute/Hospital, Chinese Academy of 
Medical Sciences & Peking Union Medical College, Beijing Key Laboratory of
Clinical Study on Anticancer Molecular Targeted Drugs Beijing, China.

BACKGROUND: To compare the overall survival (OS) of patients with advanced lung
adenocarcinoma in China before and after the approved use of gefitinib, and
analyze clinical factors that may affect OS.
METHODS: Clinical data of 558 patients with advanced lung adenocarcinoma who
received chemotherapy from January 2002 to December 2010 were retrospectively
analyzed. According to the matched-pair case-control study design, 255 patients
who only received chemotherapy and 255 patients who received gefitinib treatment 
after its approval were stringently matched by age, gender, and smoking history
and enrolled in the study. Clinical factors including age, gender, smoking
history, Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) performance status (PS), tumor
stage, organ metastasis, and the number of prior chemotherapies were analyzed to 
determine their correlations with OS.
RESULTS: The median survival time (MST) of the 510 enrolled patients with
advanced lung adenocarcinoma was 22.8 months. The MST of the patients who
received gefitinib treatment was significantly longer than that of patients who
did not receive gefitinib treatment (33.5 vs. 14.1 months, P < 0.001). The OS in 
patients who received gefitinib treatment was significantly longer than in
patients who did not receive gefitinib treatment in almost all clinical
factor-based subgroups, including age, gender, smoking history, ECOG PS 0-1,
tumor stage, the presence or absence of lung, pleural, bone, brain, adrenal gland
and liver metastasis, and the number of prior chemotherapies (all P < 0.001),
except in the ECOG PS ≥2 subgroup.
CONCLUSIONS: Gefitinib treatment significantly improved the survival of patients 
with advanced lung adenocarcinoma in China.

DOI: 10.1111/1759-7714.12267 
PMCID: PMC4567010
PMID: 26445613  [PubMed]


314. PLoS One. 2015 Oct 6;10(10):e0139809. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0139809.
eCollection 2015.

Contrasting Effects of the Cytotoxic Anticancer Drug Gemcitabine and the EGFR
Tyrosine Kinase Inhibitor Gefitinib on NK Cell-Mediated Cytotoxicity via
Regulation of NKG2D Ligand in Non-Small-Cell Lung Cancer Cells.

Okita R(1), Wolf D(2), Yasuda K(3), Maeda A(3), Yukawa T(3), Saisho S(3), Shimizu
K(3), Yamaguchi Y(4), Oka M(5), Nakayama E(6), Lundqvist A(7), Kiessling R(7),
Seliger B(2), Nakata M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Thoracic Surgery, Kawasaki Medical School, Kurashiki,
Japan; Department of Oncology and Pathology, Immune and Gene Therapy Laboratory, 
Cancer Center Karolinska, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. (2)Institute 
of Medical Immunology, Martin Luther University, Halle-Wittenberg, Halle,
Germany. (3)Department of General Thoracic Surgery, Kawasaki Medical School,
Kurashiki, Japan. (4)Department of Clinical Oncology, Kawasaki Medical School,
Kurashiki, Japan. (5)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Kawasaki Medical School,
Kurashiki, Japan. (6)Faculty of Health and Welfare, Kawasaki University of
Medical Welfare, Kurashiki, Japan. (7)Department of Oncology and Pathology,
Immune and Gene Therapy Laboratory, Cancer Center Karolinska, Karolinska
Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.

INTRODUCTION: Several cytotoxic anticancer drugs inhibit DNA replication and/or
mitosis, while EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors inactivate EGFR signalling in
cancer cell. Both types of anticancer drugs improve the overall survival of the
patients with non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC), although tumors often become
refractory to this treatment. Despite several mechanisms by which the tumors
become resistant having been described the effect of these compounds on
anti-tumor immunity remains largely unknown.
METHODS: This study examines the effect of the cytotoxic drug Gemcitabine and the
EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor Gefitinib on the expression of NK group 2 member D
(NKG2D) ligands as well as the sensitivity of NSCLC cells to the NK-mediated
lysis.
RESULTS: We demonstrate that Gemcitabine treatment leads to an enhanced
expression, while Gefitinib downregulated the expression of molecules that act as
key ligands for the activating receptor NKG2D and promote NK cell-mediated
recognition and cytolysis. Gemcitabine activated ATM and ATM- and Rad-3-related
protein kinase (ATR) pathways. The Gemcitabine-induced phosphorylation of ATM as 
well as the upregulation of the NKG2D ligand expression could be blocked by an
ATM-ATR inhibitor. In contrast, Gefitinib attenuated NKG2D ligand expression.
Silencing EGFR using siRNA or addition of the PI3K inhibitor resulted in
downregulation of NKG2D ligands. The observations suggest that the EGFR/PI3K
pathway also regulates the expression of NKG2D ligands. Additionally, we showed
that both ATM-ATR and EGFR regulate MICA/B via miR20a.
CONCLUSION: In keeping with the effect on NKG2D expression, Gemcitabine enhanced 
NK cell-mediated cytotoxicity while Gefitinib attenuated NK cell killing in NSCLC
cells.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0139809 
PMCID: PMC4595469
PMID: 26439264  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Expert Rev Anticancer Ther. 2015;15(11):1327-36. doi:
10.1586/14737140.2015.1092385. Epub 2015 Sep 28.

Epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors in elderly patients
with non-small cell lung cancer.

Zaarour M(1), Weerasinghe C(1), Nazha B(1), Hassan S(2), Atallah JP(2).

Author information: 
(1)a 1 Department of Medicine, Staten Island University Hospital, North Shore -
LIJ Health System, Staten Island, NY, USA. (2)b 2 Department of Medicine,
Division of Hematology/Oncology, Staten Island University Hospital, North Shore -
LIJ Health System, Staten Island, NY, USA.

Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is the leading cause of cancer-related deaths 
worldwide. At diagnosis, half of the patients are over 70 years of age, and most 
present with advanced disease, for which chemotherapy is recommended as
first-line treatment. However, the benefit from such therapy is modest and it is 
at times poorly tolerated. The discovery of epidermal growth factor receptor
tyrosine kinase inhibitors (EGFR-TKIs) has significantly impacted the treatment
of patients with EGFR mutation-positive advanced NSCLC. These novel agents
demonstrate efficacy and a favorably mild toxicity profile. Despite limited data 
in elderly patients, the largest subpopulation in NSCLC, EGFR-TKIs are considered
the standard of care therapy for advanced EGFR-positive disease in the elderly.
In this review, we seek to compile the available data about the EGFR-TKIs use in 
elderly patients with advanced NSCLC, with the hope to better understand its role
in this major yet, underrepresented, group of patients.

DOI: 10.1586/14737140.2015.1092385 
PMID: 26414352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Free Radic Biol Med. 2015 Dec;89:287-99. doi:
10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2015.07.155. Epub 2015 Sep 26.

Vorinostat synergizes with EGFR inhibitors in NSCLC cells by increasing ROS via
up-regulation of the major mitochondrial porin VDAC1 and modulation of the
c-Myc-NRF2-KEAP1 pathway.

Leone A(1), Roca MS(1), Ciardiello C(1), Terranova-Barberio M(1), Vitagliano
C(1), Ciliberto G(2), Mancini R(3), Di Gennaro E(1), Bruzzese F(1), Budillon
A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Pharmacology Unit, Istituto Nazionale Tumori Fondazione G.
Pascale-IRCCS, 80131 Naples, Italy. (2)Scientific Direction, Istituto Nazionale
Tumori Fondazione G. Pascale-IRCCS, 80131 Naples, Italy. (3)Department of Surgery
"P.Valdoni" and Department of Clinical and Molecular Medicine, La Sapienza
University, 00161 Rome, Italy. (4)Experimental Pharmacology Unit, Istituto
Nazionale Tumori Fondazione G. Pascale-IRCCS, 80131 Naples, Italy. Electronic
address: a.budillon@istitutotumori.na.it.

In non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients, the activation of alternative
pathways contributes to the limited efficacy of the epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) gefitinib and erlotinib. The
present study examines a panel of EGFR wild-type, K-Ras mutated, NSCLC lines,
which were all intrinsically resistant to EGFR-TKIs, and demonstrates that the
histone deacetylase inhibitor vorinostat can improve the therapeutic efficacy of 
gefitinib or erlotinib, inducing strong synergistic antiproliferative and
pro-apoptotic effects that are paralleled by reactive oxygen species accumulation
and by increased DNA damage. By knockdown experiments, we suggested that the
up-regulation of voltage-dependent anion-selective channel protein 1 (VDAC1), the
major mitochondrial porin of the outer mitochondrial membrane, which was induced 
by vorinostat and further increased by the combination, could be functionally
involved in oxidative stress-dependent apoptosis. Significantly, we also observed
the attenuation of the expression of both the enzyme hexokinase1, a negative
VDAC1 regulator, and the anti-apoptotic porin VDAC2, only in the combination
setting, suggesting convergent mechanisms that enhanced mitochondria-dependent
apoptosis by targeting VDAC protein functions. Furthermore, the prosurvival
capacities of the cells were also inhibited by the combination treatments, as
shown by complete pAKT deactivation, increased GSK3β expression, and c-Myc
down-regulation. Finally, we observed that the combination treatment of
vorinostat and either of the EGFR-TKIs induced the down-regulation of the
c-Myc-regulated nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 2 (NRF2) transcription 
factor and the up-regulation of the NRF2 repressor Kelch-like ECH-associated
protein 1 regulator (KEAP1). These two genes are crucial for the redox stress
response, often dysfunctional in NSCLC, and involved in EGFR-TKI resistance.
Taken together, these results are the first to demonstrate that altering redox
homeostasis is a new mechanism underlying the observed synergism between
vorinostat and EGFR TKIs in NSCLC.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2015.07.155 
PMID: 26409771  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. J Bras Pneumol. 2015 Jul-Aug;41(4):365-75. doi: 10.1590/S1806-37132015000004531.

Identifying activating mutations in the EGFR gene: prognostic and therapeutic
implications in non-small cell lung cancer.

[Article in English, Portuguese]

Lopes GL(1), Vattimo EF(2), Castro Junior Gd(2).

Author information: 
(1)Hospital Sírio-Libanês, São Paulo, SP, BR. (2)Faculdade de Medicina,
Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, SP, BR.

Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer-related deaths worldwide. Promising
new therapies have recently emerged from the development of molecular targeted
drugs; particularly promising are those blocking the signal transduction
machinery of cancer cells. One of the most widely studied cell signaling pathways
is that of EGFR, which leads to uncontrolled cell proliferation, increased cell
angiogenesis, and greater cell invasiveness. Activating mutations in the EGFR
gene (deletions in exon 19 and mutation L858R in exon 21), first described in
2004, have been detected in approximately 10% of all non-squamous non-small cell 
lung cancer (NSCLC) patients in Western countries and are the most important
predictors of a response to EGFR tyrosine-kinase inhibitors (EGFR-TKIs). Studies 
of the EGFR-TKIs gefitinib, erlotinib, and afatinib, in comparison with
platinum-based regimens, as first-line treatments in chemotherapy-naïve patients 
have shown that the EGFR-TKIs produce gains in progression-free survival and
overall response rates, although only in patients whose tumors harbor activating 
mutations in the EGFR gene. Clinical trials have also shown EGFR-TKIs to be
effective as second- and third-line therapies in advanced NSCLC. Here, we review 
the main aspects of EGFR pathway activation in NSCLC, underscore the importance
of correctly identifying activating mutations in the EGFR gene, and discuss the
main outcomes of EGFR-TKI treatment in NSCLC.

DOI: 10.1590/S1806-37132015000004531 
PMCID: PMC4635957
PMID: 26398757  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Tumour Biol. 2016 Feb;37(2):2597-602. doi: 10.1007/s13277-015-4093-8. Epub 2015
Sep 21.

Overexpression of Gremlin promotes non-small cell lung cancer progression.

Yin Y(1), Yang Y(2), Yang L(3), Yang Y(1), Li C(1), Liu X(1), Qu Y(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Qilu Hospital of Shandong University,
Jinan, 250012, China. (2)Clinical Laboratory, Qianfoshan Hospital of Shandong
Province, Jinan, 250012, China. (3)Yinan Branch of Qilu Hospital of Shandong
University, Yinan, 276300, China. (4)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Qilu
Hospital of Shandong University, Jinan, 250012, China. yiqing_qu@126.com.

Lung cancer is the major cause of cancer-related death worldwide, and 80 % of
them are non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cases. Gremlin, a bone morphogenetic 
protein (BMP) antagonist, is overexpressed in various cancerous tissues; however,
little is known about the roles of Gremlin in lung carcinogenesis, and it remains
unclear whether Gremlin expression may associate with EGFR-TKI resistance. In
this study, expression of Gremlin mRNA and protein in matched tumor and normal
lung specimens are quantified by quantitative real-time PCR and western blot. The
functional role of Gremlin in NSCLC cells was evaluated by interference RNA
(siRNA). The effects of Silenced Gremlin on the resistant PC-9/GR cell line were 
investigated by proliferation and apoptosis analysis compared with control PC-9
cells. Our results found that Gremlin expression levels were higher in NSCLC
tissues, and Gremlin was more highly expressed in PC-9/GR cells compared to PC-9 
cells. Knocking down of Gremlin in PC-9/GR cells decreased cell proliferation and
increased the expression of BMP7 protein. In addition, Gremlin silencing
significantly potentiated apoptosis induced by gefitinib in PC-9/GR with Gremlin 
knockdown compared to PC-9 transfected with control shRNA, suggesting Gremlin
contributes to gefitinib resistance in NSCLC. Gremlin might be explored as a
candidate of therapeutic target for modulating EGFR-TKI sensitivity in NSCLC.

DOI: 10.1007/s13277-015-4093-8 
PMID: 26392110  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Clin Lung Cancer. 2016 Jan;17(1):75-9. doi: 10.1016/j.cllc.2015.08.004. Epub 2015
Aug 18.

Gefitinib Combined With Standard Chemoradiotherapy in EGFR-Mutant Locally
Advanced Non-Small-Cell Lung Cancer: The LOGIK0902/OLCSG0905 Intergroup Study
Protocol.

Hotta K(1), Sasaki J(2), Saeki S(3), Takigawa N(4), Katsui K(5), Takayama K(6),
Nogami N(7), Shioyama Y(8), Bessho A(9), Kishimoto J(10), Tanimoto M(11), Kiura
K(12), Ichinose Y(13).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Okayama University Hospital, Okayama,
Japan. Electronic address: khotta@okayama-u.ac.jp. (2)Research and Development
Center for New Medical Frontiers, Kitasato University School of Medicine,
Sagamihara, Japan. (3)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Kumamoto University
Hospital, Kumamoto, Japan. (4)Department of General Internal Medicine 4, Kawasaki
Medical School, Okayama, Japan. (5)Department of Radiology, Okayama University
Hospital, Okayama, Japan. (6)Department of Respirology, Kyoto Prefectural
University of Medicine, Kyoto, Japan. (7)Department of Respiratory Medicine,
National Hospital Organization Shikoku Cancer Center Hospital, Matsuyama, Japan. 
(8)Department of Radiation Oncology, Ion Beam Therapy Center, SAGA-HIMAT
Foundation, Tosu, Japan. (9)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Japanese Red
Cross Okayama Hospital, Okayama, Japan. (10)Department of Research and
Development of Next Generation Medicine, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Kyushu
University, Fukuoka, Japan. (11)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Okayama
University Hospital, Okayama, Japan. (12)Department of Respiratory Medicine,
Okayama University Hospital, Okayama, Japan. (13)Clinical Research Institute,
National Kyushu Cancer Center, Fukuoka, Japan.

Herein, we describe an ongoing phase II trial in patients with locally advanced
non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) with mutated epidermal growth factor receptor 
(EGFR). Patients with chemotherapy-naive locally advanced disease with active
EGFR mutations will receive the induction treatment, specified as gefitinib
monotherapy (250 mg/body) for 8 weeks. Patients whose disease has not progressed 
during the induction therapy will receive cisplatin and docetaxel (40 mg/m(2)) on
days 1, 8, 29, and 36, and concurrent 3-dimensional conformal thoracic
radiotherapy with a single daily fraction of 2 Gy, for 5 consecutive days each
week to provide a total dose of 60 Gy. The primary end point is overall survival 
at 24 months. A target sample size of 21 evaluable patients is considered
sufficient to validate an expected rate of 85%, and 60% would be the lower limit 
of interest, with 80% power and a 1-sided α of 5%. Secondary end points include
toxicity, response rate, and overall survival. This study will clarify whether
tyrosine kinase inhibitors targeted to EGFR can produce a maximal effect in
selected NSCLC patients with the relevant driver mutation, even in the locally
advanced setting.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cllc.2015.08.004 
PMID: 26387039  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Zhongguo Fei Ai Za Zhi. 2015 Sep 20;18(9):554-8. doi:
10.3779/j.issn.1009-3419.2015.09.05.

[Clinical Experience of Gefitinib in the Treatment of 32 Lung Adenocarcinoma
Patients with Brain Metastases].

[Article in Chinese; Abstract available in Chinese from the publisher]

Xu J(1), Liu X(1), Yang S(1), Zhang X(1), Shi Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Cancer Hospital Chinese Academy of Medical
Sciences, Peking Union Medical College, Beijing 100021, China.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Brain metastasis was frequent in non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC) patients with poor prognosis. Gefitinib was an epidermal growth
factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase inhibitor which has been used in the
treatment of NSCLC. Our study was to evaluate the efficacy and toxicities of
gefitinib in lung adenocarcinoma patients with brain metastases.
METHODS: We retrospectively reviewed clinical records of 32 lung adenocarcinoma
patients with brain metastases, who had received gefitinib 250 mg Qd until
disease progression or intolerable toxicities.
RESULTS: The median overall survival (mOS) and median progression-free survival
(mPFS) were 24.7 months and 11.2 months, respectively. Response rate (RR) and
disease control rate (DCR) were 62.5% and 93.8%, respectively. The mOS and mPFS
of gefitinib-naive patients were 35.6 months and 11.3 months, respectively, and
RR and DCR were 75.0% and 100.0%, respectively. The mOS and mPFS of gefitinib
treatment patients were 18.6 months and 6.7 months, respectively, and RR and DCR 
were 50.0% and 83.3%, respectively. The mOS and mPFS of patients with sensitive
EGFR mutation were 24.8 months and 10.8 months, respectively, and RR and DCR were
75.0% and 100.0%, respectively. The mOS and mPFS of patients with unknown EGFR
status were 35.6 months and 12.3 months, respectively, and RR and DCR were 53.3% 
and 86.7%, respectively. Treatment was well tolerated and no severe toxicities
were observed. Common toxicities include: rash in 15 patients (46.9%), diarrhea
in 7 cases (21.9%) and oral ulcer in 1 case (3.1%).
CONCLUSIONS: Gefitinib was highly effective and well tolerated in lung
adenocarcinoma patients with brain metastases, and could be recommended as a
treatment choice for this population.

Publisher: 背景与目的 脑转移是晚期非小细胞肺癌（non-small cell lung cancer,
NSCLC）常见的转移部位，预后欠佳。吉非替尼是一种表皮生长因子受体（epithelial growth factor receptor,
EGFR）酪氨酸激酶抑制剂，用于治疗晚期NSCLC。本研究旨在探讨吉非替尼治疗肺腺癌脑转移的疗效及毒副反应。方法
回顾性分析32例肺腺癌脑转移患者的临床资料，所有患者均口服吉非替尼250 mg Qd，直到疾病进展或发生不可耐受的毒副反应。结果
全组32例患者的中位生存时间（median overall survival, mOS）和中位无进展生存时间（median progression-free
survival, mPFS）分别为24.7个月和11.2个月，有效率（response rate, RR）和疾病控制率（disease control
rate,
DCR）分别为62.5%和93.8%。吉非替尼用于初治患者的mOS和mPFS分别为35.6个月和11.3个月，RR和DCR分别为75.0%和100.0%。吉非替尼
用于复治患者的mOS和mPFS分别为18.6个月和6.7个月，RR和DCR分别为50.0%和83.3%。EGFR敏感性突变患者的mOS和mPFS分别为24.8个月
和10.8个月，RR和DCR分别为75.0%和100.0%。EGFR突变状态不明患者的mOS和mPFS分别为35.6个月和12.3个月，RR和DCR分别为53.3
%和86.7%。全组患者耐受性好，未观察到严重毒副反应。常见的毒副反应包括：皮疹15例（46.9%）、腹泻7例（21.9%）、口腔溃疡1例（3.1%）。结论
吉非替尼对肺腺癌脑转移患者有效率较高且耐受性好，可以作为肺腺癌脑转移患者的一种治疗选择。.
DOI: 10.3779/j.issn.1009-3419.2015.09.05 
PMID: 26383979  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Lancet Oncol. 2015 Sep;16(9):e447-59. doi: 10.1016/S1470-2045(15)00246-6.

Treatment approaches for EGFR-inhibitor-resistant patients with non-small-cell
lung cancer.

Tan CS(1), Gilligan D(2), Pacey S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology-Oncology, National University Cancer Institute of
Singapore, National University Health System, Singapore. (2)Cambridge University 
Hospitals NHS Trust, Cambridge, UK. (3)Department of Oncology, University of
Cambridge, Cambridge, UK. Electronic address: scp46@medschl.cam.ac.uk.

Discovery of activating mutations in EGFR and their use as predictive biomarkers 
to tailor patient therapy with EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) has
revolutionised treatment of patients with advanced EGFR-mutant non-small-cell
lung cancer (NSCLC). At present, first-line treatment with EGFR TKIs (gefitinib, 
erlotinib, and afatinib) has been approved for patients harbouring exon 19
deletions or exon 21 (Leu858Arg) substitution EGFR mutations. These agents
improve response rates, time to progression, and overall survival. Unfortunately,
patients develop resistance, limiting patient benefit and posing a challenge to
oncologists. Optimum treatment after progression is not clearly defined. A more
detailed understanding of the biology of EGFR-mutant NSCLC and the mechanisms of 
resistance to targeted therapy mean that an era of treatment approaches based on 
rationally developed drugs or therapeutic strategies has begun. Combination
approaches-eg, dual EGFR blockade-to overcome resistance have been trialled and
seem to be promising but are potentially limited by toxicity. Third-generation
EGFR-mutant-selective TKIs, such as AZD9291 or rociletininb, which target
Thr790Met-mutant tumours, the most common mechanism of EGFR TKI resistance, have 
entered clinical trials, and exciting, albeit preliminary, efficacy data have
been reported. In this Review, we summarise the scientific literature and
evidence on therapy options after EGFR TKI treatment for patients with NSCLC,
aiming to provide a guide to oncologists, and consider how to maximise
therapeutic advances in outcomes in this rapidly advancing area.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S1470-2045(15)00246-6 
PMID: 26370354  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Onco Targets Ther. 2015 Sep 2;8:2399-406. doi: 10.2147/OTT.S89225. eCollection
2015.

The distinctive nature of adenocarcinoma of the lung.

Roviello G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Translational Medicine, University of Brescia,
Brescia, Italy.

In recent years, many personalized treatments have been developed for NSCLC
(non-small-cell lung cancer) patients. Among these, gefitinib, erlotinib, and
afatinib are selective epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase
inhibitors for patients with EGFR gene mutations, while crizotinib and ceritinib 
are two new tyrosine kinase inhibitors directed against the echinoderm
microtubule-like protein 4-anaplastic lymphoma kinase translocation. The
possibility of these new molecules being used to treat patients without
adenocarcinoma histology is notably small. For example, EGFR mutations and
anaplastic lymphoma kinase fusion gene rearrangement are rare in patients with
squamous cell carcinoma (generally <1%). Additionally, the benefit of targeted
treatment approaches in patients with small-cell lung cancer histology is
limited. All of these findings highlight the distinctive nature of adenocarcinoma
of the lung among all lung cancer subtypes. Unfortunately, to date, less than 15%
of patients with adenocarcinoma of the lung are ideal candidates for these
targeted therapies.

DOI: 10.2147/OTT.S89225 
PMCID: PMC4562731
PMID: 26366094  [PubMed]


323. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol. 2015 Oct;76(4):835-41. doi:
10.1007/s00280-015-2867-8. Epub 2015 Sep 8.

EGFR-TKI rechallenge with bevacizumab in EGFR-mutant non-small cell lung cancer.

Otsuka K(1), Hata A(2), Takeshita J(1), Okuda C(1), Kaji R(1), Masago K(1),
Fujita S(1), Katakami N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Integrated Oncology, Institute of Biomedical Research and
Innovation, 2-2, Minatojima-minamimachi, Chuo-ku, Kobe, 650-0047, Japan.
(2)Division of Integrated Oncology, Institute of Biomedical Research and
Innovation, 2-2, Minatojima-minamimachi, Chuo-ku, Kobe, 650-0047, Japan.
a-hata@fbri.org.

BACKGROUND: Efficacies of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)-tyrosine kinase
inhibitor (TKI) rechallenge have been demonstrated in EGFR-mutant non-small cell 
lung cancer (NSCLC). However, their efficacies were only moderate. Some
preclinical studies suggested synergistic effects of bevacizumab to EGFR-TKI in
TKI-resistant models.
METHODS: We retrospectively evaluated clinical efficacy and safety of EGFR-TKI
rechallenge with bevacizumab. Rebiopsy was performed on all studied cases to
examine T790M-resistant mutation status.
RESULTS: Between January 2010 and June 2014, a total of 24 EGFR-mutant NSCLC
patients who had been previously treated with EGFR-TKIs (gefitinib, erlotinib,
and/or afatinib) received EGFR-TKI rechallenge with bevacizumab. Twenty-two (92
%) patients underwent erlotinib and two (8 %) gefitinib as rechallenge EGFR-TKIs 
in combination with bevacizumab. Three patients achieved partial response, and 18
had stable disease, resulting in the response rate (RR) of 13 % and disease
control rate (DCR) of 88 %, respectively. The median progression-free survival
(PFS) was 4.1 [95 % confidence interval (CI) 2.3-4.9] months, and the median
overall survival (OS) was 13.5 (95 % CI 9.7-27.4) months. The RR, DCR, median
PFS, and median OS for T790M-positive versus T790M-negative were 0 versus 18 % (p
= 0.530), 86 versus 88 % (p = 1.00), 3.3 versus 4.1 months (p = 0.048), and 15.1 
versus 13.5 months (p = 0.996), respectively. Severe adverse events (≥grade 3):
grade 3 of 1 (4 %) rash; grade 3 of 1 (4 %) paronychia; grade 3 of 1 (4 %)
hypertension; and grade 3 of 1 (4 %) anemia, were observed.
CONCLUSIONS: EGFR-TKI rechallenge with bevacizumab demonstrated higher DCR and
modestly longer PFS than historical data on EGFR-TKI rechallenge alone. Its
activity was notably higher in T790M-negative population.

DOI: 10.1007/s00280-015-2867-8 
PMID: 26349474  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Genet Mol Res. 2015 Aug 19;14(3):9813-20. doi: 10.4238/2015.August.19.14.

Study of the methylation patterns of the EGFR gene promoter in non-small cell
lung cancer.

Pan ZY(1), Jiang ZS(1), Ouyang HQ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Tianjin Key Laboratory of Cancer Prevention and Therapy, National Clinical
Research Center of Cancer, Tianjin, China.

We investigated the methylation state of the epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR) gene promoter in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and analyzed its
effect on tumor biology. We enrolled 120 patients with NSCLC who had been
confirmed by pathologic diagnosis and had been operated on. The methylation
states of the EGFR gene promoter were detected and analyzed and a prognosis was
given. NSCLC cell lines and nude mice were used to study the treatment reactivity
of gefitinib (an EGFR inhibitor) with or without 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine
(5-aza-CdR) intervention. EGFR expression was high when the methylation degree
was lower in patients with adenocarcinoma and poor pathological differentiation
of tumor than in patients with squamous cell carcinoma and good pathological
differentiation. NSCLC cells with low expression of EGFR and high methylation in 
the promoter region were insensitive to EGFR-targeted therapy. However, apoptosis
and proliferation inhibition of cancer cells were even more pronounced when
5-aza-CdR was used to inhibit methylation. An in vivo study confirmed that
methylation adjuvant therapy can improve the sensitivity of cancer to
EGFR-targeted therapy. Application of a demethylating agent could be an important
supplement for improving EGFR inhibition in the treatment of NSCLC, especially in
those who are insensitive to the use of an EGFR inhibitor alone.

DOI: 10.4238/2015.August.19.14 
PMID: 26345914  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2015 Jul 1;8(7):8603-6. eCollection 2015.

EGFR mutation L747P led to gefitinib resistance and accelerated liver metastases 
in a Chinese patient with lung adenocarcinoma.

Yu G(1), Xie X(2), Sun D(1), Geng J(3), Fu F(2), Zhang L(1), Wang H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Affiliated Yantai Yuhuangding Hospital, Medical College of Qingdao University 
Yantai 264000, China. (2)Key Laboratory of Molecular Pharmacology and Drug
Evaluation (Ministry of Education of China), School of Pharmacy, Yantai
University Yantai 264005, China. (3)Department of Imaging Center, Affiliated
Yantai Hospital of Binzhou Medical University Yantai 264100, China.

BACKGROUND: Mutations in the epidermal growth factor receptor gene (EGFR) are
found in around half of Asian patients with non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC).
For this reason, EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKI) are often prescribed
depending on the EGFR status. Two common EGFR mutations, a deletion in exon 19
and L858R in exon 21, demonstrate a positive response to gefitinib, the first
approved EGFR TKI. However, T790M and an insertion in EGFR exon 21 are resistant 
to EGFR TKI treatment. The relationships between the EGFR mutation type and
response to the target drug have not been fully investigated.
CASE PRESENTATION: We describe a 66-year-old Chinese male diagnosed with stage IV
lung adenocarcinoma based on evidence from a computed tomography (CT) scan and
histological features of a biopsy taken during fiberoptic bronchoscopy surgery.
Molecular analysis of EGFR exons 19 and 21 revealed the presence of only one
mutation in exon 19: L747P (2239-2240 TT>CC). The patient requested gefitinib
treatment for 2 weeks but his response was poor. A CT scan revealed that the
number and relative volume of the liver metastases had increased after treatment.
CONCLUSION: L747P (2239-2240 TT>CC) in exon 19 is a rare EGFR mutation that
appears to lead to gefitinib resistance and might accelerate liver metastases.


PMCID: PMC4555769
PMID: 26339441  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Eur J Health Econ. 2016 Sep;17(7):855-63. doi: 10.1007/s10198-015-0726-5. Epub
2015 Sep 4.

Cost-effectiveness analysis of EGFR mutation testing in patients with non-small
cell lung cancer (NSCLC) with gefitinib or carboplatin-paclitaxel.

Arrieta O(1), Anaya P(2), Morales-Oyarvide V(3), Ramírez-Tirado LA(3), Polanco
AC(4).

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Thoracic Oncology, Instituto Nacional de Cancerología (INCan), San
Fernando #22, Col. Sección XVI, Tlalpan, 14080, México City, Mexico.
ogarrieta@gmail.com. (2)IMS Health, Mexico City, Mexico. (3)Unit of Thoracic
Oncology, Instituto Nacional de Cancerología (INCan), San Fernando #22, Col.
Sección XVI, Tlalpan, 14080, México City, Mexico. (4)AstraZeneca, Mexico City,
Mexico.

OBJECTIVE: Assess the cost-effectiveness of an EGFR-mutation testing strategy for
advanced NSCLC in first-line therapy with either gefitinib or
carboplatin-paclitaxel in Mexican institutions.
METHODS: Cost-effectiveness analysis using a discrete event simulation (DES)
model to simulate two therapeutic strategies in patients with advanced NSCLC.
Strategy one included patients tested for EGFR-mutation and therapy given
accordingly. Strategy two included chemotherapy for all patients without testing.
All results are presented in 2014 US dollars. The analysis was made with data
from the Mexican frequency of EGFR-mutation. A univariate sensitivity analysis
was conducted on EGFR prevalence. Progression-free survival (PFS) transition
probabilities were estimated on data from the IPASS and simulated with a Weibull 
distribution, run with parallel trials to calculate a probabilistic sensitivity
analysis.
RESULTS: PFS of patients in the testing strategy was 6.76 months (95 % CI
6.10-7.44) vs 5.85 months (95 % CI 5.43-6.29) in the non-testing group. The
one-way sensitivity analysis showed that PFS has a direct relationship with
EGFR-mutation prevalence, while the ICER and testing cost have an inverse
relationship with EGFR-mutation prevalence. The probabilistic sensitivity
analysis showed that all iterations had incremental costs and incremental PFS for
strategy 1 in comparison with strategy 2.
CONCLUSION: There is a direct relationship between the ICER and the cost of EGFR 
testing, with an inverse relationship with the prevalence of EGFR-mutation. When 
prevalence is >10 % ICER remains constant. This study could impact Mexican and
Latin American health policies regarding mutation detection testing and treatment
for advanced NSCLC.

DOI: 10.1007/s10198-015-0726-5 
PMID: 26338546  [PubMed - in process]


327. Oncology. 2015;89(5):275-80. doi: 10.1159/000438703. Epub 2015 Sep 4.

Impact of Smoking History on the Efficacy of Gefitinib in Patients with Non-Small
Cell Lung Cancer Harboring Activating Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor Mutations.

Igawa S(1), Sasaki J, Otani S, Ishihara M, Takakura A, Katagiri M, Masuda N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Kitasato University School of Medicine,
Sagamihara, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Gefitinib treatment has come to be recognized as the standard therapy
for patients with non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) harboring epidermal growth
factor receptor (EGFR) mutations. However, resistance to gefitinib has been
observed in certain subpopulations of these patients. The purpose of this study
was to evaluate the impact of smoking status on the efficacy of gefitinib in
patients with NSCLC harboring EGFR mutations.
METHODS: The records of NSCLC patients harboring EGFR mutations who were treated 
with gefitinib at Kitasato University Hospital were retrospectively reviewed, and
the treatment outcomes were evaluated.
RESULTS: In 153 patients with NSCLC harboring EGFR mutations, the overall
response rate and progression-free survival (PFS) were 66.7% and 9.0 months,
respectively. PFS differed significantly among the current smokers and
never-smokers/former light smokers (10.7 vs. 5.4 months, p=0.0002), and the
response rate was significantly higher in the never-smokers/former light smokers 
than in the current smokers (72.3 vs. 55.8%, p=0.04). Multivariate analysis
identified smoking status as an independent predictor of PFS.
CONCLUSION: The clinical data obtained in this study provide a valuable rationale
for considering smoking status as a predictor of the efficacy of gefitinib in
patients with NSCLC harboring activating EGFR mutations.

© 2015 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000438703 
PMID: 26335629  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Oncotarget. 2015 Sep 22;6(28):26090-103. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.4636.

Src inhibitors act through different mechanisms in Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer
models depending on EGFR and RAS mutational status.

Formisano L(1), D'Amato V(1), Servetto A(1), Brillante S(1), Raimondo L(1), Di
Mauro C(1), Marciano R(1), Orsini RC(1), Cosconati S(2), Randazzo A(3), Parsons
SJ(4), Montuori N(5), Veneziani BM(6), De Placido S(1), Rosa R(1), Bianco R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Medicine and Surgery, University of Naples "Federico
II", Naples, Italy. (2)DiSTABiF, Second University of Naples, Caserta, Italy.
(3)Department of Pharmacy, University of Naples "Federico II", Naples, Italy.
(4)Department of Microbiology, Immunology & Cancer Biology, Cancer Center,
University of Virginia Health System, Charlottesville, Virginia, USA.
(5)Department of Translational Medical Sciences, University of Naples Federico
II, Naples, Italy. (6)Department of Molecular Medicine and Medical
Biotechnologies, University of Naples "Federico II", Naples, Italy.

Resistance to the EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) gefitinib and erlotinib,
often related to Ras or secondary EGFR mutations, is a relevant clinical issue in
Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer (NSCLC). Although Src TK has been involved in such
resistance, clinical development of its inhibitors has been so far limited. To
better define the molecular targets of the Src TKIs saracatinib, dasatinib and
bosutinib, we used a variety of in vitro/in vivo studies. Kinase assays supported
by docking analysis demonstrated that all the compounds directly inhibit EGFR TK 
variants. However, in live cells only saracatinib efficiently reduced EGFR
activation, while dasatinib was the most effective agent in inhibiting Src TK.
Consistently, a pronounced anti-proliferative effect was achieved with
saracatinib, in EGFR mutant cells, or with dasatinib, in wt EGFR/Ras mutant
cells, poorly dependent on EGFR and erlotinib-resistant. We then identified the
most effective drug combinations to overcome resistance to EGFR inhibitors, both 
in vitro and in nude mice: in T790M EGFR erlotinib-resistant cells, saracatinib
with the anti-EGFR mAb cetuximab; in Ras mutant erlotinib-resistant models,
dasatinib with the MEK inhibitor selumetinib. Src inhibitors may act with
different mechanisms in NSCLCs, depending on EGFR/Ras mutational profile, and may
be integrated with EGFR or MEK inhibitors for different cohorts of NSCLCs.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.4636 
PMCID: PMC4694888
PMID: 26325669  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. J Clin Oncol. 2015 Oct 20;33(30):3488-515. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2015.62.1342. Epub
2015 Aug 31.

Systemic Therapy for Stage IV Non-Small-Cell Lung Cancer: American Society of
Clinical Oncology Clinical Practice Guideline Update.

Masters GA(1), Temin S(1), Azzoli CG(1), Giaccone G(1), Baker S Jr(1), Brahmer
JR(1), Ellis PM(1), Gajra A(1), Rackear N(1), Schiller JH(1), Smith TJ(1), Strawn
JR(1), Trent D(1), Johnson DH(1); American Society of Clinical Oncology Clinical 
Practice.

Author information: 
(1)Gregory A. Masters, Helen F. Graham Cancer Center, Newark, DE; Sarah Temin,
American Society of Clinical Oncology, Alexandria; Sherman Baker Jr, Virginia
Commonwealth University; David Trent, Virginia Cancer Center, Richmond, VA;
Christopher G. Azzoli, Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center, Boston, MA; 
Giuseppe Giaccone, Lombardi Cancer Center, Georgetown University, Washington, DC;
Julie R. Brahmer and Thomas J. Smith, Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center, 
Johns Hopkins, Baltimore, MD; Peter M. Ellis, Juravinski Cancer Centre, Hamilton,
Ontario, Canada; Ajeet Gajra, Upstate Medical University, Syracuse, NY; Nancy
Rackear, Uniting Against Lung Cancer, Fort Lauderdale, FL; Joan H. Schiller,
University of Texas Southwestern; David H. Johnson, University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center at Dallas, Dallas; and John R. Strawn, patient
representative, Houston, TX.

Erratum in
    J Clin Oncol. 2016 Apr 10;34(11):1287.

PURPOSE: To provide evidence-based recommendations to update the American Society
of Clinical Oncology guideline on systemic therapy for stage IV non-small-cell
lung cancer (NSCLC).
METHODS: An Update Committee of the American Society of Clinical Oncology NSCLC
Expert Panel based recommendations on a systematic review of randomized
controlled trials from January 2007 to February 2014.
RESULTS: This guideline update reflects changes in evidence since the previous
guideline.
RECOMMENDATIONS: There is no cure for patients with stage IV NSCLC. For patients 
with performance status (PS) 0 to 1 (and appropriate patient cases with PS 2) and
without an EGFR-sensitizing mutation or ALK gene rearrangement, combination
cytotoxic chemotherapy is recommended, guided by histology, with early concurrent
palliative care. Recommendations for patients in the first-line setting include
platinum-doublet therapy for those with PS 0 to 1 (bevacizumab may be added to
carboplatin plus paclitaxel if no contraindications); combination or single-agent
chemotherapy or palliative care alone for those with PS 2; afatinib, erlotinib,
or gefitinib for those with sensitizing EGFR mutations; crizotinib for those with
ALK or ROS1 gene rearrangement; and following first-line recommendations or using
platinum plus etoposide for those with large-cell neuroendocrine carcinoma.
Maintenance therapy includes pemetrexed continuation for patients with stable
disease or response to first-line pemetrexed-containing regimens, alternative
chemotherapy, or a chemotherapy break. In the second-line setting,
recommendations include docetaxel, erlotinib, gefitinib, or pemetrexed for
patients with nonsquamous cell carcinoma; docetaxel, erlotinib, or gefitinib for 
those with squamous cell carcinoma; and chemotherapy or ceritinib for those with 
ALK rearrangement who experience progression after crizotinib. In the third-line 
setting, for patients who have not received erlotinib or gefitinib, treatment
with erlotinib is recommended. There are insufficient data to recommend routine
third-line cytotoxic therapy. Decisions regarding systemic therapy should not be 
made based on age alone. Additional information can be found at
http://www.asco.org/guidelines/nsclc and http://www.asco.org/guidelineswiki.

© 2015 by American Society of Clinical Oncology.

DOI: 10.1200/JCO.2015.62.1342 
PMCID: PMC5019421
PMID: 26324367  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Lung Cancer. 2015 Nov;90(2):307-13. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2015.08.004. Epub 2015
Aug 12.

Impact of single nucleotide polymorphisms on severe hepatotoxicity induced by
EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors in patients with non-small cell lung cancer
harboring EGFR mutations.

Sugiyama E(1), Umemura S(2), Nomura S(3), Kirita K(1), Matsumoto S(1), Yoh K(1), 
Niho S(1), Ohmatsu H(1), Tsuboi M(4), Ohe Y(5), Goto K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Oncology, National Cancer Center Hospital East, Japan. 
(2)Department of Thoracic Oncology, National Cancer Center Hospital East, Japan. 
Electronic address: sumemura@east.ncc.go.jp. (3)Biostatistics Division, Center
for Research Administration and Support, National Cancer Center, Japan.
(4)Department of Thoracic Surgery, National Cancer Center Hospital East, Japan.
(5)Department of Thoracic Oncology, National Cancer Center Hospital, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Many patients are forced to discontinue treatment with EGFR tyrosine 
kinase inhibitors (TKIs), particularly gefitinib, due to severe hepatotoxicity.
Here, we investigated the association between the rate of severe hepatotoxicity
and single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in metabolic enzymes.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Multi-SNP analyses were performed in 60 patients with
EGFR-mutated non-small cell lung cancer using blood samples obtained prior to
starting treatment with gefitinib. The poor metabolizer (PM) phenotype was
defined as homozygosity or double heterozygosity for variant alleles that confer 
reduced enzyme activities. Associated enzymes were screened using univariate
logistic regression analyses adjusted for multiplicity and were further evaluated
using multivariate logistic regression analyses to determine the influence of
these enzymes on severe hepatotoxicity.
RESULTS: Severe hepatotoxicity was detected in 19 (32%) of the 60 patients.
Patient phenotypes consisted of CYP3A5, PM/non-PM (31/29) and CYP2D6, PM/non-PM
(5/55). In multivariate logistic regression analyses, the rate of severe
hepatotoxicity was significantly higher among patients with PM phenotypes than
those without (CYP3A5 PM vs. non-PM: 48.4% vs. 13.8%, P=0.0069; CYP2D6 PM vs.
non-PM: 80.0% vs. 27.3%, P=0.0364). Of the 9 patients switched from gefitinib to 
erlotinib due to severe hepatotoxicity, 8 had a PM phenotype for CYP2D6 or
CYP3A5. All cases were successfully managed without exacerbation of severe
hepatotoxicity.
CONCLUSIONS: Evaluation of SNPs in CYP3A5 and CYP2D6 can effectively predict
severe hepatotoxicity induced by gefitinib. Erlotinib can be used as an
alternative treatment for patients who develop gefitinib-induced severe
hepatotoxicity.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2015.08.004 
PMID: 26323212  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Cancer Med. 2015 Nov;4(11):1621-32. doi: 10.1002/cam4.506. Epub 2015 Aug 26.

Advances in molecular-based personalized non-small-cell lung cancer therapy:
targeting epidermal growth factor receptor and mechanisms of resistance.

Jotte RM(1), Spigel DR(2).

Author information: 
(1)Rocky Mountain Cancer Centers, Lone Tree, Colorado. (2)Sarah Cannon Research
Institute, Nashville, Tennessee.

Molecularly targeted therapies, directed against the features of a given tumor,
have allowed for a personalized approach to the treatment of advanced
non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC). The reversible epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) gefitinib and erlotinib had
undergone turbulent clinical development until it was discovered that these
agents have preferential activity in patients with NSCLC harboring activating
EGFR mutations. Since then, a number of phase 3 clinical trials have collectively
shown that EGFR-TKI monotherapy is more effective than combination chemotherapy
as first-line therapy for EGFR mutation-positive advanced NSCLC. The next
generation of EGFR-directed agents for EGFR mutation-positive advanced NSCLC is
irreversible TKIs against EGFR and other ErbB family members, including afatinib,
which was recently approved, and dacomitinib, which is currently being tested in 
phase 3 trials. As research efforts continue to explore the various proposed
mechanisms of acquired resistance to EGFR-TKI therapy, agents that target
signaling pathways downstream of EGFR are being studied in combination with EGFR 
TKIs in molecularly selected advanced NSCLC. Overall, the results of numerous
ongoing phase 3 trials involving the EGFR TKIs will be instrumental in
determining whether further gains in personalized therapy for advanced NSCLC are 
attainable with newer agents and combinations. This article reviews key clinical 
trial data for personalized NSCLC therapy with agents that target the EGFR and
related pathways, specifically based on molecular characteristics of individual
tumors, and mechanisms of resistance.

© 2015 The Authors. Cancer Medicine published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/cam4.506 
PMCID: PMC4673988
PMID: 26310719  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol. 2015 Oct;76(4):873-7. doi: 10.1007/s00280-015-2847-z.
Epub 2015 Aug 27.

Whole-brain radiation fails to boost intracerebral gefitinib concentration in
patients with brain metastatic non-small cell lung cancer: a self-controlled,
pilot study.

Fang L(1,)(2), Sun X(2,)(3), Song Y(1), Zhang Y(1), Li F(4), Xu Y(2,)(3), Ma
S(5), Lin N(6).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Clinical Pharmacy, Zhejiang Cancer Hospital, Hangzhou, Zhejiang,
China. (2)Zhejiang Key Laboratory of Diagnosis and Treatment Technology on
Thoracic Oncology (Lung and Esophagus), Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China. (3)Department 
of Radiation Oncology, Zhejiang Cancer Hospital, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China.
(4)College of Pharmaceutical Science, Zhejiang Chinese Medical University,
Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China. (5)Department of Radiation Oncology, Affiliated
Hangzhou Hospital of Nanjing Medical University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China.
mashenglin@medmail.com.cn. (6)Institute for Individualized Medicine, Hangzhou
First People's Hospital, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China. lnm1013@163.com.

PURPOSE: Whole-brain radiation therapy (WBRT) is generally considered as an
efficient strategy to improve blood-brain barrier (BBB) permeability by damaging 
BBB structure and is therefore, used as a promising pretreatment of chemotherapy.
However, the impact of radiotherapy on leaky BBB is still controversial for the
reason that BBB of metastatic brain tumor lesion had been breached by tumor
metastasizing. Herein, we conducted a self-controlled study to evaluate the
effect of WBRT on the permeability of BBB in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
patients with brain metastases (BM).
METHOD: A prospective self-controlled research was performed. Radiation-naive
NSCLC patients with BM were enrolled and treated with gefitinib for 2 weeks, and 
then concurrently combined with WBRT for 2 weeks. Plasma and cerebrospinal fluid 
(CSF) before and after WBRT were collected on day 15 and 29 after the initiation 
of gefitinib treatment. The concentrations of gefitinib in these samples were
measured by HPLC.
RESULTS: Three patients were enrolled and evaluated. The concentrations of
gefitinib in plasma and CSF pre-WBRT were comparable to those of post-WBRT.
Consequently, no significant change was noted in the CSF-to-plasma ratios of
gefitinib before and after WBRT (2.79 ± 1.47 vs. 2.35 ± 1.74 %, p = 0.123).
CONCLUSIONS: The WBRT may not affect the BBB permeability by determining the
concentration of gefitinib in NSCLC patients with BM.

DOI: 10.1007/s00280-015-2847-z 
PMID: 26310285  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Oncotarget. 2015 Sep 29;6(29):26814-25. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.4254.

A decade of EGFR inhibition in EGFR-mutated non small cell lung cancer (NSCLC):
Old successes and future perspectives.

Russo A(1), Franchina T(1), Ricciardi GR(1), Picone A(1), Ferraro G(1), Zanghì
M(1), Toscano G(1), Giordano A(2), Adamo V(1).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Oncology Unit AOOR Papardo-Piemonte & Department of Human Pathology,
University of Messina, Messina, Italy. (2)Sbarro Institute for Cancer Research
and Molecular Medicine, Center for Biotechnology, Temple University,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.

The discovery of Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor (EGFR) mutations in Non Small
Cell Lung Cancer (NSCLC) launched the era of personalized medicine in advanced
NSCLC, leading to a dramatic shift in the therapeutic landscape of this disease. 
After ten years from the individuation of activating mutations in the tyrosine
kinase domain of the EGFR in NSCLC patients responding to the EGFR tyrosine
kinase inhibitor (TKI) Gefitinib, several progresses have been done and first
line treatment with EGFR TKIs is a firmly established option in advanced
EGFR-mutated NSCLC patients. During the last decade, different EGFR TKIs have
been developed and three inhibitors have been approved so far in these selected
patients. However, despite great breakthroughs have been made, treatment of these
molecularly selected patients poses novel therapeutic challenges, such as
emerging of acquired resistance, brain metastases development or the need to
translate these treatments in earlier clinical settings, such as adjuvant
therapy. The aim of this paper is to provide a comprehensive review of the major 
progresses reported so far in the EGFR inhibition in this molecularly-selected
subgroup of NSCLC patients, from the early successes with first generation EGFR
TKIs, Erlotinib and Gefitinib, to the novel irreversible and mutant-selective
inhibitors and ultimately the emerging challenges that we, in the next future,
are called to deal with.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.4254 
PMCID: PMC4694955
PMID: 26308162  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2015 Nov 1;288(3):359-73. doi:
10.1016/j.taap.2015.08.008. Epub 2015 Aug 20.

Identification of protein expression alterations in gefitinib-resistant human
lung adenocarcinoma: PCNT and mPR play key roles in the development of
gefitinib-associated resistance.

Lin CC(1), Chen JT(2), Lin MW(3), Chan CH(4), Wen YF(5), Wu SB(6), Chung TW(2),
Lyu KW(7), Chou HC(8), Chan HL(9).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedical Science, National Chung-Hsing University, Taichung,
Taiwan; Institute of Biomedical Science, and Rong Hsing Research Center for
Translational Medicine, National Chung Hsing University, Taiwan; Department of
Medical Research and Education, Taichung Veterans General Hospital, Taichung,
Taiwan; Division of Chest Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine, Changhua
Christian Hospital, Changhua, Taiwan. (2)Department of Medical Science and
Institute of Bioinformatics and Structural Biology, National Tsing Hua
University, Hsinchu, Taiwan. (3)Department of Medical Science and Institute of
Bioinformatics and Structural Biology, National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu,
Taiwan; Department of Applied Science, National Hsinchu University of Education, 
Hsinchu, Taiwan. (4)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Hsinchu Mackay
Memorial Hospital, Hsinchu 30071, Taiwan. (5)Department of Medical Science and
Institute of Bioinformatics and Structural Biology, National Tsing Hua
University, Hsinchu, Taiwan; Department of Internal Medicine, National Taiwan
University Hospital Hsinchu Branch, Hsinchu, Taiwan. (6)Department of Applied
Science, National Hsinchu University of Education, Hsinchu, Taiwan. (7)Lutheran
Medical Center, Brooklyn, NY, USA; Global Scholars Program, St. George's
University/Northumbria University, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom.
(8)Department of Applied Science, National Hsinchu University of Education,
Hsinchu, Taiwan. Electronic address: chouhc@mail.nhcue.edu.tw. (9)Department of
Medical Science and Institute of Bioinformatics and Structural Biology, National 
Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan. Electronic address:
hlchan@life.nthu.edu.tw.

Gefitinib is the first-line chemotherapeutic drug for treating non-small cell
lung cancer (NSCLC), which comprises nearly 85% of all lung cancer cases
worldwide. However, most patients eventually develop drug resistance after 12-18 
months of treatment. Hence, investigating the drug resistance mechanism and
resistance-associated biomarkers is necessary. Two lung adenocarcinoma cell
lines, PC9 and gefitinib-resistant PC9/Gef, were established for examining
resistance mechanisms and identifying potential therapeutic targets.
Two-dimensional differential gel electrophoresis and matrix-assisted laser
desorption ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry were used for examining
global protein expression changes between PC9 and PC9/Gef. The results revealed
that 164 identified proteins were associated with the formation of gefitinib
resistance in PC9 cells. Additional studies using RNA interference showed that
progesterone receptor membrane component 1 and pericentrin proteins have major
roles in gefitinib resistance. In conclusion, the proteomic approach enabled
identifying of numerous proteins involved in gefitinib resistance. The results
provide useful diagnostic markers and therapeutic candidates for treating
gefitinib-resistant NSCLC.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.taap.2015.08.008 
PMID: 26298006  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. PLoS One. 2015 Aug 19;10(8):e0136176. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0136176.
eCollection 2015.

Gefitinib and Erlotinib Lead to Phosphorylation of Eukaryotic Initiation Factor 2
Alpha Independent of Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor in A549 Cells.

Koyama S(1), Omura T(1), Yonezawa A(1), Imai S(1), Nakagawa S(1), Nakagawa T(1), 
Yano I(1), Matsubara K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics, Kyoto University
Hospital, Kyoto, Japan.

Gefitinib and erlotinib are anticancer agents, which inhibit epidermal growth
factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase. Interstitial lung disease (ILD) occurs in
patients with non-small cell lung cancer receiving EGFR inhibitors. In the
present study, we examined whether gefitinib- and erlotinib-induced lung injury
related to ILD through endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress, which is a causative
intracellular mechanism in cytotoxicity caused by various chemicals in
adenocarcinomic human alveolar basal epithelial cells. These two EGFR inhibitors 
increased Parkinson juvenile disease protein 2 and C/EBP homologous protein mRNA 
expressions, and activated the eukaryotic initiation factor (eIF) 2α/activating
transcription factor 4 pathway without protein kinase R-like ER kinase activation
in A549 cells. Gefitinib and erlotinib caused neither ER stress nor cell death;
however, these agents inhibited cell growth via the reduction of cyclin-D1
expression. Tauroursodeoxycholic acid, which is known to suppress eIF2α
phosphorylation, cancelled the effects of EGFR inhibitors on cyclin-D1 expression
and cell proliferation in a concentration-dependent manner. The results of an
EGFR-silencing study using siRNA showed that gefitinib and erlotinib affected
eIF2α phosphorylation and cyclin-D1 expression independent of EGFR inhibition.
Therefore, the inhibition of cell growth by these EGFR inhibitors might equate to
impairment of the alveolar epithelial cell repair system via eIF2α
phosphorylation and reduced cyclin-D1 expression.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0136176 
PMCID: PMC4545731
PMID: 26288223  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. Thorac Cancer. 2015 Mar;6(2):216-9. doi: 10.1111/1759-7714.12146. Epub 2015 Mar
2.

Poor response to gefitinib in lung adenocarcinoma with concomitant epidermal
growth factor receptor mutation and anaplastic lymphoma kinase rearrangement.

Zhou J(1), Zheng J(1), Zhao J(2), Sheng Y(1), Ding W(2), Zhou J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Disease, Thoracic Disease Center, The First
Affiliated Hospital, College of Medicine, Zhejiang University Hangzhou, China.
(2)Department of Pathology, The First Affiliated Hospital, College of Medicine,
Zhejiang University Hangzhou, China.

A patient presenting with concomitant epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)
mutation and anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) translocation is rare. We report a 
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patient with concomitant ALK rearrangement and
exon 19 (E746-A750del) EGFR mutation. The ALK rearrangement was confirmed not
only in the primary tumor biopsy specimen, but also in the pleural effusion cell 
block by reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), Ventana ALK
immunohistochemistry assay, and fluorescence in situ hybridization. No clinical
benefit using chemotherapy or EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor gefitinib was
obtained in this case.

DOI: 10.1111/1759-7714.12146 
PMCID: PMC4448493
PMID: 26273361  [PubMed]


337. Mol Diagn Ther. 2015 Oct;19(5):267-72. doi: 10.1007/s40291-015-0158-z.

Antitumoral activity of tyrosine kinase inhibitors in patients with non-small
cell lung cancer harbouring rare epidermal growth factor receptor mutations.

Oyaert M(1), Demedts I(2), Boone E(3), Dedeurwaerdere F(4), Vandorpe J(4), De
Laere E(3), Breyne J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Diagnostics, AZ Delta Roeselare Menen,
Ardooisesteenweg 276, 8800, Roeselare, Belgium. matthijsoyaert@telenet.be.
(2)Department of Pneumology, Center for Thoracic Oncology, AZ Delta Roeselare
Menen, Roeselare, Belgium. (3)Department of Molecular Diagnostics, AZ Delta
Roeselare Menen, Ardooisesteenweg 276, 8800, Roeselare, Belgium. (4)Department of
Pathology, AZ Delta Roeselare Menen, Roeselare, Belgium.

INTRODUCTION: Mutations in the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) have been 
reported as predictive markers of tumour response to tyrosine kinase inhibitors
(TKIs) in patients with non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Although the "common"
EGFR mutations have been associated with response to EGFR-TKIs, the correlation
with response to treatment for many other rare mutations is still unclear. The
aim of this study was to investigate the clinical significance of rare and
complex mutations, and the efficacy of EGFR-TKIs in this selected group of
patients.
METHODS: Three hundred and thirty patients with stage IIIB/IV NSCLC (106 females 
aged 62.5 ± 1.1 years; 224 males aged 68.0 ± 0.6 years) were enrolled in the
study. Formalin fixed paraffin embedded tissue samples were screened for
mutations using a high resolution melting technique, followed by Sanger
sequencing of exons 18-21 of the EGFR-gene. Mutation status was also tested using
the Roche Cobas(®) EGFR mutation test.
RESULTS: EGFR mutations were detected in 31 tumours (9.4 %). Eleven cases carried
novel mutations, six of these patients were treated with erlotinib or gefitinib. 
A response rate (RR) of 50.0 % was obtained in the group with rare EGFR
mutations, the PFS was 3.0 months [standard deviation (STD) = 5.4 months]. The RR
to EGFR-TKIs in patients with conventional EGFR mutations was 85 % with a median 
PFS of 10.5 months (STD = 3.6 months).
CONCLUSION: We reported six patients with rare EGFR mutations of unknown clinical
significance and their association with EGFR-TKIs. Report of cases harbouring
rare mutations can support the decision making progress in this subset of
patients.

DOI: 10.1007/s40291-015-0158-z 
PMID: 26266520  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. Lung Cancer. 2015 Oct;90(1):71-7. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2015.07.006. Epub 2015
Jul 26.

Cost-effectiveness analysis of EGFR mutation testing and gefitinib as first-line 
therapy for non-small cell lung cancer.

Narita Y(1), Matsushima Y(1), Shiroiwa T(2), Chiba K(3), Nakanishi Y(4), Kurokawa
T(1), Urushihara H(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Drug Development and Regulatory Science, Faculty of Pharmacy,
Keio University, Tokyo, Japan. (2)Department of Health and Welfare Services,
National Institute for Public Health, Saitama, Japan. (3)Laboratory of Clinical
Pharmacology, Yokohama University of Pharmacy, Kanagawa, Japan. (4)Department of 
Clinical Medicine, Research Institute for Diseases of the Chest, Faculty of
Medical Science, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan. (5)Department of Drug
Development and Regulatory Science, Faculty of Pharmacy, Keio University, Tokyo, 
Japan. Electronic address: urushihara-hs@pha.keio.ac.jp.

OBJECTIVES: The combination use of gefitinib and epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR) testing is a standard first-line therapy for patients with non-small cell 
lung cancer (NSCLC). Here, we examined the cost-effectiveness of this approach in
Japan.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Our analysis compared the 'EGFR testing strategy', in
which EGFR mutation testing was performed before treatment and patients with EGFR
mutations received gefitinib while those without mutations received standard
chemotherapy, to the 'no-testing strategy,' in which genetic testing was not
conducted and all patients were treated with standard chemotherapy. A three-state
Markov model was constructed to predict expected costs and outcomes for each
strategy. We included only direct medical costs from the healthcare payer's
perspective. Outcomes in the model were based on those reported in the Iressa
Pan-Asia Study (IPASS). The incremental cost-effectiveness ratio (ICER) was
calculated using quality-adjusted life-years (QALYs) gained. Sensitivity and
scenario analyses were conducted.
RESULTS: The incremental cost and effectiveness per patient of the 'EGFR testing 
strategy' compared to the 'no-testing strategy' was estimated to be approximately
JP¥122,000 (US$1180; US$1=JP¥104 as of February 2014) and 0.036 QALYs. The ICER
was then calculated to be around JP¥3.38 million (US$32,500) per QALY gained.
These results suggest that the 'EGFR testing strategy' is cost-effective compared
with the 'no-testing strategy' when JP¥5.0 million to 6.0 million per QALY gained
is considered an acceptable threshold. These results were supported by the
sensitivity and scenario analyses.
CONCLUSION: The combination use of gefitinib and EGFR testing can be considered a
cost-effective first-line therapy compared to chemotherapy such as
carboplatin-paclitaxel for the treatment for NSCLC in Japan.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd.. All rights
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2015.07.006 
PMID: 26259876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol. 2015 Oct;76(4):761-9. doi: 10.1007/s00280-015-2841-5.
Epub 2015 Aug 8.

First-line gefitinib treatment in elderly patients (aged ≥75 years) with
non-small cell lung cancer harboring EGFR mutations.

Kuwako T(1), Imai H(2), Masuda T(1), Miura Y(3), Seki K(1), Yoshino R(4), Kaira
K(5), Utsugi M(6), Shimizu K(7), Sunaga N(1), Tomizawa Y(4), Ishihara S(8),
Ishizuka T(9), Mogi A(10), Hisada T(1), Minato K(3), Takise A(11), Saito R(4),
Yamada M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Molecular Science, Gunma University Graduate School
of Medicine, 3-39-15, Showa-machi, Maebashi, Gunma, 371-8511, Japan.
(2)Department of Medicine and Molecular Science, Gunma University Graduate School
of Medicine, 3-39-15, Showa-machi, Maebashi, Gunma, 371-8511, Japan.
m06701014@gunma-u.ac.jp. (3)Division of Respiratory Medicine, Gunma Prefectural
Cancer Center, Ohta, Gunma, Japan. (4)Division of Respiratory Medicine, National 
Hospital Organization Nishigunma Hospital, Shibukawa, Gunma, Japan. (5)Department
of Oncology Clinical Development, Gunma University Graduate School of Medicine,
Maebashi, Gunma, Japan. (6)Division of Internal Medicine, Kiryu Kosei General
Hospital, Kiryu, Gunma, Japan. (7)Department of Thoracic Visceral Organ Surgery, 
Gunma University Graduate School of Medicine, Maebashi, Gunma, Japan. (8)Division
of Internal Medicine, Isesaki Municipal Hospital, Isesaki, Gunma, Japan.
(9)Division of Internal Medicine, Public Tomioka General Hospital, Tomioka,
Gunma, Japan. (10)Department of General Surgical Science, Gunma University
Graduate School of Medicine, Maebashi, Gunma, Japan. (11)Division of Respiratory 
Medicine, Maebashi Red Cross Hospital, Maebashi, Gunma, Japan.

PURPOSE: The efficacy of gefitinib [an epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)
tyrosine kinase inhibitor] in elderly patients with non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC) and EGFR mutation has not been elucidated. Therefore, the objective of
this study was to investigate the efficacy and feasibility of gefitinib in
elderly chemotherapy-naive patients with NSCLC harboring sensitive EGFR
mutations.
METHODS: We retrospectively evaluated the clinical effects of gefitinib as a
first-line treatment for elderly (≥75 years) NSCLC patients with EGFR mutations
(exon 19 deletion or exon 21 L858R mutation). All patients were initially treated
with gefitinib (250 mg/day) at seven institutions.
RESULTS: Between January 2006 and December 2012, 62 patients (17 men, 45 women)
with a median age of 80 years (range, 75-89 years) were included in our analysis.
The overall response and disease control rates were 61.2 and 83.8 %,
respectively, and the median progression-free survival and overall survival were 
13.2 and 19.0 months, respectively. Common adverse events included rash,
diarrhea, and liver dysfunction. Major grade 3 or 4 toxicities included skin rash
(3.2 %) and increased levels of aspartate aminotransferase or alanine
aminotransferase (21.0 %). Gefitinib treatment was discontinued owing to adverse 
events of liver dysfunction in 3 patients, drug-induced pneumonitis in 2, and
diarrhea in 1.
CONCLUSION: First-line gefitinib could be a preferable standard treatment in
elderly patients with advanced NSCLC harboring sensitive EGFR mutations.

DOI: 10.1007/s00280-015-2841-5 
PMID: 26254024  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Int J Oncol. 2015 Oct;47(4):1545-53. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2015.3111. Epub 2015 Aug 4.

MicroRNA-146a inhibits epithelial mesenchymal transition in non-small cell lung
cancer by targeting insulin receptor substrate 2.

Park DH(1), Jeon HS(2), Lee SY(3), Choi YY(4), Lee HW(5), Yoon S(6), Lee JC(7),
Yoon YS(8), Kim DS(9), Na MJ(9), Kwon SJ(9), Kim DS(10), Kang J(11), Park JY(12),
Son JW(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology and Pain Medicine, Konyang University Hospital,
Daejeon, Republic of Korea. (2)The Molecular Diagnostics and Imaging Research
Institute, School of Medicine, Kyungpook National University, Daegu, Republic of 
Korea. (3)Myunggok Research Institute for Medical Science, Konyang University,
Daejeon, Republic of Korea. (4)Department of Biochemistry, School of Medicine,
Kyungpook National University, Daegu, Republic of Korea. (5)Clinical Drug
Manufacturing Center, Daegu-Gyeongbuk Medical Innovation Foundation, Daegu,
Republic of Korea. (6)Department of Chemical Engineering, University of
Massachusetts Lowell, MA, USA. (7)Department of Oncology, Asan Medical Center,
University of Ulsan, College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea. (8)Department
of Thoracic Surgery, Konyang University Hospital, Daejeon, Republic of Korea.
(9)Department of Internal Medicine, Konyang University Hospital, Daejeon,
Republic of Korea. (10)Department of Anatomy, School of Medicine, Kyungpook
National University, Daegu, Republic of Korea. (11)Department of Pharmacology,
College of Medicine, Konyang University, Daejeon, Republic of Korea. (12)Lung
Cancer Center, Kyungpook National University Medical Center, Daegu, Republic of
Korea.

During cancer progression, some tumor cells show changes in their plasticity by
morphological and phenotypical conversions, as an expression of mesenchymal
markers and loss of epithelial markers, collectively referred to as
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). EMT has been increasingly recognized as 
a critical phenomenon in lung cancer progression. The goal of this study was to
identify microRNAs involved in lung cancer progression. A microarray and qRT-PCR 
were performed to investigate the miRNA expression profiles in mesenchymal-like
lung cancer cells. The role of miR‑146a in lung cancer progression was measured
by invasion and migration assays in vitro. Bioinformatics and luciferase report
assays were used to identify the target of miR‑146a. The expression of miR‑146a
was reduced in mesenchymal-like lung cancer cell lines. The overexpression of
miR‑146a induced a marked reduction of the mesenchymal marker and increase the
epithelial marker in lung cancer cell lines. Moreover, the overexpression of
miR‑146a suppressed lung cancer cell migration and invasion. Co-treatment with
miR‑146a and gefitinib treatment showed a significant reduction of invasion in
the resistant lung cancer cells induced by EMT. The expression of miR‑146a was
downregulated in advanced lung cancer tissues. Insulin receptor substrate 2
(IRS2), an adaptor protein that modulates normal growth, metabolism, survival,
and differentiation, was identified as a target of miR‑146a. miR‑146a regulated
the expression of IRS2 at the mRNA and protein levels. These data demonstrate for
the first time that miR‑146a suppresses lung cancer progression by repressing
IRS2 expression. This provides new insight into the post-transcriptional
regulation of lung cancer progression by miRNAs, a potential approach for the
treatment of lung cancer.

DOI: 10.3892/ijo.2015.3111 
PMID: 26238771  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Lung Cancer. 2015 Oct;90(1):65-70. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2015.06.002. Epub 2015 
Jun 15.

Phase II study of a combination regimen of gefitinib and pemetrexed as first-line
treatment in patients with advanced non-small cell lung cancer harboring a
sensitive EGFR mutation.

Yoshimura N(1), Kudoh S(2), Mitsuoka S(3), Yoshimoto N(4), Oka T(4), Nakai T(4), 
Suzumira T(3), Matusura K(4), Tochino Y(5), Asai K(4), Kimura T(6), Kawaguchi
T(3), Hirata K(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Oncology, Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka City
University, 1-4-3, Asahi-machi, Abeno-ku, Osaka 545-8585, Japan; Department of
Respiratory Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka City University, 1-4-3, 
Asahi-machi, Abeno-ku, Osaka 545-8585, Japan. Electronic address:
y-naruo@sc4.so-net.ne.jp. (2)Department of Clinical Oncology, Graduate School of 
Medicine, Osaka City University, 1-4-3, Asahi-machi, Abeno-ku, Osaka 545-8585,
Japan. (3)Department of Clinical Oncology, Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka
City University, 1-4-3, Asahi-machi, Abeno-ku, Osaka 545-8585, Japan; Department 
of Respiratory Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka City University,
1-4-3, Asahi-machi, Abeno-ku, Osaka 545-8585, Japan. (4)Department of Respiratory
Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka City University, 1-4-3, Asahi-machi,
Abeno-ku, Osaka 545-8585, Japan. (5)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Graduate 
School of Medicine, Osaka City University, 1-4-3, Asahi-machi, Abeno-ku, Osaka
545-8585, Japan; Department of Medical Education and General Practice, Graduate
School of Medicine, Osaka City University, 1-4-3, Asahi-machi, Abeno-ku, Osaka
545-8585, Japan. (6)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Graduate School of
Medicine, Osaka City University, 1-4-3, Asahi-machi, Abeno-ku, Osaka 545-8585,
Japan; Department of Premier Preventive Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine,
Osaka City University, 1-4-3, Asahi-machi, Abeno-ku, Osaka 545-8585, Japan.

PURPOSE: Patients with advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) harboring a
sensitive epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutation have been shown to
exhibit a marked response to EGFR-tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) treatment.
Pemetrexed and gefitinib were reported to have a schedule-dependent cytotoxic
synergism. We evaluated the efficacy and safety of a combination regimen of
gefitinib and pemetrexed as first-line chemotherapy in EGFR-mutated NSCLC
patients.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Systemic therapy-naïve patients with advanced non-squamous 
NSCLC harboring a sensitive EGFR mutation were included in this study. Pemetrexed
was administered on day 1 at a dose of 500 mg/m(2), and gefitinib was
sequentially administered on days 2-16. This treatment regimen was repeated every
3 weeks until disease progression.
RESULTS: Twenty-six patients were enrolled in this study. The median number of
treatment cycles was 16 (range, 1-35). The overall response rate (ORR) was 84.6% 
(95% confidence interval [CI], 70.7-98.5%), and the disease control rate (DCR)
was 96.2% (95% CI, 88.9-100%). Grade 3/4 hematological toxicities included
neutropenia (15.4%), leukopenia (7.7%), and anemia (3.8%). No grade 4
non-hematological toxicities were observed. The main grade 3 non-hematological
toxicities were infection (11.5%), increased alanine aminotransferase (11.5%) and
aspartate aminotransferase (7.7%) levels, fatigue (3.8%), diarrhea (3.8%), and
pneumonitis (3.8%). We observed a median progression-free survival (PFS) of 18.0 
months (95% CI, 15.0-21.0 months) and a median survival time (MST) of 32.0 months
(95% CI, 28.5-35.5 months). There were no treatment-related deaths.
CONCLUSIONS: The combination regimen used in this study showed a high ORR, long
median PFS, and acceptable toxicity. A future randomized trial on pemetrexed plus
gefitinib compared with gefitinib alone is warranted.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2015.06.002 
PMID: 26238424  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. Respir Med Case Rep. 2015 May 7;15:42-4. doi: 10.1016/j.rmcr.2015.02.007.
eCollection 2015.

Pneumothorax triggered by the combination of gefitinib and amrubicin and treated 
with endobronchial silicone spigots.

Imamura F(1), Okamoto N(2), Inoue T(1), Uchida J(1), Nishino K(1), Kimura M(1),
Kumagai T(1), Okami J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Oncology, Osaka Medical Center for Cancer and
Cardiovascular Diseases, Osaka 537-8511, Japan. (2)Department of Thoracic
Malignancy, Osaka Prefectural Medical Center for Respiratory and Allergic
Diseases, Osaka 538-8588, Japan.

Pneumothorax is a rare complication in cancer chemotherapy. We report a case in
which a male patient with advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) developed
repetitive pneumothorax after receiving a combination of the chemotherapeutic
drugs gefitinib and amrubicin (GEF + AMR). Both episodes of pneumothorax occurred
on the 3rd day of GEF + AMR administration. Tube thoracostomy was performed, but 
pulmonary air leaks persisted in the second pneumothorax. Whereas surgical
intervention was not applicable because of poor respiratory reserve, the chest
tube was successfully removed by endoscopic occlusion of bronchopleural fistula
with endobronchial Watanabe spigots (EWSs), a type of silicone bronchial blocker.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmcr.2015.02.007 
PMCID: PMC4501458
PMID: 26236599  [PubMed]


343. Bull Cancer. 2015 Sep;102(9):749-57. doi: 10.1016/j.bulcan.2015.05.001. Epub 2015
Jul 30.

[3rd generation's TKI in lung cancer non-small cell EGFR-mutated having acquired 
a secondary T790M resistance].

[Article in French]

Brosseau S(1), Viala M(2), Varga A(3), Planchard D(4), Besse B(4), Soria JC(5).

Author information: 
(1)Institut Gustave-Roussy, département d'innovation thérapeutique et d'essais
précoces, 94800 Villejuif, France; CHU de Caen, pneumologie et oncologie
thoracique, 14000 Caen, France. (2)Institut Gustave-Roussy, département
d'innovation thérapeutique et d'essais précoces, 94800 Villejuif, France; CHU
Clermont-Ferrand, oncologie médicale, 63000 Clermont-Ferrand, France. (3)Institut
Gustave-Roussy, département d'innovation thérapeutique et d'essais précoces,
94800 Villejuif, France. (4)Institut Gustave-Roussy, département de médecine
oncologique, 94800 Villejuif, France. (5)Institut Gustave-Roussy, département
d'innovation thérapeutique et d'essais précoces, 94800 Villejuif, France;
Institut Gustave-Roussy, département de médecine oncologique, 94800 Villejuif,
France; Université Paris-Sud, 91400 Orsay, France. Electronic address:
soria@gustaveroussy.fr.

Activating EGFR mutations discovery and efficacy of 1st generation tyrosine
kinase inhibitors (TKI), such as erlotinib or gefitinib, inaugurated the
beginning of personalized medicine in the treatment of EGFR-mutated non-small
cell lung cancer (NSCLC). However, all patients showed a tumor progression of 10 
to 16 months after the onset of TKI therapy related to molecular resistance
mechanisms as T790M mutation. Till now, patients suffering from EGFR-mutated
NSCLC with acquired resistance have conventional treatment options. Two new 3rd
generations' TKI, AZD9291 and rociletinib, are currently being studied in phases 
1-3 studies. Preliminary results show relevant therapeutic properties in patients
with T790M mutated-EGFR NSCLC. This review aims to highlight these new molecules,
their effectiveness and their clinical toxicities in the treatment of advanced
stages of NSCLC expressing the T790M mutation.

Copyright © 2015. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bulcan.2015.05.001 
PMID: 26235419  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol. 2015 Oct;76(4):713-21. doi:
10.1007/s00280-015-2837-1. Epub 2015 Aug 2.

Phase I dose-finding and pharmacokinetic study of docetaxel and gefitinib in
patients with advanced or metastatic non-small-cell lung cancer: evaluation of
drug-drug interaction.

Motonaga M(1,)(2), Yamamoto N(3,)(4), Makino Y(1), Ando-Makihara R(1), Ohe Y(5), 
Takano M(2), Hayashi Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy, National Cancer Center Hospital, Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Department of Pharmaceutics and Therapeutics, Graduate School of Biomedical
and Health Sciences, Hiroshima University, Hiroshima, Japan. (3)Department of
Thoracic Oncology, National Cancer Center Hospital, Tsukiji 5-1-1, Chuo-ku,
Tokyo, Japan. nbryamam@ncc.go.jp. (4)Department of Experimental Therapeutics,
Exploratory Oncology Research and Clinical Trial Center, National Cancer Center, 
Tokyo, Japan. nbryamam@ncc.go.jp. (5)Department of Thoracic Oncology, National
Cancer Center Hospital, Tsukiji 5-1-1, Chuo-ku, Tokyo, Japan.

PURPOSE: Docetaxel and gefitinib play key roles in the treatment of
non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC), and their combination could be of interest.
Both drugs are mainly metabolized by CYP3A4, and drug-drug interactions are a
major concern. This phase I dose-finding study was designed to assess the
tolerability and drug-drug interactions in this combination using full
pharmacokinetic (PK) samplings.
METHODS: Docetaxel was intravenously administered on days 1 and 22 at a dose of
45 or 60 mg/m(2). Gefitinib (250 mg/day) was orally administrated starting on day
2. Ten PK samplings of docetaxel were performed on days 1 and 22. Seven PK
samplings of gefitinib were performed on day 18 ± 3 and on day 22.
RESULTS: Twelve patients with advanced or metastatic NSCLC were enrolled without 
considering EGFR mutation status. The major toxicity was neutropenia. Two
patients withdrew from this study due to dose-limiting toxicities; however, the
toxicity profiles in this combination were generally acceptable. The docetaxel
AUC0-24 and C max did not differ whether administered alone or with gefitinib,
and the geometric mean ratios (GMRs) of AUC0-24 and C max
(co-administrated/administrated alone) were 0.95 (90 % CI 0.85-1.06) and 0.95 (90
% CI 0.85-1.05), respectively. Furthermore, the GMRs of the steady state
gefitinib AUC0-24 and C max were 0.93 (90 % CI 0.84-1.03) and 0.98 (90 % CI
0.88-1.09), respectively.
CONCLUSION: The tolerability of 60 mg/m(2) docetaxel with 250 mg/day gefitinib
was confirmed, and we observed no drug-drug interaction in this combination.

DOI: 10.1007/s00280-015-2837-1 
PMID: 26233803  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. Drug Des Devel Ther. 2015 Jul 23;9:3837-51. doi: 10.2147/DDDT.S85357. eCollection
2015.

Navigating into the binding pockets of the HER family protein kinases: discovery 
of novel EGFR inhibitor as antitumor agent.

Liu W(1), Ning JF(2), Meng QW(1), Hu J(1), Zhao YB(1), Liu C(3), Cai L(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Fourth Department of Medical Oncology, Harbin Medical University Cancer
Hospital, Harbin, People's Republic of China. (2)The Thoracic Surgery Department,
Harbin Medical University Cancer Hospital, Harbin, People's Republic of China.
(3)General Surgery Department, Mudanjiang Guanliju Central Hospital, Mishan,
Heilongjiang Province, People's Republic of China.

The epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) family has been validated as a
successful antitumor drug target for decades. Known EGFR inhibitors were exposed 
to distinct drug resistance against the various EGFR mutants within
non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC), particularly the T790M mutation. Although so 
far a number of studies have been reported on the development of third-generation
EGFR inhibitors for overcoming the resistance issue, the design procedure largely
depends on the intuition of medicinal chemists. Here we retrospectively make a
detailed analysis of the 42 EGFR family protein crystal complexes deposited in
the Protein Data Bank (PDB). Based on the analysis of inhibitor binding modes in 
the kinase catalytic cleft, we identified a potent EGFR inhibitor (compound A-10)
against drug-resistant EGFR through fragment-based drug design. This compound
showed at least 30-fold more potency against EGFR T790M than the two control
molecules erlotinib and gefitinib in vitro. Moreover, it could exhibit potent
HER2 inhibitory activities as well as tumor growth inhibitory activity. Molecular
docking studies revealed a structural basis for the increased potency and mutant 
selectivity of this compound. Compound A-10 may be selected as a promising
candidate in further preclinical studies. In addition, our findings could provide
a powerful strategy to identify novel selective kinase inhibitors on the basis of
detailed kinase-ligand interaction space in the PDB.

DOI: 10.2147/DDDT.S85357 
PMCID: PMC4517520
PMID: 26229444  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Sci Rep. 2015 Jul 28;5:10648. doi: 10.1038/srep10648.

Randomized, Multicenter Study of Gefitinib Dose-escalation in Advanced
Non-small-cell Lung Cancer Patients Achieved Stable Disease after One-month
Gefitinib Treatment.

Xue C(1), Hong S(1), Li N(2), Feng W(3), Jia J(4), Peng J(5), Lin D(6), Cao X(7),
Wang S(8), Zhang W(9), Zhang H(8), Dong W(10), Zhang L(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Collaborative Innovation
Center for Cancer Medicine, Department of Medical Oncology, Sun Yat-Sen
University Cancer Center, Guangzhou, China. (2)Department of Oncology, Guangzhou 
Chest Hospital, Guangzhou, China. (3)Department of Medical Oncology, the First
People's Hospital of Foshan, Foshan, China. (4)Department of Medical Oncology,
Dongguan People's Hospital, Dongguan, China. (5)Cancer Center, Zhongshan People's
Hospital, Zhongshan, China. (6)Department of Oncology, Jiangmen Central Hospital,
Jiangmen, China. (7)Department of Oncology, Panyu District Central Hospital,
Guangzhou, China. (8)Department of Oncology, the Fifth Affiliated Hospital of Sun
Yat-sen University, Zhuhai, China. (9)Department of Oncology, General Hospital of
Guangzhou Military Command of PLA, Guangzhou, China. (10)Department of Hematology
and Rheumatism, the First People's Hospital of Shunde, Foshan, China.

There is no consensus on the optimal treatment for patients with advanced
non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and stable disease (SD) after gefitinib
therapy. This randomized, open-label, multicenter study aimed to explore whether 
dose-escalation of gefitinib would improve response and survival in NSCLC
patients who achieved SD after one-month of standard gefitinib dosage. Between
May 2009 and January 2012, 466 patients were enrolled and 100 eligible patients
were randomized (1:1) to receive either a higher dose (500 mg/d; H group) or to
continue standard dose (250 mg/d; S group) of gefitinib. Objective response rate 
(ORR) was similar between the two groups (12.5% vs 12.5%, p = 1.000). There were 
no significant differences regarding progression-free survival (PFS) and overall 
survival (OS) between both arms (H group vs S group: median PFS, 5.30 months vs
6.23 months, p = 0.167; median OS, 13.70 months vs 18.87 months, p = 0.156).
Therefore, dose-escalation of gefitinib does not confer a response or survival
advantage in patients who achieve SD with one month of standard-dose gefitinib
treatment.

DOI: 10.1038/srep10648 
PMCID: PMC4516974
PMID: 26216071  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Biochem Pharmacol. 2015 Sep 1;97(1):111-21. doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2015.07.010. Epub 
2015 Jul 23.

Metabolomics reveals the formation of aldehydes and iminium in gefitinib
metabolism.

Liu X(1), Lu Y(2), Guan X(3), Dong B(1), Chavan H(4), Wang J(5), Zhang Y(1),
Krishnamurthy P(4), Li F(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Alkek Center for Molecular
Discovery, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA. (2)Zunyi Medical
College, Zunyi, Guizhou 563000, China. (3)USDA/ARS Children's Nutrition Research 
Center, Department of Pediatrics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, 
USA. (4)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Kansas Medical
Center, Kansas City, KS 66160, USA. (5)Department of Pharmacology, Baylor College
of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA. (6)Department of Molecular and Cellular
Biology, Alkek Center for Molecular Discovery, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX 77030, USA. Electronic address: fl3@bcm.edu.

Gefitinib (GEF), an inhibitor of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine
kinase, is widely used for the treatment of cancers, particularly non-small cell 
lung cancer. However, its clinical use is limited by multiple adverse effects
associated with GEF, such as liver and lung injuries, severe nausea, and
diarrhea. Although, the exact mechanism of GEF adverse effects are still unknown,
xenobiotic-induced bioactivation is thought to play a significant role in GEF
induced toxicity. Using a metabolomic approach, we investigated the metabolic
pathways of GEF in human and mouse liver microsomes. Thirty four GEF metabolites 
and adducts were identified and half of them are novel. The potential reactive
metabolites, two aldehydes and one iminium, were identified for the first time.
The previously reported GSH adducts and primary amines were observed as well. The
aldehyde and iminium pathways were further confirmed by using methoxylamine and
potassium cyanide as trapping reagents. Using recombinant CYP450 isoforms, CYP3A4
inhibitor, and S9 from Cyp3a-null mice, we confirmed CYP3A is the major enzyme
contributing to the formation of aldehydes, GSH adducts, and primary amines in
liver. Multiple enzymes contribute to the formation of iminium. This study
provided us more knowledge of GEF bioactivation and enzymes involved in metabolic
pathways, which can be utilized for understanding the mechanism of adverse
effects associated with GEF and predicting possible drug-drug interactions.
Further studies are suggested to determine the roles of these bioactivation
pathways in GEF toxicity.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bcp.2015.07.010 
PMID: 26212543  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Transl Lung Cancer Res. 2015 Jun;4(3):223-7. doi:
10.3978/j.issn.2218-6751.2015.03.01.

Improved overall survival following tyrosine kinase inhibitor treatment in
advanced or metastatic non-small-cell lung cancer-the Holy Grail in cancer
treatment?

Sellmann L(1), Fenchel K(1), Dempke WC(1).

Author information: 
(1)1 Medical Oncology Unit, D-41069 Mönchengladbach, Germany ; 2 Medical Oncology
Unit, D-07318 Saalfeld/Saale, Germany ; 3 University of Munich, University
Hospital of Grosshadern (Hematology and Oncology), D-81377 Munich, Germany ; 4
AstraZeneca Global Oncology, Cambridge, UK.

Advanced or metastatic non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is characterized by a
poor prognosis and few second- or third-line treatments. First-generation
epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibition has paved the way for
targeted therapies in lung cancer. Although these drugs result in excellent
responses [and significantly improved progression-free survival (PFS)] in
patients with activating EGFR mutations, none of these randomized studies has yet
demonstrated a statistically significant improvement of overall survival (OS).
PFS is often used as a predictor for improved OS since it is independent of
subsequent treatment, but OS is acknowledged as the key clinical outcome in the
treatment of advanced NSCLC. When effective treatment is given as post therapy,
it will be difficult to distinguish the treatment effect of original and
subsequent treatments because differences in OS are potentially confounded by
crossover, and a relevant number of patients assigned to chemotherapy arms
received tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) as second- or third-line treatment
after disease progression. The high proportion of crossover may extend the
benefit associated with the administration of TKIs to patients assigned to the
control arm, and its "salvage"-effect may compensate for the relevant differences
in PFS of first-line treatment consistently demonstrated in all TKI trials.
Results for the INFORM trial (maintenance therapy with gefitinib following
platinum-based chemotherapy) provided evidence that maintenance therapy with
gefitinib significantly improved PFS, with greatest benefit in patients harboring
EGFR mutation. Despite a high crossover rate (53%) final OS results of this study
have now demonstrated a significant survival benefit for the gefitinib-treated
EGFR mutation-positive patients (46.9 vs. 21.0 months, P=0.036). This is the
first randomized clinical trial that showed a significant and clinical meaningful
OS benefit in EGFR mutation-positive NSCLC patients following maintenance therapy
with gefitinib as compared to placebo. It remains to be seen whether further
exploration of this treatment strategy will confirm these promising results.

DOI: 10.3978/j.issn.2218-6751.2015.03.01 
PMCID: PMC4483472
PMID: 26207209  [PubMed]


349. Clin Lung Cancer. 2015 Nov;16(6):e259-61. doi: 10.1016/j.cllc.2015.06.002. Epub
2015 Jun 24.

First Reported Case of Unexpected Response to an Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor
Tyrosine Kinase Inhibitor in the I744M Uncommon EGFR Mutation.

Kempf E(1), Lacroix L(2), Soria JC(3).

Author information: 
(1)Gustave Roussy Cancer Campus, Drug Development Department and University
Paris-Sud, Villejuif, France. Electronic address: emma@kempf.pro. (2)Gustave
Roussy Cancer Campus, Department of Medical Biology and Pathology, Translational 
Research Laboratory and Biobank (UMS3655 CNRS /US23 INSERM), INSERM Unit U981,
Villejuif, France. (3)Gustave Roussy Cancer Campus, Drug Development Department
and University Paris-Sud, Villejuif, France.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cllc.2015.06.002 
PMID: 26206728  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Cell Death Dis. 2015 Jul 23;6:e1829. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2015.197.

Reciprocal positive regulation between Cx26 and PI3K/Akt pathway confers acquired
gefitinib resistance in NSCLC cells via GJIC-independent induction of EMT.

Yang J(1), Qin G(1), Luo M(1), Chen J(2), Zhang Q(1), Li L(3), Pan L(4), Qin
S(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, School of Pharmacy, Guangxi Medical University, 22
Shuangyong Road, Nanning 530021, Guangxi, China. (2)Department of Hepatobiliary
Surgery, Affiliated Cancer Hospital, Guangxi Medical University, 71 Hedi Road,
Nanning 530021, Guangxi, China. (3)Division of Pulmonary, Department of Medicine,
Allergy and Critical Care, Lung Biology Laboratory, Columbia University Medical
Center, New York, NY 10032, USA. (4)Nephrology Division, The First Affiliated
Hospital, Guangxi Medical University, 6 Shuangyong Road, Nanning 530021, Guangxi,
China. (5)Department of Respiratory Medicine, The First Affiliated Hospital,
Guangxi Medical University, 6 Shuangyong Road, Nanning 530021, Guangxi, China.

Gefitinib efficiency in non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) therapy is limited due
to development of drug resistance. The molecular mechanisms of gefitinib
resistance remain still unclear. In this study, we first found that connexin 26
(Cx26) is the predominant Cx isoform expressed in various NSCLC cell lines. Then,
two gefitinib-resistant (GR) NSCLC cell lines, HCC827 GR and PC9 GR, from their
parental cells were established. In these GR cells, the results showed that
gefitinib resistance correlated with changes in cellular EMT phenotypes and
upregulation of Cx26. Cx26 was detected to be accumulated in the cytoplasm and
failed to establish functional gap-junctional intercellular communication (GJIC) 
either in GR cells or their parental cells. Ectopic expression of GJIC-deficient 
chimeric Cx26 was sufficient to induce EMT and gefitinib insensitivity in HCC827 
and PC9 cells, while knockdown of Cx26 reversed EMT and gefitinib resistance in
their GR cells both in vitro and in vivo. Furthermore, Cx26 overexpression could 
activate PI3K/Akt signaling in these cells. Cx26-mediated EMT and gefitinib
resistance were significantly blocked by inhibition of PI3K/Akt pathway.
Specifically, inhibition of the constitutive activation of PI3K/Akt pathway
substantially suppressed Cx26 expression, and Cx26 was confirmed to functionally 
interplay with PI3K/Akt signaling to promote EMT and gefitinib resistance in
NSCLC cells. In conclusion, the reciprocal positive regulation between Cx26 and
PI3K/Akt signaling contributes to acquired gefitinib resistance in NSCLC cells by
promoting EMT via a GJIC-independent manner.

DOI: 10.1038/cddis.2015.197 
PMCID: PMC4650742
PMID: 26203858  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. J Thorac Oncol. 2015 Aug;10(8):e79. doi: 10.1097/JTO.0000000000000583.

Challenges in Bevacizumab and Gefitinib Combination Therapy for Patients with
Non-Small-Cell Lung Cancer.

Ichihara E(1), Hotta K, Kiura K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Okayama University Hospital, Okayama,
Japan.

Comment on
    J Thorac Oncol. 2015 Aug;10(8):e78-9.
    J Thorac Oncol. 2015 Mar;10(3):486-91.

DOI: 10.1097/JTO.0000000000000583 
PMID: 26200288  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. J Thorac Oncol. 2015 Aug;10(8):e78-9. doi: 10.1097/JTO.0000000000000582.

Challenges in Bevacizumab and Gefitinib Combination Therapy for Patients with
Non-Small-Cell Lung Cancer.

Zhang X(1).

Author information: 
(1)Tongji University Cancer Institute Tongji University School of Medicine,
Shanghai, China.

Comment in
    J Thorac Oncol. 2015 Aug;10(8):e79.

Comment on
    J Thorac Oncol. 2015 Mar;10(3):486-91.

DOI: 10.1097/JTO.0000000000000582 
PMID: 26200287  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. J Thorac Oncol. 2015 Aug;10(8):1189-94. doi: 10.1097/JTO.0000000000000569.

Total Lesion Glycolysis in Positron Emission Tomography Can Predict Gefitinib
Outcomes in Non-Small-Cell Lung Cancer with Activating EGFR Mutation.

Keam B(1), Lee SJ, Kim TM, Paeng JC, Lee SH, Kim DW, Jeon YK, Chung DH, Kang KW, 
Chung JK, Heo DS.

Author information: 
(1)*Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul,
Republic of Korea; †Cancer Research Institute, Seoul National University College 
of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea; ‡Department of Nuclear Medicine, and
§Department of Pathology, Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul, Republic of 
Korea.

Comment in
    J Thorac Oncol. 2015 Aug;10(8):1131-2.
    J Thorac Oncol. 2015 Aug;10(8):1133-41.

INTRODUCTION: The purpose of this study was to evaluate the predictive role of
quantitative metabolic parameters using total lesion glycolysis (TLG) in
F-2-fluoro-2-deoxyglucose-positron emission tomography/computed tomography for
developing gefitinib resistance in epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)-mutant
non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients treated with first-line gefitinib.
METHODS: A total of 75 NSCLC patients harboring activating EGFR mutation and
receiving first-line gefitinib were analyzed. Whole-body
F-2-fluoro-2-deoxyglucose positron emission tomography/computed tomography scans 
were acquired before first-line gefitinib. The maximal standardized uptake value 
and TLG of all lesions were calculated. Maximal standardized uptake value and TLG
were categorized using the tertile cutoff. Treatment outcomes were compared
between groups.
RESULTS: Overall response rate of gefitinib was 69.4%, and median
progression-free survival (PFS) of gefitinib was 11.5 months. Overall response
rates were similar between low, intermediate, and high TLG groups (68.0% versus
76.0% versus 68.0%, p = 0.274). However, PFS significantly differed by TLG
groups, and high TLG was associated with shorter PFS (7.2 months in high TLG;
11.9 months in intermediate TLG; and 24.2 months in low, p < 0.001). Multivariate
models adjusted for disease status and response to gefitinib showed that TLG was 
an independent predictive factor for PFS. TLG was also significantly associated
with overall survival (p = 0.005).
CONCLUSION: TLG can predict PFS and development of gefitinib resistance in
EGFR-mutant NSCLC patients treated with first-line gefitinib. Baseline metabolic 
tumor burdens measured with TLG before first-line gefitinib will be of great help
in predicting time to acquired resistance.

DOI: 10.1097/JTO.0000000000000569 
PMID: 26200273  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Drugs. 2015 Aug;75(12):1335-48. doi: 10.1007/s40265-015-0434-6.

Expert Consensus on the Management of Adverse Events from EGFR Tyrosine Kinase
Inhibitors in the UK.

Califano R(1), Tariq N, Compton S, Fitzgerald DA, Harwood CA, Lal R, Lester J,
McPhelim J, Mulatero C, Subramanian S, Thomas A, Thatcher N, Nicolson M.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research UK Department of Medical Oncology, The Christie NHS Foundation
Trust, Wilmslow Road, Manchester, M20 4BX, UK, raffaele.califano@christie.nhs.uk.

Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) such as
gefitinib, erlotinib, and afatinib are standard-of-care for first-line treatment 
of EGFR-mutant advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). These drugs have a
proven benefit in terms of higher response rate, delaying progression and
improvement of quality of life over palliative platinum-based chemotherapy. The
most common adverse events (AEs) are gastrointestinal (GI) (diarrhoea and
stomatitis/mucositis) and cutaneous (rash, dry skin and paronychia). These are
usually mild, but if they become moderate or severe, they can have a negative
impact on the patient's quality of life (QOL) and lead to dose modifications or
drug discontinuation. Appropriate management of AEs, including prophylactic
measures, supportive medications, treatment delays and dose reductions, is
essential. A consensus meeting of a UK-based multidisciplinary panel composed of 
medical and clinical oncologists with a special interest in lung cancer,
dermatologists, gastroenterologists, lung cancer nurse specialists and oncology
pharmacists was held to develop guidelines on prevention and management of
cutaneous (rash, dry skin and paronychia) and GI (diarrhoea, stomatitis and
mucositis) AEs associated with the administration of EGFR-TKIs. These guidelines 
detail supportive measures, treatment delays and dose reductions for EGFR-TKIs.
Although the focus of the guidelines is to support healthcare professionals in UK
clinical practice, it is anticipated that the management strategies proposed will
also be applicable in non-UK settings.

DOI: 10.1007/s40265-015-0434-6 
PMCID: PMC4532717
PMID: 26187773  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Cytogenet Genome Res. 2015;146(1):1-8. doi: 10.1159/000434741. Epub 2015 Jul 11.

MicroRNA-200a Targets EGFR and c-Met to Inhibit Migration, Invasion, and
Gefitinib Resistance in Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer.

Zhen Q(1), Liu J, Gao L, Liu J, Wang R, Chu W, Zhang Y, Tan G, Zhao X, Lv B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Fourth Hospital, Hebei Medical University,
Shijiazhuang, China.

Lung cancer, especially non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), is the major cause of
cancer death worldwide. Mutations in epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) and 
hepatocyte growth factor receptor (c-Met), both of which are receptor tyrosine
kinases, have been identified in a considerable percentage of NSCLC patients.
EGFR and c-Met share the same downstream pathways and cooperate not only in
promoting metastasis but also in conferring resistance to tyrosine kinase
inhibitor (TKI) therapies in NSCLC. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are a family of small
non-coding RNAs, usually 21-25 nucleotides long, and are critical in regulating
gene expression. Abnormal miRNA expression has been implicated in the initiation 
and progression in many forms of cancers, including lung cancer. In this study,
we found that miR-200a is downregulated in NSCLC cells, where it directly targets
the 3'-UTR of both EGFR and c-Met mRNA. Overexpression of miR-200a in NSCLC cells
significantly downregulates both EGFR and c-Met levels and severely inhibits cell
migration and invasion. Moreover, in NSCLC cell lines that are resistant to
gefitinib, a drug often used in TKI therapies to treat NSCLC, miR-200a expression
is able to render the cells much more sensitive to the drug treatment.

© 2015 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000434741 
PMID: 26184032  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. Zhongguo Fei Ai Za Zhi. 2015 Jul;18(7):462-8. doi:
10.3779/j.issn.1009-3419.2015.07.11.

[Progress in Palliative Care Benefit of Elderly Patients with Non-small Cell Lung
Cancer].

[Article in Chinese; Abstract available in Chinese from the publisher]

Jiang S(1), Li P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Translational Research (Ministry of
Education), Department of Integration Medicine and Geriatric Oncology, Peking
University Cancer Hospital and Institute, Beijing 100142, China.

Lung cancer is the leading cause of death among all cancers in China. It also has
the highest incidence when compared to other cancers. Almost half of all lung
cancers occur over 70-year-old. Approximately 85% of all lung cancers are
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). The majority of patients are advanced lung
cancer. Due to the unique alterations in physiology, elderly patients are at a
greater risk of toxicity from chemotherapy. Palliative care as a special medical 
care is an important treatment for elderly patients with advanced NSCLC. Low-dose
palliative radiotherapy can improve respiratory symptoms in elderly patients with
NSCLC, with the tolerated side effects. Elderly patients with epidermal growth
factor receptor (EGFR) mutation can benefit from gefitinib and have a good
tolerate of erlotiib. Cryocare Surgical System has an increasing trend of
application in the treatment of elderly patients with NSCLC. Chinese medicine has
effects in improving clinical symptoms and reducing side effects of chemotherapy,
it can also improve the quality of life in these patients. Psychosocial support
therapy can alleviate the burden of patients with NSCLC to some extent, but needs
to improve its systematicness. Assessment and the time of palliative care are two
important factors which determine the outcome of patients. We introduce the
progress in palliative care benefit of elderly NSCLC, in order to provide the
basis for palliative care of elderly NSCLC.

Publisher:
在中国，肺癌的发病率和病死率均居恶性肿瘤的第一位。有近一半的肺癌发生在年龄大于70岁的老年患者。肺癌中约85%是非小细胞肺癌（non-small cell
lung cancer,
NSCLC），且大多数肺癌患者发现时已属中晚期。老年晚期NSCLC患者具有伴随疾病多、器官功能衰退等特点。制定恰当的治疗策略是我们面临的挑战。姑息治疗作为特殊的医
疗关怀，是老年晚期NSCLC的重要治疗方式之一。低剂量局部姑息放疗可以有效改善老年NSCLC患者的呼吸道症状，且副作用可以耐受；对于表皮生长因子受体（epider
mal growth factor receptor,
EGFR）突变的老年晚期NSCLC，吉非替尼在疾病控制率、症状缓解等方面均可使老年患者从治疗中获益。同时，老年晚期NSCLC患者对厄洛替尼也显示出良好的耐受性； 
氩氦刀在治疗老年NSCLC患者的应用有增加趋势且患者对氩氦刀技术的耐受性和反应性都较好。中医药在改善临床症状、减少放化疗的毒副作用和提高生活质量方面有较好的疗效；
社会心理支持疗法在一定程度上可缓解NSCLC患者的困扰，但其系统性有待完善。姑息治疗的评估和介入时机，是患者能否从中获益的重要因素。文章介绍了老年NSCLC姑息治
疗获益研究的进展，为老年NSCLC的姑息治疗提供依据。.Publisher:
在中国，肺癌的发病率和病死率均居恶性肿瘤的第一位。有近一半的肺癌发生在年龄大于70岁的老年患者。肺癌中约85%是非小细胞肺癌（non-small cell
lung cancer,
NSCLC），且大多数肺癌患者发现时已属中晚期。老年晚期NSCLC患者具有伴随疾病多、器官功能衰退等特点。制定恰当的治疗策略是我们面临的挑战。姑息治疗作为特殊的医
疗关怀，是老年晚期NSCLC的重要治疗方式之一。低剂量局部姑息放疗可以有效改善老年NSCLC患者的呼吸道症状，且副作用可以耐受；对于表皮生长因子受体（epider
mal growth factor receptor,
EGFR）突变的老年晚期NSCLC，吉非替尼在疾病控制率、症状缓解等方面均可使老年患者从治疗中获益。同时，老年晚期NSCLC患者对厄洛替尼也显示出良好的耐受性； 
氩氦刀在治疗老年NSCLC患者的应用有增加趋势且患者对氩氦刀技术的耐受性和反应性都较好。中医药在改善临床症状、减少放化疗的毒副作用和提高生活质量方面有较好的疗效；
社会心理支持疗法在一定程度上可缓解NSCLC患者的困扰，但其系统性有待完善。姑息治疗的评估和介入时机，是患者能否从中获益的重要因素。文章介绍了老年NSCLC姑息治
疗获益研究的进展，为老年NSCLC的姑息治疗提供依据。.
DOI: 10.3779/j.issn.1009-3419.2015.07.11 
PMID: 26182873  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Am J Cancer Res. 2015 Apr 15;5(5):1692-705. eCollection 2015.

Circulating miRNAs is a potential marker for gefitinib sensitivity and
correlation with EGFR mutational status in human lung cancers.

Zhao Q(1), Cao J(2), Wu YC(3), Liu X(3), Han J(3), Huang XC(3), Jiang LH(3), Hou 
XX(3), Mao WM(1), Ling ZQ(4).

Author information: 
(1)Zhejiang Cancer Research Institute, Zhejiang Province Cancer Hospital,
Zhejiang Cancer Center No.38 Guangji Rd., Banshanqiao District, Hangzhou 310022, 
China ; Department of Thoracic Tumor Surgery, Zhejiang Province Cancer Hospital, 
Zhejiang Cancer Center No.38 Guangji Rd., Banshanqiao District, Hangzhou 310022, 
China ; Zhejiang Key Laboratory of Diagnosis & Treatment Technology on Thoracic
Oncology (Lung and Esophagus) Hangzhou 310022, China. (2)Zhejiang Cancer Research
Institute, Zhejiang Province Cancer Hospital, Zhejiang Cancer Center No.38
Guangji Rd., Banshanqiao District, Hangzhou 310022, China ; The Affiliated Tumor 
Hospital of Zhejiang Chinese Medical University Zhejiang, China. (3)Zhejiang
Cancer Research Institute, Zhejiang Province Cancer Hospital, Zhejiang Cancer
Center No.38 Guangji Rd., Banshanqiao District, Hangzhou 310022, China.
(4)Zhejiang Cancer Research Institute, Zhejiang Province Cancer Hospital,
Zhejiang Cancer Center No.38 Guangji Rd., Banshanqiao District, Hangzhou 310022, 
China ; Zhejiang Key Laboratory of Diagnosis & Treatment Technology on Thoracic
Oncology (Lung and Esophagus) Hangzhou 310022, China.

miRNA expression is deregulated in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), and some
miRNAs are associated with gefitinib sensitivity. Here, we investigated if
circulating miRNAs could be a useful biomarker for the prediction of EGFR
mutation and the patient's prognosis. The differential miRNAs related to
gefitinib sensitivity were screened and identified by microRNA array. Using
Taqman-based real-time RT-PCR, we analyzed the expression of selected miRNAs in
tumor tissues and plasma of 150 NSCLC patients. Kaplan-Meier survival analysis
and Cox proportional hazards regression were used to determine the association
between miRNAs expression and survival. Receiver operating characteristic curve
analysis was also performed. Compared with PC9 cell line, 41 microRNAs detected
by microarray were significantly differentially expressed in A549 and H1299
cells. The 5 selected hsa-miRNAs were all found differently expressed between
wild and mutant EGFR carriers (all P<0.01). Down-regulation of 5 selected miRNAs 
were independently associated with lymphatic invasion (all P<0.01) and clinical
stage (all P<0.01), respectively. Both down-regulation of has-miR-195 (P=0.012)
and has-miR-21 (P=0.004) were associated with poor differentiation. All
up-regulation of 5 has-miRNAs were associated with smoking (All P<0.05). 5
hsa-miRNAs were up-regulated both in plasma and tissue samples. A model including
4 hsa-miRNAs may predict EGFR mutational status and gefitinib-sensitivity (both
AUC: 0.869). Plasma levels of has-miR-125b expression were associated with
disease-free survival (P=0.033) and overall survival in the patients (P=0.028).
In a word, Circulating 5 selected miRNAs may especially be useful in predicting
EGFR mutation, and circulating hsa-miR-125b may have prognostic values in NSCLC
patients.


PMCID: PMC4497436
PMID: 26175938  [PubMed]


358. Eur J Cancer. 2015 Sep;51(14):1904-10. doi: 10.1016/j.ejca.2015.06.120. Epub 2015
Jul 11.

A prospective, multicentre phase II trial of low-dose erlotinib in non-small cell
lung cancer patients with EGFR mutations pretreated with chemotherapy: Thoracic
Oncology Research Group 0911.

Yamada K(1), Aono H(2), Hosomi Y(3), Okamoto H(4), Kato T(5), Komase Y(6),
Nishikawa M(7), Azuma K(8), Takeoka H(8), Okuma Y(3), Nakahara Y(9), Sato A(4),
Oba MS(10), Morita S(11), Kunitoh H(12), Watanabe K(13).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Respirology, Neurology, and Rheumatology, Department of Internal
Medicine, Kurume University School of Medicine, Fukuoka, Japan. Electronic
address: kayamada@med.kurume-u.ac.jp. (2)Respiratory Medicine, Mitsui Memorial
Hospital, Tokyo, Japan. (3)Department of Thoracic Oncology and Respiratory
Medicine, Tokyo Metropolitan Cancer and Infectious Diseases Center Komagome
Hospital, Tokyo, Japan. (4)Department of Respiratory Medicine and Medical
Oncology, Yokohama Municipal Citizen's Hospital, Kanagawa, Japan. (5)Division of 
Respiratory Medicine, Kanagawa Cardiovascular and Respiratory Center, Kanagawa,
Japan. (6)Department of Respiratory Internal Medicine, St. Marianna University
School of Medicine, Yokohama-City Seibu Hospital, Kanagawa, Japan. (7)Department 
of Respiratory Medicine, Fujisawa City Hospital, Kanagawa, Japan. (8)Division of 
Respirology, Neurology, and Rheumatology, Department of Internal Medicine, Kurume
University School of Medicine, Fukuoka, Japan. (9)Department of Thoracic Oncology
and Respiratory Medicine, Tokyo Metropolitan Cancer and Infectious Diseases
Center Komagome Hospital, Tokyo, Japan; Department of Respiratory Medicine,
Kitasato University School of Medicine, Kanagawa, Japan. (10)Department of
Biostatistics, Yokohama City University Medical Center, Kanagawa, Japan.
(11)Department of Biomedical Statistics and Bioinformatics, Kyoto University
Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto, Japan. (12)Respiratory Medicine, Mitsui
Memorial Hospital, Tokyo, Japan; Department of Medical Oncology, Japanese Red
Cross Medical Center, Tokyo, Japan. (13)Thoracic Oncology Research Group,
Kanagawa, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Low-dose erlotinib may be as effective as gefitinib or erlotinib at
full dose in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients with activating
mutations of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) gene.
METHODS: Patients with chemotherapy pretreated NSCLC harbouring EGFR mutations
received erlotinib at 50 mg/d until disease progression or unacceptable
toxicities. The dose was escalated to 150 mg/d in patients showing no response
(i.e. without major tumour shrinkage according to Response Evaluation Criteria in
Solid Tumours (RECIST)) to the initial dose during the first 4 weeks. The primary
end-point was the objective response rate at the dose of 50 mg/d.
RESULTS: Thirty-four patients from seven institutes were enrolled. The study was 
closed early when no response was confirmed in 15 patients, excluding the
possibility that the primary end-point would be met. The objective response and
disease control rates at the dose of 50 mg/d as determined by an independent
review committee were 54.5% and 84.8%, respectively. Four additional patients
achieved partial response with increased 150 mg/d dose. Progression-free survival
and median survival times during the entire period of the study were 9.5 and 28.5
months, respectively. Treatment-related toxicities were generally mild, the most 
common being skin disorders and diarrhoea. Only one case experienced grade 3
toxicity, which was transient increase of hepatic enzymes.
CONCLUSION: The primary end-point was not met; low-dose erlotinib is not
recommended for fit patients with NSCLC harbouring EGFR mutations. However, it
may merit further evaluation for elderly or frail patients.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejca.2015.06.120 
PMID: 26174465  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. Mol Clin Oncol. 2015 Jul;3(4):802-806. Epub 2015 May 14.

Plasma neuron-specific enolase level as a prognostic marker in patients with
non-small cell lung cancer receiving gefitinib.

Inomata M(1), Hayashi R(1), Yamamoto A(1), Tokui K(1), Taka C(1), Okazawa S(1),
Kambara K(1), Suzuki K(2), Ichikawa T(1), Yamada T(1), Miwa T(1), Kashii T(3),
Matsui S(4), Tobe K(1), Imura J(5).

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Toyama, Toyama, Toyama 930-0194, Japan. (2)Department of Respiratory Medicine,
Toyama Prefectural Central Hospital, Toyama, Toyama 930-8550, Japan.
(3)Department of Medical Oncology, Toyama University Hospital, Toyama, Toyama
930-0194, Japan. (4)Health Administration Center, University of Toyama, Toyama,
Toyama 930-0194, Japan. (5)Department of Diagnostic Pathology, Graduate School of
Medicine and Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Toyama, Toyama, Toyama
930-0194, Japan.

Determination of the presence of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) gene
mutation is useful for predicting the efficacy of gefitinib. However, the
survival rate following the initiation of treatment with gefitinib varies among
individuals. A retrospective study was conducted to investigate the associations 
of the pretreatment serum pro-gastrin-releasing peptide (pro-GRP) and plasma
neuron-specific enolase (NSE) levels to the patient survival rate following
initiation of treatment with gefitinib in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
patients receiving gefitinib treatment. Patients with NSCLC harboring EGFR gene
mutations who received gefitinib therapy between 2004 and 2012 were included in
the study. Data from a total of 41 patients were analyzed. The serum pro-GRP
level was measured in 31 patients and the plasma NSE in 22 patients. The
progression-free survival (PFS) (P=0.013) and overall survival (OS) (P=0.014,
log-rank test) rates decreased as the plasma NSE level increased. Statistical
analysis using a Cox proportional hazards regression model adjusted for age,
gender, performance status (PS) and disease stage showed that higher NSE levels
were associated with shorter PFS (P=0.021) and OS (P=0.0024). By contrast, no
association was detected between the serum level of pro-GRP and survival rate.
The results suggest that pretreatment NSE measurement could be clinically useful 
in patients with NSCLC scheduled to receive gefitinib treatment.

DOI: 10.3892/mco.2015.568 
PMCID: PMC4486842
PMID: 26171184  [PubMed]


360. Exp Ther Med. 2015 Jul;10(1):386-388. Epub 2015 May 18.

Successful treatment of EGFR-mutated non-small cell lung cancer with reduced-dose
gefitinib: A case report.

Watanabe H(1), Tamura T(1), Kagohashi K(1), Takayashiki N(2), Kurishima K(1),
Satoh H(1), Hizawa N(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Respiratory Medicine, Department of Clinical Medicine, Mito
Medical Center, University of Tsukuba, Mito, Ibaraki 310-0015, Japan. (2)Division
of Pathology, Department of Clinical Medicine, Mito Medical Center, University of
Tsukuba, Mito, Ibaraki 310-0015, Japan. (3)Division of Respiratory Medicine,
Department of Clinical Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Tsukuba,
Tsukiba, Ibaraki 305-8575, Japan.

Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutation is a favorable prognostic factor
of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). In the majority of patients with EGFR
mutations, clinical benefits of EGFR-tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) have been 
reported. One of the TKIs, gefitinib, appears to be less toxic to the skin than
other TKIs. The present study reports a case of NSCLC with EGFR mutation (exon 19
deletion) in which dose-reduced gefitinib was effective against recurrence. Due
to development of a grade 3 skin adverse event (AE) after 2 months of daily
administration of gefitinib, the frequency of administration of gefitinib was
reduced to every other day for 2 weeks. As the AE continued, the frequency of
administration was reduced to once every 3 days. The patient has been in
remission for 27 months since treatment with 250 mg gefitinib once every 3 days
was initiated, which is the lowest dose to be reported in a successfully treated 
case of NSCLC with EGFR mutation. Dose reduction of gefitinib might be
appropriate for patients with severe AEs and should be considered as a treatment 
option after 1 or 2 months of regular daily dosing of gefitinib if there is no
other satisfactory treatment option.

DOI: 10.3892/etm.2015.2499 
PMCID: PMC4487036
PMID: 26170967  [PubMed]


361. Onco Targets Ther. 2015 Jul 3;8:1603-10. doi: 10.2147/OTT.S73731. eCollection
2015.

Gefitinib upregulates death receptor 5 expression to mediate rmhTRAIL-induced
apoptosis in Gefitinib-sensitive NSCLC cell line.

Yan D(1), Ge Y(2), Deng H(3), Chen W(4), An G(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Beijing Chao-yang Hospital, Capital Medical
University, Beijing, People's Republic of China ; Translational Molecular
pathology, M.D Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA. (2)Department of
Oncology, Beijing Chao-yang Hospital, Capital Medical University, Beijing,
People's Republic of China. (3)School of Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing, 
People's Republic of China. (4)Department of Hematology, Beijing Chao-yang
Hospital, Capital Medical University, Beijing, People's Republic of China.

BACKGROUND: Tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL)
triggers apoptosis in tumor cells, but when used alone, it is not effective in
the treatment of TRAIL-resistant tumors. Some studies have shown that gefitinib
interacts with recombinant mutant human TRAIL (rmhTRAIL) to induce high levels of
apoptosis in gefitinib-responsive bladder cancer cell lines; however, the
molecular mechanisms underlying the anticancer effects are not fully understood. 
Several reports have shown that the death receptor 5 (DR5) plays an important
role in sensitizing cancer cells to apoptosis induced by TRAIL. Therefore, we
investigated the effects of the combination of drugs and the expression of the
DR5 to analyze the growth of a gefitinib-responsive non-small cell lung cancer
cell line PC9, which was treated with rmhTRAIL and gefitinib individually or in
combination.
METHODS: Human PC9 non-small cell lung cancer cells harboring an epidermal growth
factor receptor mutation were used as a model for the identification of the
therapeutic effects of gefitinib alone or in combination with rmhTRAIL, and
cytotoxicity was assessed by MTT assays. Cell cycle and apoptosis were
investigated using flow cytometry. Moreover, the effects of drugs on DR5, BAX,
FLIP, and cleaved-caspase3 proteins expressions were analyzed using Western blot 
analyses. Finally, quantitative polymerase chain reaction analysis was carried
out to assess whether rmhTRAIL and gefitinib modulate the expression of genes
related to drug activity.
RESULTS: Gefitinib and rmhTRAIL synergistically interact to inhibit cell
proliferation, and apoptosis assessment demonstrated that associations of drug
increased the apoptotic index. rmhTRAIL when used alone downregulated DR5 and
upregulated BAX, FLIP, and cleaved-caspase3 proteins expressions. However,
results obtained in Western blot analyses demonstrated that the combined
treatment-induced cell apoptosis was achieved involving upregulated DR5,
cleaved-caspase3, and BAX proteins expression and downregulated FLIP protein
expression. Moreover, quantitative polymerase chain reaction showed that
gefitinib modulated the expression of targets related to rmhTRAIL activity.
CONCLUSION: These results indicate that epidermal growth factor receptor
inhibitors enhance rmhTRAIL antitumor activity in the gefitinib-responsive PC9
cell line, and upregulated DR5 expression plays a critical role in activating
caspase-signaling apoptotic pathway.

DOI: 10.2147/OTT.S73731 
PMCID: PMC4498723
PMID: 26170696  [PubMed]


362. Lung Cancer. 2015 Sep;89(3):287-93. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2015.06.016. Epub 2015
Jul 2.

Cytotoxic chemotherapy may overcome the development of acquired resistance to
epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors (EGFR-TKIs) therapy.

Kanda S(1), Horinouchi H(2), Fujiwara Y(2), Nokihara H(2), Yamamoto N(2), Sekine 
I(3), Kunitoh H(4), Kubota K(5), Tamura T(6), Ohe Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Oncology, National Cancer Center Hospital, Tokyo,
Japan. Electronic address: skanda@ncc.go.jp. (2)Department of Thoracic Oncology, 
National Cancer Center Hospital, Tokyo, Japan. (3)Division of Respiratory
Medicine, Chiba Cancer Center, Chiba, Japan. (4)Division of Chemotherapy,
Department of Internal Medicine, Japanese Red Cross Medical Center, Tokyo, Japan.
(5)Division of Pulmonary Medicine, Infection and Oncology, Department of Internal
Medicine, Nippon Medical School, Tokyo, Japan. (6)Thoracic Center, St. Luke's
International Hospital, Tokyo, Japan.

OBJECTIVES: In the first-line treatment of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
harboring EGFR mutations, epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)-tyrosine kinase
inhibitors (TKIs) has been shown to yield a longer progression-free survival
(PFS) rate than platinum-doublet chemotherapy; however, after the initial
response, most patients develop resistance to the EGFR-TKIs. We hypothesized that
the insertion of platinum-doublet chemotherapy after the initial response to
EGFR-TKIs might prevent the emergence of acquired resistance to EGFR-TKIs and
prolong survival.
METHODS: We carried out a phase II study of the following first-line treatment
for patients with advanced NSCLC harboring EGFR mutations. Gefitinib (250 mg) was
administered on days 1-56. Then, after a two-week drug-free period, three cycles 
of cisplatin (80 mg/m2) and docetaxel (60 mg/m2) were administered on days 71,
92, and 113. Thereafter, gefitinib was re-started on day 134 and continued until 
disease progression. The primary endpoint was the two-year PFS rate.
RESULTS: A total of 34 patients were enrolled. Of the 33 eligible patients and 12
achieved a two-year PFS. Thus, this therapeutic strategy met the criterion for
usefulness. The 1-, 2-, 3-, and 5-year PFS rates were 67.0%, 40.2%, 36.9%, and
22.0%, respectively, and the median PFS was 19.5 months. The 1-, 2-, 3- and
5-year survival rates were 90.6%, 71.9%, 64.8%, and 36.5% respectively, and the
median survival time was 48.0 months.
CONCLUSION: These results indicate that the insertion of platinum-doublet
chemotherapy might prevent the development of acquired resistance to EGFR-TKIs in
patients with advanced NSCLC harboring EGFR mutations.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2015.06.016 
PMID: 26169499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2015 Feb 3;95(5):386-91.

[Radiotherapy concomitant with first-generation epidermal growth factor receptor 
tyrosine kinase inhibitors in the treatment of brain metastases from non small
cell lung cancer: a meta-analysis].

[Article in Chinese]

Jiang Y, Bi Z, Li D, Liu Y.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the efficacy of whole brain radiotherapy (WBRT) or/and
stereotactic radiotherapy (SRT) concomitant with first-generation epidermal
growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKI), like erlotinib and
gefitinib, in the treatment of brain metastases from non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC).
METHODS: Comprehensive searches were performed in different databases, including 
EMBASE, MEDLINE and Cochrane Library, etc. All randomized controlled trials
(RCTs) and non-randomized controlled trials (non-RCTs) comparing radiotherapy
(RT) plus TKI with RT alone in the treatment of brain metastases from NSCLC were 
included for meta-analysis with Cochrane Collaboration's RevMan5. 2 software. The
primary end-points were objective remission (OR), disease control (DC) and
toxicity while the secondary end-point was overall survival (OS).
RESULTS: Three RCTs and one non-randomized controlled trial were selected and
included for final analysis. The RT + TKI group had significant improvements in
OR rate (RR = 1. 80, P <0. 01) and DC rate (RR = 1. 31, P <0. 01). Meanwhile,
rash (RR = 14. 36, P = 0. 003) and diarrhea (RR = 3. 49, P = 0. 005) increased in
the RT + TKI group. Yet there was no significant difference in nausea or vomiting
(P = 0. 20).
CONCLUSION: For NSCLC with brain metastases, RT plus TKI could improve OR, DC and
OS, but there was a higher incidence of rash and diarrhea. There fore future
high-quality and prospective RCTs are warranted to confirm the clinical efficacy 
of RT plus TKI in the treatment of NSCLC with brain metastases.


PMID: 26168678  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Sci Rep. 2015 Jul 13;5:8477. doi: 10.1038/srep08477.

Homoharringtonine induces apoptosis and inhibits STAT3 via IL-6/JAK1/STAT3 signal
pathway in Gefitinib-resistant lung cancer cells.

Cao W(1), Liu Y(2), Zhang R(1), Zhang B(3), Wang T(4), Zhu X(1), Mei L(1), Chen
H(1), Zhang H(1), Ming P(5), Huang L(6).

Author information: 
(1)1] School of Life Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing, 100084, China [2]
The Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Gene and Antibody Therapy, State Key Laboratory of
Health Science and Technology (prep), Center for Biotechnology &Biomedicine and
Division of Life &Health Sciences, Graduate School at Shenzhen, Tsinghua
University, Shenzhen, Guangdong, 518055, China. (2)1] The Shenzhen Key Laboratory
of Gene and Antibody Therapy, State Key Laboratory of Health Science and
Technology (prep), Center for Biotechnology &Biomedicine and Division of Life
&Health Sciences, Graduate School at Shenzhen, Tsinghua University, Shenzhen,
Guangdong, 518055, China [2] School of Basic Medical Sciences, Hubei University
of Medicine, Shiyan, 442000, Hubei, China. (3)National Laboratory of
Biomacromolecules, Institute of Biophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing,
100101, China. (4)1] The Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Gene and Antibody Therapy,
State Key Laboratory of Health Science and Technology (prep), Center for
Biotechnology &Biomedicine and Division of Life &Health Sciences, Graduate School
at Shenzhen, Tsinghua University, Shenzhen, Guangdong, 518055, China [2] The Key 
Laboratory of Bioorganic Phosphorus Chemistry &Chemical Biology (Ministry of
Education), Department of Chemistry, Tsinghua University, Beijing, 100084, China.
(5)Laboratory of Zhuhai People's Hospital, Zhuhai, Guangdong, 519000, China.
(6)1] School of Life Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing, 100084, China [2]
The Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Gene and Antibody Therapy, State Key Laboratory of
Health Science and Technology (prep), Center for Biotechnology &Biomedicine and
Division of Life &Health Sciences, Graduate School at Shenzhen, Tsinghua
University, Shenzhen, Guangdong, 518055, China [3] The Key Laboratory of
Bioorganic Phosphorus Chemistry &Chemical Biology (Ministry of Education),
Department of Chemistry, Tsinghua University, Beijing, 100084, China.

Tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) are mostly used in non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC) treatment. Unfortunately, treatment with Gefitinib for a period of time
will result in drug resistance and cause treatment failure in clinic. Therefore, 
exploring novel compounds to overcome this resistance is urgently required. Here 
we investigated the antitumor effect of homoharringtonine (HHT), a natural
compound extracted from Cephalotaxus harringtonia, on Gefitinib-resistant NSCLC
cell lines in vitro and in vivo. NCI-H1975 cells with EGFR T790M mutation are
more sensitive to HHT treatment compared with that of A549 cells with wild type
EGFR. HHT inhibited cells growth, cell viability and colony formation, as well as
induced cell apoptosis through mitochondria pathway. Furthermore, we explored the
mechanism of HHT inhibition on NSCLC cells. Higher level of interleukin-6 (IL-6) 
existed in lung cancer patients and mutant EGFR and TGFβ signal requires the
upregulation of IL-6 through the gp130/JAK pathway to overactive STAT3, an
oncogenic protein which has been considered as a potential target for cancer
therapy. HHT reversiblely inhibited IL-6-induced STAT3 Tyrosine 705
phosphorylation and reduced anti-apoptotic proteins expression.
Gefitinib-resistant NSCLC xenograft tests also confirmed the antitumor effect of 
HHT in vivo. Consequently, HHT has the potential in Gefitinib-resistant NSCLC
treatment.

DOI: 10.1038/srep08477 
PMCID: PMC4499885
PMID: 26166037  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. Oncotarget. 2015 Sep 15;6(27):23857-73.

Lovastatin overcomes gefitinib resistance through TNF-α signaling in human
cholangiocarcinomas with different LKB1 statuses in vitro and in vivo.

Yang SH(1), Lin HY(1,)(2), Chang VH(3), Chen CC(4), Liu YR(5), Wang J(6), Zhang
K(7), Jiang X(6), Yen Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)PhD Program for Cancer Biology and Drug Discovery, College of Medical Science 
and Technology, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan. (2)Taipei Cancer
Center, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan. (3)Institute of Translational 
Medicine, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan. (4)Graduate Institute of
Biomedical Materials and Engineering, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan. 
(5)Office of Human Research, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan. (6)The
First Department of Biliary Surgery, Eastern Hepatobiliary Surgical Hospital, The
Second Military Medical University, Shanghai, China. (7)Department of Molecular
Pharmacology, City of Hope National Medical Center and Beckman Research Center,
Duarte, California, USA.

Gefitinib resistance has been shown to complicate cancer therapy. Lovastatin is a
proteasome inhibitor that enhances gefitinib-induced antiproliferation in
non-small cell lung cancer. The objective of this study is to investigate the
mechanism of lovastatin-induced antiproliferation in gefitinib-resistant human
cholangiocarcinoma.Two gefitinib-resistant cholangiocarcinoma cell lines, SSP-25 
and HuH-28, were used in this study to determine how to compensate gefitinib
resistance. The combined effect of these two drugs was examined using the MTT
assay, qPCR, immunoblotting, flow cytometry, and in vivo xenograft. Results
indicated that lovastatin enhanced TNF-α-induced cell death in vitro. In
addition, the combination of lovastatin with gefitinib enhanced accumulation of
TNF-α. Furthermore, the treatment induced a synergistic cytotoxic effect and
antiproliferation through apoptosis in SSP-25 cells and cell cycle arrest in
HuH-28 cells. Reproductive results were also observed in in vivo xenografts.
These observations suggest that the combination of gefitinib and lovastatin might
have additive antiproliferative effects against gefitinib-resistant
cholangiocarcinoma cells. Based on these observations, we concluded that the
combination of gefitinib and lovastatin could be used to overcome gefitinib
resistance in cholangiocarcinoma cells.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.4408 
PMCID: PMC4695157
PMID: 26160843  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. Oncotarget. 2015 Sep 15;6(27):23582-93.

Long non-coding RNA UCA1 induces non-T790M acquired resistance to EGFR-TKIs by
activating the AKT/mTOR pathway in EGFR-mutant non-small cell lung cancer.

Cheng N(1), Cai W(1), Ren S(1), Li X(2), Wang Q(1), Pan H(1), Zhao M(1), Li J(1),
Zhang Y(1), Zhao C(2), Chen X(1), Fei K(3), Zhou C(1), Hirsch FR(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Shanghai Pulmonary Hospital, Tongji
University, Tongji University Medical School Cancer Institute, Shanghai, P. R.
China. (2)Department of Lung Cancer and Immunology, Shanghai Pulmonary Hospital, 
Tongji University, Tongji University Medical School Cancer Institute, Shanghai,
P. R. China. (3)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Shanghai Pulmonary Hospital,
Tongji University, Tongji University Medical School Cancer Institute, Shanghai,
P. R. China. (4)Department of Medical and Pathology, University of Colorado
Cancer Center, Aurora, Colorado, USA.

The aim of this study was to explore the role of long non-coding RNA UCA1
(urothelial cancer-associated 1) in acquired resistance to epidermal growth
factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors (EGFR-TKIs) in EGFR-mutant non-small
cell lung cancer (NSCLC). In our study, UCA1 expression was significantly
increased in lung cancer cells and patients with acquired resistance to
EGFR-TKIs. Over-expression of UCA1 was significantly associated with a shorter
progression-free survival (PFS) [13.0 vs. 8.5 months, P < 0.01] in tumors with
respond to EGFR-TKIs. The significant relationship was not observed in patients
with T790M mutation (10.5 vs. 12.0 months, P = 0.778), but in patients with
non-T790M (19.0 vs. 9.0 months, P = 0.023). UCA1 knockdown restored gefitinib
sensitivity in acquired resistant cells with non-T790M and inhibited the
activation of the AKT/mTOR pathway and epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT).
The mTOR inhibitor was effective in UCA1-expressing cell PC9/R. Inhibiting mTOR
could change the expression of UCA1, although there was no significant
difference. In conclusion, the influence of over-expression of UCA1 on PFS for
patients with acquired resistance to EGFR-TKIs was from the subgroup with
non-T790M mutation. UCA1 may induce non-T790M acquired resistance to EGFR-TKIs by
activating the AKT/mTOR pathway and EMT.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.4361 
PMCID: PMC4695138
PMID: 26160838  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. Lancet Oncol. 2015 Aug;16(8):990-8. doi: 10.1016/S1470-2045(15)00121-7. Epub 2015
Jul 6.

Gefitinib plus chemotherapy versus placebo plus chemotherapy in
EGFR-mutation-positive non-small-cell lung cancer after progression on first-line
gefitinib (IMPRESS): a phase 3 randomised trial.

Soria JC(1), Wu YL(2), Nakagawa K(3), Kim SW(4), Yang JJ(2), Ahn MJ(5), Wang
J(6), Yang JC(7), Lu Y(8), Atagi S(9), Ponce S(10), Lee DH(4), Liu Y(11), Yoh
K(12), Zhou JY(13), Shi X(14), Webster A(15), Jiang H(14), Mok TS(16).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Gustave Roussy Cancer Campus and University Paris-Sud,
Villejuif, France. (2)Guangdong Lung Cancer Institute, Guangdong General Hospital
and Guangdong Academy of Medical Sciences, Guangzhou, China. (3)Department of
Medical Oncology, The Faculty of Medicine, Kinki University, Osakasayama City,
Osaka, Japan. (4)Department of Oncology, Asan Medical Center, University of Ulsan
College of Medicine, Seoul, South Korea. (5)Division of Hematology-Oncology,
Department of Medicine, The Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University
School of Medicine, Seoul, South Korea. (6)Department of Thoracic Medical
Oncology, Peking University School of Oncology, Beijing Cancer Hospital and
Institute, Beijing, China. (7)Department of Oncology, The National Taiwan
University Hospital and College of Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan. (8)Department of
Thoracic Cancer, Cancer Centre, West China Hospital, West China Medical School,
Sichuan University, Sichuan, China. (9)Department of Thoracic Oncology,
Kinki-chuo Chest Medical Center, Osaka, Japan. (10)Medical Oncology Service,
Hospital Universitario 12 de Octubre, Madrid, Spain. (11)Department of Medical
Oncology, The First Hospital of China Medical University, Shengyang City, China. 
(12)Division of Thoracic Oncology, National Cancer Centre Hospital East, Chiba,
Japan. (13)Department of Respiratory Diseases, The First Affiliated Hospital of
College of Medicine, Zhejiang University, Zhejiang, China. (14)AstraZeneca,
Shanghai, China. (15)AstraZeneca, Macclesfield, UK. (16)State Key Laboratory of
South China, Hong Kong Cancer Institute, Department of Clinical Oncology, The
Chinese University of Hong Kong, Prince of Wales Hospital, Sha Tin, Hong Kong,
China. Electronic address: tony@clo.cuhk.edu.hk.

BACKGROUND: Optimum management strategies for patients with advanced
non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) with acquired resistance to EGFR
tyrosine-kinase inhibitors are undefined. We aimed to assess the efficacy and
safety of continuing gefitinib combined with chemotherapy versus chemotherapy
alone in patients with EGFR-mutation-positive advanced NSCLC with acquired
resistance to first-line gefitinib.
METHODS: The randomised, phase 3, multicentre IMPRESS study was done in 71
centres in 11 countries in Europe and the Asia-Pacific region. Eligible patients 
were aged at least 18 years with histologically confirmed, chemotherapy-naive,
stage IIIB-IV EGFR-mutation-positive advanced NSCLC with previous disease control
with first-line gefitinib and recent disease progression (Response Evaluation
Criteria in Solid Tumors version 1.1). Participants were randomly assigned (1:1) 
by central block randomisation to oral gefitinib 250 mg or placebo once daily in 
tablet form; randomisation did not include stratification factors. All patients
also received the platinum-based doublet chemotherapy cisplatin 75 mg/m(2) plus
pemetrexed 500 mg/m(2) on the first day of each cycle. After completion of a
maximum of six chemotherapy cycles, patients continued their randomly assigned
treatment until disease progression or another discontinuation criterion was met.
All study investigators and participants were masked to treatment allocation. The
primary endpoint was progression-free survival in the intention-to-treat
population. Safety was assessed in patients who received at least one dose of
study treatment. The study has completed enrolment, but patients are still in
follow-up for overall survival. This trial is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov,
number NCT01544179.
FINDINGS: Between March 29, 2012, and Dec 20, 2013, 265 patients were randomly
assigned: 133 to the gefitinib group and 132 to the placebo group. At the time of
data cutoff (May 5, 2014), 98 (74%) patients had disease progression in the
gefitinib group compared with 107 (81%) in the placebo group (hazard ratio 0·86, 
95% CI 0·65-1·13; p=0·27; median progression-free survival 5·4 months in both
groups [95% CI 4·5-5·7 in the gefitinib group and 4·6-5·5 in the placebo group]).
The most common adverse events of any grade were nausea (85 [64%] of 132 patients
in the gefitinib group and 81 [61%] of 132 patients in the placebo group) and
decreased appetite (65 [49%] and 45 [34%]). The most common adverse events of
grade 3 or worse were anaemia (11 [8%] of 132 patients in the gefitinib group and
five [4%] of 132 patients in the placebo group) and neutropenia (nine [7%] and
seven [5%]). 37 (28%) of 132 patients in the gefitinib group and 28 (21%) of 132 
patients in the placebo group reported serious adverse events.
INTERPRETATION: Continuation of gefitinib after radiological disease progression 
on first-line gefitinib did not prolong progression-free survival in patients who
received platinum-based doublet chemotherapy as subsequent line of treatment.
Platinum-based doublet chemotherapy remains the standard of care in this setting.
FUNDING: AstraZeneca.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S1470-2045(15)00121-7 
PMID: 26159065  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. Chin J Cancer Res. 2015 Jun;27(3):294-300. doi:
10.3978/j.issn.1000-9604.2015.05.03.

Epidermal growth factor receptor mutation analysis in cytological specimens and
responsiveness to gefitinib in advanced non-small cell lung cancer patients.

Li L(1), Zhang Z(1), Bie Z(1), Wang Z(1), Zhang P(1), Nie X(1), Li Y(1), Wang
H(1), Ai B(1), Cheng G(1).

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Oncology, 2 Department of Pathology, Beijing Hospital, Beijing
100730, China.

BACKGROUND: Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutation is the key predictor
of EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) efficacy in non-small cell lung cancer 
(NSCLC). We conducted this study to verify the feasibility of EGFR mutation
analysis in cytological specimens and investigate the responsiveness to gefitinib
treatment in patients carrying EGFR mutations.
METHODS: A total of 210 cytological specimens were collected for EGFR mutation
detection by both direct sequencing and amplification refractory mutation system 
(ARMS). We analyzed EGFR mutation status by both methods and evaluated the
responsiveness to gefitinib treatment in patients harboring EGFR mutations by
overall response rate (ORR), disease control rate (DCR) and progression free
survival (PFS).
RESULTS: Of all patients, EGFR mutation rate was 28.6% (60/210) by direct
sequencing and 45.2% (95/210) by ARMS (P<0.001) respectively. Among the EGFR wild
type patients tested by direct sequencing, 26.7% of them were positive by ARMS.
For the 72 EGFR mutation positive patients treated with gefitinib, the ORR, DCR
and median PFS were 69.4%, 90.2% and 9.3 months respectively. The patients whose 
EGFR mutation status was negative by direct sequencing but positive by ARMS had
lower ORR (48.0% vs. 80.9%, P=0.004) and shorter median PFS (7.4 vs. 10.5 months,
P=0.009) as compared with that of EGFR mutation positive patients by both
detection methods.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study verified the feasibility of EGFR analysis in cytological
specimens in advanced NSCLC. ARMS is more sensitive than direct sequencing in
EGFR mutation detection. EGFR Mutation status tested on cytological samples is
applicable for predicting the response to gefitinib. Abundance of EGFR mutations 
might have an influence on TKIs efficacy.

DOI: 10.3978/j.issn.1000-9604.2015.05.03 
PMCID: PMC4490197
PMID: 26157326  [PubMed]


369. Health Technol Assess. 2015 Jun;19(47):1-134. doi: 10.3310/hta19470.

Erlotinib and gefitinib for treating non-small cell lung cancer that has
progressed following prior chemotherapy (review of NICE technology appraisals 162
and 175): a systematic review and economic evaluation.

Greenhalgh J(1), Bagust A(1), Boland A(1), Dwan K(1), Beale S(1), Hockenhull
J(1), Proudlove C(2), Dundar Y(1), Richardson M(1), Dickson R(1), Mullard A(3),
Marshall E(3).

Author information: 
(1)Liverpool Reviews and Implementation Group, University of Liverpool,
Liverpool, UK. (2)North West Medicines Information Centre, Pharmacy Practice
Unit, Liverpool, UK. (3)The Clatterbridge Centre NHS Foundation Trust, Liverpool,
UK.

BACKGROUND: Lung cancer is the second most diagnosed cancer in the UK. Over 70%
of lung cancers are non-small cell lung cancers (NSCLCs). Patients with stage III
or IV NSCLC may be offered treatment to improve survival, disease control and
quality of life. One-third of these patients receive further treatment following 
disease progression; these treatments are the focus of this systematic review.
OBJECTIVES: To appraise the clinical effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of
erlotinib [Tarceva(®), Roche (UK) Ltd] and gefitinib (IRESSA(®), AstraZeneca)
compared with each other, docetaxel or best supportive care (BSC) for the
treatment of NSCLC after disease progression following prior chemotherapy. The
effectiveness of treatment with gefitinib was considered only for patients with
epidermal growth factor mutation-positive (EGFR M+) disease.
DATA SOURCES: Four electronic databases (EMBASE, MEDLINE, The Cochrane Library,
PubMed) were searched for randomised controlled trials (RCTs) and economic
evaluations. Manufacturers' evidence submissions to the National Institute for
Health and Care Excellence were also considered.
REVIEW METHODS: Outcomes for three distinct patient groups based on EGFR mutation
status [EGFR M+, epidermal growth factor mutation negative (EGFR M-) and
epidermal growth factor mutation status unknown (EGFR unknown)] were considered. 
Heterogeneity of the data precluded statistical analysis. A de novo economic
model was developed to compare treatments (incremental cost per quality-adjusted 
life-year gained).
RESULTS: Twelve trials were included in the review. The use of gefitinib was
compared with chemotherapy (n = 6) or BSC (n = 1), and the use of erlotinib was
compared with chemotherapy (n = 3) or BSC (n = 1). One trial compared the use of 
gefitinib with the use of erlotinib. No trials included solely EGFR M+ patients; 
all data were derived from retrospective subgroup analyses from six RCTs [Kim ST,
Uhm JE, Lee J, Sun JM, Sohn I, Kim SW, et al. Randomized phase II study of
gefitinib versus erlotinib in patients with advanced non-small cell lung cancer
who failed previous chemotherapy. Lung Cancer 2012;75:82-8, V-15-32, Tarceva In
Treatment of Advanced NSCLC (TITAN), BR.21, IRESSA Survival Evaluation in Lung
cancer (ISEL) and IRESSA NSCLC Trial Evaluating REsponse and Survival versus
Taxotere (INTEREST)]. These limited data precluded conclusions regarding the
clinical effectiveness of any treatment for EGFR M+ patients. For EGFR M-
patients, data were derived from the TArceva Italian Lung Optimization tRial
(TAILOR) trial and Docetaxel and Erlotinib Lung Cancer Trial (DELTA).
Retrospective data were also derived from subgroup analyses of BR.21, Kim et al.,
TITAN, INTEREST and ISEL. The only statistically significant reported results
were for progression-free survival (PFS) for TAILOR and DELTA, and favoured
docetaxel over erlotinib [TAILOR hazard ratio (HR) 1.39, 95% confidence interval 
(CI) 1.06 to 1.82; DELTA HR 1.44, 95% CI 1.08 to 1.92]. In EGFR unknown patients,
nine trials (INTEREST, IRESSA as Second-line Therapy in Advanced NSCLC - KoreA,
Li, Second-line Indication of Gefitinib in NSCLC, V-15-32, ISEL, DELTA, TITAN and
BR.21) reported overall survival data and only one (BR.21) reported a
statistically significant result favouring the use of erlotinib over BSC (HR 0.7,
95% CI 0.58 to 0.85). For PFS, BR.21 favoured the use of erlotinib when compared 
with BSC (HR 0.61, 95% CI 0.51 to 0.74) and the use of gefitinib was favoured
when compared with BSC (HR 0.82, 95% CI 0.73 to 0.92) in ISEL. Limitations in the
clinical data precluded assessment of cost-effectiveness of treatments for an
EGFR M+ population by the Assessment Group (AG). The AG's economic model
suggested that for the EGFR M- population, the use of erlotinib was not
cost-effective compared with the use of docetaxel and compared with BSC. For EGFR
unknown patients, the use of erlotinib was not cost-effective when compared with 
BSC.
CONCLUSIONS/FUTURE WORK: The lack of clinical data available for distinct patient
populations limited the conclusions of the assessment. Future trials should
distinguish between patients with EGFR M+ and EGFR M- disease.
FUNDING: The National Institute for Health Research Health Technology Assessment 
programme.

DOI: 10.3310/hta19470 
PMCID: PMC4781386
PMID: 26134145  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. Int J Clin Exp Med. 2015 Apr 15;8(4):6242-6. eCollection 2015.

Randomized study of gefitinib versus pemetrexed as maintenance treatment in
patients with advanced glandular non-small cell lung cancer.

Xu YH(1), Mei JS(2), Zhou J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Jingzhou Hospital Affiliated to Tongji Medical College of Huazhong University 
of Science and Technology Jingzhou 434020, Hubei Province, China. (2)Jingzhou
Central Hospital of Thoracic Surgery Jingzhou 434020, China. (3)Jingzhou Central 
Hospital, Jingzhou 434020 Hubei Province, China.

Gefitinib was compared with pemetrexed as maintenance therapy in Patients with
Advanced Glandular Non-small Cell Lung Cancer, mainly regarding clinical effect
and side effect. A randomized trial of pemetrexed as study group (500 mg/m(2),
dl) versus gefitinib as the control group [250 mg on night 1, 250 mg on morning 2
(every day)] was conducted in 188 patients, 94 cases in each group with a therapy
cycle of 21 days. In addition, the study group was also treated with folic acid, 
vitB12 and dexamethasone. Therapeutic effects and adverse reactions of the two
groups were compared. Patients of two groups completed four cycles of
chemotherapy mostly, and there was no complete remission (CR) case. The
median-cycle of chemotherapy was 2 for the study group, and partial response
(PR), stable disease (SD), progressive disease (PD) were observed in 28 (29.8%), 
34 (36.2%), 32 (34.0%) cases respectively. The median-cycle was 3 for the control
group, PR, SD and PD were observed in 17 (18.1%), 23 (24.5%), 54 (57.4%) cases
respectively. The effective rates were 29.8% and 18.1% for pemetrexed (28 cases) 
and gefitinib (17 cases) respectively (P > 0.05). However, there was a
statistically significant difference in disease control rates between the 2
groups (65.0% vs 42.6%; P < 0.05). Adverse reactions occurred in two groups were 
mainly mild adverse reactions of 1-2 degree, without renal failure. The study
group and control group had three and five cases of mild infection respectively, 
without statistically significant difference. There was no significant difference
in the incidence rate of rash and alopecia between the two groups (P > 0.05).
However, the number of cases with neutropenia, anemia, thrombocytopenia,
gastrointestinal reactions and fatigue in the study group was lower than that of 
the control group, with a statistically significant difference (P < 0.05).
Considering the disease control rate and the tolerance of patients with advanced 
NSCLC, pemetrexed is strongly recommended to be used in clinical.


PMCID: PMC4483979
PMID: 26131232  [PubMed]


371. Int J Clin Exp Med. 2015 Apr 15;8(4):5397-405. eCollection 2015.

Mutation of the epidermal growth factor receptor gene and its impact on the
efficacy of gefitinib in advanced non-small cell lung cance.

Li XN(1), Qiu D(2), Pan X(3), Hou XX(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou
University Zhengzhou 450052, Henan Province, P. R. China. (2)Department of
Clinical Laboratory, Henan Medical College Zhengzhou 451191, Henan Province, P.
R. China. (3)Nursing College of Zhengzhou University Zhengzhou 450052, Henan
Province, P. R. China. (4)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Operating Room, The
First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou University Zhengzhou 450052, Henan
Province, P. R. China.

Mutations in the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) gene are associated with
subsets of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Some patients with EGFR mutations 
are responsive to targeted therapy with the EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor
gefitinib. Here, the mutation status of EGFR was assessed in advanced-stage NSCLC
patients to determine how mutation status influences the clinical efficacy of
gefitinib. The study included 106 patients with advanced NSCLC who were treated
with gefitinib. Exons 19 and 21 of EGFR were sequenced from tumor tissues samples
by PCR, and patient clinical characteristics, short-term outcomes (partial
response, stable disease, progressive disease), and survival [overall survival
(OS) and progression-free survival (PFS)] were compared. EGFR mutations in either
exon 19 or exon 21 were detected in 54.7% of cases. The EGFR gene mutation rate
was significantly different in patients with different pathological types
(χ(2)=6.612, P<0.05). The distribution of short-term outcomes differed
significantly by EGFR gene mutation status, history of smoking, and bone
metastasis (χ(2)=6.481~35.938, P<0.05). Further, OS and PFS was significantly
higher following gefitinib in patients with EGFR mutations than those without
EGFR mutation (χ(2)=19.135, 6.953, P<0.05). OS was also significantly higher in
patients with an exon 19 deletion mutation than in those with the exon 21 point
mutation (χ(2)=8.575, P<0.05). Cox multivariate regression analysis indicated
that OS was correlated with the pathological type of the tumor (HR=4.877), US
Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group Physical Status (ECOG PS) score (HR=3.087),
and EGFR mutation status (HR=1.876) (all P<0.05), while PFS was correlated with
ECOG PS score (HR=2.218), cycles of chemotherapy (HR=1.829), and EGFR mutation
status (HR=1.840) (all P<0.05). Only mild adverse events were reported during
gefitinib treatment. The findings indicate that gefitinib treatment can improve
the clinical outcomes of NSCLC patients with EGFR mutation, prolonging their
survival time with only mild adverse events.


PMCID: PMC4483999
PMID: 26131116  [PubMed]


372. Anticancer Res. 2015 Jul;35(7):3885-91.

Effectiveness of Tyrosine Kinase Inhibitors in Japanese Patients with Non-small
Cell Lung Cancer Harboring Minor Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor Mutations:
Results from a Multicenter Retrospective Study (HANSHIN Oncology Group 0212).

Otsuka T(1), Mori M(2), Yano Y(3), Uchida J(4), Nishino K(4), Kaji R(5), Hata
A(5), Hattori Y(6), Urata Y(6), Kaneda T(7), Tachihara M(8), Imamura F(4),
Katakami N(5), Negoro S(9), Morita S(10), Yokota S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Oncology, National Hospital Organization Toneyama
National Hospital, Toyonaka, Japan Department of Respiratory Medicine, Allergy,
and Rheumatic Diseases, Osaka University Graduate School of Medicine, Suita,
Japan. (2)Department of Thoracic Oncology, National Hospital Organization
Toneyama National Hospital, Toyonaka, Japan mmori@toneyama.go.jp. (3)Department
of Thoracic Oncology, National Hospital Organization Toneyama National Hospital, 
Toyonaka, Japan. (4)Department of Thoracic Oncology, Osaka Medical Center for
Cancer and Cardiovascular Diseases, Osaka, Japan. (5)Division of Integrated
Oncology, Institute of Biomedical Research and Innovation, Kobe, Japan.
(6)Department of Thoracic Oncology, Hyogo Cancer Center, Akashi, Japan.
(7)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Kobe City Medical Center West Hospital,
Kobe, Japan. (8)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Kobe University Graduate
School of Medicine, Kobe, Japan. (9)Department of Medical Oncology, Hyogo Cancer 
Center, Akashi, Japan. (10)Department of Biomedical Statistics and
Bioinformatics, Kyoto University Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto, Japan.

AIM: Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) with minor mutations in the epidermal
growth factor receptor (EGFR) gene, except for the common 15 base-pair deletions 
in exon 19 and the L858R mutation in exon 21, is rare, and only few data exist on
this patient population. The aim of the present study was to describe the
clinical characteristics and to clarify the efficacy of EGFR-tyrosine kinase
inhibitors (TKIs) in patients with NSCLC harboring minor mutations of the EGFR
gene.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: This was a multicenter, retrospective study that analyzed
specimens from patients with NSCLC who had minor EGFR gene mutations and were
treated with EGFR-TKIs between June 2002 and March 2012.
RESULTS: Out of 56 patients with minor mutations of the EGFR gene, 44 were
treated with either gefitinib or erlotinib. Mutation sites were G719X in exon 18 
(n=35), L861Q in exon 21 (n=11), and G874S in exon 21 (n=1). Three patients had
both the G719S and the L861Q mutation. The response rate to TKI treatment was
29.5%, and the disease control rate was 63.6%. The median progression-free
survival (PFS) was 6.7 months [95% confidence interval (CI)=2.06-8.66 months].
The median PFS was 7.2 months (95% CI=4.23-12.3 months) in 32 patients who
received first- or second-line treatment with EGFR-TKIs, whereas the median PFS
was 1.57 months (95% CI=0.73-3.8 months) in 12 patients treated with EGFR-TKIs as
a third-line or later treatment. In multivariate Cox analysis, erlotinib therapy 
was associated with a longer PFS than gefitinib (p=0.025).
CONCLUSION: Patients with NSCLC harboring minor mutations of the EGFR gene
exhibited a modest response to EGFR-TKI treatment. Treatment with
first-generation EGFR-TKIs, in particular erlotinib, may be considered a first-
or second-line option for patients with NSCLC with minor EGFR mutations.

Copyright© 2015 International Institute of Anticancer Research (Dr. John G.
Delinassios), All rights reserved.


PMID: 26124334  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. BioDrugs. 2015 Jun;29(3):167-83. doi: 10.1007/s40259-015-0130-9.

Next-Generation Covalent Irreversible Kinase Inhibitors in NSCLC: Focus on
Afatinib.

Hirsh V(1).

Author information: 
(1)McGill Department of Oncology, Royal Victoria Hospital, 687 Pine Avenue W.,
Montreal, QC, H3A 1A1, Canada, vera.hirsh@muhc.mcgill.ca.

First-generation, reversible epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine
kinase inhibitors (TKIs), erlotinib and gefitinib, represented an important
addition to the treatment armamentarium for non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
patients with activating EGFR mutations. However, all patients inevitably develop
acquired resistance to these agents, primarily due to secondary EGFR mutations,
molecular aberrations affecting other signaling pathways, or transformation to
small-cell histology. It was hypothesized that development of second-generation
TKIs with broader inhibitory profiles could confer longer-lasting clinical
activity and overcome acquired resistance to first-generation inhibitors. Here,
we review the development of afatinib, an irreversible ErbB family blocker that
potently inhibits signaling of all homodimers and heterodimers formed by the
EGFR, human epidermal growth factor receptor (HER)-2, HER3, and HER4 receptors.
In two phase III trials in patients with EGFR mutation-positive NSCLC, first-line
afatinib significantly improved progression-free survival (PFS) and
health-related quality of life versus standard-of-care chemotherapy. Moreover, in
preplanned sub-analyses, afatinib significantly improved overall survival in
patients harboring EGFR Del19 mutations. Afatinib has also demonstrated clinical 
activity in NSCLC patients who had progressed on erlotinib/gefitinib,
particularly when combined with cetuximab, and offers 'treatment beyond
progression' benefit when combined with paclitaxel versus chemotherapy alone.
Furthermore, a recent phase III study demonstrated that PFS was significantly
improved with afatinib versus erlotinib for the second-line treatment of patients
with squamous cell carcinoma of the lung. The activity of afatinib in both
first-line and relapsed/refractory settings may reflect its ability to
irreversibly inhibit all ErbB family members. Afatinib has a well-defined safety 
profile with characteristic gastrointestinal (diarrhea, stomatitis) and cutaneous
(rash/acne) adverse events.

DOI: 10.1007/s40259-015-0130-9 
PMCID: PMC4488453
PMID: 26123538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. J Eval Clin Pract. 2015 Oct;21(5):808-16. doi: 10.1111/jep.12382. Epub 2015 Jun
11.

Decision to adopt medical technology under the National Health Insurance System
in Taiwan: case study of new molecular targeted drugs among non-small cell lung
cancer patients.

Chen HL(1), Shen LJ(1,)(2,)(3), Wei CP(4), Lu HM(4), Hsiao FY(1,)(2,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Clinical Pharmacy, College of Medicine, National Taiwan 
University, Taipei, Taiwan. (2)School of Pharmacy, College of Medicine, National 
Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan. (3)Department of Pharmacy, National Taiwan
University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan. (4)Department of Information Management,
College of Management, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan.

RATIONALE, AIMS AND OBJECTIVES: Molecular targeted drugs (MTD), gefitinib and
erlotinib, have been proven to provide clinical benefits to advanced stage
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients. Therefore, access to such medical
innovations in time is critical for patients with the right indications. The aim 
of this study was to explore determinants of the adoption of MTD among NSCLC
patients under Taiwan's National Health Insurance (NHI) system.
METHODS: Using Taiwan's Longitudinal Health Insurance Database and Cancer
Registry database as the data source, we identified 1555 newly diagnosed NSCLC
patients who started their cancer treatment between 2004 and 2009. Patients were 
categorized into 'non-MTD' and 'MTD' groups based on the cancer treatment they
received. Hierarchical logistic regression was used to explore potential
determinants associated with the adoption of MTD by adjusting for patient-,
disease-, doctor-, hospital-level characteristics and changes of reimbursement
schemes.
RESULTS: During the study period, 562 (36%) NSCLC patients were classified as the
'MTD group and 993 (64%) patients were the 'non-MTD' group. Hierarchical logistic
regression model showed that the elderly were less likely to receive MTD
(OR = 0.41; 95% CI: 0.28-0.60). In contrast, patients whose cancer type was
adenocarcinoma (OR = 2.99; 95% CI: 2.09-4.26) were more likely to receive MTD.
Those who went to private hospitals (OR = 1.75; 95% CI: 1.01-3.03) and hospitals 
with higher economic scale (OR = 3.00; 95% CI: 1.72-5.25) were more likely to
receive MTD as well.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest that both patient- and hospital-level
characteristics significantly affected the adoption of MTD among NSCLC patients.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jep.12382 
PMID: 26096761  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Sci Rep. 2015 Jun 22;5:11392. doi: 10.1038/srep11392.

ERβ localization influenced outcomes of EGFR-TKI treatment in NSCLC patients with
EGFR mutations.

Wang Z(1), Li Z(1), Ding X(2), Shen Z(3), Liu Z(1), An T(1), Duan J(1), Zhong
J(1), Wu M(1), Zhao J(1), Zhuo M(1), Wang Y(1), Wang S(1), Sun Y(4), Bai H(1),
Wang J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Medical Oncology, Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and 
Translational Research (Ministry of Education), Beijing Cancer Hospital &Beijing 
Institute for Cancer Research, Beijing, China. (2)Department of Oncology,
Aviation General Hospital, Beijing, China. (3)Metabolomics Center, National
Institute of Biological Sciences, Beijing, China. (4)Department of Pathology, Key
Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Translational Research (Ministry of Education), 
Beijing Cancer Hospital &Beijing Institute for Cancer Research, Beijing, China.

Effects of estrogen receptorβ (ERβ) localization on epidermal growth factor
receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors (EGFR-TKIs) in advanced non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC) are unknown. First, we analyzed the relationship between ERβ
localization determined by immunohistochemistry and EGFR-TKI outcomes in 184
patients with advanced NSCLC and found that ERβ expression localized in the
cytoplasm and/or nucleus. The frequency of cytoplasmic ERβ (c-ERβ) and nuclear
ERβ (n-ERβ) co-expression was 12% (22/184). C-ERβ and n-ERβ co-expression was
correlated with poor median progression-free survival compared to patients
without co-expression. In subsequent in vitro experiments, PC9 cells transfected 
with ERβ isoform1 (ERβ1, strong expression of both c-ERβ and n-ERβ) were more
resistant to gefitinib than PC9 cells transfected with ERβ isoform2 or 5 (ERβ2 or
ERβ5, strong expression of ERβ in cytoplasm but not nucleus). Resistance was
identified due to interactions between ERβ1 and other isoforms, and mediated by
activation of non-genomic pathways. Moreover, gefitinib resistance was reversed
by a combination treatment with gefitinib and fulvestrant, both in cell lines and
in one NSCLC patient. These results suggested that c-ERβ and n-ERβ co-expression 
was a potential molecular indicator of EGFR-TKI resistance, which might be
overcome by combining EGFR-TKI and ER antagonist.

DOI: 10.1038/srep11392 
PMCID: PMC4476037
PMID: 26096604  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. J Recept Signal Transduct Res. 2016;36(1):37-44. doi:
10.3109/10799893.2015.1015739. Epub 2015 Jun 22.

Mapping inhibitor response to the in-frame deletions, insertions and duplications
of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) in non-small cell lung cancer.

Ning J(1,)(2), Wu Q(1), Liu Z(3), Wang J(2), Lin X(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Chemistry , Zhejiang University , Hangzhou , P. R. China .
(2)b School of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Changsha University of
Science & Technology , Changsha , P. R. China , and. (3)c Department of
Infectious Diseases , The Third Xiangya Hospital, Central South University ,
Changsha , P. R. China.

Human epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) has become a well-established
target for the treatment of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). However, a large 
number of in-frame deletion, insertion and duplication mutations in the EGFR
tyrosine kinase (TK) domain have been observed to alter drug response to such a
kinase target. Thus, a systematic investigation of the intermolecular
interactions between the clinical small-molecule agents and various EGFR in-frame
mutants would help to establish a complete picture of drug response to kinase
mutations in lung cancer, and to design new EGFR inhibitors with high potency and
selectivity to target drug-resistant mutants. Here, we describe a combined
pipeline to explore the drug response of five representative EGFR inhibitors,
including three FDA-approved agents (gefitinib, erlotinib and lapatinib) and two 
compounds under clinical development (AEE788 and TAK-285) to a number of
clinically relevant EGFR in-frame mutations, aiming at a comprehensive
understanding of molecular mechanism and biological implication underlying drug
resistance and sensitivity to EGFR in-frame mutations. It was found that the
insertion and duplication mutations in exon 20 can generally cause drug
resistance to EGFR due to the reduced size of kinase's active pocket, while
deletion mutations in exon 19 associate closely with increased inhibitor
sensitivity to EGFR by establishing additional non-bonded interactions across
complex interface, including hydrogen bonds, cation-π interactions and
hydrophobic contacts.

DOI: 10.3109/10799893.2015.1015739 
PMID: 26096169  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. Target Oncol. 2016 Feb;11(1):41-7. doi: 10.1007/s11523-015-0373-x.

Is There a Survival Benefit of First-Line Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor
Tyrosine-Kinase Inhibitor Monotherapy Versus Chemotherapy in Patients with
Advanced Non-Small-Cell Lung Cancer?: A Meta-Analysis.

Guetz GD(1), Landre T(2,)(3), Uzzan B(4), Chouahnia K(1), Nicolas P(4), Morere
JF(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Avicenne Hospital, HUPSSD, AP-HP, 125 route de
Stalingrad, 93009, Bobigny, France. (2)Unité de Coordination en Onco-Gériatrie
(UCOG), HUPSSD, AP-HP, Sevran, France. thierry.landre@rmb.aphp.fr. (3)Department 
of Geriatric Oncology, René Muret hospital, HUPSSD, AP-HP, Avenue du Dr
Schaeffner, 93270, Sevran, France. thierry.landre@rmb.aphp.fr. (4)Department of
Pharmacology, Avicenne Hospital, HUPSSD, AP-HP, Bobigny, France.

BACKGROUND: Tyrosine-kinase inhibitors (TKIs) markedly improve progression-free
survival (PFS) of patients with advanced non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
mutated for epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR). Results on overall survival 
(OS) are less clear-cut. We performed a publication-based meta-analysis to
address further this issue.
METHODS: We did a PubMed query using keywords simultaneously (lung neoplasm,
tyrosine kinase inhibitors, epidermal growth factor receptor mutation, survival, 
and randomized controlled trials). We also searched for relevant abstracts in
annual proceedings of ASCO, ESMO, and WCLC meetings. We cross-checked all
references from all eligible articles. Only phase III randomized controlled
trials comparing TKI monotherapy and platinum-based doublet chemotherapy in
first-line treatment of metastatic or advanced NSCLC were included. We used
EasyMA software to perform statistical analyses. A random effect model was used
in case of heterogeneity between studies (and a fixed effect model in absence of 
heterogeneity).
RESULTS: The eight eligible studies included 2962 patients (780 males, 2182
females, mostly Asian, median age 60 years), 2909 adenocarcinomas (98 %), 1739
mutated tumors (897 exon 19 deletion, 699 L858 mutation), 448 stage IIIB, and
2222 stage IV (75 %) tumours and 2453 never smokers (83 %). Four studies assessed
gefitinib, two studies assessed erlotinib, and two studies assessed afatinib.
Chemotherapies were doublets including a platinum salt. All studies included
patients with EGFR mutations, but six studies included only EGFR mutated
patients. OS was similar among patients who first received TKI or chemotherapy
(HR 0.98, 95 % CI 0.87-1.10, fixed effect model). Conversely, compared with
chemotherapy, EGFR TKIs significantly improved PFS in patients with EGFR-mutated 
tumours (HR 0.37, 95 % CI 0.29-0.49, random effect model). Concerning side
effects, rash (RR 6.29, 95 % CI 4.05-9.77), diarrhoea (RR 3.51, 95 % CI
2.15-5.75), stomatitis (RR 3.57, 95 % CI 1.81-7.04), and interstitial lung
disease (RR 6.07, 95 % CI 1.66-22.2) were significantly more frequent after TKIs.
As expected, fatigue (RR 0.38, 95 % CI 0.32-0.45), nausea/vomiting (RR 0.19, 95 %
CI 0.11-0.32), and haematological disorders, including thrombocytopenia (RR 0.18,
95 % CI 0.09-0.35), anaemia (RR 0.22, 95 % CI 0.15-0.33), and grade 3-4
neutropenia (RR 0.06, 95 % CI 0.04-0.08), were significantly more frequent after 
chemotherapy.
CONCLUSION: The major discrepancy between a similar OS and a markedly improved
PFS after first-line TKI compared with chemotherapy could be related to the high 
level of crossing-over between both groups.

DOI: 10.1007/s11523-015-0373-x 
PMID: 26092590  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. Curr Oncol. 2015 Jun;22(3):e183-215. doi: 10.3747/co.22.2566.

Use of the epidermal growth factor receptor inhibitors gefitinib, erlotinib,
afatinib, dacomitinib, and icotinib in the treatment of non-small-cell lung
cancer: a systematic review.

Ellis PM(1), Coakley N(2), Feld R(3), Kuruvilla S(4), Ung YC(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, McMaster University, Hamilton, ON; ; Juravinski Cancer
Centre, Hamilton, ON; (2)Department of Oncology, McMaster University, Hamilton,
ON; ; Cancer Care Ontario, Program in Evidence-Based Care, Hamilton, ON;
(3)Division of Medical Oncology and Hematology, Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, 
and University Health Network, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON; (4)Department 
of Oncology, The University of Western Ontario, and London Regional Cancer
Program, London, ON; (5)Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Toronto, 
and Odette Cancer Centre, Toronto, ON.

INTRODUCTION: This systematic review addresses the use of epidermal growth factor
receptor (egfr) inhibitors in three populations of advanced non-small-cell lung
cancer (nsclc) patients-unselected, selected, and molecularly selected-in three
treatment settings: first line, second line, and maintenance.
METHODS: Ninety-six randomized controlled trials found using the medline and
embase databases form the basis of this review.
RESULTS: In the first-line setting, data about the efficacy of egfr tyrosine
kinase inhibitors (tkis) compared with platinum-based chemotherapy are
inconsistent. Results from studies that selected patients based on clinical
characteristics are also mixed. There is high-quality evidence that an egfrtki is
preferred over a platinum doublet as initial therapy for patients with an
activating mutation of the EGFR gene. The egfrtkis are associated with a higher
likelihood of response, longer progression-free survival, and improved quality of
life. Multiple trials of second-line therapy have compared an egfrtki with
chemotherapy. Meta-analysis of those data demonstrates similar progression-free
and overall survival. There is consequently no preferred sequence for second-line
egfrtki or second-line chemotherapy. The egfrtkis have also been evaluated as
switch-maintenance therapy. No molecular marker could identify patients in whom a
survival benefit was not observed; however, the magnitude of the benefit was
modest.
CONCLUSIONS: Determination of EGFR mutation status is essential to making
appropriate treatment decisions in patients with nsclc. Patients who are EGFR
mutation-positive should be treated with an egfrtki as first-line therapy. An
egfrtki is still appropriate therapy in patients who are EGFR wild-type, but the 
selected agent should be administered as second- or third-line therapy.

DOI: 10.3747/co.22.2566 
PMCID: PMC4462541
PMID: 26089730  [PubMed]


379. Curr Oncol. 2015 Jun;22(3):e157-63. doi: 10.3747/co.22.2296.

An exploratory comparative analysis of tyrosine kinase inhibitors or docetaxel in
second-line treatment of EGFR wild-type non-small-cell lung cancer: a
retrospective real-world practice review at a single tertiary care centre.

Ma K(1), Cohen V(2), Kasymjanova G(2), Small D(2), Novac K(3), Peterson J(3),
Levit A(3), Agulnik J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology Oncology, McGill University, Montreal, QC; (2)Peter
Brojde Lung Cancer Centre, Jewish General Hospital, Montreal, QC; (3)McGill
University, Montreal, QC.

BACKGROUND: Treatment for advanced non-small-cell lung cancer (nsclc), especially
in patients with wild-type EGFR, remains limited. Recently, erlotinib, a tyrosine
kinase inhibitor (tki) targeting EGFR mutation, was approved as second-line
treatment in EGFR wild-type nsclc. Despite evidence of better overall survival
(os) with chemotherapy than with tki in second-line treatment, data on the use of
tki in the real-life clinical setting remain limited. The present practice review
of tki use for second- and third-line treatment in EGFR wild-type nsclc also
compares clinical outcomes for tki and single-agent docetaxel as second-line
treatment.
METHODS: Our retrospective cohort study included patients with EGFR wild-type
nsclc treated at the Jewish General Hospital (Montreal, QC) between 2003 and
2013. Patients received a tki (erlotinib or gefitinib) in the second and third
line or docetaxel in the second line. For each group, we determined os, disease
control rate, progression-free survival (pfs), and event-free survival (efs).
RESULTS: The tki group included 145 patients, with 92 receiving second-line
treatment. In the control group, 53 patients received docetaxel as second-line
therapy. In the tki group, os was 6.0 months; pfs, 2.7 months; and efs, 3.0
months. Comparing second-line treatments, os was 5.3 and 5.0 months respectively 
(p = 0.88), pfs was 2.5 and 1.8 months respectively (p = 0.041), and efs was 3.0 
and 1.7 months respectively (p = 0.009).
CONCLUSIONS: In our study cohort, second-line therapy for EGFR wild-type nsclc
with tki (compared with docetaxel) was associated with statistically better pfs
and efs and noninferior os. Those findings raise the question of whether efs
should also be considered when choosing second-line treatment in this patient
population.

DOI: 10.3747/co.22.2296 
PMCID: PMC4462537
PMID: 26089726  [PubMed]


380. Onco Targets Ther. 2015 Jun 8;8:1351-4. doi: 10.2147/OTT.S78925. eCollection
2015.

An active treatment of lung adenocarcinoma cancer with brain metastases:
icotinib.

Zhang Y(1), Tang H(1), Li J(1), Li M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiration Medicine, Municipal Hospital, Qingdao, People's
Republic of China.

Lung cancer has the highest mortality rate of all cancers worldwide. A total of
70%-75% of all lung cancers are non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) with
two-thirds presenting with locally advanced or metastatic disease at diagnosis.
Brain metastasis is one of the most common problems in the management of NSCLC,
worsening the prognosis and quality of life of NSCLC patients. The epidermal
growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors (EGFR-TKIs) gefitinib and
erlotinib have been tested in patients with NSCLC and brain metastasis. Icotinib 
is a new type of oral EGFR-TKI. In this report, we describe a patient with lung
adenocarcinoma cancer with brain metastases who received icotinib treatment and
kept satisfactory health-related quality of life for 1 year.

DOI: 10.2147/OTT.S78925 
PMCID: PMC4467641
PMID: 26089684  [PubMed]


381. Int J Cancer. 2015 Dec 15;137(12):2947-58. doi: 10.1002/ijc.29647. Epub 2015 Jul 
15.

Sequential use of vinorelbine followed by gefitinib enhances the antitumor effect
in NSCLC cell lines poorly responsive to reversible EGFR tyrosine kinase
inhibitors.

Dal Bello MG(1), Alama A(1), Barletta G(1), Coco S(1), Truini A(1,)(2), Vanni
I(1), Boccardo S(3), Genova C(1), Rijavec E(1), Biello F(1), Bottoni G(4),
Sambuceti G(4), Grossi F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Lung Cancer Unit, IRCCS AOU San Martino-IST-National Institute for Cancer
Research, Genoa, Italy. (2)Department of Internal Medicine and Medical
Specialties (DIMI), University of Genoa-IRCCS AOU San Martino-IST-National
Institute for Cancer Research, Genoa, Italy. (3)Pathology and Cytohistology
Division, IRCCS AOU San Martino-IST-National Institute for Cancer Research,
Genoa, Italy. (4)Nuclear Medicine Unit, Department of Health Science, University 
of Genoa-IRCCS AOU San Martino-IST-National Institute for Cancer Research, Genoa,
Italy.

Preclinical studies have suggested that combining cytotoxic agents with epidermal
growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors (EGFR-TKIs) to treat
EGFR-mutated tumors may increase their inhibitory effect depending on the order
of drug administration. The antitumor efficacy of different treatment sequences
using vinorelbine (VNB) and gefitinib (GEF) was investigated both in vitro and in
vivo in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cell lines with the rationale of
potentially translating these findings into the clinical setting. The
EGFR-wild-type A549 and the EGFR-mutated (exon 21 L858R/exon 20 T790M) H1975 cell
lines were treated as follows: GEF followed by VNB, VNB followed by GEF and the
two drugs applied individually or concurrently. Results in vitro demonstrated
that the sequence of VNB followed by GEF was significantly more active than
single-agent treatments. The expression of activated EGFR and its downstream
pathway genes indicated that the increased cytotoxic effect of the VNB and GEF
treatment sequence was accompanied by inhibition of EGFR, AKT and ERK1/2.
Moreover, the increased inhibition of tumor growth after treatment with VNB
followed by GEF was also confirmed in CD1-nude mice that were xenotransplanted
with H1975 cells (p < 0.0001). This effect was paralleled by a corresponding
decrease in cancer glucose consumption, as assessed by micro-positron emission
tomography scans (p < 0.05). These preclinical findings in NSCLC cell lines,
which are poorly responsive to EGFR-TKIs, demonstrated that the sequential
treatment of VNB followed by GEF induced a significant antitumor effect, which
supports the translation of this treatment schedule into a clinical setting.

© 2015 UICC.

DOI: 10.1002/ijc.29647 
PMID: 26089022  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. Methods Mol Biol. 2015;1317:187-223. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4939-2727-2_12.

Oncolytic Viral Therapy Using Reovirus.

Thirukkumaran C(1), Morris DG.

Author information: 
(1)Southern Alberta Cancer Research Institute, University of Calgary, Calgary,
AB, Canada.

Current mainstays in cancer treatment such as chemotherapy, radiation therapy,
hormonal manipulation, and even targeted therapies such as Trastuzumab
(herceptin) for breast cancer or Iressa (gefitinib) for non-small cell lung
cancer among others are limited by lack of efficacy, cellular resistance, and
toxicity. Dose escalation and combination therapies designed to overcome
resistance and increase efficacy are limited by a narrow therapeutic index.
Oncolytic viruses are one such group of new biological therapeutics that appears 
to have a wide spectrum of anticancer activity with minimal human toxicity. Since
the malignant phenotype of tumors is the culmination of multiple mutations that
occur in genes eventually leading to aberrant signaling pathways, oncolytic
viruses either natural or engineered specifically target tumor cells taking
advantage of this abnormal cellular signaling for their replication. Reovirus is 
one such naturally occurring double-stranded RNA virus that exploits altered
signaling pathways (including Ras) in a myriad of cancers. The ability of
reovirus to infect and lyse tumors under in vitro, in vivo, and ex vivo
conditions has been well documented previously by us and others. The major
mechanism of reovirus oncolysis of cancer cells has been shown to occur through
apoptosis with autophagy taking place during this process in certain cancers. In 
addition, the synergistic antitumor effects of reovirus in combination with
radiation or chemotherapy have also been demonstrated for reovirus resistant and 
moderately sensitive tumors. Recent progress in our understanding of viral
immunology in the tumor microenvironment has diverted interest in exploring
immunologic mechanisms to overcome resistance exhibited by chemotherapeutic drugs
in cancer. Thus, currently several investigations are focusing on immune
potentiating of reovirus for maximal tumor targeting. This chapter therefore has 
concentrated on immunologic cell death induction with reovirus as a novel
approach to cancer therapy used under in vitro and in vivo conditions, as well as
in a clinical setting. Reovirus phase I clinical trials have shown indications of
efficacy, and several phase II/III trials are ongoing at present. Reovirus's
extensive preclinical efficacy, replication competency, and low toxicity profile 
in humans have placed it as an attractive anticancer therapeutic for ongoing
clinical testing that are highlighted in this chapter.

DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4939-2727-2_12 
PMID: 26072409  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. Clin Lung Cancer. 2015 Nov;16(6):496-506. doi: 10.1016/j.cllc.2015.05.001. Epub
2015 May 13.

Modern Treatments in Advanced Non-Small-Cell Lung Cancer: Temporal Trends and
Effect on Survival. A French Population-Based Study.

Carpentier O(1), Selvaggi L(2), Jégu J(3), Purohit A(2), Prim N(2), Velten M(3), 
Quoix E(4).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire d'épidémiologie et de santé publique, EA3430, Faculté de Médecine,
Université de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France. (2)Service de pneumologie, Nouvel
Hôpital Civil, Strasbourg, France. (3)Laboratoire d'épidémiologie et de santé
publique, EA3430, Faculté de Médecine, Université de Strasbourg, Strasbourg,
France; Service de santé publique, Nouvel Hôpital Civil, Strasbourg, France.
(4)Service de pneumologie, Nouvel Hôpital Civil, Strasbourg, France. Electronic
address: elisabeth.quoix@chru-strasbourg.fr.

Extrapolation of clinical trials results to the general population is always
challenging. We analysed 1047 patients diagnosed with an advanced stage disease
between 1998 and 2005 in a french administrative department and found a good
spread of modern chemotherapy since 1998 and targeted therapy since 2002.
Moreover, the outcomes in patients treated according to guidelines are very
proximal from those obtained in clinical trials.BACKGROUND: Management of
metastatic non-small-cell lung cancer has considerably evolved during the past 2 
decades. In this study we aimed to assess how treatments have spread at a
population-based level and their effect on survival.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Medical records of patients diagnosed from 1998 to 2005 in 
the French department of Bas-Rhin were checked to collect data on patient
characteristics and treatments received. Multivariate analysis of survival was
performed using pretherapeutic and therapeutic factors including targeted
therapies received as third-line treatment.
RESULTS: We included 1047 patients with stage IIIB to IV non-small-cell lung
cancer. The proportion of patients who underwent chemotherapy increased from
373/471 (79.2%) to 491/576 (85.2%) over the 1998 to 2001 and 2002 to 2005
periods, and there was an increased use of third-generation drugs associated with
platin. Third-line treatment was gefitinib or erlotinib in 73/155 (47.1%) of the 
cases among patients diagnosed from 2002 to 2005. Compared with older agents,
targeted therapy administered as third-line treatment was associated with a
longer survival but there was no significant difference in survival with recent
chemotherapy agents in multivariate analyses (hazard ratio, 0.773; 95% confidence
interval, 0.445-1.343).
CONCLUSION: Results of our study showed a good spread of modern chemotherapy and 
targeted therapy use at a population-based level. However, even if the general
outcomes were improved along the years, the results observed in real clinical
practice were slightly different from those reported in clinical trials.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cllc.2015.05.001 
PMID: 26071190  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. Crit Rev Oncol Hematol. 2015 Nov;96(2):206-19. doi:
10.1016/j.critrevonc.2015.05.007. Epub 2015 Jun 10.

Risk of pruritus in cancer patients treated with biological therapies: A
systematic review and meta-analysis of clinical trials.

Santoni M(1), Conti A(1), Andrikou K(1), Bittoni A(1), Lanese A(1), Pistelli
M(1), Pantano F(2), Vincenzi B(2), Armento G(2), Massari F(3), Tonini G(2),
Cascinu S(1), Santini D(4).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Oncology, Università Politecnica delle Marche, Azienda
Ospedaliero-Universitaria Ospedali Riuniti Umberto I, GM Lancisi, G Salesi,
Ancona, Italy. (2)Medical Oncology Department, University Campus Bio-Medico,
Rome, Italy. (3)Medical Oncology, Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria Integrata,
University of Verona, Verona, Italy. (4)Medical Oncology Department, University
Campus Bio-Medico, Rome, Italy. Electronic address: d.santini@unicampus.it.

BACKGROUND: Pruritus has been described with targeted therapies in cancer
patients. We performed an up-to-date meta-analysis to determine the incidence and
RR in patients with cancer treated with these agents.
METHODS: PubMed databases were searched for articles published till October 2014.
Eligible studies were selected according to PRISMA statement. Summary incidence, 
RR, and 95% CIs were calculated using random-effects or fixed-effects models
based on the heterogeneity of selected studies.
FINDINGS: A total of 4803 potentially relevant trials were identified; of them,
33 randomized phase III studies were included in this meta-analysis; 20,151
patients treated with 14 distinct targeted agents were available for this
analysis; 8816 (44%) had Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and 12,257 had other 
malignancies. The highest incidences of all-grade pruritus were observed with
panitumumab (56.8) and gefitinib (49.4), while the lowest incidences were
reported by erlotinib (3.6) and sunitinib (5.8). In addition, the highest
incidence of high-grade pruritus was reported by gefitinib (5.9). The summary RR 
of developing all-grade and high-grade pruritus with targeted agents vs. controls
were 2.2 and 2.6, respectively. The highest RRs of all-grade pruritus were
associated with panitumumab (25.6) and ipilimumab (4.5). Grouping by drug
category, the RR of all-grade pruritus with anti-EGFR mAbs was 2.84 (95% CI 2.39 
to 3.37) compared to anti-EGFR/HER2 TKIs and 1.24 (95% CI 1.03 to 1.49) to
immunotherapy.
INTERPRETATION: Treatment with biological therapy in cancer patients is
associated with a significant increase in the risk of pruritus, and frequent
clinical monitoring of pruritus should be emphasized when managing these and
newer targeted agents.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.critrevonc.2015.05.007 
PMID: 26070625  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. Pneumologie. 2015 Jun;69(6):350-60. doi: 10.1055/s-0034-1392081. Epub 2015 Jun
11.

[Estrogen Receptors and their Impact for Prognosis and Therapy of Lung Cancer -
New Insights to an Underestimated Mechanism].

[Article in German]

Brückl WM(1), Al-Batran SE(2), Ficker JH(1), Wirtz RM(3), Atmaca A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Universitätsklinik für Pneumologie, Allergologie und Schlafmedizin der
Paracelsus Medizinischen Privatuniversität. (2)Institut für Klinische Forschung
(IKF), Krankenhaus Nordwest, Universitäres Centrum für Tumorerkrankungen
Frankfurt (UCT), Frankfurt am Main. (3)Stratifyer Molecular Pathology GmbH, Köln.
(4)Klinik für Hämatologie und Onkologie, Krankenhaus Nordwest, Frankfurt am Main.

Though tobacco smoking is the leading cause of lung cancer, during the last
decades the prevalence increased in never smoking patients, especially in women. 
Sex steroid hormones and particularly the estrogen receptors (ERs) seem to play
an important but still underestimated role in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC).
Beside long existing hints that hormone replacement therapy (HRT) increases the
risk of lung tumors recent analyses on cell lines, xenografts and human tumors of
both sexes gave clear evidence of ER expression and proliferation in NSCLC. Most 
recently, the expression of ERs apparently has prognostic and predictive value.
Recently, an intracellular "cross-talk" between the ER and the epithelial growth 
factor receptor (EGFR) could be demonstrated. EGFR are important targets of
approved tyrosinkinases (TKIs), like gefitinib, erlotinib or afatinib. Currently,
clinical studies are enrolling lung tumor patients for combination treatment with
EGFR TKI and antihormonal drugs, e. g. fulvestrant.

© Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0034-1392081 
PMID: 26069097  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. Expert Opin Investig Drugs. 2015;24(9):1143-61. doi:
10.1517/13543784.2015.1056341. Epub 2015 Jun 12.

An overview of angiogenesis inhibitors in Phase II studies for non-small-cell
lung cancer.

Pilotto S(1), Novello S, Peretti U, Kinspergher S, Ciuffreda L, Milella M,
Carbognin L, Vavalà T, Ferrara R, Caccese M, Tortora G, Bria E.

Author information: 
(1)University of Verona Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria Integrata, Medical
Oncology , P.le L.A. Scuro 10, 37124, Verona , Italy +390 458 128 124 ; +390 458 
027 410 ; emilio.bria@univr.it.

INTRODUCTION: Angiogenesis plays a major role in the development and progression 
of solid tumors, including lung cancer. Although some anti-angiogenic agents have
demonstrated a statistically significant advantage in terms of primary outcome in
clinical trials, the reliable clinical benefit obtained with these drugs is still
questionable and often quantitatively limited. To better clarify this complex
scenario and definitively establish the concrete benefits of anti-angiogenic
strategies in lung cancer, several clinical trials have been conducted with
others currently ongoing.
AREAS COVERED: In this review, the authors highlight the data ascertained from
Phase II trials conducted in NSCLC patients who are treated with recently
discovered innovative anti-angiogenic molecules. The authors also discuss older
widely investigated anti-angiogenic drugs that have been repurposed or used in
different contexts and combinations.
EXPERT OPINION: Globally considered, the results of the countless clinical trials
evaluating anti-angiogenic agents suggest that angiogenesis (with its molecules
and pathways) represents a non-ideal druggable process for several biologically
relevant reasons. Consequently, it is important that the conceptual development
and clinical validation of anti-angiogenic agents is different from those
employed for traditional target agents (i.e., erlotinib, gefitinib and
crizotinib). Indeed, the development and validation of these agents still
represents a major challenge for modern scientific research.

DOI: 10.1517/13543784.2015.1056341 
PMID: 26065529  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. Ther Adv Respir Dis. 2015 Aug;9(4):146-63. doi: 10.1177/1753465815588053. Epub
2015 Jun 10.

Experience with erlotinib in the treatment of non-small cell lung cancer.

Landi L(1), Cappuzzo F(2).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Oncologist at Istituto Toscano Tumori, Medical Oncology Department,
Ospedale Civile Livorno, Livorno, Italy. (2)Director of Medical Oncology
Department, Istituto Toscano Tumori, Ospedale Civile, Viale Alfieri 36, 57100
Livorno, Italy f.cappuzzo@gmail.com.

Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) remains the leading cause of cancer-related
deaths. In the last decade, the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)
signalling pathway has emerged as one of the most important molecular
aberrations, representing an attractive therapeutic target in NSCLC. Drugs
interfering with the tyrosine kinase domain of the EGFR (EGFR TKIs), such as
erlotinib and gefitinib, have demonstrated efficacy in patients with advanced
NSCLC irrespective of therapy line and particularly in patients harbouring
activating mutations in the EGFR gene (EGFR(mut+)). Results of large phase III
randomized trials clearly established that EGFR TKIs are superior to chemotherapy
as frontline treatment in patients with EGFR(mut+), whereas in the EGFR wild-type
(EGFR(WT)) or EGFR unknown population, platinum-based chemotherapy remains the
standard of care, with no consistent benefit produced by the addition of EGFR
TKI. In pretreated NSCLC, EGFR TKIs are considered more effective than standard
monotherapy with cytotoxics in the presence of classical EGFR mutations, whereas 
in the EGFR(WT) population, a similar efficacy to docetaxel or pemetrexed in
terms of survival has been demonstrated. Unfortunately, patients who initially
responded to EGFR TKIs invariably develop acquired resistance. For such patients 
there is an urgent need for more effective strategies able to delay or possibly
overcome resistance. In the present review we analysed the available data on
erlotinib in the treatment of advanced NSCLC.

© The Author(s), 2015.

DOI: 10.1177/1753465815588053 
PMID: 26063687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. Onco Targets Ther. 2015 May 19;8:1137-42. doi: 10.2147/OTT.S75388. eCollection
2015.

Combination of afatinib with cetuximab in patients with EGFR-mutant
non-small-cell lung cancer resistant to EGFR inhibitors.

Ribeiro Gomes J(1), Cruz MR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Antonio Ermirio de Moraes Oncology Center, São Paulo-Brazil.

Tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) targeting the epidermal growth factor receptor 
(EGFR) have shown effectiveness for advanced non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
with activating mutations in the EGFR gene. However, resistance to the EGFR TKIs 
develops mostly secondary to T790M mutation in exon 20. The use of afatinib
associated with cetuximab represents a new possibility of therapy following
progression on gefitinib or erlotinib. We present two patients who acquired
resistance to first-generation TKI and who underwent combination treatment with
afatinib plus cetuximab as third-line therapy. Both patients presented partial
response, and the time duration of disease control was 8 months and 10 months.
The combined use of afatinib plus cetuximab emerges as a new possibility for the 
treatment of patients with advanced NSCLC harboring mutated EGFR after
progression on first-generation EGFR TKIs with consequently acquired resistance
to TKIs. Further studies are necessary to consolidate the data.

DOI: 10.2147/OTT.S75388 
PMCID: PMC4446010
PMID: 26056478  [PubMed]


389. Mol Carcinog. 2016 May;55(5):991-1001. doi: 10.1002/mc.22342. Epub 2015 Jun 4.

Inhibition of IGF1R signaling abrogates resistance to afatinib (BIBW2992) in EGFR
T790M mutant lung cancer cells.

Lee Y(1), Wang Y(1), James M(2), Jeong JH(3), You M(1,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology & Toxicology, Medical College of Wisconsin,
Milwaukee, Wisconsin. (2)Department of Surgery, Medical College of Wisconsin,
Milwaukee, Wisconsin. (3)Department of Dermatology, Medical College of Wisconsin,
Milwaukee, Wisconsin. (4)Cancer Center, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, 
Wisconsin.

Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients with an epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR) mutation have benefited from treatment of reversible EGFR
tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) such as gefitinib and erlotinib. Acquisition of
a secondary mutation in EGFR T790M is the most common mechanism of resistance to 
first generation EGFR TKIs, resulting in therapeutic failure. Afatinib is a
second generation of EGFR TKI that showed great efficacy against tumors bearing
the EGFR T790M mutation, but it failed to show the improvement on overall
survival of lung cancer patients with EGFR mutations possibly because of novel
acquired resistance mechanisms. Currently, there are no therapeutic options
available for lung cancer patients who develop acquired resistance to afatinib.
To identify novel resistance mechanism(s) to afatinib, we developed afatinib
resistant cell lines from a parental human-derived NSCLC cell line, H1975,
harboring both EGFR L858R and T790M mutations. We found that activation of the
insulin-like growth factor 1 receptor (IGF1R) signaling pathway contributes to
afatinib resistance in NSCLC cells harboring the T790M mutation. IGF1R knockdown 
not only significantly sensitizes resistant cells to afatinib, but also induces
apoptosis in afatinib resistance cells. In addition, combination treatment with
afatinib and linsitinib shows more than additive effects on tumor growth in in
vivo H1975 xenograft. Therefore, these finding suggest that IGF1R inhibition or
combination of EGFR-IGF1R inhibition strategies would be potential ways to
prevent or potentiate the effects of current therapeutic options to lung cancer
patients demonstrating resistance to either first or second generation EGFR TKIs.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/mc.22342 
PMID: 26052929  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. Radiat Oncol. 2015 Jun 6;10:127. doi: 10.1186/s13014-015-0431-7.

Increased survival with the combination of stereotactic radiosurgery and
gefitinib for non-small cell lung cancer brain metastasis patients: a nationwide 
study in Taiwan.

Lin CH(1), Hsu KH(2), Chang SN(3), Tsou HK(4), Sheehan J(5), Sheu ML(6), Pan
HC(7,)(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Research, Taichung Veterans General Hospital, Taichung, 
Taiwan. joelin99@gmail.com. (2)Department of Chest Medicine, Taichung Veterans
General Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan. vghryan@gmail.com. (3)Department of Medical
Research, Taichung Veterans General Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan.
shihni@vghtc.gov.tw. (4)Functional Neurosurgery Division, Neurosurgical
Institute, Taichung Veterans General Hospital, 1650 Taiwan Boulevard Sec.4,
40705, Taichung, Taiwan. tsouhsikai@gmail.com. (5)Department of Neurosurgery,
University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, USA. jps2f@hscmail.mcc.virginia.edu.
(6)Institute of Biomedical Sciences, National Chung-Hsing University, Taichung,
Taiwan. mlsheu@nchu.edu.tw. (7)Functional Neurosurgery Division, Neurosurgical
Institute, Taichung Veterans General Hospital, 1650 Taiwan Boulevard Sec.4,
40705, Taichung, Taiwan. hcpan2003@yahoo.com.tw. (8)Faculty of Medicine, School
of Medicine, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan.
hcpan2003@yahoo.com.tw.

PURPOSE: Whole brain irradiation (WBRT) either with or without resection has
historically been the treatment for brain metastases from non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC). The effect of gamma knife (GK) radiosurgery, chemotherapy, or the
combination remains incompletely defined. In this study, we assessed the outcome 
of brain metastases from non-small cell lung cancer treated by WBRT followed by
GK, gefitinib, or the combination of GK and gefitinib.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: We retrieved the records of NSCLC patients with brain
metastases from the National Health Insurance Research Database (NHIRD) of Taiwan
from 2004 to 2010. WBRT either with or without resection was the first line
treatment for nearly all patients. The decision to add GK and/or gefitinib
treatment was at the discretion of the treating physician and based upon a
patient's medical records and imaging data. These patients were classified into
four groups including WBRT, WBRT + gefitinib, WBRT + GK, WBRT + gefitinib + GK.
These data was evaluated for difference in survival and factors that portended an
extended survival from the time of brain metastasis diagnosis.
RESULTS: Of the 60194 patients with newly diagnosed NSCLC, 23874 (39.6 %)
developed brain metastases. The distribution of patients for the groups was WBRT 
for 20241, WBRT + gefitinib for 3379, WBRT + GK for 155, and WBRT+ gefitinib + GK
for 99 patients. The median survival for the time of brain metastasis diagnosis
for WBRT, WBRT+ gefitinib, WBRT+ GK, WBRT+ gefitinib + GK groups was 0.53, 1.01, 
1.46, and 2.25 years, respectively (p < 0.0001). The hazard ratio (95 % CI) for
survival was 1, 0.56, 0.43, and 0.40, respectively (p < 0.001). The adjusted
hazard ratio (95 % CI) by age, sex and Charlson comorbidity index (CCI) was 1,
0.73, 0.49, and 0.42, respectively (p < 0.001).
CONCLUSION: Patients with brain metastases from NSCLC receiving GK or gefitinib
demonstrated extended survival. The improved survival seen with GK and gefitinib 
suggests a survival benefit in selected patients receiving the combined
treatment. Further Phase II study should be conducted to assessment these
influence.

DOI: 10.1186/s13014-015-0431-7 
PMCID: PMC4490645
PMID: 26048754  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol. 2015 Aug;76(2):251-6. doi: 10.1007/s00280-015-2789-5.
Epub 2015 Jun 3.

Impact of body surface area on survival in EGFR-mutant non-small cell lung cancer
patients treated with gefitinib monotherapy: observational study of the Okayama
Lung Cancer Study Group 0703.

Kudo K(1), Hotta K, Ichihara E, Yoshioka H, Kunimasa K, Tsubouchi K, Iwasaku M,
Kato Y, Oze I, Takigawa N, Tanimoto M, Kiura K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Okayama University Hospital, 2-5-1,
Shikata-cho, Kitaku, Okayama, 700-8558, Japan, kudoken19800411@yahoo.co.jp.

BACKGROUND: The approved dose of gefitinib is fixed, without adjustment for
physical size. We demonstrated previously that its efficacy was affected by body 
surface area (BSA) in patients with EGFR-mutant non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC). To validate these observations, we assessed the association between BSA 
and the efficacy of gefitinib using a different patient cohort.
METHODS: Prospective cohort data from 115 NSCLC patients with EGFR-mutant
tumours, who received gefitinib monotherapy between 2007 and 2012, were analysed.
RESULTS: Gefitinib was less effective in individuals with a high BSA (≥1.5 m(2)) 
in EGFR-mutant NSCLC compared with those with a low BSA (<1.5 m(2)). The median
progression-free survival (PFS) in the high- and low-BSA groups was 4.2 and 8.5
months, respectively, although there was no difference in survival among the
whole NSCLC cohort. Multivariate analysis also showed a significant effect of BSA
on PFS (hazard ratio 1.72; 95 % confidence interval 1.08-2.74; p = 0.021).
Sensitivity analysis revealed that the use of the BSA cut-off level around 1.50
m(2) was robust for detecting subpopulations that would benefit less from
gefitinib monotherapy.
CONCLUSION: We found in the prospective cohort data that BSA could affect the
efficacy of gefitinib monotherapy in patients with EGFR-mutant NSCLC, suggesting 
that BSA-based dose setting of gefitinib monotherapy might be further
investigated, despite the fact that no molecular-targeted agent described to date
undergoes dose adjustment according to BSA.

DOI: 10.1007/s00280-015-2789-5 
PMID: 26037206  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. Drug Resist Updat. 2015 May;20:12-28. doi: 10.1016/j.drup.2015.05.002. Epub 2015 
May 12.

Fighting cancer drug resistance: Opportunities and challenges for
mutation-specific EGFR inhibitors.

Juchum M(1), Günther M(1), Laufer SA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical and Medicinal Chemistry, Institute of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Eberhard Karls University Tuebingen, Auf der
Morgenstelle 8, 72076 Tuebingen, Germany. (2)Department of Pharmaceutical and
Medicinal Chemistry, Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Eberhard Karls
University Tuebingen, Auf der Morgenstelle 8, 72076 Tuebingen, Germany.
Electronic address: stefan.laufer@uni-tuebingen.de.

Multiple mutations in the EGFR gene are a major cause for the failure of
Erlotinib and Gefitinib in the treatment of patients harboring non-small-cell
lung cancer (NSCLC) who initially responded to this therapy. The development of
these tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) is going back to the early 90s, where
cancer was widely considered and fully treated as a disease of an organ.
Fundamental gain of knowledge in cell biology in general and cancer genetics in
particular led us to where we currently stand: cancer is a disease that
originates in the genome. Fast and affordable gene sequencing paved the way and
opened our eyes for the genetic instability of many cancers, particularly EGFR
driven NSCLC. This might allow highly rational and personal therapies by aiming
at a very particular wild type and mutant kinase pattern. However, the paradigm
"one disease - one target - one drug" is currently challenged. Both activating
and deactivating EGFR mutations are known to render the development of novel
targeted drugs difficult. Among all lung adenocarcinomas, only 20% are driven by 
EGFR and only a subpopulation has an activating mutation (e.g. L858R), making
them sensitive to first generation EGFR inhibitors. Unfortunately, most of them
acquire second deactivating mutations (e.g. T790M) during treatment, leading to a
complete loss of response. Are specific inhibitors of the double EGFR mutant
L858R/T790M the magic bullet? Much scientific evidence but also high expectations
justify this approach. Structural biology of EGFR mutants constitutes the basis
for highly rational approaches. Second generation pan EGFR inhibitors inhibiting 
wild type (WT) and mutant EGFR like Afatinib suffer from dose-limiting adverse
effects. Inhibition of WT EGFR is considered to be the culprit. Third generation 
EGFR inhibitors follow two strategies. Mutant selectivity and improved target
residential time. These inhibitors display high mutant selectivity and
irreversible binding patterns while sparing WT EGFR activity, hence enhancing
tumor selectivity while minimizing adverse effects. Third generation EGFR
inhibitors are still undergoing preclinical and clinical evaluation. The most
advanced are Rociletinib and AZD9291 which displayed encouraging preliminary
clinical phase II data regarding response and adverse effects. In the current
review we show both a medicinal chemists' approach toward the design of third
generation EGFR inhibitors as well as a detailed overview of the development of
EGFR inhibitors over the last decade. High interdisciplinary approaches, such as 
structural biology and time-resolved tumor genetics pave the way toward the
development of drugs that target EGFR mutants. This might lead to highly
effective targeted and personalized therapies with enhanced response rates for a 
minor cohort of patients which have to undergo continuous gene sequencing, hence 
enabling therapies with tailor-made TKIs.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.drup.2015.05.002 
PMID: 26021435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. Ther Adv Respir Dis. 2015 Oct;9(5):242-50. doi: 10.1177/1753465815587820. Epub
2015 May 27.

Clinical approaches to treat patients with non-small cell lung cancer and
epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor acquired resistance.

Tartarone A(1), Lerose R(2).

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Medical Oncology, Department of Onco-Hematology, IRCCS, Centro di
Riferimento Oncologico della Basilicata, via Padre Pio 1, 85028 Rionero in
Vulture (PZ), Italy tarta1@virgilio.it. (2)Hospital Pharmacy, IRCCS, Centro di
Riferimento Oncologico della Basilicata, Rionero in Vulture (PZ), Italy.

The discovery of epidermal growth factor receptor activating mutations (EGFR
Mut+) has determined a paradigm shift in the treatment of non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC). In several phase III studies, patients with NSCLC EGFR Mut+
achieved a significantly better progression-free survival when treated with a
first- (gefitinib, erlotinib) or second-generation (afatinib) EGFR tyrosine
kinase inhibitor (TKI) compared with standard chemotherapy. However, despite
these impressive results, most patients with NSCLC EGFR Mut+ develop acquired
resistance to TKIs. This review will discuss both the mechanisms of resistance to
TKIs and the therapeutic strategies to overcome resistance, including emerging
data on third-generation TKIs.

© The Author(s), 2015.

DOI: 10.1177/1753465815587820 
PMID: 26016841  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. Ann Transl Med. 2015 May;3(7):96. doi: 10.3978/j.issn.2305-5839.2015.03.60.

The latest therapeutic strategies after resistance to first generation epidermal 
growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors (EGFR TKIs) in patients with
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC).

Xu M(1), Xie Y(1), Ni S(1), Liu H(1).

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Respiratory Medicine, Affiliated Hospital of Nantong
University, Nantong 226001, China ; 2 Department of Pulmonary Disease, Rugao
Traditional Chinese Medicine Hospital, Rugao 226500, China.

First-generation epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors
(EGFR TKIs), gefitinib and erlotinib, produce reliable responses and survival
benefits in selected patients with advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC).
Unfortunately, most patients who initially respond to first-line therapy with
EGFR TKIs will experience disease progression in 1-2 years. To overcome the
resistance of EGFR TKIs, the potent resistance mechanisms and novel therapeutic
strategies have been developed. T790M mutation and activation of bypass signaling
pathway are identified the predominant mechanisms of acquired resistance to TKIs.
Several approaches have shown promise, such as next-generation EGFR TKIs,
immunotherapy, and combinational therapies. And the limited clinical data suggest
that all drugs are acceptable safe. Additionally, this review will also focus on 
the increasingly importance of re-biopsy at the time of disease progression, and 
the matching effective therapies is related to the identification of specific
molecular types of tumors.

DOI: 10.3978/j.issn.2305-5839.2015.03.60 
PMCID: PMC4430733
PMID: 26015938  [PubMed]


395. J Thorac Oncol. 2015 Jun;10(6):903-9. doi: 10.1097/JTO.0000000000000535.

The BIM Deletion Polymorphism and its Clinical Implication in Patients with
EGFR-Mutant Non-Small-Cell Lung Cancer Treated with EGFR Tyrosine Kinase
Inhibitors.

Lee JY(1), Ku BM, Lim SH, Lee MY, Kim H, Kim M, Kim S, Jung HA, Sun JM, Ahn JS,
Park K, Ahn MJ.

Author information: 
(1)*Department of Medicine, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University
School of Medicine, Seoul, South Korea; and †Samsung Biomedical Research
Institute, Samsung Cancer Research Institute, Samsung Medical Center, Seoul,
South Korea.

INTRODUCTION: A germline BIM deletion polymorphism has been proposed to predict
poor treatment response to certain kinase inhibitors. The purpose of this study
was to explore whether the BIM deletion polymorphism predicts treatment efficacy 
of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) in
Korean patients with EGFR-mutant non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC).
METHODS: Peripheral blood samples from a total of 205 patients with EGFR-mutant
NSCLC who were treated with EGFR TKIs between July 2008 and April 2013 were
included. The incidence of BIM deletions in these samples was detected by
polymerase chain reaction. We compared the clinical outcomes in patients with and
without the polymorphism after treatment with EGFR TKIs (gefitinib or erlotinib).
RESULTS: The BIM deletion polymorphism was present in 15.6% (32 of 205) of
patients. One patient was homozygous for the deletion, and the remaining 31 had
heterozygous deletions. The majority of patients were younger than 65 years
(74%), female (68%), never smokers (76%), and had stage IV NSCLC (67%). There
were no associations between the BIM deletion polymorphism and
clinicopathological features including gender, age, smoking status, histology,
stage, and number of metastasis sites. Patients with and without the BIM deletion
polymorphism had similar objective response rates (91 vs. 84%, p = 0.585).
Progression-free survival and overall survival did not differ significantly
between patients with and without the BIM deletion polymorphism (median
progression-free survival 12 vs. 11 months, p = 0.160; median overall survival 31
vs. 30 months, p = 0.452). Multivariate analysis identified significantly
predictive markers for clinical outcomes of EGFR TKIs including Eastern
Cooperative Oncology Group performance status 0-1, adenocarcinoma histology,
recurrent disease, and EGFR mutation type. The results were validated in an
independent cohort of 69 NSCLC patients.
CONCLUSIONS: It remains to be determined whether the BIM deletion polymorphism
provides intrinsic resistance or decreased sensitivity to EGFR TKIs in
EGFR-mutant NSCLC patients.

DOI: 10.1097/JTO.0000000000000535 
PMID: 26001141  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. J Cancer. 2015 May 7;6(6):568-74. doi: 10.7150/jca.11893. eCollection 2015.

Defining the role of tyrosine kinase inhibitors in early stage non-small cell
lung cancer.

Lampaki S(1), Lazaridis G(2), Zarogoulidis K(1), Kioumis I(1), Papaiwannou A(1), 
Tsirgogianni K(1), Karavergou A(1), Tsiouda T(3), Karavasilis V(3), Yarmus L(4), 
Darwiche K(5), Freitag L(5), Sakkas A(6), Kantzeli A(7), Baka S(8),
Hohenforst-Schmidt W(9), Zarogoulidis P(1).

Author information: 
(1)1. Pulmonary Department-Oncology Unit, "G. Papanikolaou" General Hospital,
Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki, Greece. (2)2. Department of
Medical Oncology, "G. Papageorgiou" University Hospital, Thessaloniki, Greece,
Nea Eukarpia. (3)3. Pulmonary Department, "Theageneio Anticancer" Hospital,
Thessaloniki, Greece, Alexander Simeonidi 2. (4)4. Division of Pulmonary and
Critical Care Medicine, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, U.S.A. (5)5.
Department of Interventional Pulmonology, Ruhrlandklinik, University Hospital
Essen, University Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany. (6)6. Department of Internal
Medicine, "Evangelisches Krankenhaus", Mülheim, Germany. (7)7. Department of
Internal Medicine, "Helios Klinikum", Wuppertal, Germany. (8)8. Oncology
Department, "Interbalkan" European Medical Center, Thessaloniki, Greece. (9)9.
Medical Clinic I, ''Fuerth'' Hospital, University of Erlangen, Fuerth, Germany.

Historical, the non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) was as a united disease entity
and the chemotherapy to the metastatic cancer had limited results. Recent studies
for the metastatic non-small cell lung cancer led to the ascertainment that the
NSCLC does not constitute exclusively a disease entity, but different neoplasms
guided from different molecular paths, different biological behavior and at
extension requires different confrontation. Thus the new direction for the
therapeutic approach of NSCLC is henceforth the most individualized approach
based on the activated molecular paths of tumor. Distinct subtypes of NSCLC are
driven by a specific genetic alteration, like EGFR, ALK, ROS1 or BRAF mutations, 
and these genetic alterations are sensitized to the inhibition of specific
oncogenic pathways. The benefit from the use of tyrosine kinase inhibitors in
patients with EGFR mutations it was confirmed by six randomized studies of phase 
III that investigated the role of gefitinib, erlotinib and afatinib. In these
studies the response rates vary in the impressive percentages from 55% to 86% and
were connected with a remarkable median progression free survival of
approximately 8 to 13 months, and with better quality of life compared to that of
chemotherapy. In early stages NSCLC is needed the individualization of systemic
treatment in order to reduce toxicity that is observed in the classic
chemotherapy and to impact outcome. The role of EGFR TKI's has been evaluated in 
the adjuvant chemotherapy in early stage resected NSCLC. The data from these
studies suggest that adjuvant TKI therapy might not increase the overall
survival, but delay the recurrences. Prospective trials restricted to EGFR or ALK
driven NSCLC subsets potentially offering the opportunity for a definitive answer
in early disease adjuvant setting (ALCHEMIST) or as induction treatment before
stage III chemo-radiotherapy (RTOG 1210/Alliance 31101), are ongoing. Ongoing
prospective trials may offer the opportunity for a definitive answer of the role 
of tyrosine kinase inhibitors in induction treatment before chemo-radiotherapy or
in early disease adjuvant therapy.

DOI: 10.7150/jca.11893 
PMCID: PMC4439943
PMID: 26000049  [PubMed]


397. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2015 Jul 17-24;463(1-2):95-101. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.05.030. Epub 2015 May 18.

EGFR-TKI down-regulates PD-L1 in EGFR mutant NSCLC through inhibiting NF-κB.

Lin K(1), Cheng J(1), Yang T(1), Li Y(1), Zhu B(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cancer, Xinqiao Hospital, Third Military Medical University,
Chongqing 400037, China. (2)Institute of Cancer, Xinqiao Hospital, Third Military
Medical University, Chongqing 400037, China. Electronic address:
b.davis.zhu@gmail.com.

Non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is a severe disease threatening human health. 
Targeted therapy of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)-tyrosine kinase
inhibitors (TKIs) has obtained potent efficacy in the treatment of NSCLC
patients. However, the effects of EGFR-TKIs on tumor immune microenvironment are 
unclear. In this study, we show that NSCLCs with EGFR mutation express higher
programmed cell death ligand 1 (PD-L1) than NSCLCs with wild type EGFR. The EGFR 
activation is also associated with high expression of PD-L1. The EGFR-TKI
gefitinib can reduce PD-L1 expression, via inhibiting NF-κB, in EGFR mutant NSCLC
in vitro and in vivo. These findings elucidate a novel anti-tumor mechanism of
EGFR-TKI and provide the possibility of combined strategy of targeted therapy and
immunotherapy for EGFR mutant NSCLC patients.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.05.030 
PMID: 25998384  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. Indian J Dermatol Venereol Leprol. 2015 Sep-Oct;81(5):547. doi:
10.4103/0378-6323.157448.

Cutaneous adverse events of epidermal growth factor receptor inhibitors: A
retrospective review of 99 cases.

Chanprapaph K, Pongcharoen P, Vachiramon V(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Dermatology, Department of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine
Ramathibodi Hospital, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand.

BACKGROUND: Previous reports regarding the cutaneous adverse events of epidermal 
growth factor receptor inhibitors are mostly limited to small case reports and
case series, mainly involving Caucasian patients.
AIMS: We describe the trends in the clinical presentation of Asian patients who
had cutaneous adverse events induced by epidermal growth factor receptor
inhibitors and to explore the relationship between skin adverse events and tumor 
response.
METHODS: From 2006 to 2010, medical records of Thai patients with non-small cell 
lung cancer receiving epidermal growth factor receptor inhibitors were retrieved 
and analyzed.
RESULTS: In all, 99 patients were reviewed and analyzed. Erlotinib and gefitinib 
were commenced in 75 (75.8%) and 24 (24.2%) patients, respectively. Cutaneous
adverse events occurred in 43 (57.3%) patients receiving erlotinib and in 15
(62.5%) patients receiving gefitinib. The most common adverse event was xerosis
(52.5%). Less common adverse events included papulo-pustular eruption (27.3%),
erythematous maculopapular rash (11.1%), mucositis (6.7%), paronychia (5.1%), and
trichomegaly (2%). Elderly patients had a higher occurrence of xerosis. The
presence of cutaneous adverse events was significantly higher in subjects who had
a tumor response.
LIMITATIONS: The limitations of study include its retrospective nature, and the
initial screening of cutaneous adverse events was done by non-dermatologists.
CONCLUSIONS: Cutaneous adverse events due to epidermal growth factor receptor
inhibitors are not uncommon in the Asian population. We found a positive
correlation between the occurrences of cutaneou adverse events and tumor response
supporting the view that they are surrogate markers for therapeutic response.

DOI: 10.4103/0378-6323.157448 
PMID: 25994883  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. Ann Transl Med. 2015 Apr;3(6):81. doi: 10.3978/j.issn.2305-5839.2015.03.44.

Role of mesenchymal-epithelial transition amplification in resistance to
anti-epidermal growth factor receptor agents.

Califano R(1), Morgillo F(1), De Mello RA(1), Mountzios G(1).

Author information: 
(1)1 Cancer Research UK Department of Medical Oncology, The Christie NHS
Foundation Trust, Manchester M20 4BX, UK ; 2 Department of Medical Oncology,
University Hospital of South Manchester NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester M23 9LT,
UK ; 3 Dipartimento di internistica clinica e sperimentale "F. Magrassi e A.
Lanzara", Seconda Università degli studi di Napoli, Naples, Italy ; 4 Department 
of Biomedical Sciences and Medicine, University of Algarve, Faro 8005-139,
Portugal ; 5 Department of Medical Oncology, Portuguese Oncology Institute, Porto
4200-072, Portugal ; 6 University of Athens School of Medicine, Athens, Greece.

All patients with epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutant advanced
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) treated with an EGFR-tyrosine kinase inhibitor
(EGFR-TKI) such as gefitinib, erlotinib or afatinib will progress after a median 
of 9-12 months. So far, development of a secondary T790M mutation represents the 
most common (approximately 60%) mechanism of resistance to these drugs. The
relative rarity of mesenchymal-epithelial transition (MET) amplification in NSCLC
suggests that this event plays a limited role in primary resistance to EGFR-TKI. 
In contrast, MET gene amplification has been detected as a secondary event
representing one of the most relevant mechanisms involved in the acquired
resistance to EGFR-TKIs both in preclinical and clinical studies. The aim of this
review is to discuss the role of MET amplification as a mechanism of resistance
to anti-EGFR therapies and to review strategies which aim at overcoming this
mechanism of resistance, including studies assessing drug combinations targeting 
both EGFR and MET pathways.

DOI: 10.3978/j.issn.2305-5839.2015.03.44 
PMCID: PMC4416951
PMID: 25992380  [PubMed]


400. Clin Transl Oncol. 2015 Sep;17(9):702-9. doi: 10.1007/s12094-015-1297-8. Epub
2015 May 20.

Efficacy of platinum combination chemotherapy after first-line gefitinib
treatment in non-small cell lung cancer patients harboring sensitive EGFR
mutations.

Masuda T(1), Imai H, Kuwako T, Miura Y, Yoshino R, Kaira K, Shimizu K, Sunaga N, 
Tomizawa Y, Ishihara S, Mogi A, Hisada T, Minato K, Takise A, Saito R, Yamada M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Molecular Science, Gunma University Graduate School
of Medicine, 3-39-15, Showa-machi, Maebashi, Gunma, 371-8511, Japan.

PURPOSE: Gefitinib is an effective first-line chemotherapy for advanced non-small
cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients harboring sensitive EGFR mutations. However,
whether second-line platinum combination chemotherapy after first-line gefitinib 
treatment shows similar effects to first-line platinum combination chemotherapy
in these patients remains unclear. Therefore, we here aimed to investigate the
efficacy of platinum combination chemotherapy after first-line gefitinib
treatment in NSCLC patients harboring sensitive EGFR mutations.
METHODS/PATIENTS: We retrospectively evaluated the clinical effects of
second-line platinum combination chemotherapy after first-line gefitinib
treatment in NSCLC patients harboring sensitive EGFR mutations (exon 19 deletion 
or exon 21 L858R mutation) at five institutions. All patients were initially
treated with gefitinib (250 mg/day) followed by platinum combination chemotherapy
as second-line chemotherapy.
RESULTS: Between January 2006 and December 2012, 42 patients [8 men, 34 women;
median age, 63 years (range 39-75 years)] were enrolled. The overall response
rate, disease control rate, and median progression-free survival (PFS) were 26.2,
61.9%, and 5.1 months, respectively, after the second-line treatment. The
corresponding values for first-line gefitinib treatment were 69.0, 95.2%, and
11.1 months, respectively. Moreover, second-line platinum combination
chemotherapy with pemetrexed or bevacizumab-containing regimens was independently
associated with improved PFS.
CONCLUSIONS: Second-line platinum combination chemotherapy after first-line
gefitinib treatment in NSCLC patients harboring sensitive EGFR mutations was
effective and showed equivalent outcomes to first-line platinum combination
chemotherapy. After failure of first-line gefitinib therapy, second-line platinum
combination chemotherapy with pemetrexed or bevacizumab might result in improved 
PFS.

DOI: 10.1007/s12094-015-1297-8 
PMID: 25990507  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. Phytomedicine. 2015 May 15;22(5):560-7. doi: 10.1016/j.phymed.2015.03.001. Epub
2015 Mar 27.

Marsdenia tenacissima extract enhances gefitinib efficacy in non-small cell lung 
cancer xenografts.

Han SY(1), Zhao W(2), Sun H(3), Zhou N(3), Zhou F(3), An G(4), Li PP(5).

Author information: 
(1)Key laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Translational Research (Ministry of
Education), Peking University Cancer Hospital & Institute, Beijing 100142, PR
China; Department of Integration of Chinese and Western Medicine, Peking
University School of Oncology, Beijing 100142, PR China. Electronic address:
shuyanhan@126.com. (2)Key laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Translational Research
(Ministry of Education), Peking University Cancer Hospital & Institute, Beijing
100142, PR China; Department of Cell Biology, Peking University Cancer Hospital &
Institute, Beijing 100142, PR China. (3)Key laboratory of Carcinogenesis and
Translational Research (Ministry of Education), Peking University Cancer Hospital
& Institute, Beijing 100142, PR China; Department of Integration of Chinese and
Western Medicine, Peking University School of Oncology, Beijing 100142, PR China.
(4)Key laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Translational Research (Ministry of
Education), Peking University Cancer Hospital & Institute, Beijing 100142, PR
China; Laboratory Animal Unit, Peking University Cancer Hospital & Institute,
Beijing 100142, PR China. (5)Key laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Translational
Research (Ministry of Education), Peking University Cancer Hospital & Institute, 
Beijing 100142, PR China; Department of Integration of Chinese and Western
Medicine, Peking University School of Oncology, Beijing 100142, PR China.
Electronic address: lppma123@sina.com.

PURPOSE: The stem of Marsdenia tenacissima (Roxb.) Wight et Arn. has long been
used as a medicine to treat cancer in China. Our previous in vitro results showed
that Marsdenia tenacissima extract (MTE) overcomes gefitinib resistance in
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cells. However, it is unknown whether MTE
could enhance gefitinib efficacy in vivo. The present study was intended to
investigate the in vivo anti-tumour activity of MTE combined with gefitinib.
METHODS: Human NSCLC H460 (K-ras mutation) or H1975 cells (EGFR T790M mutation)
were subcutaneously inoculated into nude mice. Tumour volume and body weight were
measured regularly. Resected tumours were weighed after the animals were
sacrificed. Immunoblotting or immunohistochemistry was used to assess the
cellular proliferation and apoptosis in xenograft tumour tissue. Expression of
the EGFR downstream pathways and c-Met were measured with western blot analysis
to explore possible mechanisms.
RESULTS: MTE (5, 10, 20 g/kg) dose-dependently reduced tumour growth and induced 
cell apoptosis. MTE suppressed EGFR related signals, and 20 g/kg was the most
effective dose. Low-dose MTE (5 g/kg) significantly enhanced gefitinib efficacy
in resistant H460 and H1975 xenografts. The combination inhibited tumour
proliferation and induced cell apoptosis in both resistant NSCLC xenografts.
Constitutive activation of the PI3K/Akt and MEK/ERK pathways is related to
EGFR-TKI resistance. Accordingly, phosphorylation of PI3K/Akt/mTOR and ERK1/2 was
suppressed after combination treatment. Simultaneously, cross-talked c-Met and
EGFR were also prominently lowered in the presence of MTE combined with
gefitinib.
CONCLUSION: The present results suggest that the combination of MTE and gefitinib
may be a promising therapeutic approach to enhance gefitinib efficacy in
resistant NSCLC.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.phymed.2015.03.001 
PMID: 25981922  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2015 Aug 15;287(1):17-25. doi:
10.1016/j.taap.2015.05.001. Epub 2015 May 14.

Combined effects of EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors and vATPase inhibitors in
NSCLC cells.

Jin HO(1), Hong SE(2), Kim CS(3), Park JA(1), Kim JH(1), Kim JY(1), Kim B(1),
Chang YH(4), Hong SI(4), Hong YJ(4), Park IC(5), Lee JK(6).

Author information: 
(1)KIRAMS Radiation Biobank, Korea Institute of Radiological and Medical
Sciences, 75 Nowon-ro, Nowon-gu, Seoul, 139-706, Republic of Korea. (2)Division
of Radiation Cancer Research, Korea Institute of Radiological and Medical
Sciences, 75 Nowon-ro, Nowon-gu, Seoul, 139-706, Republic of Korea. (3)Department
of Microbiological Engineering, Kon-Kuk University, 120 Neungdong-ro,
Gwangjin-gu, Seoul, 143-701, Republic of Korea. (4)Department of Laboratory
Medicine, Korea Cancer Center Hospital, Korea Institute of Radiological and
Medical Sciences, 75 Nowon-ro, Nowon-gu, Seoul, 139-706, Republic of Korea.
(5)Division of Radiation Cancer Research, Korea Institute of Radiological and
Medical Sciences, 75 Nowon-ro, Nowon-gu, Seoul, 139-706, Republic of Korea.
Electronic address: parkic@kirams.re.kr. (6)KIRAMS Radiation Biobank, Korea
Institute of Radiological and Medical Sciences, 75 Nowon-ro, Nowon-gu, Seoul,
139-706, Republic of Korea; Department of Laboratory Medicine, Korea Cancer
Center Hospital, Korea Institute of Radiological and Medical Sciences, 75
Nowon-ro, Nowon-gu, Seoul, 139-706, Republic of Korea. Electronic address:
jklee@kirams.re.kr.

Despite excellent initial clinical responses of non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC) patients to epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase
inhibitors (TKIs), many patients eventually develop resistance. According to a
recent report, vacuolar H+ ATPase (vATPase) is overexpressed and is associated
with chemotherapy drug resistance in NSCLC. We investigated the combined effects 
of EGFR TKIs and vATPase inhibitors and their underlying mechanisms in the
regulation of NSCLC cell death. We found that combined treatment with EGFR TKIs
(erlotinib, gefitinib, or lapatinib) and vATPase inhibitors (bafilomycin A1 or
concanamycin A) enhanced synergistic cell death compared to treatments with each 
drug alone. Treatment with bafilomycin A1 or concanamycin A led to the induction 
of Bnip3 expression in an Hif-1α dependent manner. Knock-down of Hif-1α or Bnip3 
by siRNA further enhanced cell death induced by bafilomycin A1, suggesting that
Hif-1α/Bnip3 induction promoted resistance to cell death induced by the vATPase
inhibitors. EGFR TKIs suppressed Hif-1α and Bnip3 expression induced by the
vATPase inhibitors, suggesting that they enhanced the sensitivity of the cells to
these inhibitors by decreasing Hif-1α/Bnip3 expression. Taken together, we
conclude that EGFR TKIs enhance the sensitivity of NSCLC cells to vATPase
inhibitors by decreasing Hif-1α/Bnip3 expression. We suggest that combined
treatment with EGFR TKIs and vATPase inhibitors is potentially effective for the 
treatment of NSCLC.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.taap.2015.05.001 
PMID: 25981168  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Clin Cancer Res. 2015 May 15;21(10):2221-6. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-14-3154.

EGFR: The Paradigm of an Oncogene-Driven Lung Cancer.

Riely GJ(1), Yu HA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Thoracic Oncology Service, Department of Medicine, Memorial Sloan Kettering
Cancer Center, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, New York.
rielyg@mskcc.org. (2)Thoracic Oncology Service, Department of Medicine, Memorial 
Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, New York.

Somatic, activating mutations in EGFR identify a significant minority of patients
with non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Although these mutations are associated 
with an approximately 70% response rate to some EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors
(gefitinib, erlotinib, and afatinib), patients develop resistance (i.e.,
"acquired resistance") after a median of 9 to 12 months. In patients with
clinical acquired resistance, repeat biopsy of tumors has identified a number of 
relevant mechanisms of resistance, but by far the most frequent event is the
acquisition of EGFR T790M, a mutation in the "gatekeeper" residue that confers
resistance to gefitinib, erlotinib, and afatinib. This emphasizes the critical
dependence upon EGFR signaling for some tumors, a property that has been
exploited therapeutically. Dual EGFR blockade using afatinib and cetuximab led to
a 29% radiographic response rate. More recently, drugs that target EGFR T790M
(e.g., rociletinib, AZD9291, and others) have entered clinical trials, with
impressive results observed in phase I clinical trials. The development of these 
newer drugs, with efficacy after resistance to first-line EGFR tyrosine kinase
inhibitor, has led to exploration of these strategies in multiple disease
settings: at resistance, in the first line, and in adjuvant treatment of those
with completely resected early-stage disease who would otherwise die of
recurrent/metastatic disease. This example of translational research that
identifies mechanisms of resistance to first-generation drugs, and then targets
those mechanisms yielding clinical benefit, is a paradigm for how targeted
therapies can be developed.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-14-3154 
PMCID: PMC4435716
PMID: 25979928  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. Clin Lung Cancer. 2015 Sep;16(5):e55-66. doi: 10.1016/j.cllc.2015.03.006. Epub
2015 Apr 2.

Autophagy Inhibition Overcomes the Antagonistic Effect Between Gefitinib and
Cisplatin in Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor Mutant Non--Small-Cell Lung Cancer 
Cells.

Liu JT(1), Li WC(1), Gao S(1), Wang F(1), Li XQ(1), Yu HQ(1), Fan LL(1), Wei
W(2), Wang H(1), Sun GP(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, First Affiliated Hospital of Anhui Medical University,
Hefei, China. (2)Institute of Clinical Pharmacology, Anhui Medical University,
Hefei, China. (3)Department of Oncology, First Affiliated Hospital of Anhui
Medical University, Hefei, China. Electronic address: sungp@ahmu.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: Four large clinical trials have shown that concurrent administration 
of an epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI),
such as gefitinib or erlotinib, with chemotherapy agents does not improve overall
survival (OS) in unselected patients with advanced non-small-cell lung cancer
(NSCLC). In the present study, the role of autophagy in the combination of
gefitinib and cisplatin on EGFR-TKI-sensitive human lung cancer cell line was
investigated. Moreover, whether simultaneous autophagy inhibition treatment
increases the antitumor activity was explored.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The PC9 cell was exposed to either gefitinib or cisplatin 
alone or together. Cell viability was measured using the
3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide assay. The cytotoxic
interaction between gefitinib and cisplatin was determined using coefficient of
drug interaction (CDI) analysis. The cell cycle distribution and apoptosis were
measured using flow cytometry. Alterations in the autophagy and apoptosis
signaling pathway were measured using Western blot assays.
RESULTS: Coadministration of gefitinib and cisplatin resulted in antagonistic
activity to tumor cell proliferation. However, the addition of chloroquine (CQ), 
an autophagy inhibitor, overcame the antagonistic effects, as demonstrated by CDI
analysis and Annexin V-FITC/propidium iodide (PI) assays. In addition, gefitinib 
administration led to cell G1 phase arrest, which might have contributed to the
antagonistic activity between gefitinib and cisplatin. However, the addition of
CQ did not deregulate cell cycle arrest, indicating that other mechanisms might
be involved. The Annexin V-FITC/PI assays showed that the addition of CQ
significantly the increased the ratio of apoptosis cells. Also, immunoblotting
assays exhibited increased Bax and decreased Bcl-2, suggesting that autophagy
inhibition by CQ could increase cell apoptosis and thus overcome the antagonistic
effects.
CONCLUSION: The combination of gefitinib with cisplatin generates antagonistic
effects on EGFR-TKI-sensitive cells. However, inhibiting autophagy produces a
synergistic effect, suggesting that gefitinib and cisplatin combined with an
autophagy inhibitor (especially CQ) might be a beneficial strategy to overcome
the antagonistic effects between EGFR-TKIs and chemotherapeutic agents.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cllc.2015.03.006 
PMID: 25979647  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. Cell Biosci. 2015 Feb 5;5:7. doi: 10.1186/2045-3701-5-7. eCollection 2015.

Up-regulation of the Hippo pathway effector TAZ renders lung adenocarcinoma cells
harboring EGFR-T790M mutation resistant to gefitinib.

Xu W(1), Wei Y(2), Wu S(2), Wang Y(2), Wang Z(3), Sun Y(4), Cheng SY(5), Wu J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Geriatrics, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical
University, 300 Guangzhou Road, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210029 China ; Department of
Developmental Genetics, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Nanjing Medical
University, 140 Hanzhong Road, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210029 China. (2)Department of
Geriatrics, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical University, 300
Guangzhou Road, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210029 China. (3)Department of Pathology, The
First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical University, 300 Guangzhou Road,
Nanjing, Jiangsu 210029 China. (4)Origin Biosciences Inc., 5 New Model Road,
Nanjing, Jiangsu 210009 China. (5)Department of Developmental Genetics, School of
Basic Medical Sciences, Nanjing Medical University, 140 Hanzhong Road, Nanjing,
Jiangsu 210029 China.

BACKGROUND: The T790M mutation of epithelial growth factor receptor (EGFR) is a
major cause of the acquired resistance to EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor
(EGFR-TKIs) treatment for lung cancer patients. The Hippo pathway effector, TAZ, 
has emerged as a key player in organ growth and tumorigenesis, including lung
cancer.
RESULTS: In this study, we have discovered high TAZ expression in non-small cell 
lung cancer (NSCLC) cells harboring dual mutation and TAZ depletion sensitized
their response to EGFR-TKIs. Mechanistically, knockdown of TAZ in T790M-induced
resistant cells leaded to reduced anchorage-independent growth in vitro, tumor
formation and resistance to gefitinib in vivo, correlated with
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and suppressed migration and invasion.
Furthermore, we confirmed CTGF and AXL, novel EMT markers and potential
therapeutic targets for overcoming EGFR inhibitor resistance, as directly
transcriptional targets of TAZ.
CONCLUSIONS: Taken together, this study suggests that expression of TAZ is an
intrinsic mechanism of T790M-induced resistance in response to EGFR-TKIs.
Combinational targeting on both EGFR and TAZ may enhance the efficacy of
EGFR-TKIs in acquired resistance of NSCLC.

DOI: 10.1186/2045-3701-5-7 
PMCID: PMC4429831
PMID: 25973173  [PubMed]


406. PLoS One. 2015 May 13;10(5):e0125232. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0125232.
eCollection 2015.

Using the MCF10A/MCF10CA1a Breast Cancer Progression Cell Line Model to
Investigate the Effect of Active, Mutant Forms of EGFR in Breast Cancer
Development and Treatment Using Gefitinib.

Bessette DC(1), Tilch E(1), Seidens T(1), Quinn MC(2), Wiegmans AP(1), Shi W(1), 
Cocciardi S(1), McCart-Reed A(3), Saunus JM(3), Simpson PT(3), Grimmond SM(2),
Lakhani SR(4), Khanna KK(1), Waddell N(5), Al-Ejeh F(1), Chenevix-Trench G(1).

Author information: 
(1)QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia.
(2)Queensland Centre for Medical Genomics, The Institute for Molecular
Bioscience, University of Queensland, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia. (3)QIMR
Berghofer Medical Research Institute, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia; The
University of Queensland, UQ Centre for Clinical Research, Brisbane, Queensland, 
Australia. (4)The University of Queensland, UQ Centre for Clinical Research,
Brisbane, Queensland, Australia; The University of Queensland School of Medicine,
Brisbane, Queensland, Australia; Pathology Queensland, The Royal Brisbane &
Women's Hospital, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia. (5)QIMR Berghofer Medical
Research Institute, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia; Queensland Centre for
Medical Genomics, The Institute for Molecular Bioscience, University of
Queensland, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia.

BACKGROUND: Basal-like and triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) share common
molecular features, poor prognosis and a propensity for metastasis to the brain. 
Amplification of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) occurs in ~50% of
basal-like breast cancer, and mutations in the epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR) have been reported in up to ~ 10% of Asian TNBC patients. In non-small
cell lung cancer several different mutations in the EGFR tyrosine kinase domain
confer sensitivity to receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors, but the tumourigenic
potential of EGFR mutations in breast cells and their potential for targeted
therapy is unknown.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Constructs containing wild type, G719S or E746-A750
deletion mutant forms of EGFR were transfected into the MCF10A breast cells and
their tumorigenic derivative, MCF10CA1a. The effects of EGFR over-expression and 
mutation on proliferation, migration, invasion, response to gefitinib, and tumour
formation in vivo was investigated. Copy number analysis and whole exome
sequencing of the MCF10A and MCF10CA1a cell lines were also performed.
RESULTS: Mutant EGFR increased MCF10A and MCF10CA1a proliferation and MCF10A
gefitinib sensitivity. The EGFR-E746-A750 deletion increased MCF10CA1a cell
migration and invasion, and greatly increased MCF10CA1a xenograft tumour
formation and growth. Compared to MCF10A cells, MCF10CA1a cells exhibited large
regions of gain on chromosomes 3 and 9, deletion on chromosome 7, and mutations
in many genes implicated in cancer.
CONCLUSIONS: Mutant EGFR enhances the oncogenic properties of MCF10A cell line,
and increases sensitivity to gefitinib. Although the addition of EGFR E746-A750
renders the MCF10CA1a cells more tumourigenic in vivo it is not accompanied by
increased gefitinib sensitivity, perhaps due to additional mutations, including
the PIK3CA H1047R mutation, that the MCF10CA1a cell line has acquired. Screening 
TNBC/basal-like breast cancer for EGFR mutations may prove useful for directing
therapy but, as in non-small cell lung cancer, accompanying mutations in PIK3CA
may confer gefitinib resistance.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0125232 
PMCID: PMC4430383
PMID: 25969993  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. J Proteome Res. 2015 Jun 5;14(6):2617-25. doi: 10.1021/acs.jproteome.5b00161.
Epub 2015 May 26.

Chemical Proteomics Uncovers EPHA2 as a Mechanism of Acquired Resistance to Small
Molecule EGFR Kinase Inhibition.

Koch H, Busto ME, Kramer K, Médard G, Kuster B(1).

Author information: 
(1)¶Center for Integrated Protein Science Munich, 81377 Munich, Germany.

Tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) have become an important therapeutic option for
treating several forms of cancer. Gefitinib, an inhibitor of the epidermal growth
factor receptor (EGFR), is in clinical use for treating non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC) harboring activating EGFR mutations. However, despite high initial
response rates, many patients develop resistance to gefitinib. The molecular
mechanisms of TKI resistance often remain unclear. Here, we describe a chemical
proteomic approach comprising kinase affinity purification (kinobeads) and
quantitative mass spectrometry for the identification of kinase inhibitor
resistance mechanisms in cancer cells. We identified the previously described
amplification of MET and found EPHA2 to be more than 10-fold overexpressed (p <
0.001) in gefitinib-resistant HCC827 cells suggesting a potential role in
developing resistance. siRNA-mediated EPHA2 knock-down or treating cells with the
multikinase inhibitor dasatinib restored sensitivity to gefitinib. Of all
dasatinib targets, EPHA2 exhibited the most drastic effect (p < 0.001). In
addition, EPHA2 knockdown or ephrin-A1 treatment of resistant cells decreased FAK
phosphorylation and cell migration. These findings confirm EPHA2 as an actionable
drug target, provide a rational basis for drug combination approaches, and
indicate that chemical proteomics is broadly applicable for the discovery of
kinase inhibitor resistance.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.jproteome.5b00161 
PMID: 25963923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. Oncogene. 2016 Feb 18;35(7):878-86. doi: 10.1038/onc.2015.142. Epub 2015 May 11.

Anti-HER3 monoclonal antibody patritumab sensitizes refractory non-small cell
lung cancer to the epidermal growth factor receptor inhibitor erlotinib.

Yonesaka K(1), Hirotani K(2), Kawakami H(1), Takeda M(1), Kaneda H(1), Sakai
K(3), Okamoto I(4), Nishio K(3), Jänne PA(5,)(6,)(7), Nakagawa K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Kinki University School of Medicine, Osaka,
Japan. (2)Daiichi-Sankyo Pharmaceutical Development, Tokyo, Japan. (3)Department 
of Genome Biology, Kinki University School of Medicine, Osaka, Japan. (4)Center
for Clinical and Translational Research, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan.
(5)Lowe Center for Thoracic Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. (6)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber
Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. (7)Department of
Medicine, Brigham Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.

Human epidermal growth factor receptor (HER) 3 is aberrantly overexpressed and
correlates with poor prognosis in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Patritumab 
is a monoclonal antibody against HER3 that has shown promising results in
early-phase clinical trials, but an optimal target population for the drug has
yet to be identified. In the present study, we examined whether heregulin, a HER3
ligand that is also overexpressed in a subset of NSCLC, can be used as a
biomarker to predict the antitumorigenic efficacy of patritumab and whether the
drug can overcome the epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor 
(EGFR TKI) resistance induced by heregulin. Patritumab sensitivity was associated
with heregulin expression, which, when abolished, resulted in the loss of HER3
and AKT activation and growth arrest. Furthermore, heregulin overexpression
induced EGFR TKI resistance in NSCLC cells harbouring an activating EGFR
mutation, while HER3 and AKT activation was maintained in the presence of
erlotinib in heregulin-overexpressing, EGFR-mutant NSCLC cells. Sustained
HER3-AKT activation was blocked by combining erlotinib with either anti-HER2 or
anti-HER3 antibody. Notably, heregulin was upregulated in tissue samples from an 
NSCLC patient who had an activating EGFR mutation but was resistant to the TKI
gefitinib. These results indicate that patritumab can overcome
heregulin-dependent EGFR inhibitor resistance in NSCLC in vitro and in vivo and
suggest that it can be used in combination with EGFR TKIs to treat a subset of
heregulin-overexpressing NSCLC patients.

DOI: 10.1038/onc.2015.142 
PMID: 25961915  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. Cancer Cell Int. 2015 Apr 19;15:43. doi: 10.1186/s12935-015-0191-3. eCollection
2015.

Impact of ABCG2 polymorphisms on the clinical outcome of TKIs therapy in Chinese 
advanced non-small-cell lung cancer patients.

Chen X(1), Chen D(1), Yang S(1), Ma R(1), Pan Y(1), Li X(1), Ma S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Nanjing Medical University, Affiliated
Hangzhou Hospital(Hangzhou First People's Hospital), 261 Huansha Road, Hangzhou, 
Zhejiang Province 310006 China.

OBJECTIVE: The primary purpose of this study was to investigate the correlation
between single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of ATP binding cassette
superfamily G member 2 (ABCG2) and outcome of tyrosine kinase inhibitions (TKIs) 
therapy in Chinese advanced non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients. The
secondary objective was to identify biomarkers to evaluate the response to
treatment and outcome of the targeted therapy.
METHODS: SNP genotyping (34 G/A, 421 C/A, 1143 C/T and -15622 C/T) of ABCG2 gene 
in 100 patients was performed using matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization
time-of-flight mass spectrometry. The clinical characteristics of 100 patients
were collected. A total of 70 patients were treated with TKIs (gefitinib,
erlotinib and icotinib). The association between ABCG2 polymorphisms and clinical
characteristics was evaluated. Kaplan-Meier survival curves were plotted for
overall survival (OS) and analyzed with the log-rank test.
RESULTS: The three polymorphisms of the ABCG2 34 G/A, 421 C/A and 1143 C/T
occurred more frequently compared with -15622 C/T in Chinese advanced NSCLC
patients. There was no association between ABCG2 polymorphisms and clinical
characteristics (p > 0.05). The median OS of patients with GG genotype at
position 34 of the ABCG2 gene was significantly shorter than those with GA or AA 
genotype (p < 0.05). No significant difference of OS was found in 421 C/A and
1143 C/T polymorphisms (p > 0.05).
CONCLUSION: ABCG2 34 G/A may be a possible predictor of the clinical outcome of
TKIs therapy in NSCLC patients.

DOI: 10.1186/s12935-015-0191-3 
PMCID: PMC4425882
PMID: 25960692  [PubMed]


410. Int J Clin Oncol. 2015 Dec;20(6):1122-9. doi: 10.1007/s10147-015-0838-z. Epub
2015 May 8.

Gefitinib treatment in patients with postoperative recurrent non-small-cell lung 
cancer harboring epidermal growth factor receptor gene mutations.

Yokoyama Y(1), Sonobe M(2), Yamada T(1), Sato M(1), Menju T(1), Aoyama A(1), Sato
T(1), Chen F(1), Omasa M(1), Date H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Kyoto University Hospital,
Shogoin-Kawahara-cho 54, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto, 606-8507, Japan. (2)Department of
Thoracic Surgery, Kyoto University Hospital, Shogoin-Kawahara-cho 54, Sakyo-ku,
Kyoto, 606-8507, Japan. mysonobe@kuhp.kyoto-u.ac.jp.

BACKGROUND: The epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase inhibitor
gefitinib is an effective treatment for recurrent or advanced lung cancer
harboring EGFR gene mutations, and has improved progression-free survival in
several clinical trials. However, the effect of gefitinib treatment for recurrent
lung cancers with EGFR gene mutations after complete resection and the influence 
of the timing of such treatment have not been fully elucidated in a practical
setting.
METHODS: We investigated 64 patients (median age: 68 years; men: 22; women: 42;
adenocarcinoma: 61; adenosquamous cell carcinoma: 2; combined large cell
neuroendocrine carcinoma: 1) with recurrent lung cancer after complete resection 
who received gefitinib for the recurrent lesions and in whom the tumors had EGFR 
gene mutations. Progression-free survival, response rate, and safety were
analyzed.
RESULTS: Complete response and partial response were achieved in 2 patients and
in 42 patients, respectively (objective response rate: 69 %). Stable disease was 
obtained in 16 patients, the disease control rate was 94 %, and median
progression-free survival was 16 months. The timing of gefitinib treatment (first
line, second line, or later) and the type of EGFR gene mutation present did not
influence progression-free survival. However, a smaller number of recurrent sites
at the start of gefitinib treatment was linked to better progression-free
survival. Hematologic and nonhematologic toxicities were generally mild, but 1
patient experienced interstitial lung disease.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that gefitinib treatment for recurrent lung
cancer with gene EGFR mutations is a useful option in a practical setting,
irrespective of the timing of such treatment and the type of EGFR gene mutation
present.

DOI: 10.1007/s10147-015-0838-z 
PMID: 25953679  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. Tumori. 2015 Jul 24;101(4):e115-7. doi: 10.5301/tj.5000317.

Primary TKI resistance in advanced non-small cell lung cancer with EGFR mutation:
an open question.

Giuliani J(1), Martelli S, Remo A, Bonetti A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Mater Salutis Hospital, ASL 21 della Regione Veneto,
Legnago (Verona) - Italy.

The malignant behavior of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is caused by
different driver mutations, which may include alterations in the epidermal growth
factor receptor (EGFR) signaling pathway. Activating mutations in exons 19 or 21 
of EGFR in NSCLC are associated with increased sensitivity to EGFR tyrosine
kinase inhibitors (TKIs) such as gefitinib and erlotinib. However, approximately 
10% of NSCLC patients show primary resistance to TKIs, and the resistance
mechanism is poorly understood. We report the case of a 72-year-old nonsmoking
Caucasian woman who underwent pulmonary segmentectomy for right peripheral T1N0M0
NSCLC. The tumor was an adenocarcinoma, with a point mutation in exon 21 of EGFR 
and with negative ALK gene rearrangement. Postoperative CT scan revealed right
pleural effusion and abundant ascites without metastases to parenchymal organs.
After paracentesis with positive cytology for adenocarcinoma, the patient started
therapy with oral gefitinib 250 mg/day. CT scan after 2 months revealed disease
progression with an increase in the pleural effusion (right and left) and
ascites, as well as the appearance of solid tissue involving the right main
bronchus and bronchus intermedius. Gefitinib was stopped and the patient died 1
month later of progressive NSCLC. The peculiarities of our case are the site of
the metastatic disease and the complete lack of a response to gefitinib in a
patient with an activating mutation in EGFR exon 21.

DOI: 10.5301/tj.5000317 
PMID: 25953440  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. Onco Targets Ther. 2015 Apr 20;8:893-8. doi: 10.2147/OTT.S81837. eCollection
2015.

Comparison of single-agent chemotherapy and targeted therapy to first-line
treatment in patients aged 80 years and older with advanced non-small-cell lung
cancer.

Zhang Q(1), Wang Z(2), Guo J(2), Liu L(2), Han X(2), Li M(1), Fang S(1), Bi X(1),
Tang N(1), Liu Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Medicine and Life Sciences, Shandong Academy of Medical Sciences,
University of Jinan, People's Republic of China. (2)Department of Oncology,
Shandong Cancer Hospital, Jinan, People's Republic of China.

PURPOSE: The aim of this study was to compare single-agent chemotherapy with
targeted therapy in initial treatment and to explore a better choice of treatment
for patients aged 80 years and older with advanced non-small-cell lung cancer
(NSCLC).
PATIENTS AND METHODS: A retrospective chart review was conducted for 136 patients
aged 80 years and older who were cytopathologically diagnosed and staged as
advanced (stage IIIB or IV) NSCLC. The patient population was divided into two
treatment groups: 78 patients were allocated to the chemotherapy group (group A, 
pemetrexed or gemcitabine or docetaxel as a single agent), and 60 patients were
allocated to another group and received epidermal growth factor-receptor
tyrosine-kinase inhibitors (group B, erlotinib or gefitinib as a single agent).
The primary end points were overall survival (OS) and progression-free survival
(PFS), and the secondary end points were response rate, disease-control rate,
safety, and quality of life.
RESULTS: In group A and group B, respectively, the median PFS was 2 versus 4
months (P=0.013), and the median OS was 8 versus 16 months (P=0.025). The 1- and 
2-year survival rates of the two groups were 23.7% (group A, 18 of 76) versus
76.7% (group B, 46 of 60) and 13.2% (group A, ten of 76) versus 10% (group B, six
of 60), respectively. The response rate and disease-control rate were 28.9%
versus 36.7% (P=0.39) and 57.9% versus 76.7% (P=0.022) in group A and group B,
respectively.
CONCLUSION: Elders aged 80 years and over with advanced NSCLC in group B had
longer PFS and OS compared with group A. It was well tolerated in group B because
of the mild adverse effects. Targeted therapy can be considered primarily for
patients aged 80 years and older with advanced NSCLC who cannot tolerate
chemotherapy or radiotherapy.

DOI: 10.2147/OTT.S81837 
PMCID: PMC4408957
PMID: 25945061  [PubMed]


413. Cancer Res Treat. 2015 Oct;47(4):549-54. doi: 10.4143/crt.2014.362. Epub 2015 Apr
29.

Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor Mutation Status in the Treatment of Non-small
Cell Lung Cancer: Lessons Learned.

Lee DH(1), Srimuninnimit V(2), Cheng R(3), Wang X(4), Orlando M(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Asan Medical Center, Seoul, Korea. (2)Siriraj
Hospital, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand. (3)Eli Lilly and Company,
Taipei, Taiwan. (4)Eli Lilly and Company, Shanghai, China. (5)Eli Lilly
Interamerica Inc., Buenos Aires, Argentina.

Advances in oncology research have led to identification of tumor-specific
biomarkers, some of which are important predictive indicators and ideal targets
for novel therapeutics. One such biomarker in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) 
is the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR). Patients with NSCLC who harbor an
activating EGFR mutation show a more favorable response to treatment with an EGFR
inhibitor, such as gefitinib, erlotinib, or afatinib, than to chemotherapy. The
prevalence of EGFR mutations in East Asian patients is higher than that in other 
populations, and in some clinical settings, patients have been treated with EGFR 
inhibitors based on clinicopathologic characteristics with no information on EGFR
status. However, based on results from a series of studies in which East Asian
patients with advanced non-squamous NSCLC were treated with EGFR inhibitors alone
or in combination with standard chemotherapy, this may not be the best practice
because EGFR mutation status was found to be a key predictor of outcome. Data
from these studies highlight the necessity of EGFR testing in determining the
most suitable treatment for patients with advanced or metastatic NSCLC.

DOI: 10.4143/crt.2014.362 
PMCID: PMC4614211
PMID: 25943319  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. Zhongguo Fei Ai Za Zhi. 2015 Apr;18(4):245-50. doi:
10.3779/j.issn.1009-3419.2015.04.10.

[TKI Resistance for T790M Mutation].

[Article in Chinese; Abstract available in Chinese from the publisher]

Wang H(1), Guo R(1), Zhang L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Deputy Director of Lung Tumor Department, 307 Hospital, Beijing 100071, China.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) the development
of orally activesmall molecule inhibitors for non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) 
provides anew treatment plan. EGFR gene mutation in patients with activation EGFR
tyrosine kinase inhibitor (EGFR-TKIs) therapy for the treatment of sensitive, so 
that a large number of clinical benefit. The first generation of reversible
ATP-competitive EGFR-TKIs, gefitinib and erlotinib as first-line, second-line or 
has the effect of maintenance therapy. Although the initial effect of these drugs
have, but most patients will produce drug resistance. Within a year, 50%-60%
patients had T790M housekeeping gene mutation associated with. Irreversible
EGFR-TKIs recent background: afatinib and dac-omitinib covalent binding and
inhibition of multiple ErbB family receptors (EGFR, HER2 and HER4). People
evaluate these drugs as first-line treatment of significance, and acquired drug
resistance situation significance on the first generation EGFR-TKIs. Afatinib is 
the first ErbB family approved blocking agent, used to treat with EGFR activating
mutations in patients with non small cell lung cancer; dacomitinib are in the
later stages of clinical development. EGFR inhibitors specifically targeting
T790M resistance mutations (AZD9291, CO-1686, HM61713) are in the early stages of
development. As discussed in this paper, the scope of the EGFR-TKIs kinase to
target different, EGFR receptor binding was reversible and drug interaction
potential is also different. For clinicians, these differences of the multi drug 
treatment of patients with non-small cell lung cancer with meaning, from the
innovative anticancer drug combination therapy strategy point of view, these
differences are also of great significance.

Publisher: 表皮生长因子受体（ epidermal growth factor receptor,
EGFR）的口服活性小分子抑制剂的开发为非小细胞肺癌（non-small cell lung cancer,
NSCLC）提供了新的治疗方案。EGFR基因发生激活突变的患者对EGFR酪氨酸激酶抑制剂（epidermal growth factor receptor
tyrosine kinase inhibitors,
EGFR-TKIs）治疗敏感，该疗法使大量患者临床获益。第一代可逆型ATP-竞争型EGFR-TKIs，吉非替尼和厄洛替尼作为一线、二线或维持疗法具有疗效。尽管这些
药物具有初始疗效，但大多数患者在1年内会产生抗药性，50%-60%的患者都与T790M管家基因出现突变有关。新近的不可逆型EGFR-TKIs-阿法替尼和dacom
itinib可共价结合并抑制多个ErbB家族的受体（EGFR、HER2和HER4）。人们主要评价这些药物作为一线治疗的意义，以及在对第一代EGFR-TKIs产生获
得性抗药性情况下的意义。阿法替尼是获批的第一种ErbB家族阻断剂，用于治疗带有EGFR激活突变的NSCLC患者；dacomitinib正处在临床开发的后期阶段。特
异性靶向T790M抗药性突变的EGFR抑制剂（AZD9291、CO-1686、HM61713）正处在早期开发阶段。正如本文中的讨论，EGFR-TKIs靶向的激酶范
围不同，它们结合EGFR受体的可逆性和药物相互作用的潜能也不同。对于临床医生来说，这些差异对经多种药物治疗的NSCLC患者具有意义，从创新型抗癌药物联合治疗策略的
角度看，这些差异也极具意义。.
DOI: 10.3779/j.issn.1009-3419.2015.04.10 
PMID: 25936890  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. J Hematol Oncol. 2015 Apr 29;8:43. doi: 10.1186/s13045-015-0140-6.

The long non-coding RNA, GAS5, enhances gefitinib-induced cell death in innate
EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor-resistant lung adenocarcinoma cells with wide-type
EGFR via downregulation of the IGF-1R expression.

Dong S(1), Qu X(2), Li W(3), Zhong X(4), Li P(5), Yang S(6), Chen X(7), Shao
M(8), Zhang L(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Surgery, First Hospital of China Medical University,
Shenyang, Liaoning Province, 110001, People's Republic of China. dsycmu@163.com. 
(2)Department of Thoracic Surgery, First Hospital of China Medical University,
Shenyang, Liaoning Province, 110001, People's Republic of China.
han_seal@163.com. (3)Department of Thoracic Surgery, First Hospital of China
Medical University, Shenyang, Liaoning Province, 110001, People's Republic of
China. liwenyacmu@163.com. (4)Department of Thoracic Surgery, First Hospital of
China Medical University, Shenyang, Liaoning Province, 110001, People's Republic 
of China. zhongxinwencmu@163.com. (5)Department of Thoracic Surgery, First
Hospital of China Medical University, Shenyang, Liaoning Province, 110001,
People's Republic of China. lipeiwencmu123@163.com. (6)Department of Thoracic
Surgery, First Hospital of China Medical University, Shenyang, Liaoning Province,
110001, People's Republic of China. yangshizecmu@163.com. (7)Department of
Thoracic Surgery, First Hospital of China Medical University, Shenyang, Liaoning 
Province, 110001, People's Republic of China. chenxitaocmu@163.com. (8)Department
of Thoracic Surgery, First Hospital of China Medical University, Shenyang,
Liaoning Province, 110001, People's Republic of China. shaomingruicmu@163.com.
(9)Department of Thoracic Surgery, First Hospital of China Medical University,
Shenyang, Liaoning Province, 110001, People's Republic of China.
zhanglincmu@163.com.

BACKGROUND: Epidermal growth factor receptor-tyrosine kinase inhibitors
(EGFR-TKIs) are approved for patients with recurrent non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC). However, the efficacy of EGFR-TKIs in NSCLC therapy is limited by
primary and acquired resistance. Recent studies have revealed that long
non-coding RNAs (LncRNA) may be involved in EGFR-TKI resistance. Therefore, a
better understanding of the interactive mechanisms underlying LncRNA-mediated
EGFR-TKIs resistance may help us to improve clinical response rates.
METHOD: To investigate the expression of growth arrest-specific 5 (GAS5) in lung 
adenocarcinoma, we performed real-time reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain
reaction. The correlation between GAS5 expression levels and the samples'
clinicopathological features was also analyzed. Primary resistance to EGFR-TKIs
was identified in the human lung adenocarcinoma cell line A549. Plasmid vectors
were used to overexpress GAS5 in A549 cells. MTT
(3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-Yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide) colony formation
assays and EdU (5-ethynyl-2'-deoxyuridine) assays were used to assess cell
proliferation, and flow-cytometric analysis was used to evaluate the apoptosis
rate. The expression levels of our target proteins, namely, EGFR, p-EGFR, ERK,
p-ERK, Akt, p-Akt, IGF-1R (insulin-like growth factor 1 receptor), and p-IGF-1R, 
were analyzed by western blotting. A549 cells transfected with pcDNA-GAS5 were
injected into nude mice. The transplanted mice were treated with gefitinib to
study the effect of GAS5 on the resistance to EGFR-TKIs in vivo.
RESULTS: Our results showed that GAS5 was significantly downregulated in lung
adenocarcinoma tissues compared with the paired adjacent non-tumorous tissue
samples. Furthermore, lower GAS5 expression levels were associated with larger
tumor sizes, poor tumor differentiation, and advanced pathological stages.
However, GAS5 was almost equally expressed between benign tumors compared with
the adjacent normal tissues. GAS5 was also overexpressed in EGFR-TKI sensitive
cell lines compared with the resistant cell line. Using MTT, EdU incorporation,
and colony formation assays, we showed that GAS5-expressing A549 cells displayed 
an elevated level of cell death. In addition to its pro-apoptotic effect in the
A549 cell line, GAS5 overexpression also suppressed the growth of A549-derived
tumors in nude mice treated with gefitinib. GAS5 overexpression was inversely
correlated with the expression of the EGFR pathway and IGF-1R proteins.
CONCLUSIONS: Collectively, our results indicated that GAS5 LncRNA may represent a
potential biomarker for the diagnosis of lung adenocarcinoma and that GAS5 might 
play a novel role in the development of the resistance to gefitinib, which could 
be reversed by overexpressing GAS5.

DOI: 10.1186/s13045-015-0140-6 
PMCID: PMC4419450
PMID: 25925741  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol. 2015 Jun;75(6):1229-36. doi:
10.1007/s00280-015-2740-9. Epub 2015 Apr 23.

A phase II trial of gefitinib monotherapy in pretreated patients with advanced
non-small cell lung cancer not harboring activating EGFR mutations: implications 
of sensitive EGFR mutation test.

Choi MK(1), Hong JY, Chang WJ, Kim MJ, Kim SM, Jung HA, Do IG, Choi YL, Sun JM,
Ahn JS, Park K, Ahn MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Department of Medicine, Samsung Medical
Center, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, 81 Irwon-ro, Gangnam-gu,
Seoul, 135-710, Korea.

PURPOSE: Efficacy of gefitinib therapy strongly depends on epidermal growth
factor receptor (EGFR) mutation status in patients with non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC). However, cumulative data from many clinical studies demonstrated 
that some patients with wild-type (WT) EGFR also responded to gefitinib with
durable disease control rate (DCR). The aim of this trial was to evaluate the
efficacy and toxicity of gefitinib in NSCLC patients with WT EGFR who failed
previous chemotherapy.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Patients with advanced or recurrent NSCLC whose tumors have
WT EGFR were eligible. Gefitinib (250 mg/day) was administered until disease
progression or unacceptable toxicity occurred. The primary end point was DCR at
8 weeks.
RESULTS: A total of 85 patients (53 men and 32 women; median age, 60 years; range
30-86) were enrolled between October 2010 and May 2013. Seventy-four patients
(87.1 %) had adenocarcinoma. Forty-two patients (49.4 %) were treated with
gefitinib as second-line chemotherapy. Eleven patients showed partial response,
and 21 had stable disease. Thus, objective response rate was 12.9 %, and DCR at
8 weeks was 37.6 %. The median progression-free survival (PFS) and overall
survival were 1.9 and 10.9 months, respectively. Skin rash was the most common
side effect. It is of note that patients with skin rash of any grade had improved
PFS with gefitinib as compared with patients experiencing no skin rash (median
PFS: 3.0 vs. 1.7 months, P = 0.004). One patient developed interstitial lung
disease (grade 2). Of 11 gefitinib responders, 6 patients were identified as
having tumor with activating EGFR mutation by peptide nucleic acid (PNA)-mediated
PCR clamping method. Regarding the outcomes of the 79 patients, excluding 6
positive mutations, the response rate was 6.3 %, and DCR at 8 weeks was 31.8 %.
CONCLUSION: Small proportion of NSCLC patients with the WT EGFR benefits with
gefitinib. Optimized diagnosis through more sensitive bioassay could have major
consequences in terms of the selection of candidate for EGFR TKI in patients with
WT EGFR by direct sequencing.

DOI: 10.1007/s00280-015-2740-9 
PMID: 25903122  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. Clin Exp Med. 2016 May;16(2):169-76. doi: 10.1007/s10238-015-0349-2. Epub 2015
Apr 23.

Analysis of KRAS and BRAF genes mutation in the central nervous system metastases
of non-small cell lung cancer.

Nicoś M(1,)(2), Krawczyk P(3), Jarosz B(4), Sawicki M(5), Szumiłło J(6),
Trojanowski T(4), Milanowski J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pneumonology, Oncology and Allergology, Medical University of
Lublin, Jaczewskiego 8, 20-954, Lublin, Poland. marcin_nicos@interia.pl.
(2)Postgraduate School of Molecular Medicine, Medical University of Warsaw,
02-091, Warsaw, Poland. marcin_nicos@interia.pl. (3)Department of Pneumonology,
Oncology and Allergology, Medical University of Lublin, Jaczewskiego 8, 20-954,
Lublin, Poland. (4)Pathological Laboratory, Department of Neurosurgery and
Pediatric Neurosurgery, Medical University of Lublin, 20-954, Lublin, Poland.
(5)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Medical University of Lublin, 20-954, Lublin, 
Poland. (6)Department of Pathomorphology, Medical University of Lublin, 20-954,
Lublin, Poland.

KRAS mutations are associated with tumor resistance to EGFR TKIs (erlotinib,
gefitinib) and to monoclonal antibody against EGFR (cetuximab). Targeted
treatment of mutated RAS patients is still considered as a challenge. Inhibitors 
of c-Met (onartuzumab or tiwantinib) and MEK (selumetinib-a dual inhibitor of
MEK1 and MEK2) signaling pathways showed activity in patients with mutations in
KRAS that can became an effective approach in carriers of such disorders. BRAF
mutation is very rare in patients with NSCLC, and its presence is associated with
sensitivity of tumor cells to BRAF inhibitors (vemurafenib, dabrafenib). In the
present study, the frequency and type of KRAS and BRAF mutation were assessed in 
145 FFPE tissue samples from CNS metastases of NSCLC. In 30 patients, material
from the primary tumor was simultaneously available. Real-time PCR technique with
allele-specific molecular probe (KRAS/BRAF Mutation Analysis Kit, Entrogen, USA) 
was used for molecular tests. KRAS mutations were detected in 21.4 % of CNS
metastatic lesions and in 23.3 % of corresponding primary tumors. Five mutations 
were identified both in primary and in metastatic lesions, while one mutation
only in primary tumor and one mutation only in the metastatic tumor. Most of
mutations were observed in codon 12 of KRAS; however, an individual patient had
diagnosed a rare G13D and Q61R substitutions. KRAS mutations were significantly
more frequent in adenocarcinoma patients and smokers. Additional analysis
indicated one patient with rare coexistence of KRAS and DDR2 mutations. BRAF
mutation was not detected in the examined materials. KRAS frequency appears to be
similar in primary and CNS.

DOI: 10.1007/s10238-015-0349-2 
PMCID: PMC4844634
PMID: 25902737  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. Lung Cancer. 2015 Jun;88(3):275-81. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2015.03.010. Epub 2015
Mar 19.

Phase I study of the HER3-targeted antibody patritumab (U3-1287) combined with
erlotinib in Japanese patients with non-small cell lung cancer.

Nishio M(1), Horiike A(2), Murakami H(3), Yamamoto N(4), Kaneda H(5), Nakagawa
K(6), Horinouchi H(7), Nagashima M(8), Sekiguchi M(9), Tamura T(10).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Medical Oncology, Cancer Institute Hospital, Japanese
Foundation for Cancer Research, 3-8-31 Ariake, Koto-ku, Tokyo 135-8550, Japan.
Electronic address: mnishio@jfcr.or.jp. (2)Department of Thoracic Medical
Oncology, Cancer Institute Hospital, Japanese Foundation for Cancer Research,
3-8-31 Ariake, Koto-ku, Tokyo 135-8550, Japan. Electronic address:
atsushi.horiike@jfcr.or.jp. (3)Division of Thoracic Oncology, Shizuoka Cancer
Center, 1007 Shimonagakubo Nagaizumi-cho, Sunto-gun, Shizuoka 411-8777, Japan.
Electronic address: ha.murakami@scchr.jp. (4)Division of Thoracic Oncology,
Shizuoka Cancer Center, 1007 Shimonagakubo Nagaizumi-cho, Sunto-gun, Shizuoka
411-8777, Japan. Electronic address: nbyamamo@wakayama-med.ac.jp. (5)Department
of Medical Oncology, Kinki University Faculty of Medicine, 377-2 Ohno-higashi,
Osakasayama, Osaka 589-8511, Japan. Electronic address:
kaneda_h@dotd.med.kindai.ac.jp. (6)Department of Medical Oncology, Kinki
University Faculty of Medicine, 377-2 Ohno-higashi, Osakasayama, Osaka 589-8511, 
Japan. Electronic address: nakagawa@med.kindai.ac.jp. (7)Department of Thoracic
Oncology, National Cancer Center Hospital, 5-1-1 Tsukiji, Chuo-ku, Tokyo
104-0045, Japan. Electronic address: hhorinou@ncc.go.jp. (8)Clinical Development 
Department II, Daiichi Sankyo Co., Ltd., 1-2-58 Hiromachi, Shinagawa-ku, Tokyo
140-8710, Japan. Electronic address: nagashima.masaki.ns@daiichisankyo.co.jp.
(9)Clinical Development Department II, Daiichi Sankyo Co., Ltd., 1-2-58
Hiromachi, Shinagawa-ku, Tokyo 140-8710, Japan. Electronic address:
sekiguchi.masaru.f3@daiichisankyo.co.jp. (10)Department of Thoracic Oncology,
National Cancer Center Hospital, 5-1-1 Tsukiji, Chuo-ku, Tokyo 104-0045, Japan.
Electronic address: tamuratomohide@gmail.com.

OBJECTIVES: Human epidermal growth factor receptor 3 (HER3) is a key dimerization
partner for HER family members and is associated with resistance to other HER
family receptor-targeted therapeutics. This study evaluated the safety,
tolerability, pharmacokinetics and efficacy of patritumab (U3-1287), a fully
human anti-HER3 monoclonal antibody, in combination with erlotinib, an epidermal 
growth factor receptor-tyrosine kinase inhibitor in patients with previously
treated advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC).
PATIENTS AND METHODS: This study enrolled patients with stage IIIB/IV NSCLC with 
Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group performance status 0-1, life expectancy >3
months and who had progressed after at least one prior course of chemotherapy
(excluding erlotinib). This open-label study included two parts: dose escalation 
(Part 1) and dose expansion (Part 2). In Part 1, patients received intravenous
patritumab 9 or 18 mg/kg every 3 weeks in addition to per-oral erlotinib 150
mg/day daily. In Part 2, patients received the recommended dose of patritumab as 
determined in Part 1. Adverse event rates, pharmacokinetics and tumor responses
were determined.
RESULTS: Twenty-four Japanese patients received patritumab at 9 mg/kg (n=3) or 18
mg/kg (n=21), and erlotinib. No dose-limiting toxicities were reported,
indicating the maximum-tolerated dose was not reached. The most frequent adverse 
events were gastrointestinal or skin toxicities, which were generally mild and
manageable. Patritumab pharmacokinetics were similar to those reported in
previous studies. The median progression-free survival (95% confidence interval) 
was 44.0 (22.0-133.0) days for the EGFR wild-type group (n=9) and 107.0
(74.0-224.0) days for the EGFR-activating mutation group (n=13). Evaluation of
biomarkers by immunohistochemical analysis did not indicate a relationship
between efficacy and HER3 expression in tumor tissues.
CONCLUSION: Patritumab in combination with erlotinib was well tolerated and the
efficacy of the combination was encouraging, especially in patients where prior
gefitinib treatment failed.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd.. All rights
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2015.03.010 
PMID: 25891541  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. BMC Bioinformatics. 2015 Mar 14;16:85. doi: 10.1186/s12859-015-0522-3.

EGFR Mutant Structural Database: computationally predicted 3D structures and the 
corresponding binding free energies with gefitinib and erlotinib.

Ma L(1), Wang DD(2), Huang Y(3), Yan H(4), Wong MP(5), Lee VH(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Electronic Engineering, City University of Hong Kong, Kowloon,
Hong Kong. lichunma2-c@my.cityu.edu.hk. (2)Department of Electronic Engineering, 
City University of Hong Kong, Kowloon, Hong Kong. danwang6-c@my.cityu.edu.hk.
(3)School of Computer Science and Technology, Soochow University, Suzhou, China. 
149145459@qq.com. (4)Department of Electronic Engineering, City University of
Hong Kong, Kowloon, Hong Kong. h.yan@cityu.edu.hk. (5)Li Ka Sing Faculty of
Medicne, University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong. mwpik@hku.hk. (6)Li Ka
Sing Faculty of Medicne, University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong.
vhflee@hku.hk.

BACKGROUND: Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutation-induced drug
resistance has caused great difficulties in the treatment of non-small-cell lung 
cancer (NSCLC). However, structural information is available for just a few EGFR 
mutants. In this study, we created an EGFR Mutant Structural Database (freely
available at http://bcc.ee.cityu.edu.hk/data/EGFR.html ), including the 3D EGFR
mutant structures and their corresponding binding free energies with two commonly
used inhibitors (gefitinib and erlotinib).
RESULTS: We collected the information of 942 NSCLC patients belonging to 112
mutation types. These mutation types are divided into five groups (insertion,
deletion, duplication, modification and substitution), and substitution accounts 
for 61.61% of the mutation types and 54.14% of all the patients. Among all the
942 patients, 388 cases experienced a mutation at residue site 858 with leucine
replaced by arginine (L858R), making it the most common mutation type. Moreover, 
36 (32.14%) mutation types occur at exon 19, and 419 (44.48%) patients carried a 
mutation at exon 21. In this study, we predicted the EGFR mutant structures using
Rosetta with the collected mutation types. In addition, Amber was employed to
refine the structures followed by calculating the binding free energies of
mutant-drug complexes.
CONCLUSIONS: The EGFR Mutant Structural Database provides resources of 3D
structures and the binding affinity with inhibitors, which can be used by other
researchers to study NSCLC further and by medical doctors as reference for NSCLC 
treatment.

DOI: 10.1186/s12859-015-0522-3 
PMCID: PMC4364680
PMID: 25886721  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. Jpn J Clin Oncol. 2015 Jul;45(7):670-6. doi: 10.1093/jjco/hyv054. Epub 2015 Apr
15.

Efficacy of chemotherapy after first-line gefitinib therapy in EGFR
mutation-positive advanced non-small cell lung cancer-data from a randomized
Phase III study comparing gefitinib with carboplatin plus paclitaxel (NEJ002).

Miyauchi E(1), Inoue A(2), Kobayashi K(3), Maemondo M(4), Sugawara S(5), Oizumi
S(6), Isobe H(7), Gemma A(8), Saijo Y(9), Yoshizawa H(10), Hagiwara K(11), Nukiwa
T(12); North-East Japan Study Group.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Tohoku University Hospital, Sendai.
(2)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Tohoku University Hospital, Sendai
akinoue@idac.tohoku.ac.jp. (3)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Saitama Medical
University Internal Medical Center, Saitama. (4)Department of Respiratory
Medicine, Miyagi Cancer Center, Miyagi. (5)Department of Pulmonary Medicine,
Sendai Kousei Hospital, Sendai. (6)First Department of Medicine, Hokkaido
University School of Medicine, Sapporo. (7)Department of Medical Oncology, KKR
Sapporo Medical Center, Sapporo. (8)Department of Pulmonary Medicine and
Oncology, Graduate School, Nippon Medical School, Tokyo. (9)Department of Medical
Oncology, Niigata University Graduate School of Medical and Dental Sciences,
Niigata. (10)Bioscience Medical Research Center, Niigata University Medical &
Dental Hospital, Niigata. (11)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Saitama Medical
University, Saitama. (12)Department of Respiratory Medicine, South Miyagi Medical
Center, Miyagi, Japan.

Comment in
    Jpn J Clin Oncol. 2015 Jul;45(7):609-10.

OBJECTIVE: Epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors are
effective as first-line therapy for advanced non-small cell lung cancer patients 
harboring epidermal growth factor receptor mutations. However, it is unknown
whether second-line platinum-based chemotherapy after epidermal growth factor
receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor therapy could lead to better outcomes. We
evaluated the efficacy of second-line platinum-based chemotherapy after gefitinib
for advanced non-small cell lung cancers harboring epidermal growth factor
receptor mutations (the NEJ002 study).
METHODS: Seventy-one non-small cell lung cancers, treated with gefitinib as
first-line therapy and then receiving platinum-based chemotherapy as second-line 
therapy were evaluated in NEJ002. Patients were evaluated for antitumor response 
to second-line chemotherapy by computed tomography according to the criteria of
the Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors group (version 1.0).
RESULTS: Of the 71 patients receiving platinum-based chemotherapy after
first-line gefitinib, a partial response was documented in 25.4% (18/71), stable 
disease in 43.7% (31/71) and progression of disease in 21.1% (15/71). The
objective response and disease control rates were 25.4% (18/71) and 69% (49/71), 
respectively. There was no significant difference between first- and second-line 
chemotherapy in objective response and disease control rates for advanced
non-small cell lung cancer harboring activating epidermal growth factor receptor 
mutations. In the analysis of epidermal growth factor receptor mutation types,
the objective responses of deletions in exon 19 and a point mutation in exon 21
(L858R) were 27.3% (9/33) and 28.1% (9/32), respectively, but these differences
between objective response rates were not significant.
CONCLUSIONS: The efficacy of second-line platinum-based chemotherapy followed at 
progression by gefitinib was similar to first-line platinum-based chemotherapy,
and epidermal growth factor receptor mutation types did not influence the
efficacy of second-line platinum-based chemotherapy.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/jjco/hyv054 
PMID: 25877748  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. Trials. 2015 Apr 10;16:146. doi: 10.1186/s13063-015-0685-2.

Fuzheng Kang'ai decoction combined with gefitinib in advanced non-small cell lung
cancer patients with epidermal growth factor receptor mutations: study protocol
for a randomized controlled trial.

Yang XB(1), Wu WY(2), Long SQ(3), Deng H(4), Pan ZQ(5), He WF(6), Zhou YS(7),
Liao GY(8), Li QP(9), Xiao SJ(10), Cai JZ(11).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Guangdong Provincial Hospital of Traditional Chinese
Medicine, No. 111 Dade Road, Guangzhou, Guangdong, 510120, China.
yangxiaobing2002@126.com. (2)Department of Oncology, Guangdong Provincial
Hospital of Traditional Chinese Medicine, No. 111 Dade Road, Guangzhou,
Guangdong, 510120, China. wwanyin@126.com. (3)Department of Oncology, Guangdong
Provincial Hospital of Traditional Chinese Medicine, No. 111 Dade Road,
Guangzhou, Guangdong, 510120, China. thinkinglong@126.com. (4)Department of
Oncology, Guangdong Provincial Hospital of Traditional Chinese Medicine, No. 111 
Dade Road, Guangzhou, Guangdong, 510120, China. denghong163@126.com.
(5)Department of Oncology, Guangdong Provincial Hospital of Traditional Chinese
Medicine, No. 111 Dade Road, Guangzhou, Guangdong, 510120, China. flypzq@126.com.
(6)Department of Oncology, Guangdong Provincial Hospital of Traditional Chinese
Medicine, No. 111 Dade Road, Guangzhou, Guangdong, 510120, China. hwfzll@126.com.
(7)Department of Oncology, Guangdong Provincial Hospital of Traditional Chinese
Medicine, No. 111 Dade Road, Guangzhou, Guangdong, 510120, China.
20387493@qq.com. (8)Department of Oncology, Guangdong Provincial Hospital of
Traditional Chinese Medicine, No. 111 Dade Road, Guangzhou, Guangdong, 510120,
China. liaoguiya_ya@126.com. (9)Department of Oncology, Guangdong Provincial
Hospital of Traditional Chinese Medicine, No. 111 Dade Road, Guangzhou,
Guangdong, 510120, China. liqiupinga@163.com. (10)Department of Oncology,
Guangdong Provincial Hospital of Traditional Chinese Medicine, No. 111 Dade Road,
Guangzhou, Guangdong, 510120, China. shujing-020@163.com. (11)Department of
Oncology, Guangdong Provincial Hospital of Traditional Chinese Medicine, No. 111 
Dade Road, Guangzhou, Guangdong, 510120, China. Caijiaozhi@163.com.

BACKGROUND: Patients with advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) harboring
mutations of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) gene respond well to the
EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) gefitinib. Chinese herbal medicine (CHM) has
been used as a complementary therapy for cancer for decades in China. CHM was
proved to be effective in improving the quality of life (QOL) and reducing the
toxicity associated with chemotherapy in patients with NSCLC. The purpose of the 
present trial is to determine whether CHM (Fuzheng Kang'ai decoction (FZKA), a
CHM formula) combined with gefitinib results in longer progression-free survival 
with less toxicity than gefitinib alone.
METHODS/DESIGN: This is a randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blind trial.
This trial is designed to determine if CHM (FZKA) combined with gefitinib results
in longer progression-free survival with less toxicity than gefitinib alone. A
total of 70 NSCLC patients with EGFR mutations will be randomly assigned to
treatment group (gefitinib plus FZKA granules) or control group (gefitinib plus
placebo). The primary endpoint is progression-free survival. Secondary endpoints 
are: (1) overall survival; (2) disease control rate; (3) QOL, measured with the
questionnaire of Functional Assessment of Cancer Therapy-lung (FACT-L 4.0) and
Lung Cancer Symptom Scale and (4) safety.
DISCUSSION: In previous clinical practice, we found that CHM (FZKA) could improve
the therapeutic efficacy of gefitinib. This study will provide objective evidence
to evaluate the efficiency of CHM combined with gefitinib in NSCLC patients with 
EGFR mutations, and may provide a novel regimen for patients with NSCLC.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: Chinese Clinical Trial Registry ( www.chictr.org ):
ChiCTR-IOR-14005679 , registered 17 December 2014.

DOI: 10.1186/s13063-015-0685-2 
PMCID: PMC4396173
PMID: 25873045  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2015 May 22;461(1):28-34. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.03.162. Epub 2015 Apr 7.

EGFR-independent autophagy induction with gefitinib and enhancement of its
cytotoxic effect by targeting autophagy with clarithromycin in non-small cell
lung cancer cells.

Sugita S(1), Ito K(1), Yamashiro Y(1), Moriya S(1), Che XF(1), Yokoyama T(2),
Hiramoto M(1), Miyazawa K(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Tokyo Medical University, Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Department of Clinical Oncology, Tokyo Medical University, Tokyo, Japan.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, Tokyo Medical University, Tokyo, Japan. Electronic
address: miyazawa@tokyo-med.ac.jp.

Gefitinib (GEF), an inhibitor for EGFR tyrosine kinase, potently induces
autophagy in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cell lines such as PC-9 cells
expressing constitutively activated EGFR kinase by EGFR gene mutation as well as 
A549 and H226 cells with wild-type EGFR. Unexpectedly, GEF-induced autophagy was 
also observed in non-NSCLC cells such as murine embryonic fibroblasts (MEF) and
leukemia cell lines K562 and HL-60 without EGFR expression. Knockout of EGFR gene
in A549 cells by CRISPR/Cas9 system still exhibited autophagy induction after
treatment with GEF, indicating that the autophagy induction by GEF is not
mediated through inhibiting EGFR kinase activity. Combined treatment with GEF and
clarithromycin (CAM), a macrolide antibiotic having the effect of inhibiting
autophagy flux, enhances the cytotoxic effect in NSCLC cell lines, although
treatment with CAM alone exhibits no cytotoxicity. GEF treatment induced
up-regulation of endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-stress related genes such as
CHOP/GADD153 and GRP78. Knockdown of CHOP in PC-9 cells and Chop-knockout MEF
both exhibited less sensitivity to GEF than controls. Addition of CAM in culture 
medium resulted in further pronounced GEF-induced ER stress loading, while CAM
alone exhibited no effect. These data suggest that GEF-induced autophagy
functions as cytoprotective and indicates the potential therapeutic possibility
of using CAM for GEF therapy. Furthermore, it is suggested that the intracellular
signaling for autophagy initiation in response to GEF can be completely
dissociated from EGFR, but unknown target molecule(s) of GEF for autophagy
induction might exist.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.03.162 
PMID: 25858318  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. J Oncol Pharm Pract. 2016 Jun;22(3):461-76. doi: 10.1177/1078155215577810. Epub
2015 Apr 8.

Tyrosine kinase inhibitors for epidermal growth factor receptor gene
mutation-positive non-small cell lung cancers: an update for recent advances in
therapeutics.

Chung C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Hematology/Oncology Clinical Pharmacist Specialist, Lyndon B Johnson General
Hospital, Harris Health System, Houston, TX, USA. clement_t_chung@yahoo.com.

The presence of activating gene mutations in the epidermal growth factor receptor
of non-small cell lung cancer patients is predictive (improved progression-free
survival and improved response rate) when treated with small molecule tyrosine
kinase inhibitors such as gefitinib, erlotinib and afatinib. The two most common 
mutations that account for greater than 85% of all EGFR gene mutations are
in-frame deletions in exon 19 (LREA deletions) and substitution in exon 21
(L858R). Exon 18 mutations occur much less frequently at about 4% of all EGFR
gene mutations. Together, exon 19 deletion and exon 21 L858R gene substitution
are present in about 10% of Caucasian patients and 20-40% of Asian patients with 
non-small cell lung cancer. T790M gene mutation at exon 20 is associated with
acquired resistance to epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase
inhibitors. Early studies showed that activating EGFR gene mutations are most
common in patients with adenocarcinoma histology, women, never smokers and those 
of Asian ethnicity. A recent multi-center phase III trial suggested that
frontline epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor therapy with
afatinib is associated with improved progression-free survival compared to
chemotherapy regardless of race. Moreover, guidelines now suggest EGFR gene
mutation testing should be conducted in all patients with lung adenocarcinoma or 
mixed lung cancers with an adenocarcinoma component, regardless of
characteristics such as smoking status, gender or race. The success of targeted
therapies in non-small cell lung cancer patients has changed the treatment
paradigm in metastatic non-small cell lung cancer. However, despite a durable
response of greater than a year, resistance to epidermal growth factor receptor
tyrosine kinase inhibitors inevitably occurs. This mini-review describes the
clinically relevant EGFR gene mutations and the efficacy/toxicity of small
molecule epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors as targeted 
therapies for these gene mutations. Therapeutic strategies to overcome
resistance, including emerging and novel therapies, are discussed.

© The Author(s) 2015.

DOI: 10.1177/1078155215577810 
PMID: 25855240  [PubMed - in process]


424. J Cancer Prev. 2015 Mar;20(1):57-63. doi: 10.15430/JCP.2015.20.1.57.

Inhibition of Ubiquitin-specific Peptidase 8 Suppresses Growth of
Gefitinib-resistant Non-small Cell Lung Cancer Cells by Inducing Apoptosis.

Jeong CH(1).

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmacy, Keimyung University, Daegu, Korea.

BACKGROUND: Therapeutic approach by treatment with epidermal growth factor
receptor-tyrosine kinase inhibitors (EGFR-TKIs) like gefitinib or erlotinib to
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients has been limited due to emergence of 
acquired drug resistance. Our study was aimed to investigate whether the
inhibition of ubiquitin-specific peptidase 8 (USP8) could be an alternative
strategy capable of overcoming acquired resistance to EGFR-TKIs for treatment of 
NSCLCs.
METHODS: The anticancer effect of USP8 inhibitor was determined by testing
anchorage-dependent or independent growth of gefitinib-sensitive or resistant
NSCLCs. The immunoprecipitation and western blotting were conducted to check
molecular interaction and signaling pathway followed by USP8 inhibition.
RESULTS: Inhibition of USP8 induced overall degradation of oncogenic receptor
tyrosine kinases including EGFR and Met, leading to a suppression of
anchorage-dependent or independent cell growth of gefitinib-sensitive or
resistant NSCLCs. Also, treatment with the USP8 inhibitor markedly induced
apoptosis in HCC827GR cells. Notably, treatment with the USP8 inhibitor was more 
effective in suppressing cell growth and inducing apoptosis in
gefitinib-resistant HCC827GR cells than that of gefitinib-sensitive HCC827 cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Inhibition of USP8 could be an effective strategy for overcoming
gefitinib resistance in NSCLCs.

DOI: 10.15430/JCP.2015.20.1.57 
PMCID: PMC4384715
PMID: 25853104  [PubMed]


425. EJNMMI Res. 2015 Mar 20;5:14. doi: 10.1186/s13550-015-0088-0. eCollection 2015.

A comparative PET imaging study with the reversible and irreversible EGFR
tyrosine kinase inhibitors [(11)C]erlotinib and [(18)F]afatinib in lung
cancer-bearing mice.

Slobbe P(1), Windhorst AD(2), Stigter-van Walsum M(3), Smit EF(4), Niessen HG(5),
Solca F(6), Stehle G(7), van Dongen GA(1), Poot AJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiology and Nuclear Medicine, VU University Medical Center, De
Boelelaan 1117, Amsterdam, 1081 HV The Netherlands ; Department of
Otolaryngology/Head and Neck Surgery, VU University Medical Center, De Boelelaan 
1117, Amsterdam, 1081 HV The Netherlands. (2)Department of Radiology and Nuclear 
Medicine, VU University Medical Center, De Boelelaan 1117, Amsterdam, 1081 HV The
Netherlands. (3)Department of Otolaryngology/Head and Neck Surgery, VU University
Medical Center, De Boelelaan 1117, Amsterdam, 1081 HV The Netherlands.
(4)Department of Pulmonary Diseases, VU University Medical Center, De Boelelaan
1117, Amsterdam, 1081 HV The Netherlands. (5)Department of Translational Medicine
and Clinical Pharmacology, Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma GmbH and Co. KG,
Birkendorfer Straße 65, 88397 Biberach an der Riss, Germany. (6)Department of
Pharmacology and Translational Research, Boehringer Ingelheim GmbH and Co. KG,
Doktor-Boehringer-Gasse 5-11, Vienna, A-1120 Austria. (7)Therapeutic Area
Oncology, Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma GmbH and Co. KG, Birkendorfer Straße 65,
88397 Biberach an der Riss, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) have experienced a tremendous boost
in the last decade, where more than 15 small molecule TKIs have been approved by 
the FDA. Unfortunately, despite their promising clinical successes, a large
portion of patients remain unresponsive to these targeted drugs. For non-small
cell lung cancer (NSCLC), the effectiveness of TKIs is dependent on the
mutational status of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR). The exon 19
deletion as well as the L858R point mutation lead to excellent sensitivity to
TKIs such as erlotinib and gefitinib; however, despite initial good response,
most patients invariably develop resistance against these first-generation
reversible TKIs, e.g., via T790M point mutation. Second-generation TKIs that
irreversibly bind to EGFR wild-type and mutant isoforms have therefore been
developed and one of these candidates, afatinib, has now reached the market.
Whether irreversible TKIs differ from reversible TKIs in their in vivo
tumor-targeting properties is, however, not known and is the subject of the
present study.
METHODS: Erlotinib was labeled with carbon-11 and afatinib with fluorine-18
without modifying the structure of these compounds. A preclinical positron
emission tomography (PET) study was performed in mice bearing NSCLC xenografts
with a representative panel of mutations: an EGFR-WT xenograft cell line (A549), 
an acquired treatment-resistant L858R/T790M mutant (H1975), and a
treatment-sensitive exon 19 deleted mutant (HCC827). PET imaging was performed in
these xenografts with both tracers. Additionally, the effect of drug efflux
transporter permeability glycoprotein (P-gp) on the tumor uptake of tracers was
explored by therapeutic blocking with tariquidar.
RESULTS: Both tracers only demonstrated selective tumor uptake in the HCC827
xenograft line (tumor-to-background ratio, [(11)C]erlotinib 1.9 ± 0.5 and
[(18)F]afatinib 2.3 ± 0.4), thereby showing the ability to distinguish
sensitizing mutations in vivo. No major differences were observed in the kinetics
of the reversible and the irreversible tracers in each of the xenograft models.
Under P-gp blocking conditions, no significant changes in tumor-to-background
ratio were observed; however, [(18)F]afatinib demonstrated better tumor retention
in all xenograft models.
CONCLUSIONS: TKI-PET provides a method to image sensitizing mutations and can be 
a valuable tool to compare the distinguished targeting properties of TKIs in
vivo.

DOI: 10.1186/s13550-015-0088-0 
PMCID: PMC4385286
PMID: 25853020  [PubMed]


426. Case Rep Oncol. 2015 Feb 11;8(1):78-82. doi: 10.1159/000375485.

Pharmacokinetics of gefitinib in a patient with non-small cell lung cancer
undergoing continuous ambulatory peritoneal dialysis.

Yamaguchi T(1), Isogai S(1), Okamura T(1), Uozu S(1), Mieno Y(1), Hoshino T(1),
Goto Y(1), Hayashi M(1), Nakanishi T(1), Imaizumi K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Respiratory Medicine and Clinical Allergy, Department of Internal 
Medicine, Fujita Health University, Toyoake, Japan.

A 72-year-old man undergoing continuous ambulatory peritoneal dialysis (CAPD) for
chronic renal failure and who had undergone right upper lobectomy for lung
adenocarcinoma (pT2aN0M0) 2 years ago was admitted for recurrence of lung cancer 
presenting as multiple brain metastases. An epidermal growth factor receptor
mutation analysis of his lung cancer revealed a deletion of 15 nucleotides
(E746-A750) in exon 19. After whole-brain radiotherapy, we started daily
administration of 250 mg gefitinib under the continuation of CAPD and performed a
pharmacokinetic analysis. We speculated that the plasma concentration of
gefitinib reached the steady state at least by day 16 after the start of
gefitinib (626.6 ng/ml at trough level). On day 46, the plasma concentration was 
538.4 ng/ml at trough level and the concentration in the peritoneal dialysis
fluid was 34.6 ng/ml, suggesting that CAPD appeared to have little effect on the 
pharmacokinetics of gefitinib. During gefitinib therapy, there were no
significant adverse events except for grade 2 diarrhea. Gefitinib could be safely
administered to a patient undergoing CAPD.

DOI: 10.1159/000375485 
PMCID: PMC4361913
PMID: 25848356  [PubMed]


427. Oncotarget. 2015 Apr 20;6(11):8839-50.

Constitutive asymmetric dimerization drives oncogenic activation of epidermal
growth factor receptor carboxyl-terminal deletion mutants.

Park AK(1,)(2), Francis JM(3), Park WY(1,)(2), Park JO(4), Cho J(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Samsung Genome Institute, Samsung Medical Center, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(2)Samsung Advanced Institute for Health Sciences and Technology, SungKyunKwan
University, Seoul, Republic of Korea. (3)The Broad Institute of Harvard and MIT, 
Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA. (4)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Samsung
Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of
Korea.

Genomic alterations targeting the Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor (EGFR) gene
have been strongly associated with cancer pathogenesis. The clinical
effectiveness of EGFR targeted therapies, including small molecules directed
against the kinase domain such as gefitinib, erlotinib and afatinib, have been
proven successful in treating non-small cell lung cancer patients with tumors
harboring EGFR kinase domain mutations. Recent large-scale genomic studies in
glioblastoma and lung cancer have identified an additional class of oncogenic
mutations caused by the intragenic deletion of carboxy-terminal coding regions.
Here, we report that combinations of exonic deletions of exon 25 to 28 lead to
the oncogenic activation of EGF receptor in the absence of ligand and consequent 
cellular transformation, indicating a significant role of C-terminal domain in
modulating EGFR activation. Furthermore, we show that the oncogenic activity of
the resulting C-terminal deletion mutants are efficiently inhibited by
EGFR-targeted drugs including erlotinib, afatinib, dacomitinib as well as
cetuximab, expanding the therapeutic rationale of cancer genome-based EGFR
targeted approaches. Finally, in vivo and in vitro preclinical studies
demonstrate that constitutive asymmetric dimerization in mutant EGFR is a key
mechanism for oncogenic activation and tumorigenesis by C-terminal deletion
mutants. Therefore, our data provide compelling evidence for oncogenic activation
of C-terminal deletion mutants at the molecular level and we propose that
C-terminal deletion status of EGFR can be considered as a potential genomic
marker for EGFR-targeted therapy.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.3559 
PMCID: PMC4496187
PMID: 25826094  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. Indian J Chest Dis Allied Sci. 2014 Jul-Sep;56(3):149-52.

Clinical experience on use of oral EGFR-TKIs as first-line treatment of advanced 
NSCLC from a tertiary care centre in North India and implications of skin rash.

Singh N, Vishwanath G, Aggarwal AN, Behera D.

BACKGROUND: Limited data are available from India on treatment outcomes with oral
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) in
newly diagnosed non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). We studied the demographic
profile and treatment outcomes of patients with NSCLC, receiving first-line
treatment with oral EGFR-TKIs.
METHODS: Retrospective study of newly diagnosed NSCLC patients treated with oral 
EGFR-TKIs over a 4-year period at a tertiary care institute in North India.
RESULTS: Of 76 patients studied, females and non-smokers constituted 32.9% and
48.7%, respectively. Majority of patients had adenocarcinoma (59.2%), stage IV
(64.5%) disease and Karnofsky performance status ≤ 70 (74.5%). Gefitinib was the 
most frequently used EGFR-TKI (92.1%). Most common indication for the use of
EGFR-TKIs was poor performance status (65.8%). Among assessable patients, disease
control and progressive disease were evident in 66% and 34%, respectively. Most
common side effects were skin rash (17%) and diarrhoea (10.6%). Patients with and
without skin rash differed significantly in relation to objective response to
treatment (100% versus 23.1%) and overall survival (median not reached versus 178
days). On multivariate logistic regression analysis, malignant pleural effusion
was associated with occurrence of rash (odds ratio = 0.19; 95% confidence
interval = 0.04-0.95; p = 0.04).
CONCLUSIONS: Oral EGFR-TKIs appear to be useful for the treatment of clinically
selected patients with advanced NSCLC. Occurrence of skin rash was independently 
associated with treatment response and better survival in the current study.


PMID: 25823108  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. Nan Fang Yi Ke Da Xue Xue Bao. 2015 Mar;35(3):446-9.

[Gefitinib versus Erlotinib as first-line treatment for patients with advanced
EGFR mutation-positive non-small-cell lung cancer].

[Article in Chinese]

Xie Y(1), Liang J, Su N.

Author information: 
(1)Departmet of Oncology, Guangzhou Chest Hospital, Guangzhou 510095,
China.E-mail: xarlin@163.com.

OBJECTIVE: To compare the efficacy of the erlotinib versus gefitinib in the
first-line treatment of patients with advanced EGFR mutation-positive NSCLC.
METHODS: Fifty patients with untreated advanced EGFR mutation- positive NSCLC
were randomly divided into gefitinib group (n=27) and erlotinib group (n=23). The
progression-free survival, objective response rate and disease control rate were 
evaluated to compare the efficacy of gefitinib and erlotinib.
RESULTS: There were no significant differences in the objective response rate
(P=0.711) and disease control rate (P=0.861) between the two groups. The
progression-free survival of gefitinib group and erlotinib group was 8.0 months
and 10.0 months, respectively. The efficacy of the two drugs was similar
(P=0.293).
CONCLUSION: There is no significant differences between gefitinib and erlotinib
in the first-line treatment of patients with advanced EGFR mutation-positive
NSCLC.


PMID: 25818798  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. PLoS One. 2015 Mar 25;10(3):e0119135. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0119135.
eCollection 2015.

Chloroquine enhances gefitinib cytotoxicity in gefitinib-resistant nonsmall cell 
lung cancer cells.

Tang MC(1), Wu MY(2), Hwang MH(3), Chang YT(2), Huang HJ(4), Lin AM(5), Yang
JC(6).

Author information: 
(1)National Center of Excellence for Clinical Trial and Research, National Taiwan
University, Taipei, Taiwan. (2)Institute of Pharmacology, National Yang-Ming
University, Taipei, Taiwan. (3)Graduate Institute of Oncology, National Taiwan
University, Taipei, Taiwan. (4)Department of Medical Research, Taipei-Veterans
General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan. (5)Institute of Pharmacology, National
Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan; Department of Medical Research,
Taipei-Veterans General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan. (6)National Center of
Excellence for Clinical Trial and Research, National Taiwan University, Taipei,
Taiwan; Graduate Institute of Oncology, National Taiwan University, Taipei,
Taiwan; Graduate Institute of Oncology, National Taiwan University and Department
of Oncology, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.

Epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors (EGFR-TKIs),
including gefitinib, are effective for non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
patients with EGFR mutations. However, these patients eventually develop
resistance to EGFR-TKI. The goal of the present study was to investigate the
involvement of autophagy in gefitinib resistance. We developed
gefitinib-resistant cells (PC-9/gef) from PC-9 cells (containing exon 19 deletion
EGFR) after long-term exposure in gefitinib. PC-9/gef cells (B4 and E3) were
200-fold more resistant to gefitinib than PC-9/wt cells. Compared with PC-9/wt
cells, both PC-9/gefB4 and PC-9/gefE3 cells demonstrated higher basal LC3-II
levels which were inhibited by 3-methyladenine (3-MA, an autophagy inhibitor) and
potentiated by chloroquine (CQ, an inhibitor of autophagolysosomes formation),
indicating elevated autophagy in PC-9/gef cells. 3-MA and CQ
concentration-dependently inhibited cell survival of both PC-9wt and PC-9/gef
cells, suggesting that autophagy may be pro-survival. Furthermore, gefitinib
increased LC3-II levels and autolysosome formation in both PC-9/wt cells and
PC-9/gef cells. In PC-9/wt cells, CQ potentiated the cytotoxicity by low
gefitinib (3 nM). Moreover, CQ overcame the acquired gefitinib resistance in
PC-9/gef cells by enhancing gefitinib-induced cytotoxicity, activation of caspase
3 and poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase cleavage. Using an in vivo model xenografting 
with PC-9/wt and PC-9/gefB4 cells, oral administration of gefitinib (50 mg/kg)
completely inhibited the tumor growth of PC-9/wt but not PC-9/gefB4cells.
Combination of CQ (75 mg/kg, i.p.) and gefitinib was more effective than
gefitinib alone in reducing the tumor growth of PC-9/gefB4. Our data suggest that
inhibition of autophagy may be a therapeutic strategy to overcome acquired
resistance of gefitinib in EGFR mutation NSCLC patients.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0119135 
PMCID: PMC4373825
PMID: 25807554  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. Transl Lung Cancer Res. 2014 Apr;3(2):89-94. doi:
10.3978/j.issn.2218-6751.2014.03.06.

Therapeutic integration of new molecule-targeted therapies with radiotherapy in
lung cancer.

Provencio M(1), Sánchez A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology of Puerta de Hierro Majadahonda, University
Hospital, Madrid, Spain.

Lung cancer is the most common form of the disease and the leading cause of
cancer deaths worldwide. Non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) accounts for
approximately 80-85% of all lung cancers. Forty percent of all cases present with
stage III, and many of them are considered inoperable (staged IIIA with
mediastinal lymph node involvement) or stage IIIB disease. Concurrent
platinum-based chemotherapy and thoracic radiation has demonstrated survival
benefits in these patients. We review the role of new target agents in
combination with radiotherapy in stage III NSCLC. Antiangiogenics improve tumor
oxygenation thereby improving the therapeutic efficacy of irradiation in models. 
Bevacizumab in combination with thoracic radiation has shown high toxicity.
However, other antiangiogenic agents are more promising. Radiation activates
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) pathways, inducing radioresistance, cell 
proliferation and enhanced DNA repair. After promising data from preclinical
models and early clinical trials, cetuximab did not show any benefit in a recent 
phase III trial. Panitumumab and nimotuzumab are under evaluation. Gefitinib has 
been investigated in combination with radiotherapy for unresectable stage III
NSCLC, but results in maintenance treatment after chemoradiotherapy were not
encouraging. Erlotinib has also been tested in a phase II trial with
chemoradiotherapy. Other new pathways and agents are being studied, such as m-TOR
pathway, bortezomib, heat shock protein 90 (Hsp90) inhibition, histone
deacetylase inhibitors (HDACS), aurora kinases, mitogen activated protein kinases
(MARK) and PARP inhibitors.

DOI: 10.3978/j.issn.2218-6751.2014.03.06 
PMCID: PMC4367654
PMID: 25806286  [PubMed]


432. Transl Lung Cancer Res. 2014 Apr;3(2):66-9. doi:
10.3978/j.issn.2218-6751.2014.02.05.

10(th) Congress on Lung Cancer-updates on clinical trials: goal.

Campelo RG(1), Massuti B(1), Mosquera J(1), Rosell R(1).

Author information: 
(1)1 Medical Oncology Unit, University Hospital A Coruña, Spain ; 2 Medical
Oncology Unit, University Hospital Alicante, Spain ; 3 Catalan Institute of
Oncology, Hospital Germans Trias i Pujol, Spain ; 4 Pangaea Biotech, USP Dexeus
University Institute, Spain.

Lung cancer is a leading cause of cancer death and probably one of the most
challenging cancers to treat. Platinum-based chemotherapy remains as the standard
of treatment for most of advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients,
and although therapeutic improvements have been achieved in the last years, the
benefits are quite modest. One of the most important advances in NSCLC care has
been the identification of oncogenic mutations that contribute to the
pathogenesis of lung cancer, suggesting that some tumors can rely on a specific
gene for their survival and proliferation, and the subsequent development of
drugs targeted to these specific alterations. Activating mutations of the
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) have been the first molecular event that 
can be targeted with specific drugs in NSCLC. The discovery of the first
reversible EGFR small-molecule inhibitors (TKIs) in the past decade, has changed 
the history of lung cancer treatment. EGFR inhibition has emerged to be an
important strategy in the treatment of NSCLC. However, all patients will
eventually present progression of disease because of both primary and acquired
resistance to EGFR TKIs. In the future, a better understanding of the tumor
heterogeneity as well as tumor resistance mechanisms will evolve more rational
therapies and potential combinations of different targeted therapies.

DOI: 10.3978/j.issn.2218-6751.2014.02.05 
PMCID: PMC4367658
PMID: 25806282  [PubMed]


433. Future Oncol. 2015;11(7):1109-22. doi: 10.2217/fon.15.16.

Risk of fatal pulmonary events in patients with advanced non-small-cell lung
cancer treated with EGF receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors: a comparative
meta-analysis.

Abdel-Rahman O(1), Elhalawani H.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Oncology Department, Faculty of Medicine, Ain Shams University,
Cairo, Egypt.

We performed a meta-analysis of fatal pulmonary events associated with erlotinib,
gefitinib or afatinib in patients with non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC).
Eligible studies included randomized trials of patients with NSCLC on the three
drugs describing events of high-grade pulmonary events. The relative risk of
high-grade interstitial lung disease, pneumonitis, pneumonia, pulmonary embolism 
and hemoptysis were 4.18 (95% CI: 2.49-7.01; p < 0.00001), 1.94 (95% CI:
0.93-4.06; p = 0.08), 1.28 (95% CI: 0.92-1.77; p = 0.14), 1.6 (95% CI: 0.81-3.18 
p = 0.17), 1.00 (95% CI: 0.14-7.08 p = 0.35), respectively. Our meta-analysis has
demonstrated that erlotinib, gefitinib and afatinib are associated with an
increased risk of high-grade interstitial lung disease in patients with NSCLC.

DOI: 10.2217/fon.15.16 
PMID: 25804125  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. Mol Clin Oncol. 2015 Mar;3(2):403-407. Epub 2014 Nov 5.

Epidermal growth factor receptor-tyrosine kinase inhibitors for non-small-cell
lung cancer patients aged 80 years or older: A retrospective analysis.

Nakao M(1), Muramatsu H(1), Sone K(1), Aoki S(1), Akiko H(2), Kagawa Y(1), Sato
H(1), Kunieda T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Kainan Hospital, Aichi Prefectural Welfare
Federation of Agricultural Cooperatives, Yatomi, Aichi 498-8502. (2)Department of
Respiratory Medicine, Nagoya City East Medical Center, Nagoya, Aichi 464-8547,
Japan.

The efficacy of epidermal growth factor receptor-tyrosine kinase inhibitors
(EGFR-TKIs) in elderly patients with non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) remains
uncertain. This retrospective study aimed to evaluate the efficacy and
feasibility of EGFR-TKIs for NSCLC patients aged ≥ 80 years. We analyzed data
from 21 NSCLC patients aged ≥ 80 years who were administered gefitinib and/or
erlotinib between January, 2009 and December, 2014. The clinical characteristics,
smoking status, type of EFGR mutation and the efficacy and toxicity of EGFR-TKIs 
were evaluated in these patients. In total, 14 (66.7%), 5 (23.8%) and 2 patients 
(9.5%) displayed partial response, stable disease and progressive disease,
respectively. The median progression-free survival was 182 days, whereas the
median overall survival was 371 days. Adverse events ≥ grade 2 were as follows:
skin toxicities, 12 patients; liver function test abnormalities, 7 patients;
anorexia, 3 patients; and diarrhea, 2 patients. Dose reduction of EGFR-TKIs due
to adverse events was required in 15 patients (71.4%). Although gefitinib and
erlotinib therapy may be beneficial in patients aged ≥ 80 years, EGFR-TKI dose
modification may be necessary according to the overall medical condition of
elderly patients. Further studies are required to evaluate our findings.

DOI: 10.3892/mco.2014.453 
PMCID: PMC4360513
PMID: 25798276  [PubMed]


435. Mol Clin Oncol. 2015 Mar;3(2):329-333. Epub 2014 Nov 10.

Clinical usefulness of gefitinib for non-small-cell lung cancer with a double
epidermal growth factor receptor mutation.

Oikawa T(1), Ohira T(2), Otani K(2), Hagiwara M(2), Konaka C(1), Ikeda N(2).

Author information: 
(1)Chemotherapy Research Institute, Kaken Hospital, Ichikawa, Chiba 272-0827.
(2)Department of Surgery, Tokyo Medical University, Tokyo 160-0023, Japan.

The aim of this study was to investigate whether the pattern of epidermal growth 
factor receptor (EGFR) gene mutations affects sensitivity to gefitinib treatment.
We investigated 44 surgically resected non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
specimens obtained between 2001 and 2012 at the Tokyo Medical University
Hospital. The specimens were obtained from patients treated with gefitinib as
1st-, 2nd-, or 3rd-line therapy for postoperative recurrent NSCLC. We detected
EGFR mutations using the cycleave PCR technique. In addition, the specimens from 
non-responders were stained with antibodies against hepatocyte growth factor
receptor (HGFR; MET) and hepatocyte growth factor (HGF). We assessed the
progression of non-responders over a period of 2 months. Intermediate responders 
were considered to be patients who responded (exhibiting at least stable disease)
to gefitinib therapy for 3-11 months, while long-term responders were defined as 
those who responded to gefitinib therapy for >12 months. The NSCLCs were
histologically classified as 43 adenocarcinomas and one large-cell neuroendocrine
carcinoma. One patient had an exon 18 point mutation, 23 an exon 19 deletion, 2
an exon 20 point mutation, 16 an exon 21 point mutation and 2 patients had both
exon 20 and 21 point mutations. There were 4 non-responders, including the 2
patients with exon 20 mutation, 25 intermediate responders (including 10 patients
under ongoing treatment) and 15 long-term responders (2 of whom are under ongoing
treatment), including the 2 patients with both exon 20 and 21 mutations. Of the
specimens obtained from non-responders, 3 stained with the anti- MET antibody and
1 stained with the anti-HGF antibody. Therefore, NSCLC with exon 20 mutation may 
respond to gefitinib treatment in the presence of an additional EGFR mutation.

DOI: 10.3892/mco.2014.455 
PMCID: PMC4360862
PMID: 25798262  [PubMed]


436. Oncologist. 2015 Apr;20(4):400-10. doi: 10.1634/theoncologist.2014-0154. Epub
2015 Mar 20.

Gefitinib and erlotinib in metastatic non-small cell lung cancer: a meta-analysis
of toxicity and efficacy of randomized clinical trials.

Burotto M(1), Manasanch EE(2), Wilkerson J(2), Fojo T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Oncology and Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA; Department of Lymphoma
and Myeloma, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, USA
mauricio.burottopichun@nih.gov mauricioburotto@yahoo.com. (2)Medical Oncology and
Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA; Department of Lymphoma and Myeloma, University
of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, USA.

Comment in
    Oncologist. 2015 Apr;20(4):335-6.

BACKGROUND: Tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) targeting the epidermal growth
factor receptor (EGFR) have been evaluated in patients with metastatic and
advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). The U.S. Food and Drug
Administration initially granted accelerated approval to gefitinib but
subsequently rescinded the authorization. Erlotinib and afatinib are similar
compounds approved for the treatment of metastatic NSCLC. The objective of this
study was to compare the efficacy and toxicity of erlotinib, gefitinib, and
afatinib in NSCLC.
METHODS: We tabulated efficacy variables including overall response rate (ORR),
progression-free survival (PFS), and overall survival (OS) and quantitated
toxicities and rates of dose reductions and discontinuation. Summary odds ratios 
were calculated using random and fixed-effects models. An odds ratio was the
summary measure used for pooling of studies.
RESULTS: We examined 28 studies including three randomized trials with afatinib. 
Clinical toxicities, including pruritus, rash, anorexia, diarrhea, nausea,
fatigue, mucositis, paronychia, and anemia, were similar between erlotinib and
gefitinib, although some statistical differences were observed. Afatinib
treatment resulted in more diarrhea, rash, and paronychia compared with erlotinib
and gefitinib. Regarding efficacy, similar outcomes were recorded for ORR, PFS,
or OS in the total population and in specific subgroups of patients between
erlotinib and gefitinib. All three TKIs demonstrated higher ORRs in first line in
tumors harboring EGFR mutations.
CONCLUSION: Gefitinib has similar activity and toxicity compared with erlotinib
and offers a valuable alternative to patients with NSCLC. Afatinib has similar
efficacy compared with erlotinib and gefitinib in first-line treatment of tumors 
harboring EGFR mutations but may be associated with more toxicity, although
further studies are needed. Gefitinib deserves consideration for U.S. marketing
as a primary treatment for EGFR-mutant NSCLC.

©AlphaMed Press.

DOI: 10.1634/theoncologist.2014-0154 
PMCID: PMC4391756
PMID: 25795635  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. Oncotarget. 2015 Apr 10;6(10):8366-76.

Blood-brain barrier permeability of gefitinib in patients with brain metastases
from non-small-cell lung cancer before and during whole brain radiation therapy.

Zeng YD(1), Liao H(2), Qin T(1), Zhang L(1), Wei WD(3), Liang JZ(4), Xu F(1),
Dinglin XX(5), Ma SX(1), Chen LK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Sun Yat-Sen University Cancer Center, State
Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Collaborative Innovation Center for
Cancer Medicine, Guangzhou 510060, China. (2)Lab of Phase I Clinical Study, Sun
Yat-Sen University Cancer Center, State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South
China, Collaborative Innovation Center for Cancer Medicine, Guangzhou 510060,
China. (3)Department of Breast Oncology, Sun Yat-Sen University Cancer Center,
State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Collaborative Innovation Center 
for Cancer Medicine, Guangzhou 510060, China. (4)Department of Pathology, Sun
Yat-Sen University Cancer Center, State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South
China, Collaborative Innovation Center for Cancer Medicine, Guangzhou 510060,
China. (5)Department of Medical Oncology, Sun Yat-Sen Memorial Hospital, Sun
Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou 510120, China.

INTRODUCTION: To explore the ability of gefitinib to penetrate blood brain
barrier (BBB) during whole brain radiation therapy (WBRT).
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Enrolled in this study were eligible patients who were
diagnosed with BM from NSCLC. Gefitinib was given at 250 mg/day for 30 days, then
concurrently with WBRT (40 Gy/20 F/4 w), followed by maintenance. Serial CSF and 
blood samples were collected on 30 day after gefitinib administration, and at the
time of 10, 20, 30 and 40 Gy following WBRT. CSF and plasma samples of 13
patients without BM who were treated with gefitinib were collected as control.
CSF and plasma gefitinib levels were measured by LC-MS/MS.
RESULTS: Fifteen BM patients completed gefitinib plus WBRT. The CSF-to-plasma
ratio of gefitinib in patients with BM was higher than that in patients without
BM (1.34% vs. 0.36%, P < 0.001). The CSF-to-plasma ratio of gefitinib increased
with the increased dose of WBRT and reached the peak (1.87 ± 0.72%) at 30 Gy,
which was significantly higher than that 1.34 ± 0.49% at 0 Gy (P = 0.01). The
median time to progression of brain lesions and the median overall survival were 
7.07 and 15.4 months, respectively.
CONCLUSION: The BBB permeability of gefitinib increased in accordance with
escalated dose of WBRT.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.3187 
PMCID: PMC4480758
PMID: 25788260  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. Oncotarget. 2015 Feb 28;6(6):4527-36.

A phase I trial of high dose gefitinib for patients with leptomeningeal
metastases from non-small cell lung cancer.

Jackman DM(1,)(2), Cioffredi LA(3), Jacobs L(4), Sharmeen F(1), Morse LK(1),
Lucca J(1), Plotkin SR(5,)(6), Marcoux PJ(1,)(2), Rabin MS(1,)(2), Lynch
TJ(7,)(8), Johnson BE(1,)(2), Kesari S(9).

Author information: 
(1)Lowe Center for Thoracic Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA,
USA. (2)Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. (3)Georgetown University School 
of Medicine, Washington, DC USA. (4)Eurofins Medinet B.V., Breda, The
Netherlands. (5)Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA. (6)Stephen E. & Catherine
Pappas Center for Neuro-Oncology, Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center,
Boston, MA, USA. (7)Smilow Cancer Hospital at Yale-New Haven, Yale Cancer Center,
New Haven, CT, USA. (8)Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA. (9)Department of
Neurosciences, Translational Neuro-Oncology Laboratories, Moores UCSD Cancer
Center, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla CA, USA.

INTRODUCTION: There are few effective treatment options for leptomeningeal
metastasis (LM) in non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC). This study assessed the
feasibility of high-dose gefitinib in patients with LM from NSCLC harboring EGFR 
mutations or prior systemic response to EGFR-TKI.
METHODS: This phase I open-label trial of a novel gefitinib dosing schedule
employed a 3+3 design. Eligible NSCLC patients with LM had known EGFR mutations
and/or prior response to EGFR-TKI. Patients alternated 2 weeks of high-dose daily
gefitinib (dose levels: 750 mg, 1000 mg, 1250 mg) with 2 weeks of maintenance
therapy (500 mg daily). Primary endpoints were safety and toxicity. Secondary
endpoints included overall survival (OS), neurological progression-free survival,
radiological response, and cytological response in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF).
RESULTS: Seven patients were treated: 3 at 750 mg dose level, 4 at 1000 mg dose
level. There were no DLTs at the 750 mg dose level, and one DLT (toxic epidermal 
necrolysis) at the 1000 mg dose level. The study was closed due to slow accrual. 
Median neurological PFS was 2.3 months (range 1.6-4.0 months); median OS was 3.5 
months (range 1.6-5.1 months). Though there were no radiologically documented
remissions of LM disease, four patients had improvement in neurological symptoms.
One patient cleared their CSF of NSCLC cells, while 2 others had decrease in
malignant cells in CSF.
CONCLUSION: Although the MTD was not defined due to slow accrual, this study
provides important information about the tolerability and CSF penetration of
high-dose gefitinib as a therapeutic option for modest palliation for NSCLC
patients with LM and a known EGFR mutation.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.2886 
PMCID: PMC4414209
PMID: 25784657  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. J BUON. 2015 Jan-Feb;20(1):136-41.

EGFR mutations in patients with non small-cell lung cancer in Bulgaria and
treatment with gefitinib.

Damyanov D(1), Koynov K, Naseva E, Bichev S.

Author information: 
(1)Clinic of Medical Oncology, Specialized Oncology Hospital, Sofia, Bulgaria.

PURPOSE: To evaluate the EGFR mutations in non small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
patients in Bulgaria, as well as to summarize the outcomes of patients with EGFR 
mutations, treated with gefitinib as first- or subsequent-line therapy.
METHODS: From January 2010 to March 2012 tumor samples from773 NSCLC patients
were evaluated for EGFR mutations.
RESULTS: Seventy-one mutations were found and 34 patients were treated with
gefitinib. Complete remission (CR) was achieved in 2 patients (6.9%), partial
remission (PR) in 11 (37.9%), stable disease (SD) in 13 (44.8%), and disease
progression (PD) in 3 (10.3%). Higher objective response rate was seen in women
and in never-smokers.The mean progression-free survival (PFS) was 11.1 months
(95% CI 9.1-13.1), registered in 29 patients (median PFS 10 months ; 95% CI
8.9-11.1).Tolerability to gefitinib was acceptable, with prevalence of skin
toxicity, and it did not lead to any significant decline of the patients' quality
of life.
CONCLUSION: This is the first study in Bulgaria to evaluate EGFR mutations in
NSCLC patients,which were encountered in 9.4% of the studied population. The
present study confirms the benefits of first- and subsequent-lines of gefitinib
for the treatment of this patient group. Our data give grounds for the conclusion
that gefitinib is an effective and well-tolerated therapeutic option for patients
with locally advanced and metastatic NSCLC harboring EGFR mutations.


PMID: 25778308  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. Cancer Res Treat. 2016 Jan;48(1):80-7. doi: 10.4143/crt.2014.307. Epub 2015 Mar
2.

Randomized Phase II Study of Pemetrexed Versus Gefitinib in Previously Treated
Patients with Advanced Non-small Cell Lung Cancer.

Kim YS(1), Cho EK(1), Woo HS(1), Hong J(1), Ahn HK(1), Park I(1), Sym SJ(1),
Kyung SY(2), Kang SM(2), Park JW(2), Jeong SH(2), Park J(1), Lee JH(1), Shin
DB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology and Oncology, Department of Internal Medicine, Gachon
University Gil Medical Center, Incheon, Korea. (2)Division of Pulmonary and
Critical Care Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine, Gachon University Gil
Medical Center, Incheon, Korea.

PURPOSE: This study aimed to evaluate the efficacy and safety of pemetrexed
versus gefitinib in patients with advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
previously treated with chemotherapy.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Patients with advanced (stage IIIB or IV) or recurrent
NSCLC were randomly assigned to receive either 500 mg/m² of pemetrexed
intravenously every 3 weeks or gefitinib 250 mg/day orally. The primary end point
was progression-free survival (PFS) at 6 months.
RESULTS: A total of 95 patients were enrolled (47 for pemetrexed and 48 for
gefitinib). Most patients were male (72%) and current/ex-smokers (69%), and 80%
had non-squamous cell carcinoma. The epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)
mutation status was determined in 38 patients (40%); one patient per each arm was
positive for EGFR mutation. The 6-month PFS rates were 22% and 15% for pemetrexed
and gefitinib, respectively (p=0.35). Both arms showed an identical median PFS of
2.0 months and a median overall survival (OS) of 8.5 months. In EGFR wild-type
patients, higher response rate (RR) and longer PFS as well as OS were achieved
via pemetrexed compared with gefitinib, although there were no significant
differences (RR: 39% vs. 9%, p=0.07; median PFS: 6.6 months vs. 3.1 months,
p=0.45; median OS: 29.6 months vs. 12.9 months, p=0.62). Toxicities were mild in 
both treatment arms. Frequently reported toxicities were anemia and fatigue for
pemetrexed, and skin rash and anorexia for gefitinib.
CONCLUSION: Both pemetrexed and gefitinib had similar efficacy with good
tolerability as second-line treatment in unselected patients with advanced NSCLC.
However, pemetrexed is considered more effective than gefitinib for EGFR
wild-type patients.

DOI: 10.4143/crt.2014.307 
PMCID: PMC4720098
PMID: 25761488  [PubMed - in process]


441. Cancer Res Treat. 2016 Jan;48(1):88-97. doi: 10.4143/crt.2014.201. Epub 2015 Mar 
3.

Gefitinib-Induced Interstitial Lung Disease in Korean Lung Cancer Patients.

Beom SH(1), Kim DW(2), Sim SH(1), Keam B(2), Park JH(1), Lee JO(1), Kim TM(2),
Lee SH(2), Heo DS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul,
Korea. (2)Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul National University Hospital,
Seoul, Korea ; Cancer Research Institute, Seoul National University College of
Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

PURPOSE: Interstitial lung disease (ILD) is a serious adverse effect of
gefitinib. We examined the incidence and clinical characteristics of drug-induced
ILD in Korean non-small cell lung carcinoma patients treated with gefitinib.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A retrospective cohort study was performed in non-small
cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients who started gefitinib treatment at Seoul
National University Hospital from January 2002 through December 2011. Patients
who developed new abnormal radiologic findings with respiratory symptoms after
gefitinib treatment were defined as having possible adverse pulmonary reactions. 
The patients' medical records were reviewed independently by investigators to
identify the causes of pulmonary toxicities.
RESULTS: Among the 1,114 patients evaluated, 128 patients (11.5%) developed
pulmonary adverse reactions after taking gefitinib. An infectious complication
occurred in 98 patients (8.8%) and 15 patients (1.3%) developed ILD. Nine of the 
15 patients (60.0%) with gefitinib-induced ILD experienced a fatal clinical
course that met either the Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events grade 4
(n=3) or grade 5 (n=6). In the multivariate analysis, a lower serum albumin level
(≤ 3.0 g/dL) at baseline was significantly associated with the development of
gefitinib-induced ILD (odds ratio, 3.91; 95% confidence interval, 1.20 to 12.71).
CONCLUSION: The incidence of gefitinib-induced ILD in Korean NSCLC patients was
similar to that reported worldwide, but lower than values reported for Japanese
population. ILD was usually a life-threatening adverse effect of gefitinib, and
the development of ILD was significantly associated with a lower baseline serum
albumin level.

DOI: 10.4143/crt.2014.201 
PMCID: PMC4720097
PMID: 25761482  [PubMed - in process]


442. Oncotarget. 2015 Apr 30;6(12):10146-60.

Targeting the degradation of AXL receptor tyrosine kinase to overcome resistance 
in gefitinib-resistant non-small cell lung cancer.

Bae SY(1), Hong JY(1), Lee HJ(1), Park HJ(1), Lee SK(1).

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmacy, Seoul National University, Seoul 151-742, Korea.

Acquired resistance to epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase
inhibitors (EGFR-TKIs), such as gefitinib, remains a major problem in non-small
cell lung cancer (NSCLC) treatment. Increased activation of AXL has been
identified as a novel mechanism for acquired resistance to EGFR-TKIs in NSCLC
treatment. However, the cause of uncontrolled AXL expression is not fully
understood. Here, we first demonstrate that AXL is overexpressed in an acquired
gefitinib-resistant cell line (H292-Gef) as a result of slow turnover and that
AXL is degraded by presenilin-dependent regulated intramembrane proteolysis
(PS-RIP). Based on the findings, we attempted to enhance AXL degradation to
overcome acquired gefitinib-resistance by the treatment of gefitinib-resistant
NSCLC cells with yuanhuadine (YD), a potent antitumor agent in NSCLC. Treatment
with YD effectively suppressed the cancer cell survival in vitro and in vivo.
Mechanistically, YD accelerated the turnover of AXL by PS-RIP and resulted in the
down-regulation of the full-length AXL. Therefore, the modulation of the
proteolytic process through degradation of overexpressed AXL may be an attractive
therapeutic strategy for the treatment of NSCLC and EGFR-TKI-resistant NSCLC.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.3380 
PMCID: PMC4496346
PMID: 25760142  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. Future Oncol. 2015;11(5):865-78. doi: 10.2217/fon.14.312.

Current and future targeted therapies for non-small-cell lung cancers with
aberrant EGF receptors.

Kanthala S(1), Pallerla S, Jois S.

Author information: 
(1)Basic Pharmaceutical Sciences, School of Pharmacy, University of Louisiana at 
Monroe, Monroe, LA 71201, USA.

Expression of the EGF receptors (EGFRs) is abnormally high in many types of
cancer, including 25% of lung cancers. Successful treatments target mutations in 
the EGFR tyrosine kinase domain with EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs).
However, almost all patients develop resistance to this treatment, and acquired
resistance to first-generation TKI has prompted the clinical development of a
second generation of EGFR TKI. Because of the development of resistance to
treatment of TKIs, there is a need to collect genomic information about EGFR
levels in non-small-cell lung cancer patients. Herein, we focus on current
molecular targets that have therapies available as well as other targets for
which therapies will be available in the near future.

DOI: 10.2217/fon.14.312 
PMCID: PMC4375777
PMID: 25757687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. Lung Cancer. 2015 May;88(2):187-94. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2015.02.012. Epub 2015
Feb 23.

Liver metastasis predicts poorer prognosis in stage IV lung adenocarcinoma
patients receiving first-line gefitinib.

Wu KL(1), Tsai MJ(2), Yang CJ(3), Chang WA(4), Hung JY(5), Yen CJ(6), Shen CH(6),
Kuo TY(7), Lee JY(8), Chou SH(9), Liu TC(10), Chong IW(11), Huang MS(12).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Internal
Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical University Hospital, No. 100, Tz-You 1st Road, 807
Kaohsiung, Taiwan; Department of Internal Medicine, Pingtung Hospital, Ministry
of Health and Welfare, Pingtung, Taiwan. (2)Division of Pulmonary and Critical
Care Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical University
Hospital, No. 100, Tz-You 1st Road, 807 Kaohsiung, Taiwan; Graduate Institute of 
Medicine, College of Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.
(3)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Internal
Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical University Hospital, No. 100, Tz-You 1st Road, 807
Kaohsiung, Taiwan; Graduate Institute of Medicine, College of Medicine, Kaohsiung
Medical University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan; Department of Internal Medicine, Kaohsiung
Municipal Ta-Tung Hospital, Kaohsiung, Taiwan; Department of Internal Medicine,
School of Medicine, College of Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung,
Taiwan. (4)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of
Internal Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical University Hospital, No. 100, Tz-You 1st
Road, 807 Kaohsiung, Taiwan; Institute of Clinical Medicine, College of Medicine,
Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan. (5)Division of Pulmonary and
Critical Care Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical
University Hospital, No. 100, Tz-You 1st Road, 807 Kaohsiung, Taiwan; Department 
of Internal Medicine, School of Medicine, College of Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical 
University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan. (6)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care
Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical University Hospital,
No. 100, Tz-You 1st Road, 807 Kaohsiung, Taiwan; Department of Nursing, Kaohsiung
Medical University Hospital, Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.
(7)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Internal
Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical University Hospital, No. 100, Tz-You 1st Road, 807
Kaohsiung, Taiwan. (8)Division of Chest Surgery, Department of Surgery, Kaohsiung
Medical University Hospital, Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.
(9)Division of Chest Surgery, Department of Surgery, Kaohsiung Medical University
Hospital, Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan; Department of
Respiratory Care, College of Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung,
Taiwan. (10)Institute of Clinical Medicine, College of Medicine, Kaohsiung
Medical University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan; Division of Hematology and Oncology,
Department of Internal Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical University Hospital, Kaohsiung
Medical University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan. (11)Division of Pulmonary and Critical
Care Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical University
Hospital, No. 100, Tz-You 1st Road, 807 Kaohsiung, Taiwan; Department of
Respiratory Care, College of Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung,
Taiwan. (12)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of
Internal Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical University Hospital, No. 100, Tz-You 1st
Road, 807 Kaohsiung, Taiwan; Graduate Institute of Medicine, College of Medicine,
Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan; Department of Internal Medicine,
School of Medicine, College of Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung,
Taiwan. Electronic address: shyang@kmu.edu.tw.

OBJECTIVES: Gefitinib is currently used as a first-line therapy in patients of
advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) with susceptible epidermal growth
factor receptor (EGFR) mutations. However, treatment outcomes of these patients
vary. This study was conducted to evaluate the impact of specific metastatic
sites on treatment outcomes of patients with stage IV lung adenocarcinoma with
susceptible EGFR mutations receiving first-line gefitinib, focusing on the impact
of liver metastasis.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Between October 2009 and April 2014, patients of stage IV 
lung adenocarcinoma harboring EGFR mutation in exon 19 or 21, who received
first-line gefitinib treatment, were enrolled in two hospitals and followed until
December 22, 2014. The impacts of various clinical features, including sex, age, 
smoking history, performance status, EGFR mutation site, metastatic sites, etc., 
on progression-free survival (PFS) and overall survival (OS) were analyzed.
RESULTS: A total of 148 patients were eligible for analysis. Patients with liver 
metastasis on initial diagnosis (n=19) had shorter PFS and OS than those without 
liver metastasis did (median of PFS, 6.7 vs. 11.2 months, p<0.0001; median of OS,
9.2 vs. 17.5 months, p<0.0001). Multivariable Cox regression analysis showed
liver metastasis was an independent poor prognostic factor for PFS (HR=2.939 [95%
CI: 1.729-4.997], p<0.0001) and OS (HR=3.300 [95% CI: 1.708-6.373], p=0.0004).
CONCLUSION: Liver metastasis predicts poorer PFS and OS in stage IV lung
adenocarcinoma patients with susceptible gene mutations receiving first-line
gefitinib. Further study is warranted to elucidate the underlying mechanisms and 
find treatment modalities to improve prognosis of these patients.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2015.02.012 
PMID: 25747806  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. Respir Investig. 2015 Mar;53(2):68-72. doi: 10.1016/j.resinv.2014.10.005. Epub
2014 Nov 13.

Disease flare after gefitinib discontinuation.

Akamatsu H(1), Ono A(2), Shukuya T(3), Tsuya A(4), Nakamura Y(5), Kenmotsu H(6), 
Naito T(7), Murakami H(8), Endo M(9), Nakajima T(10), Yamamoto N(11), Takahashi
T(12).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Thoracic Oncology, Shizuoka Cancer Center, 1007 Shimonagakubo,
Nagaizumi-cho Sunto-gun, Shizuoka 411-8777, Japan; Third Department of Internal
Medicine, Wakayama Medical University, 811-1 Kimiidera, Wakayama 641-8509, Japan.
Electronic address: h-akamat@wakayama-med.ac.jp. (2)Division of Thoracic
Oncology, Shizuoka Cancer Center, 1007 Shimonagakubo, Nagaizumi-cho Sunto-gun,
Shizuoka 411-8777, Japan. Electronic address: a.ono@scchr.jp. (3)Division of
Thoracic Oncology, Shizuoka Cancer Center, 1007 Shimonagakubo, Nagaizumi-cho
Sunto-gun, Shizuoka 411-8777, Japan; Department of Respiratory Medicine, Juntendo
University, School of Medicine, 2-1-1 Hongou, Bunkyou-ku, Tokyo 113-8421, Japan. 
Electronic address: tshukuya@juntendo.ac.jp. (4)Division of Thoracic Oncology,
Shizuoka Cancer Center, 1007 Shimonagakubo, Nagaizumi-cho Sunto-gun, Shizuoka
411-8777, Japan; Department of Clinical Oncology, Osaka City General Hospital,
2-13-22 Miyakojimahondohri, Miyakojima-ku, Osaka 534-0021, Japan. Electronic
address: a-tsuya@hospital.city.osaka.jp. (5)Division of Thoracic Oncology,
Shizuoka Cancer Center, 1007 Shimonagakubo, Nagaizumi-cho Sunto-gun, Shizuoka
411-8777, Japan; Department of Respiratory Medicine, Yokohama Munincipal
Citizen׳s Hospital, 56 Okazawa-cho, Hodogaya-ku, Yokohama, Kanagawa 240-8555,
Japan. Electronic address: yu43-nakamura@city.yokohama.jp. (6)Division of
Thoracic Oncology, Shizuoka Cancer Center, 1007 Shimonagakubo, Nagaizumi-cho
Sunto-gun, Shizuoka 411-8777, Japan. Electronic address: h.kenmotsu@scchr.jp.
(7)Division of Thoracic Oncology, Shizuoka Cancer Center, 1007 Shimonagakubo,
Nagaizumi-cho Sunto-gun, Shizuoka 411-8777, Japan. Electronic address:
t.naito@scchr.jp. (8)Division of Thoracic Oncology, Shizuoka Cancer Center, 1007 
Shimonagakubo, Nagaizumi-cho Sunto-gun, Shizuoka 411-8777, Japan. Electronic
address: ha.murakami@scchr.jp. (9)Division of Diagnostic Radiology, Shizuoka
Cancer Center, 1007 Shimonagakubo, Nagaizumi-cho Sunto-gun, Shizuoka 411-8777,
Japan. Electronic address: m.endo@scchr.jp. (10)Division of Radiation Oncology,
Shizuoka Cancer Center, 1007 Shimonagakubo, Nagaizumi-cho Sunto-gun, Shizuoka
411-8777, Japan. Electronic address: t.nakajima@scchr.jp. (11)Division of
Thoracic Oncology, Shizuoka Cancer Center, 1007 Shimonagakubo, Nagaizumi-cho
Sunto-gun, Shizuoka 411-8777, Japan; Third Department of Internal Medicine,
Wakayama Medical University, 811-1 Kimiidera, Wakayama 641-8509, Japan.
Electronic address: nb.yamamo@wakayama-med.ac.jp. (12)Division of Thoracic
Oncology, Shizuoka Cancer Center, 1007 Shimonagakubo, Nagaizumi-cho Sunto-gun,
Shizuoka 411-8777, Japan. Electronic address: t.takahashi@scchr.jp.

INTRODUCTION: A recent retrospective analysis found that 23% of non-small cell
lung cancer patients who acquired resistance to epidermal growth factor receptor 
(EGFR)-tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) demonstrated "disease flare" after
discontinuation of EGFR-TKIs. However, limitations of this study present the need
for further investigation to elucidate this phenomenon in more detail.
METHODS: We reviewed the clinical records of EGFR mutated patients with advanced 
lung adenocarcinoma who were treated with gefitinib monotherapy in our hospital
between January 2007 and December 2010. Disease flare was defined as unexpected
interventions (e.g. radiation therapy or pleural drainage), hospitalization, or
death attributable to disease progression after gefitinib discontinuation.
RESULTS: Among 52 eligible patients, only two experienced disease flare (4%; 95% 
confidence interval: 1-13%). In both cases, interval time from gefitinib
discontinuation to disease flare was 11 days, and the brain was the site of
flare. Survival time after gefitinib was significantly shorter in the flare
patients (78 and 97 days, respectively) compared with the no-flare patients
(median 388 days).
CONCLUSIONS: Our analysis demonstrated a lower incidence rate of disease flare
after gefitinib discontinuation compared with the previous report, but the
prognosis was similarly poor.

Copyright © 2014 The Japanese Respiratory Society. Published by Elsevier B.V. All
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.resinv.2014.10.005 
PMID: 25745851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. Cancer Manag Res. 2015 Feb 19;7:75-82. doi: 10.2147/CMAR.S51808. eCollection
2015.

Afatinib for the treatment of metastatic non-small cell lung cancer.

Joshi M(1), Rizvi SM(1), Belani CP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Penn State Milton S Hershey Medical Center, Department of Medicine, Division
of Hematology-Oncology, Hershey, PA, USA.

Targeting the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) in patients with non-small 
cell lung cancer (NSCLC) harboring sensitizing mutations in the tyrosine kinase
(TKI) domain has led to a significant change in the management of this disease.
The classic or sensitizing mutations are G719X mutation in exon 18, in-frame
deletions or insertion of exon 19, L858R or L861Q mutation in exon 21.
Approximately 90% of these mutations are exon 19 deletion or exon 21 L858R point 
mutation. Gefitinib and erlotinib are reversible first-generation inhibitors of
mutant EGFR, and treatment with these agents in the first-line setting has
demonstrated a progression-free survival of 9.5-13.7 months. However, the
majority of these patients ultimately develop resistance to these drugs. Afatinib
is an irreversible pan-ErbB inhibitor that was developed to circumvent the
problem of resistance to first-generation TKIs. The LUX-Lung studies have
evaluated the efficacy and toxicities of afatinib in treatment-naïve and
refractory NSCLC patients. The promising results of some of these trials led to
approval of afatinib by the US Food and Drug Administration for patients with
advanced NSCLC and EGFR exon 19 deletions or exon 21 (L858R) substitution
mutations. Afatinib causes toxicities similar to those of the first-generation
EGFR TKIs, such as diarrhea, rash, acne, and stomatitis, and overall is well
tolerated. This article focuses on the clinical studies of afatinib in patients
with NSCLC.

DOI: 10.2147/CMAR.S51808 
PMCID: PMC4340466
PMID: 25733926  [PubMed]


447. Oncotarget. 2015 Mar 30;6(9):6749-61.

Inhibition of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) growth by a novel small
molecular inhibitor of EGFR.

Li J(1,)(2,)(3), Deng H(2), Hu M(2), Fang Y(2), Vaughn A(4), Cai X(1), Xu L(1),
Wan W(1), Li Z(1), Chen S(3), Yang X(1), Wu S(3), Xiao J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedic Oncology, Changzheng Hospital, The Second Military
Medical University, Shanghai 200003, China. (2)The Institute of Biomedical
Sciences, East China Normal University, Shanghai 200241, China. (3)Department of 
Orthopaedics, The Third Xiangya Hospital of Central South University, Changsha,
Hunan 410013, China. (4)Department of Molecular Biosciences, Institute of
Cellular and Molecular Biology, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX
78712, USA.

The epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is a therapeutic target (oncotarget) 
in NSCLC. Using in vitro EGFR kinase activity system, we identified a novel small
molecule, WB-308, as an inhibitor of EGFR. WB-308 decreased NSCLC cell
proliferation and colony formation, by causing G2/M arrest and apoptosis.
Furthermore, WB-308 inhibited the engraft tumor growths in two animal models in
vivo (lung orthotopic transplantation model and patient-derived engraft mouse
model). WB-308 impaired the phosphorylation of EGFR, AKT, and ERK1/2 protein.
WB-308 was less cytotoxic than Gefitinib. Our study suggests that WB-308 is a
novel EGFR-TKI and may be considered to substitute for Gefitinib in clinical
therapy for NSCLC.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.3155 
PMCID: PMC4466647
PMID: 25730907  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. Lung Cancer. 2015 May;88(2):181-6. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2015.02.004. Epub 2015 
Feb 9.

Factors associated with a poor response to gefitinib in the NEJ002 study: smoking
and the L858R mutation.

Fukuhara T(1), Maemondo M(2), Inoue A(3), Kobayashi K(4), Sugawara S(5), Oizumi
S(6), Isobe H(7), Gemma A(8), Harada M(9), Yoshizawa H(10), Kinoshita I(11),
Fujita Y(12), Saijo Y(13), Hagiwara K(14), Morita S(15), Nukiwa T(16).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Miyagi Cancer Center, 47-1 Nodayama,
Medeshima-Shiode, Natori 981-1293, Japan. Electronic address:
fukuhara-tatsuro@miyagi-pho.jp. (2)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Miyagi
Cancer Center, 47-1 Nodayama, Medeshima-Shiode, Natori 981-1293, Japan.
(3)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Tohoku University, 1-1 Seiryomachi,
Aoba-ku, Sendai 980-8574, Japan. (4)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Saitama
Medical University International Medical Center, 1397-1 Yamane, Hidaka-shi,
Saitama 350-1298, Japan. (5)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Sendai Kousei
Hospital, 4-15 Hirosemachi, Aoba-ku, Sendai 980-0873, Japan. (6)First Department 
of Medicine, Hokkaido University School of Medicine, Kita 15, Nishi 7, Kita-ku,
Sapporo 060-8638, Japan. (7)Department of Medical Oncology, KKR Sapporo Medical
Center, 6-3-40 Hiragishi 1-jo, Toyohira-ku, Sapporo 062-0931, Japan.
(8)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Pulmonary Medicine, Infections
Disease and Oncology, Nipppon Medical School, 1-1-5 Sendagi, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo
113-8602, Japan. (9)Department of Respiratory Medicine, National Hospital
Organization Hokkaido Cancer Center, 4-jo-2-3-54 Kikusui, Shiroishi-ku, Sapporo
003-0804, Japan. (10)Bioscience Medical Research Center, Niigata University
Medical & Dental Hospital, 8050, Ikarashi 2-no-cho, Nishi-ku, Niigata 950-2181,
Japan. (11)Department of Medical Oncology, Hokkaido University Graduate School of
Medicine, Kita 15, Nishi 7, Kita-ku, Sapporo 060-8638, Japan. (12)Department of
Respiratory Medicine, National Hospital Organization Asahikawa Medical Center,
7-4048 Hanasakicho, Asahikawa 070-0901, Japan. (13)Department of Medical
Oncology, Niigata University Medical & Dental Hospital, 8050, Ikarashi 2-no-cho, 
Nishi-ku, Niigata 950-2181, Japan. (14)Department of Respiratory Medicine,
Saitama Medical University, 38 Morohongo Moroyama-machi, Iruma-gun, Saitama
350-0495, Japan. (15)Department of Data Science, Institute for Advancement of
Clinical and Translational Science, Kyoto University Hospital, 54 Kawaharacho,
Shogoin, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan. (16)Japan Anti-Tuberculosis
Association, Misaki-cho 1-3-12, Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo 101-0061, Japan.

INTRODUCTION: Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)-tyrosine kinase inhibitor
(TKI) treatment is the standard therapy for non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
harbouring EGFR-activating mutations. The NEJ002 phase 3 clinical trial
demonstrated the efficacy of EGFR-TKI; gefitinib was significantly superior in
both progression-free survival (PFS) and objective response rate (ORR) than
carboplatin plus paclitaxel. However, several cases showed no response. In this
study, we performed further analysis of the characteristics of these
non-responders.
METHODS: Available data from NEJ002 on maximum changes in tumour size were
obtained from 103 cases (90.4%) and 110 cases (96.5%) in the
carboplatin-paclitaxel and gefitinib groups, respectively. Waterfall plots of
maximum tumour size changes were created for non-responders.
RESULTS: Five (4.9%) and 9 (8.2%) cases in the carboplatin-paclitaxel and
gefitinib groups were non-responders, respectively. The mean pack years of the
non-responders in the carboplatin-paclitaxel and gefitinib groups were 0.33 and
31.7, respectively. The ORR of total smokers (61.5%) and heavy smokers (over 40
pack years, 52.6%) in the gefitinib group were significantly lower compared to
people who have never smoked (80.0%) (P=0.044 and P=0.020, respectively). Smoker 
cases also showed a tendency towards lower PFS and overall survival (OS). In
addition, the EGFR common mutation types did not affect PFS and OS in
gefitinib-treated cases in NEJ002. However, in this study, the ORR and waterfall 
plots showed that gefitinib-treated non-responders who had a deletion in exon 19 
in the EGFR gene exhibited a tendency towards a higher response compared to those
with a L858R mutation.
CONCLUSIONS: NSCLC patients with a smoking history or the EGFR L858R mutation may
demonstrate a poorer response to gefitinib treatment.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd.. All rights
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2015.02.004 
PMID: 25726043  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. PLoS One. 2015 Feb 26;10(2):e0117983. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0117983.
eCollection 2015.

The use of a two-tiered testing strategy for the simultaneous detection of small 
EGFR mutations and EGFR amplification in lung cancer.

Lewandowska MA(1), Czubak K(2), Klonowska K(2), Jozwicki W(3), Kowalewski J(4),
Kozlowski P(2).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Oncology and Genetics Unit, Department of Tumour Pathology and
Pathomorphology, Franciszek Lukaszczyk Oncology Centre, Bydgoszcz, Poland;
Department of Thoracic Surgery and Tumours, Ludwik Rydygier Collegium Medicum,
Nicolaus Copernicus University, Bydgoszcz, Poland. (2)European Centre of
Bioinformatics and Genomics, Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry, Polish Academy of
Sciences, Poznan, Poland; Poznan University of Technology, Pl. Marii
Sklodowskiej-Curie 5, 60-965, Poznan, Poland. (3)Department of Tumour Pathology
and Pathomorphology, Franciszek Łukaszczyk Oncology Centre, Ludwik Rydygier
Collegium Medicum, Nicolaus Copernicus University, Bydgoszcz, Poland.
(4)Department of Thoracic Surgery and Tumours, Franciszek Łukaszczyk Oncology
Centre, Ludwik Rydygier Collegium Medicum, Nicolaus Copernicus University,
Bydgoszcz, Poland.

Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer-related death worldwide. Recent
progress in lung cancer diagnosis and treatment has been achieved due to a better
understanding the molecular mechanisms of the disease and the identification of
biomarkers that allow more specific cancer treatments. One of the best known
examples of personalized therapy is the use of tyrosine kinase inhibitors, such
as gefitinib and erlotinib, for the successful treatment of non-small-cell lung
cancer patients selected based on the specific EGFR mutations. Therefore, the
reliable detection of mutations is critical for the application of appropriate
therapy. In this study, we tested a two-tiered mutation detection strategy using 
real-time PCR assays as a well-validated high-sensitivity method and multiplex
ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA)-based EGFRmut+ assay as a
second-tier standard-sensitivity method. One additional advantage of the applied 
MLPA method is that it allows the simultaneous detection of EGFR mutations and
copy-number alterations (i.e., amplifications) in EGFR, MET and ERBB2. Our
analysis showed high concordance between these two methods. With the use of this 
two-tier strategy, we reliably determined the frequency of EGFR mutations and
EGFR, MET and ERBB2 amplifications in over 200 lung cancer samples. Additionally,
taking advantage of simultaneous copy number and small mutation analyses, we
showed a very strong correlation between EGFR mutations and EGFR amplifications
and a mutual exclusiveness of EGFR mutations/amplifications with MET and ERBB2
amplifications. Our results proved the reliability and usefulness of the
two-tiered EGFR testing strategy.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0117983 
PMCID: PMC4342230
PMID: 25719557  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. Cancer Res Treat. 2015 Oct;47(4):661-9. doi: 10.4143/crt.2014.282. Epub 2015 Feb 
23.

Peptide Nucleic Acid Clamping Versus Direct Sequencing for the Detection of EGFR 
Gene Mutation in Patients with Non-small Cell Lung Cancer.

Yoon SH(1,)(2), Choi YD(1,)(3), Oh IJ(1,)(3), Kim KS(1,)(3), Choi H(1,)(3), Chang
J(1,)(3), Shin HJ(1,)(3), Park CK(1,)(3), Kim YC(1,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Lung and Esophageal Cancer Clinic, Chonnam National University Hwasun
Hospital, Hwasun, Korea. (2)Department of Internal Medicine, Pusan National
University Yangsan Hospital, Yangsan, Korea. (3)Chonnam National University
Medical School, Gwangju, Korea.

PURPOSE: Direct sequencing (DS) is the standard method for detection of epidermal
growth factor receptor (EGFR) gene mutation in non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC); however, low detection sensitivity is a problem. The aim of this study
is to demonstrate higher detection rate of EGFR gene mutation with peptide
nucleic acid (PNA) clamping compared with DS.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: This is a single arm, prospective study for patients with 
stage IIIB/IV or relapsed NSCLC. Using tumor DNA from 138 patients, both DS and
PNA clamping for EGFR gene in exon 18, 19, 20, and 21 were performed. Discrepant 
results between the two methods were verified using Cobas and a mutant enrichment
based next generation sequencing (NGS). Patients with activating mutations were
treated with EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor (EGFR-TKI, gefitinib, or erlotinib)
as first line treatment.
RESULTS: Of 138 paired test sets, 24 (17.4%) and 45 (32.6%) cases with activating
mutations were detected by DS and PNA clamping, respectively. The difference of
detection rate between the two methods was 15.2% (95% confidence interval, 8.7%
to 17.8%; p < 0.001). Between the two methods, 25 cases showed discrepant results
(n=23, PNA+/DS-; n=2, PNA-/DS+). Mutations were confirmed by Cobas or NGS in 22
of 23 PNA+/DS- cases. The response rates to EGFR-TKI were 72.2% in the PNA+/DS+
group and 85.0% in the PNA+/DS- group.
CONCLUSION: PNA clamping showed a significantly higher detection rate of EGFR
gene mutation compared with DS. Higher sensitivity of PNA clamping was not
compromised by the loss of predictive power of response to EGFR-TKI.

DOI: 10.4143/crt.2014.282 
PMCID: PMC4614223
PMID: 25715768  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. Oncotarget. 2015 Mar 20;6(8):5832-45.

Afatinib increases sensitivity to radiation in non-small cell lung cancer cells
with acquired EGFR T790M mutation.

Zhang S(1), Zheng X(2), Huang H(1), Wu K(1), Wang B(1), Chen X(3), Ma S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Affiliated Hangzhou Hospital of Nanjing
Medical University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China. (2)Centre of Molecular Medicine,
Zhejiang Academy of Medical Sciences, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China. (3)Department of
Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of California at Los Angeles, Los
Angeles, CA, USA.

Afatinib is a second-generation of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)
tyrosine kinase inhibitor and has shown a significant clinical benefit in
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients with EGFR-activating mutations.
However, the potential therapeutic effects of afatinib combining with other
modalities, including ionizing radiation (IR), are not well understood. In this
study, we developed a gefitinib-resistant cell subline (PC-9-GR) with a secondary
EGFR mutation (T790M) from NSCLC PC-9 cells after chronic exposures to increasing
doses of gefitinib. The presence of afatinib significantly increases the cell
killing effect of radiation in PC-9-GR cells harboring acquired T790M, but not in
H1975 cells with de novo T790M or in H460 cells that express wild-type EGFR. In
PC-9-GR cells, afatinib remarkable blocks baseline of EGFR and ERK
phosphorylations, and causes delay of IR-induced AKT phosphorylation. Afatinib
treatment also leads to increased apoptosis and suppressed DNA damage repair in
irradiated PC-9-GR cells, and enhanced tumor growth inhibition when combined with
IR in PC-9-GR xenografts. Our findings suggest a potential therapeutic impact of 
afatinib as a radiation sensitizer in lung cancer cells harboring acquired T790M 
mutation, providing a rationale for a clinical trial with combination of afatinib
and radiation in NSCLCs with EGFR T790M mutation.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.3332 
PMCID: PMC4467405
PMID: 25714021  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. Lung Cancer. 2015 Apr;88(1):74-9. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2015.01.026. Epub 2015
Feb 7.

Pooled safety analysis of EGFR-TKI treatment for EGFR mutation-positive non-small
cell lung cancer.

Takeda M(1), Okamoto I(2), Nakagawa K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Kinki University Faculty of Medicine, 377-2
Ohno-higashi, Osaka-Sayama 589-8511, Osaka, Japan. (2)Center for Clinical and
Translational Research, Kyushu University Hospital, 3-1-1 Maidashi, Higashi-ku,
Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan. Electronic address: okamotoi@kokyu.med.kyushu-u.ac.jp.

OBJECTIVES: Three epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase
inhibitors (TKIs) - afatinib, erlotinib, and gefitinib - are available for the
treatment of patients with EGFR mutation-positive non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC). Given the long-term exposure of such patients to EGFR-TKIs, the
toxicological properties of these agents in these individuals may differ from
those observed in unselected patients. We compared the frequencies of severe
adverse events (AEs) among EGFR mutation-positive NSCLC patients treated with
these three EGFR-TKIs.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We performed a pooled analysis of severe AEs according to 
the type of EGFR-TKI administered with the use of data extracted from prospective
clinical trials that evaluated the clinical efficacy of gefitinib, erlotinib, or 
afatinib in NSCLC patients with EGFR mutations.
RESULTS: Twenty-one trials published between 2006 and 2014 and including 1468
patients were eligible for analysis. Patients in 13 trials (n=457) received
gefitinib, those in 5 trials (n=513) received erlotinib, and those in 3 trials
(n=498) received afatinib. Rash and diarrhea of grade ≥3 were significantly more 
frequent with afatinib therapy than with erlotinib or gefitinib therapy. The
frequency of interstitial lung disease (ILD) of grade ≥3 was low (0.6-2.2%) with 
all three EGFR-TKIs and did not differ significantly among them. Gefitinib was
associated with a significantly higher frequency of hepatotoxicity of grade ≥3
compared with erlotinib or afatinib. The overall frequency of AEs leading to
treatment withdrawal was 6.1% (83 of 1354 evaluable patients), with such AEs
occurring significantly more often with afatinib or gefitinib than with
erlotinib. The most common withdrawal AEs were skin toxicity, ILD, and
hepatotoxicity.
CONCLUSION: Such information on AEs should facilitate selection of the most
appropriate EGFR-TKI for EGFR mutation-positive NSCLC patients with regard to
mitigation of the risk for certain types of toxicity.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2015.01.026 
PMID: 25704957  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. Lung Cancer. 2015 Apr;88(1):16-23. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2015.01.027. Epub 2015 
Feb 7.

Chronic nicotine exposure mediates resistance to EGFR-TKI in EGFR-mutated lung
cancer via an EGFR signal.

Togashi Y(1), Hayashi H(2), Okamoto K(3), Fumita S(3), Terashima M(1), de Velasco
MA(1), Sakai K(1), Fujita Y(1), Tomida S(1), Nakagawa K(4), Nishio K(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genome Biology, Kinki University Faculty of Medicine,
Osaka-Sayama, Osaka, Japan. (2)Department of Genome Biology, Kinki University
Faculty of Medicine, Osaka-Sayama, Osaka, Japan; Department of Medical Oncology, 
Kinki University Faculty of Medicine, Osaka-Sayama, Osaka, Japan; Department of
Medical Oncology, Kishiwada Municipal Hospital, Osaka, Japan. (3)Department of
Medical Oncology, Kinki University Faculty of Medicine, Osaka-Sayama, Osaka,
Japan; Department of Medical Oncology, Kishiwada Municipal Hospital, Osaka,
Japan. (4)Department of Medical Oncology, Kinki University Faculty of Medicine,
Osaka-Sayama, Osaka, Japan. (5)Department of Genome Biology, Kinki University
Faculty of Medicine, Osaka-Sayama, Osaka, Japan. Electronic address:
knishio@med.kindai.ac.jp.

BACKGROUND: Some of patients with non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) harboring
somatic activating mutations of the epidermal growth factor receptor gene (EGFR
mutations) show poor responses to EGFR-tyrosine kinase inhibitors (EGFR-TKIs)
treatment. Cigarette smoking is the strongest documented risk factor for the
development of lung cancer. Nicotine, while not carcinogenic by itself, has been 
shown to induce proliferation, angiogenesis, and the epithelial-mesenchymal
transition; these effects might be associated with EGFR-TKI resistance.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: PC-9 and 11_18 cell lines (EGFR-mutated NSCLC cell lines) 
were cultured with 1μM nicotine for 3 months and were designated as PC-9/N and
11_18/N cell lines, respectively. The sensitivities of these cell lines to
EGFR-TKI were then tested in vitro. Moreover, the association between the smoking
status and the progression-free survival (PFS) period was investigated in
patients with EGFR-mutated NSCLC who were treated with gefitinib.
RESULTS: The PC-9/N and 11_18/N cell lines were resistant to EGFR-TKI, compared
with controls. The phosphorylation of EGFR in these cell lines was reduced by
EGFR-TKI to a smaller extent than that observed in controls, and a higher
concentration of EGFR-TKI was capable of further decreasing the phosphorylation. 
Clinically, smoking history was an independent predictor of a poor PFS period on 
gefitinib treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: Chronic nicotine exposure because of cigarette smoking mediates
resistance to EGFR-TKI via an EGFR signal. Smoking cessation is of great
importance, while resistance may be overcome through the administration of
high-dose EGFR-TKI.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2015.01.027 
PMID: 25704955  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. Tumour Biol. 2015 Aug;36(8):5801-5. doi: 10.1007/s13277-015-3249-x. Epub 2015 Feb
22.

Statins augment efficacy of EGFR-TKIs in patients with advanced-stage non-small
cell lung cancer harbouring KRAS mutation.

Fiala O(1), Pesek M, Finek J, Minarik M, Benesova L, Bortlicek Z, Topolcan O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology and Radiotherapy, Medical School and Teaching Hospital 
in Pilsen, Charles University in Prague, alej Svobody 80, 304 60, Pilsen, Czech
Republic, fiala.o@centrum.cz.

Epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors (EGFR-TKIs) represent
novel effective agents approved for the treatment of patients with advanced-stage
NSCLC. KRAS mutations have been reported as a negative prognostic and predictive 
factor in patients with NSCLC treated with EGFR-TKIs. Several studies have
recently shown that statins can block tumour cell growth, invasion and metastatic
potential. We analysed clinical data of 67 patients with locally advanced (IIIB) 
or metastatic stage (IV) NSCLC harbouring Kirsten rat sarcoma viral oncogene
(KRAS) mutation treated with erlotinib or gefitinib. Twelve patients were treated
with combination of EGFR-TKI and statin and 55 patients were treated with
EGFR-TKI alone. Comparison of patients' survival (progression-free survival (PFS)
and overall survival (OS)) according to the treatment used was performed using
the Gehan-Wilcoxon test. The median of PFS and OS for patients treated with
EGFR-TKI alone was 1.0 and 5.4 months compared to 2.0 and 14.0 months for
patients treated with combination of EGFR-TKI and statin (p = 0.025, p = 0.130). 
In conclusion, the study results suggest significant improvement of PFS for
patients treated with combination of statin and EGFR-TKI, and the difference in
OS was not significant.

DOI: 10.1007/s13277-015-3249-x 
PMID: 25702091  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. J Geriatr Oncol. 2015 May;6(3):233-40. doi: 10.1016/j.jgo.2015.02.002. Epub 2015 
Feb 16.

Similar survival rates with first-line gefitinib, gemcitabine, or docetaxel in a 
randomized phase II trial in elderly patients with advanced non-small cell lung
cancer and a poor performance status (IFCT-0301).

Des Guetz G(1), Landre T(2), Westeel V(3), Milleron B(3), Vaylet F(3), Urban
T(3), Barlesi F(3), Souquet PJ(3), Debieuvre D(3), Braun D(3), Fraboulet G(3),
Monnet I(3), Uzzan B(3), Molinier O(3), Morin F(3), Moro-Sibilot D(3), Morère
JF(3).

Author information: 
(1)Intergroupe Francophone de Cancérologie Thoracique (IFCT), Paris, France;
Unité de Coordination Onco - Gériatrique (UCOG 93), HUPSSD - APHP, France.
(2)Intergroupe Francophone de Cancérologie Thoracique (IFCT), Paris, France;
Unité de Coordination Onco - Gériatrique (UCOG 93), HUPSSD - APHP, France.
Electronic address: thierry.landre@rmb.aphp.fr. (3)Intergroupe Francophone de
Cancérologie Thoracique (IFCT), Paris, France.

OBJECTIVES: We evaluated the impact of age in a randomized phase II trial that
compared three first-line drugs in elderly patients with advanced non-small cell 
lung cancer (NSCLC) and a poor performance status (PS).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Patients with advanced NSCLC with a PS of 2 or 3 were
enrolled into a multicenter randomized trial: arm A, gefitinib; arm B,
gemcitabine; and arm C, docetaxel. We performed subgroup analyses according to
age.
RESULTS: Between December 2004 and June 2007, 127 patients were enrolled.
Analyses were performed between the two subgroups aged <70years (younger, n=56)
and ≥70years (older, n=71). Patients mainly had adenocarcinoma (46% young vs.
51%: elderly), of which 62% vs. 75% had a PS of 2, respectively. Significantly
more elderly patients were women and non-smokers, and there was a non-significant
trend towards more PS-2 among the elderly. Progression-free survival (PFS) was
1.4months (95% CI: 1.1-1.9) for younger compared to 2.3months (95% CI: 2.1-2.9)
for elderly patients. Overall survival (OS) was 2.0months (95% CI: 1.5-2.4) and
3.7months (95% CI: 2.4-4.8), respectively. Toxicity did not differ between
younger and older patients. NSCLC was better controlled in elderly patients after
three cycles of monotherapy compared to younger patients (p=0.034). When adjusted
for stratification criteria, age was the main prognostic factor for PFS. Adjusted
HRs for PFS was 0.57 (95% CI: 0.38-0.85) for the elderly compared to patients
aged <70years (p=0.004).
CONCLUSIONS: Older patients had a decreased risk of progression/death compared to
younger patients. Single-agent chemotherapy can be considered for patients aged
≥70years with a PS of 2.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jgo.2015.02.002 
PMID: 25698450  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. Int J Oncol. 2015 May;46(5):2083-95. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2015.2898. Epub 2015 Feb
17.

Continuous exposure of non-small cell lung cancer cells with wild-type EGFR to an
inhibitor of EGFR tyrosine kinase induces chemoresistance by activating STAT3.

Tang J(1), Guo F(2), Du Y(1), Liu X(2), Qin Q(2), Liu X(2), Yin T(3), Jiang L(1),
Wang Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Abdominal Oncology, Cancer Center and State Key Laboratory of
Biotherapy, West China Hospita, Chengdu, Sichuan 610041, P.R. China.
(2)Department of Thoracic Oncology, Cancer Center and State Key Laboratory of
Biotherapy, West China Hospita, Chengdu, Sichuan 610041, P.R. China. (3)State Key
Laboratory of Biotherapy, Sichuan University, Chengdu, Sichuan 610041, P.R.
China.

Epidermal growth factor receptor-tyrosine kinase inhibitors (EGFR‑TKIs) have
shown promising effects against the growth of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) 
cells harboring EGFR mutations (EGFR‑mts). However, many patients with NSCLC that
are accepted for EGFR‑TKI treatment followed by chemotherapy possess an unknown
EGFR status including wild-type EGFR (EGFR‑wt). Little is known about the
potential effects of EGFR‑TKI treatment prior to chemotherapy. We investigated
the effects and underlying molecular events of 4 weeks of continuous exposure to 
EGFR‑TKIs in the EGFR‑wt NSCLC line H1299. This treatment dramatically increased 
the IC50 of several relevant chemotherapeutic agents: cisplatin (DDP) (29.25±6.1 
µM for gefitinib, 43.25±14.87 µM for erlotinib, and 6.92±1.15 µM for parental),
paclitaxel (11.16±3.36 µM for gefitinib, 9.16±1.41 µM for erlotinib, and
2.09±0.44 µM for parental), gemcitabine (47.18±6.2 µM for gefitinib, 40.36±11.1
µM for erlotinib, and 16.00±3.38 µM for parental) and pemetrexed (11.78±4.07 µM
for gefitinib, 15.97±7.23 µM for erlotinib, and 4.72±1.9 µM for parental). This
chemoresistance was critically dependent on the activation of the mediator signal
transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3). In cells exposed to
EGFR‑TKIs for 4 weeks, activation of STAT3 was found to be unrelated to EGFR and 
to be independent of IL‑6 and ‑22. Treatment with the STAT3 inhibitor NSC 74859
was able to reverse the TKI exposure-induced chemoresistance in EGFR‑wt NSCLC
cells. Similar phenomena were observed in H1975 cells harboring EGFR L858R and
T790M mutations. Based on the observed molecular events following long exposure
of an EGFR‑wt NSCLC cell line to an EGFR‑TKI, this study indicates that such
drugs should be not recommended for EGFR‑wt patients who can undergo
chemotherapy. This study also suggests that STAT3 inhibitors may aid in the
treatment NSCLC patients who exhibit EGFR‑TKI resistance due to an acquired T790M
mutation.

DOI: 10.3892/ijo.2015.2898 
PMID: 25695284  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. J Thorac Oncol. 2015 Mar;10(3):486-91. doi: 10.1097/JTO.0000000000000434.

Phase II trial of gefitinib in combination with bevacizumab as first-line therapy
for advanced non-small cell lung cancer with activating EGFR gene mutations: the 
Okayama Lung Cancer Study Group Trial 1001.

Ichihara E(1), Hotta K, Nogami N, Kuyama S, Kishino D, Fujii M, Kozuki T, Tabata 
M, Harada D, Chikamori K, Aoe K, Ueoka H, Hosokawa S, Bessho A, Hisamoto-Sato A, 
Kubo T, Oze I, Takigawa N, Tanimoto M, Kiura K.

Author information: 
(1)*Department of Respiratory Medicine, Okayama University Hospital, Okayama,
Japan; †Department of Hematology/Oncology, Vanderbilt Vanderbilt University
Medical Center, Nashville, TN; ‡Department of Respiratory Medicine, NHO Shikoku
Cancer Center, Matsuyama, Japan; §Department of Respiratory Medicine, NHO Iwakuni
Clinical Center, Iwakuni, Japan; ‖Department of Medical Oncology, NHO
Yamaguchi-Ube Medical Center, Ube, Japan; ¶Department of Respiratory Internal
Medicine, Japanese Red Cross Kobe Hospital, Kobe, Japan; #Division of Clinical
Oncology, Sumitomo Besshi Hospital, Niihama, Japan; **Department of Clinical
Research, NHO Yamaguchi-Ube Medical Center, Ube, Japan; ††Department of
Respiratory Medicine, Japanese Red Cross Okayama Hospital, Okayama, Japan;
‡‡Division of Epidemiology and Prevention, Aichi Cancer Center Research
Institute, Nagoya, Japan; and §§Department of General Internal Medicine 4,
Kawasaki Medical School, Okayama, Japan.

Comment in
    J Thorac Oncol. 2015 Aug;10(8):e79.
    J Thorac Oncol. 2015 Aug;10(8):e78-9.

PURPOSE: Whether bevacizumab enhances the effect of the epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR) inhibitor gefitinib on EGFR mutant non-small cell lung cancers
(NSCLCs) remains unknown. We conducted a phase II trial to investigate the
efficacy and safety of gefitinib when combined with bevacizumab as first-line
therapy in patients with advanced NSCLC harboring EGFR gene mutations.
METHODS: In this trial, 42 patients with a performance status of 0 to 2 received 
gefitinib (250 mg/d) and bevacizumab (15 mg/kg, every 3 weeks). The primary end
point of this study was the 1-year progression-free survival (PFS) rate. We
assumed that a 1-year PFS rate of 55% would indicate potential usefulness and
that a 1-year PFS rate of 40% would constitute the lower limit of interest.
RESULTS: Forty-two patients were enrolled in the study with a median age of 73
(range 42-86) years. Activating EGFR gene mutations included exon 19 deletion
(57%) and L858R point mutations in exon 21 (38%). The objective response rate was
73.8% and included two complete responses. The 1-year PFS rate and median PFS
time were 56.7% (95% confidence interval [CI] 39.9-70.5) and 14.4 months (95% CI 
10.1-19.2), respectively. The median PFS differed significantly between EGFR exon
19 deletion and the L858R point mutation (18.0 versus 9.4 months, respectively; p
= 0.006). The median overall survival had not yet been reached. Severe adverse
events included grade 3 skin rash (15%), hypertension (17%), aspartate
transaminase/alanine aminotransferase elevation (17%), proteinuria (7%),
intracranial hemorrhage (2%), and grade 4 perforation of the digestive tract
(2%). There were no treatment-related deaths.
CONCLUSION: Gefitinib in combination with bevacizumab as first-line therapy seems
to be a favorable and well-tolerated treatment for patients with advanced NSCLC
with activating EGFR gene mutations, especially those with EGFR exon 19 deletion 
mutations, although the primary end point was not met because the lower limit of 
the CI was less than 40%.

DOI: 10.1097/JTO.0000000000000434 
PMID: 25695221  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. Lung Cancer. 2015 Apr;88(1):63-9. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2015.01.013. Epub 2015
Jan 23.

Phase II study of afatinib, an irreversible ErbB family blocker, in
demographically and genotypically defined lung adenocarcinoma.

De Grève J(1), Moran T(2), Graas MP(3), Galdermans D(4), Vuylsteke P(5), Canon
JL(6), Schallier D(7), Decoster L(8), Teugels E(9), Massey D(10), Chand VK(11),
Vansteenkiste J(12).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Oncology, Oncologisch Centrum, UZ Brussel, Laarbeeklaan 101, 1090
Brussels, Belgium. Electronic address: jacques.degreve@uzbrussel.be. (2)Institut 
Catala d'Oncologia, Hospital Germans Trias I Pujol, Universitat Autònoma de
Barcelona, Departament de Medicina, Badalona, Spain. Electronic address:
mmoran@iconcologia.net. (3)Centre Hospitalier Chrétien, Liège, Belgium.
Electronic address: marie-pascale.graas@chc.be. (4)ZNA Middelheim Hospital,
Antwerp, Belgium. Electronic address: danny.galdermans@pandora.be. (5)Clinique et
Maternité Sainte-Elisabeth, Medical Oncology, Namur, Belgium. Electronic address:
peter.vuylsteke@cmsenamur.be. (6)Grand Hospital de Charleroi,
Oncologie-Hématologie, Grand Rue 3, Charleroi 6000, Belgium. Electronic address: 
jean_luc.canon@ghdc.be. (7)Medical Oncology, Oncologisch Centrum, UZ Brussel,
Laarbeeklaan 101, 1090 Brussels, Belgium. Electronic address:
denis.schallier@uzbrussel.be. (8)Medical Oncology, Oncologisch Centrum, UZ
Brussel, Laarbeeklaan 101, 1090 Brussels, Belgium. Electronic address:
lore.decoster@uzbrussel.be. (9)Medical Oncology, Oncologisch Centrum, UZ Brussel,
Laarbeeklaan 101, 1090 Brussels, Belgium. Electronic address:
Erik.Teugels@uzbrussel.be. (10)Boehringer Ingelheim, Ltd., Bracknell, Berkshire, 
UK. Electronic address: dan.massey.ext@boehringer-ingelheim.com. (11)Boehringer
Ingelheim Pharmaceuticals Inc., Ridgefield, CT, USA. Electronic address:
vikram.chand@boehringer-ingelheim.com. (12)Respiratory Oncology Unit, Department 
of Pulmonology, University Hospitals KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. Electronic
address: johan.vansteenkiste@uz.kuleuven.ac.be.

OBJECTIVES: Afatinib, an oral irreversible ErbB family blocker, has demonstrated 
efficacy in patients with epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)
mutation-positive advanced lung adenocarcinoma. Other potential biomarkers
predicting response to afatinib, such as human epidermal growth factor receptor-2
(HER2) mutations and EGFR gene amplification, have not been validated yet. This
phase II study investigated whether afatinib conferred clinical benefit in
cohorts of adenocarcinoma patients with: (1) EGFR mutation and failing on
erlotinib/gefitinib; or (2) increased copy number of EGFR by fluorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH); or (3) HER2 mutation.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Patients started daily afatinib 50mg monotherapy. Upon
disease progression, patients could continue, at the investigator's discretion,
afatinib (40mg) with the addition of paclitaxel (80mg/m(2) weekly for 3
weeks/4-week cycle). Endpoints included confirmed objective response (OR),
progression-free survival (PFS), disease control, and safety.
RESULTS: Of 41 patients treated (cohort 1: n=32; cohort 2: n=2; cohort 3: n=7),
33 received afatinib monotherapy; eight subsequently received afatinib plus
paclitaxel. With afatinib monotherapy, one patient achieved a confirmed OR
(partial response [PR]; cohort 2). Two further patients achieved unconfirmed PRs 
(one each in cohort 1 and cohort 3). Disease control was achieved by 17/32 (53%),
2/2 (100%) and 5/7 (71%) patients in cohorts 1, 2 and 3, respectively. In
patients receiving combination therapy (median PFS: 6.7 weeks), one (cohort 3)
had confirmed PR of 41.9 weeks. The most common afatinib-related adverse events
were diarrhea (95%) and rash/acne (80%).
CONCLUSION: Afatinib demonstrated signs of clinical activity in heavily
pretreated patients with activating HER2 or EGFR mutations or EGFR FISH-positive 
tumors.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2015.01.013 
PMID: 25682316  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. Onco Targets Ther. 2014 Dec 31;8:111-5. doi: 10.2147/OTT.S76712. eCollection
2015.

Lung cancer patients harboring epidermal growth factor receptor mutation among
those infected by human immunodeficiency virus.

Okuma Y(1), Hosomi Y(1), Imamura A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Oncology and Respiratory Medicine, Tokyo Metropolitan
Cancer and Infectious diseases Center Komagome Hospital, Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Department of Infectious Disease, Tokyo Metropolitan Cancer and Infectious
diseases Center Komagome Hospital, Tokyo, Japan.

With the advent of antiretroviral therapy, lung cancer has become a crucial
health problem among individuals living with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). 
In East Asian populations, the frequency of lung cancer patients harboring
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutations is greater than in other
populations. Herein, we present two cases of advanced non-small cell lung cancer 
with EGFR mutations in patients treated with EGFR-tyrosine kinase inhibitors.
Both patients were male, 67 and 59 years of age, with known HIV infection and
immunologically stable disease with antiretroviral therapy. Case 1 was treated
with erlotinib for recurrent adenocarcinoma metastasizing to the liver and brain 
harboring EGFR mutation in exon 21 L858R. The duration of treatment efficacy was 
9.7 months. Case 2 had an EGFR mutation exon 19 in-frame deletion with bone
metastasis and was treated with gefitinib for 22.1 months in combination with
antiretroviral therapy. These advanced lung cancer patients living with HIV with 
EGFR mutations demonstrate the promising effectiveness and safety of
EGFR-tyrosine kinase inhibitors concomitant with antiretroviral therapy for an
extended period.

DOI: 10.2147/OTT.S76712 
PMCID: PMC4317148
PMID: 25678798  [PubMed]


460. Future Oncol. 2015;11(3):385-97. doi: 10.2217/fon.14.249.

Icotinib, a selective EGF receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor, for the treatment
of non-small-cell lung cancer.

Tan F(1), Shi Y, Wang Y, Ding L, Yuan X, Sun Y.

Author information: 
(1)Betta Pharmaceuticals Co., Ltd, Hangzhou, China.

Advanced non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is the main cause for cancer-related 
mortality. Treatments for advanced NSCLC are largely palliative and a benefit
plateau appears to have reached with the platinum-based chemotherapy regimens.
EGF receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase inhibitors gefitinib, erlotinib and afatinib 
came up with prolonged progression-free survival and improved quality of life,
especially in EGFR-mutated patients. Icotinib is an oral selective EGFR tyrosine 
kinase, which was approved by China Food and Drug administration in June 2011 for
treating advanced NSCLC. Its approval was based on the registered Phase III trial
(ICOGEN), which showed icotinib is noninferior to gefitinib. This review will
discuss the role of icotinib in NSCLC, and its potential application and ongoing 
investigations.

DOI: 10.2217/fon.14.249 
PMID: 25675121  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. Onco Targets Ther. 2015 Jan 29;8:269-77. doi: 10.2147/OTT.S62128. eCollection
2015.

NVP-BEZ235 overcomes gefitinib-acquired resistance by down-regulating
PI3K/AKT/mTOR phosphorylation.

Sun Z(1), Li Q(2), Zhang S(2), Chen J(2), Huang L(3), Ren J(2), Chang Y(2), Liang
Y(2), Wu G(2).

Author information: 
(1)Oncology department, Xiangyang central Hospital, Xiangyang, Hubei, People's
Republic of China. (2)Cancer Center, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei, People's Republic of
China. (3)Radiation Oncology Department, Fifth Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen
University, Zhuhai, Guangdong, People's Republic of China.

BACKGROUND: Patients harboring activating mutations in epidermal growth factor
receptors (EGFR) are particularly sensitive to EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors
(TKIs). However, most patients develop an acquired resistance after a period of
about 10 months. This study focuses on the therapeutic effect of NVP-BEZ235, a
dual inhibitor of phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase/mammalian target of rapamycin
(PI3K/mTOR), in gefitinib-resistant non-small cell lung cancer.
METHODS: H1975 cell line was validated as a gefitinib-resistant cell model by the
nucleotide-sequence analysis. We used the
3-(4,5-Dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) assay to
detect the growth of H1975 cell line in vitro. H1975 cells' migration was
detected by the migration assay. Xenograft models were used to investigate the
growth of gefitinib-resistant non-small cell lung cancer in vivo. Western blot
and immunohistochemical analysis were used to investigate the level of
PI3K/protein kinase B(AKT)/mTOR signaling pathway proteins.
RESULTS: We show that NVP-BEZ235 effectively inhibited the growth of H1975 cells 
in vivo as well as in vitro. Similarly, H1975 cell migration was reduced by
NVP-BEZ235. Further experiments revealed that NVP-BEZ235 attenuated the
phosphorylation of PI3K/AKT/mTOR signaling pathway proteins.
CONCLUSION: Taken together, we suggest that NVP-BEZ235 inhibits
gefitinib-resistant tumor growth by downregulating PI3K/AKT/mTOR phosphorylation.

DOI: 10.2147/OTT.S62128 
PMCID: PMC4321659
PMID: 25674002  [PubMed]


462. Onco Targets Ther. 2015 Jan 28;8:259-63. doi: 10.2147/OTT.S76860. eCollection
2015.

Changes in sebum levels and the development of acneiform rash in patients with
non-small cell lung cancer after treatment with EGFR inhibitors.

Nakahara T(1), Moroi Y(2), Takayama K(3), Itoh E(1), Kido-Nakahara M(2),
Nakanishi Y(3), Furue M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Skin Surface Sensing, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan ;
Department of Dermatology, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan. (2)Department of
Dermatology, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan. (3)Research Institute for
Diseases of the Chest, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu University,
Fukuoka, Japan.

BACKGROUND: It has recently been shown that patients treated with epidermal
growth factor receptor (EGFR) inhibitors often develop various cutaneous adverse 
events. While the pathogenesis underlying these events remains unclear, the
relationship between skin toxicity induced by EGFR inhibitors and the sebaceous
glands that express EGFR has been previously reported.
OBJECTIVES: The primary aim of this study was to determine the relationship
between cutaneous sebum levels and acneiform rash, a typical skin toxicity of
EGFR inhibitors, by measuring the sebum levels before and after EGFR inhibitor
treatment.
METHODS: Eight patients diagnosed with non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) (three 
men and five women with an average age of 69.3 years) who were initiated on
treatment with EGFR inhibitors (either gefitinib [Iressa(®)] or erlotinib
[Tarceva(®)]) were enrolled. Using a Sebumeter(®), sebum levels in the face,
chest, and back of each patient were measured before and after EGFR inhibitor
treatment. The development of acneiform rash in each skin region was also
assessed.
RESULTS: Changes in sebum level along with the development of an acneiform rash
were observed after patients were started on EGFR inhibitor treatment. Patients
who developed an EGFR inhibitor-induced acneiform rash tended to have higher
pretreatment sebum levels (baseline) than did patients who did not experience an 
acneiform rash. At each time point measurement, sebum levels were found to be
significantly higher in patients who had developed an acneiform rash at that
time. Patients who developed rash during treatment showed greater differences in 
sebum level compared with pretreatment baseline.
CONCLUSION: Patients who had increased levels of sebum or whose sebum levels
showed greater change from pretreatment baseline developed an acneiform rash,
suggesting that sebaceous gland activity may be involved in the mechanism
underlying the development of acneiform rash, in patients treated with EGFR
inhibitors.

DOI: 10.2147/OTT.S76860 
PMCID: PMC4315547
PMID: 25670908  [PubMed]


463. Ann Oncol. 2015 May;26(5):888-94. doi: 10.1093/annonc/mdv063. Epub 2015 Feb 10.

Randomized phase II study of concurrent versus sequential alternating gefitinib
and chemotherapy in previously untreated non-small cell lung cancer with
sensitive EGFR mutations: NEJ005/TCOG0902.

Sugawara S(1), Oizumi S(2), Minato K(3), Harada T(4), Inoue A(5), Fujita Y(6),
Maemondo M(7), Yoshizawa H(8), Ito K(9), Gemma A(10), Nishitsuji M(11), Harada
M(12), Isobe H(13), Kinoshita I(14), Morita S(15), Kobayashi K(16), Hagiwara
K(17), Kurihara M(18), Nukiwa T; North East Japan Study Group and Tokyo
Cooperative Oncology Group.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Sendai Kousei Hospital, Sendai. (2)First
Department of Medicine, Hokkaido University School of Medicine, Sapporo
soizumi@med.hokudai.ac.jp. (3)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Gunma
Prefectural Cancer Center, Gunma. (4)Center for Respiratory Diseases, JCHO
Hokkaido Hospital, Sapporo. (5)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Tohoku
University Hospital, Sendai. (6)Department of Respiratory Medicine, National
Hospital Organization Asahikawa Medical Center, Asahikawa. (7)Department of
Respiratory Medicine, Miyagi Cancer Center, Natori. (8)Bioscience Medical
Research Center, Niigata University Medical and Dental Hospital, Niigata.
(9)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Niigata City General Hospital, Niigata.
(10)Department of Pulmonary Medicine and Oncology, Nippon Medical School,
Graduate School of Medicine, Tokyo. (11)Department of Respiratory Medicine,
Ishikawa Prefectural Central Hospital, Kanazawa. (12)Department of Respiratory
Medicine, National Hospital Organization Hokkaido Cancer Center, Sapporo.
(13)Department of Medical Oncology, KKR Sapporo Medical Center, Sapporo.
(14)Department of Medical Oncology, Hokkaido University Graduate School of
Medicine, Sapporo. (15)Department of Biomedical Statistics and Bioinformatics,
Kyoto University Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto. (16)Department of
Respiratory Medicine, Saitama Medical University International Medical Center,
Hidaka. (17)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Saitama Medical University,
Saitama. (18)Tokyo Cooperative Oncology Group, Tokyo.

BACKGROUND: The first-line combination of an epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR) tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) and platinum-based doublet chemotherapy
has not been sufficiently evaluated for patients with EGFR-mutant non-small cell 
lung cancer (NSCLC). This randomized phase II study was designed to select a
combination regimen for phase III evaluation.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Chemotherapy-naïve patients with advanced non-squamous,
EGFR-mutant NSCLC were randomly assigned to receive either a concurrent or a
sequential alternating regimen with gefitinib (250 mg) and carboplatin/pemetrexed
[area under the curve (AUC) = 6 and 500 mg/m(2); 3-weekly]. The primary end point
was progression-free survival (PFS). Secondary end points were overall survival
(OS), response, and safety.
RESULTS: All 80 patients enrolled were eligible and assessable for efficacy (41
and 39 patients in the concurrent and sequential alternating regimen groups,
respectively). Median PFS was 18.3 months for the concurrent regimen and 15.3
months for the sequential alternating regimen [hazard ratio (HR) 0.71
(0.42-1.20), P = 0.20]. Although OS data are immature (16 and 24 death events),
median survival times were 41.9 and 30.7 months in the concurrent and sequential 
alternating regimen groups, respectively [HR 0.51 (0.26-0.99); P = 0.042].
Response rates were similar in both groups (87.8% and 84.6%). Hematological and
non-hematological adverse events were common and reversible; interstitial lung
disease was neither frequent nor fatal (two cases in each group; 5% of all
patients).
CONCLUSION: This is the first randomized study to investigate the efficacy of
combinational EGFR-TKI and chemotherapy in the EGFR-mutated setting. Both
regimens had promising efficacy with predictable toxicities, although concurrent 
regimens might provide better OS. The concurrent regimen was chosen to compare
with gefitinib monotherapy in our ongoing phase III study.
CLINICAL TRIALS REGISTRATION: University Hospital Medical Information Network
(UMIN) Clinical Trial Registry (UMIN C000002789).

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the European
Society for Medical Oncology. All rights reserved. For permissions, please email:
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/annonc/mdv063 
PMID: 25669832  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. Exp Cell Res. 2015 May 15;334(1):126-35. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2015.01.016. Epub
2015 Feb 4.

Down-regulation of ERK1/2 and AKT-mediated X-ray repair cross-complement group 1 
protein (XRCC1) expression by Hsp90 inhibition enhances the gefitinib-induced
cytotoxicity in human lung cancer cells.

Tung CL(1), Jian YJ(2), Syu JJ(3), Wang TJ(3), Chang PY(3), Chen CY(3), Jian
YT(3), Lin YW(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Ditmanson Medical Foundation Chia-Yi Christian
Hospital, Chiayi, Taiwan. (2)Department of Pathology, Ditmanson Medical
Foundation Chia-Yi Christian Hospital, Chiayi, Taiwan; Department of Biochemical 
Science and Technology, National Chiayi University, 300 Syuefu Road, Chiayi 600, 
Taiwan. (3)Department of Biochemical Science and Technology, National Chiayi
University, 300 Syuefu Road, Chiayi 600, Taiwan. (4)Department of Biochemical
Science and Technology, National Chiayi University, 300 Syuefu Road, Chiayi 600, 
Taiwan. Electronic address: linyw@mail.ncyu.edu.tw.

Gefitinib (Iressa(R), ZD1839) is a selective epidermal growth factor
receptor-tyrosine kinase inhibitor (EGFR-TKI) that blocks growth factor-mediated 
cell proliferation and extracellular signal-regulated kinases 1/2 (ERK1/2) and
AKT signaling activation. It has been shown that inhibition of Hsp90 function can
enhance antitumor activity of EGFR-TKI. XRCC1 is an important scaffold protein in
base excision repair, which could be regulated by ERK1/2 and AKT pathways.
However, the role of ERK1/2 and AKT-mediated XRCC1 expression in gefitinib alone 
or combination with an Hsp90 inhibitor-induced cytotoxicity in non-small cell
lung cancer (NSCLC) cells has not been identified. In this study, gefitinib
treatment decreased XRCC1 mRNA and protein expression through ERK1/2 and AKT
inactivation in two NSCLC cells, A549 and H1975. Knocking down XRCC1 expression
by transfection with small interfering RNA of XRCC1 enhanced the cytotoxicity and
cell growth inhibition of gefitinib. Combining treatment of gefitinib with an
Hsp90 inhibitor resulted in enhancing the reduction of XRCC1 protein and mRNA
levels in gefitinib-exposed A549 and H1975 cells. Compared to a single agent
alone, gefitinib combined with an Hsp90 inhibitor resulted in cytotoxicity and
cell growth inhibition synergistically in NSCLC cells. Furthermore, transfection 
with constitutive active MKK1 or AKT vectors rescued the XRCC1 protein level as
well as the cell survival suppressed by an Hsp90 inhibitor and gefitinib. These
findings suggested that down-regulation of XRCC1 can enhance the sensitivity of
gefitinib for NSCLC cells.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2015.01.016 
PMID: 25662161  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. Thorax. 2015 Apr;70(4):359-67. doi: 10.1136/thoraxjnl-2014-205914. Epub 2015 Feb 
6.

A systematic review of the clinical effectiveness of first-line chemotherapy for 
adult patients with locally advanced or metastatic non-small cell lung cancer.

Pilkington G(1), Boland A(1), Brown T(2), Oyee J(3), Bagust A(1), Dickson R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Liverpool Reviews and Implementation Group (LRiG), University of Liverpool,
Liverpool, UK. (2)Centre for Population Health Sciences, University of Edinburgh,
Edinburgh, UK. (3)Covance Clinical Development Services, Maidenhead, UK.

Our aim was to evaluate the clinical effectiveness of chemotherapy treatments
currently licensed in Europe and recommended by the National Institute for Health
and Care Excellence (NICE) for the first-line treatment of adult patients with
locally advanced or metastatic non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). A systematic
search of MEDLINE, EMBASE and the Cochrane Library for randomised controlled
trials (RCTs) published from 2001 to 2010 was carried out. Relative treatment
effects for overall survival (OS) and progression-free survival (PFS) were
estimated using standard meta-analysis and mixed treatment comparison
methodology. A total of 23 RCTs were included: 18 trials compared platinum-based 
chemotherapy, two compared pemetrexed and three compared gefitinib. There are no 
statistically significant differences in OS between any of the four
third-generation chemotherapy regimens. There is statistically significant
evidence that pemetrexed+platinum increases OS compared with
gemcitabine+platinum. There are no statistically significant differences in OS
between gefitinib and docetaxel+platinum or between gefitinib and
paclitaxel+platinum. There is a statistically significant improvement in PFS with
gefitinib compared with docetaxel+platinum and gefitinib compared with
paclitaxel+platinum. Due to reduced generic pricing, third-generation
chemotherapy regimens (except vinorelbine) are still competitive options for most
patients. This research provides a comprehensive evidence base, which clinicians 
and decision-makers can use when deciding on the optimal first-line chemotherapy 
treatment regimen for patients diagnosed with locally advanced or metastatic
NSCLC.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

DOI: 10.1136/thoraxjnl-2014-205914 
PMID: 25661113  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. Oncologist. 2015 Mar;20(3):307-15. doi: 10.1634/theoncologist.2014-0285. Epub
2015 Feb 5.

The role of smoking status on the progression-free survival of non-small cell
lung cancer patients harboring activating epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)
mutations receiving first-line EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor versus platinum
doublet chemotherapy: a meta-analysis of prospective randomized trials.

Hasegawa Y(1), Ando M(2), Maemondo M(1), Yamamoto S(1), Isa S(1), Saka H(1), Kubo
A(1), Kawaguchi T(1), Takada M(1), Rosell R(1), Kurata T(1), Ou SH(2).

Author information: 
(1)Izumi Municipal Hospital, Osaka, Japan; Nagoya University Hospital, Nagoya,
Aichi, Japan; Miyagi Cancer Center, Miyagi, Japan; University of Kansas Cancer
Center, Kansas City, Kansas, USA; National Hospital Organization Kinki-Chuo Chest
Medical Center, Osaka, Japan; National Hospital Organization Nagoya Medical
Center, Aichi, Japan; Aichi Medical University School of Medicine, Nagoya, Aichi,
Japan; Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka City University, Osaka, Japan; Koyo
Hospital, Wakayama, Japan; Catalan Institute of Oncology, Barcelona, Spain;
Kansai Medical University Hirakata Hospital, Osaka, Japan; Chao Family
Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of California Irvine School of Medicine, 
Orange, California, USA. (2)Izumi Municipal Hospital, Osaka, Japan; Nagoya
University Hospital, Nagoya, Aichi, Japan; Miyagi Cancer Center, Miyagi, Japan;
University of Kansas Cancer Center, Kansas City, Kansas, USA; National Hospital
Organization Kinki-Chuo Chest Medical Center, Osaka, Japan; National Hospital
Organization Nagoya Medical Center, Aichi, Japan; Aichi Medical University School
of Medicine, Nagoya, Aichi, Japan; Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka City
University, Osaka, Japan; Koyo Hospital, Wakayama, Japan; Catalan Institute of
Oncology, Barcelona, Spain; Kansai Medical University Hirakata Hospital, Osaka,
Japan; Chao Family Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of California Irvine
School of Medicine, Orange, California, USA Ignatius.ou@uci.edu
mando@med.nagoya-u.ac.jp.

BACKGROUND: Univariate analyses from several randomized phase III trials seemed
to suggest ever-smokers with advanced mutated epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFRm) non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) did not seem to benefit from EGFR
tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) as first-line treatment when compared with
platinum-doublet chemotherapy as measured by progression-free survival (PFS).
METHODS: A literature-based meta-analysis of PFS outcomes as measured by
log-transformed pooled hazard ratio (HR) was performed using a random-effect
model. Pooled HRs for smoking status, age, gender, ethnicity, type of EGFR
mutation, and EGFR TKI were obtained. Comparison of the pooled HR was performed
by metaregression analysis.
RESULTS: Among the 1,649 EGFRm NSCLC patients analyzed from 7 prospective
randomized trials (WJTOG3405, NEJ002, EURTAC, OPTIMAL, LUX Lung-3, LUX Lung-6,
and ENSURE), 83.7% were Asians, and 30.0% were ever-smokers. An equal percentage 
of ever-smokers received doublet chemotherapy (30.2%) or EGFR TKI (30.0%). The
pooled HR for PFS was 0.29 (95% confidence interval [CI]: 0.21-0.39) for
never-smokers and 0.54 (95% CI: 0.38-0.76) for ever-smokers (p < .007 by
metaregression). The pooled PFS HR for exon 19 deletion was 0.25 (95% CI:
0.19-0.31) and 0.44 for exon 21 substitution (95% CI: 0.34-0.57) (p < .001 by
metaregression analysis). The pooled PFS HR was 0.33 (95% CI: 0.24-0.46) for
Asians and 0.48 for non-Asians (95% CI: 0.28-0.84) (p = .261 by metaregression
analysis).
CONCLUSION: EGFRm NSCLC patients derived significant PFS benefit from TKI over
platinum-doublet chemotherapy as first-line treatment regardless of smoking
status; however, PFS benefit is significantly better in never-smokers by
metaregression analysis.

©AlphaMed Press.

DOI: 10.1634/theoncologist.2014-0285 
PMCID: PMC4350797
PMID: 25657199  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. Int J Oncol. 2015 Apr;46(4):1721-9. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2015.2871. Epub 2015 Feb 4.

EGF‑stimulated AKT activation is mediated by EGFR recycling via an early
endocytic pathway in a gefitinib‑resistant human lung cancer cell line.

Nishimura Y(1), Takiguchi S(2), Ito S(3), Itoh K(4).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pharmaceutical Cell Biology, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Kyushu University, Fukuoka 812‑8582, Japan. (2)Institute for Clinical
Research, National Kyushu Cancer Center, Fukuoka 811‑1395, Japan. (3)Institute of
Biomaterials and Bioengineering, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Tokyo
101‑0062, Japan. (4)Department of Biology, Osaka Medical Center for Cancer and
Cardiovascular Diseases, Osaka 537‑8511, Japan.

The receptor tyrosine kinase epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) and its
ligand epidermal growth factor (EGF) are known to play important roles in
malignant tumor cells, and the EGFR signaling pathway is one of the most
important targets in various tumors, including non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC). We reported recently that an aberration in certain steps of
EGF-stimulated phosphorylated epidermal growth factor receptor (pEGFR) endocytic 
trafficking from the early endosomes to the late endosomes occurs in the
gefitinib-resistant NSCLC cells, in which large amounts of sorting nexin 1 (SNX1)
are colocalized with EGFR in the aggregated early endosomes where the
internalized pEGFR is also accumulated of these cells. To further investigate the
role of SNX1 in EGF‑stimulated pEGFR endocytosis, followed by downstream
signaling leading to the activation of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)--the 
serine/threonine kinase AKT pathway, we examined the effect of depletion of SNX1 
knock-down expression by siRNA and an inhibition of targeting membrane recycling 
using monensin. Using immunofluorescence, we observed an efficient endocytic
transport of pEGFR from early endosomes to late endosomes/lysosomes after
EGF-stimulation in the cells transfected with siRNA‑SNX1, whereas the delayed
endocytic delivery of pEGFR was evident in the siRNA-control-transfected cells.
Furthermore, a large amount of endocytosed pEGFR was accumulated in the presence 
of monensin in the early endosomes of the SNX1 knock-down cells. In western blot 
analysis, EGF stimulation of both control and cells transfected with siRNA-SNX1
resulted in rapid phosphorylation of EGFR and enhanced AKT phosphorylation.
Monensin-dependent inhibition of AKT phosphorylation was stronger in SNX1
knock-down cells than in controls. In contrast, however, monensin had no effect
on AKT phosphorylation triggered by activation of the MET receptor tyrosine
kinase. Collectively, we suggest that EGF-stimulated recycling of EGFR to the
plasma membrane induces downstream signaling leading to AKT phosphorylation.
Suppression of EGFR membrane recycling by SNX1 appears to be critical for the
activation of EGFR/PI3K/AKT signaling pathway in human lung cancer cells.

DOI: 10.3892/ijo.2015.2871 
PMID: 25653196  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. Target Oncol. 2015 Mar;10(1):153-70. doi: 10.1007/s11523-015-0358-9. Epub 2015
Feb 1.

Gefitinib: a review of its use in adults with advanced non-small cell lung
cancer.

Dhillon S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Springer, Private Bag 65901, Mairangi Bay, 0754, Auckland, New Zealand,
demail@springer.com.

Gefitinib (Iressa®) is a selective small-molecule epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase inhibitor (EGFR TKI) indicated for the treatment 
of adults with locally advanced or metastatic non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) 
with activating mutations of EGFR tyrosine kinase. Large phase III or IV clinical
trials in patients with locally advanced or metastatic NSCLC showed that
gefitinib as first- or subsequent-line treatment significantly prolonged
progression-free survival (PFS) and improved objective response rates and/or
health-related quality of life parameters in patients with activating EGFR
mutations and in clinically selected patients (e.g., Asian patients or
never-smokers) who are more likely to harbour these mutations. Overall survival
did not increase significantly with gefitinib, although post-study treatments may
have had a confounding effect on this outcome. Gefitinib was generally well
tolerated in these studies, with mild or moderate skin reactions,
gastrointestinal disturbances and elevations in liver enzymes among the most
common adverse reactions in gefitinib recipients; interstitial lung disease has
also been reported in <6 % of gefitinib recipients. Compared with chemotherapy,
gefitinib as first- or subsequent-line therapy provided similar or greater PFS
benefit and was generally associated with fewer haematological adverse events,
neurotoxicity, asthenic disorders, as well as grade ≥3 adverse events. Although
the position of gefitinib with respect to other EGFR TKIs is not definitively
established, current evidence indicates that gefitinib monotherapy is an
effective and generally well-tolerated first- or subsequent-line treatment option
for patients with NSCLC and activating EGFR mutations who have not received an
EGFR TKI previously.

DOI: 10.1007/s11523-015-0358-9 
PMID: 25637458  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. Future Oncol. 2015;11(8):1245-57. doi: 10.2217/fon.15.15. Epub 2015 Jan 28.

Common EGFR-mutated subgroups (Del19/L858R) in advanced non-small-cell lung
cancer: chasing better outcomes with tyrosine kinase inhibitors.

Reguart N(1), Remon J.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Oncology Department, Hospital Clínic, Villarroel 170, 08036 Barcelona,
Spain.

Ten years ago, somatic mutations in EGFR were identified in patients with
non-small-cell lung cancer. Demonstration of the antitumor efficacy of EGF
receptor-directed tyrosine kinase inhibitors resulted in their approval for the
treatment of advanced non-small-cell lung cancer. Insights into the role of
EGFR-sensitizing mutations and acquired and de novo T790M resistance mutations
followed, and differences in progression-free survival for patients with EGFR
Del19- and L858R-mutated tumors treated with reversible first-generation EGF
receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors were reported. Recently, overall survival
benefit in patients with Del19- but not L858R-mutated tumors has been
demonstrated after treatment with afatinib, an irreversible ErbB family blocker. 
Although the biology underlying this difference in survival is currently unclear,
this review examines several hypotheses.

DOI: 10.2217/fon.15.15 
PMID: 25629371  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. Med Oncol. 2015 Mar;32(3):40. doi: 10.1007/s12032-014-0474-x. Epub 2015 Jan 25.

Phase II trial of carboplatin, S-1, and gefitinib as first-line triplet
chemotherapy for advanced non-small cell lung cancer patients with activating
epidermal growth factor receptor mutations.

Tamiya A(1), Tamiya M, Shiroyama T, Saijo N, Nakatani T, Minomo S, Tsuji T,
Takeuchi N, Omachi N, Kurata K, Suzuki H, Okamoto N, Okishio K, Hirashima T,
Atagi S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Kinki-Chuo Chest Medical Center, Osaka,
Japan.

Gefitinib, an epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor
(EGFR-TKI), is an effective treatment for advanced non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC) in patients with activating EGFR mutations. However, there have been
little evidence-based studies of gefitinib in combination with platinum-doublet
therapy in these patients. We performed a phase II trial to determine the
efficacy and safety of triplet chemotherapy with gefitinib, carboplatin, and S-1 
as a first-line treatment. This was a multicentre, single-arm, phase II trial of 
carboplatin, S-1, and gefitinib in advanced NSCLC patients with activating EGFR
mutations. Patients received four courses of these drugs in 3-4 week cycles. In
each cycle, carboplatin (area under curve = 5) was administered on day 1, S-1 (80
mg/m(2)) on days 1-14, and gefitinib (250 mg) every day. Subsequently, the same
regimen without carboplatin was administered until disease progression or
unacceptable toxicity occurred. The 1-year progression-free survival (PFS) was
the primary endpoint, while response rate (RR), PFS, overall survival (OS), and
safety were secondary endpoints. Thirty-five patients were enrolled into this
study. The 1-year PFS was 74.3% and the overall RR was 85.7%. The median PFS for 
all patients was 17.6 months (95% confidence interval 15.5-∞), but the median OS 
was not reached, because 28 patients were still alive after a median follow-up
time of 21.4 months. Haematological adverse events (grade 3 or higher) included
neutropaenia (17.1%), thrombocytopenia (14.3%), and anaemia (5.7%), while
non-haematological adverse events (grade 3 or higher) included elevated
aminotransferase (20.0%), diarrhoea (14.3%), and febrile neutropaenia (2.9%). No 
interstitial lung disease or treatment-related deaths occurred. Combination
chemotherapy with carboplatin, S-1, and gefitinib is efficacious and well
tolerated as a first-line treatment in advanced NSCLC patients with activating
EGFR mutations.

DOI: 10.1007/s12032-014-0474-x 
PMID: 25616723  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. Cancer Biol Med. 2014 Dec;11(4):270-6. doi: 10.7497/j.issn.2095-3941.2014.04.006.

Effect of EGFR-TKI retreatment following chemotherapy for advanced non-small cell
lung cancer patients who underwent EGFR-TKI.

Xia GH(1), Zeng Y(1), Fang Y(1), Yu SR(1), Wang L(1), Shi MQ(1), Sun WL(1), Huang
XE(1), Chen J(1), Feng JF(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Jiangsu Cancer Hospital, Nanjing 210009,
China.

OBJECTIVE: Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients with epidermal growth
factor receptor (EGFR)-activating mutations have higher response rate and more
prolonged survival following treatment with single-agent EGFR tyrosine kinase
inhibitor (EGFR-TKI) compared with patients with wild-type EGFR. However, all
patients treated with reversible inhibitors develop acquired resistance over
time. The mechanisms of resistance are complicated. The lack of established
therapeutic options for patients after a failed EGFR-TKI treatment poses a great 
challenge to physicians in managing this group of lung cancer patients. This
study evaluates the influence of EGFR-TKI retreatment following chemotherapy
after failure of initial EGFR-TKI within at least 6 months on NSCLC patients.
METHODS: The data of 27 patients who experienced treatment failure from their
initial use of EGFR-TKI within at least 6 months were analyzed. After
chemotherapy, the patients were retreated with EGFR-TKI (gefitinib 250 mg qd or
erlotinib 150 mg qd), and the tumor progression was observed. The patients were
assessed for adverse events and response to therapy. Targeted tumor lesions were 
assessed with CT scan.
RESULTS: Of the 27 patients who received EGFR-TKI retreatment, 1 (3.7%) patient
was observed in complete response (CR), 8 (29.6%) patients in partial response
(PR), 14 (51.9%) patients in stable disease (SD), and 4 (14.8%) patients in
progressive disease (PD). The disease control rate (DCR) was 85.2% (95% CI:
62%-94%). The median progression-free survival (mPFS) was 6 months (95% CI:
1-29). Of the 13 patients who received the same EGFR-TKI, 1 patient in CR, 3
patients in PR, 8 patients in SD, and 2 patients in PD were observed. The DCR was
84.6%, and the mPFS was 5 months. Of the 14 patients who received another
EGFR-TKI, no patient in CR, 6 patients in PR, 6 patients in SD, and 2 patients in
PD were observed. The DCR was 85.7%, and the mPFS was 9.5 months. Significant
difference was found between the two groups in PFS but not in response rate or
DCR.
CONCLUSION: Retreatment of EGFR-TKIs can be considered an option after failure of
chemotherapy for patients who were previously controlled by EGFR-TKI treatment.

DOI: 10.7497/j.issn.2095-3941.2014.04.006 
PMCID: PMC4296083
PMID: 25610713  [PubMed]


472. Oncol Rep. 2015 Mar;33(3):1499-504. doi: 10.3892/or.2015.3735. Epub 2015 Jan 20.

Hsp90 inhibitor NVP-AUY922 enhances the radiation sensitivity of lung cancer cell
lines with acquired resistance to EGFR-tyrosine kinase inhibitors.

Hashida S(1), Yamamoto H(1), Shien K(1), Ohtsuka T(1), Suzawa K(1), Maki Y(1),
Furukawa M(1), Soh J(1), Asano H(1), Tsukuda K(1), Miyoshi S(1), Kanazawa S(2),
Toyooka S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic, Breast and Endocrinological Surgery, Okayama
University Graduate School of Medicine, Dentistry and Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Okayama 700-8558, Japan. (2)Department of Radiology, Okayama University Graduate 
School of Medicine, Dentistry and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Okayama 700-8558,
Japan.

Acquired resistance to epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)-tyrosine kinase
inhibitors (TKIs) is a critical issue that needs to be overcome in the treatment 
of patients with non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) harboring EGFR activating
mutations. EGFR and AKT are client proteins of the 90-kDa heat shock protein
(Hsp90). Therefore, it was hypothesized that the use of Hsp90 inhibitors might
allow the resistance to EGFR-TKIs to be overcome. Furthermore, Hsp90 inhibitors
are known to function as radiosensitizers in various types of cancer. In the
present study, we evaluated the radiosensitizing effect of the novel Hsp90
inhibitor, NVP-AUY922 (AUY), on NSCLC cell lines harboring EGFR activating
mutations and showing acquired resistance to EGFR-TKIs via any of several
mechanisms. We used HCC827 and PC-9, which are NSCLC cell lines harboring EGFR
exon 19 deletions, and gefitinib-resistant sublines derived from the same cell
lines with T790M mutation, MET amplification or stem-cell like properties. AUY
was more effective against the gefitinib-resistant sublines with T790M mutation
and MET amplification than against the parental cell lines, although the subline 
with stem cell-like properties showed more than a 10-fold higher resistance to
AUY than the parental cell line. AUY exerted a significant radiosensitizing
effect on the parental cell line and the MET-amplified subline through inducing
G2/M arrest and inhibition of non-homologous end joining (NHEJ). In contrast, the
radiosensitizing effect of AUY was limited on the subline with stem cell-like
properties, in which it did not induce G2/M arrest or inhibition of NHEJ. In
conclusion, combined inhibition of Hsp90 plus radiation was effective, and
therefore a promising treatment alternative for overcoming major EGFR-TKI
resistance, such as that induced by T790M mutation or MET amplification. However,
other approaches are required to overcome minor resistance to EGFR-TKIs, such as 
that observed in cells with stem cell-like properties.

DOI: 10.3892/or.2015.3735 
PMID: 25607753  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2014;15(24):10967-70.

Efficacy and survival-associated factors with gefitinib combined with cisplatin
and gemcitabine for advanced non- small cell lung cancer.

Fang H(1), Lin RY, Sun MX, Wang Q, Zhao YL, Yu JL, Tian Y, Wang XY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncological Chemotherapy, Peking University First Hospital,
Beijing, China E-mail : fanghongdexiang@sina.com.

OBJECTIVE: To analyze the efficacy and survival associated factors of gefitinib
combined with cisplatin and gemcitabine for advanced non-small cell lung cancer.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A total of 57 patients with advanced non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC), who received platinum-based chemotherapy regimens for more than 1
cycle, were treated with gefitinib combined with cisplatin and gemcitabine until 
disease progression. Efficacy, survival time and adverse reactions were observed.
The Kaplan-Meier method was adopted for analysis of survival and Cox regression
for associated influencing factors.
RESULTS: The patients were followed up until October 31, 2013, and the median
follow-up time was 19 months. Of 57 patients, there were 4 (7.0%) with complete
remission (CR), 8 (14.0%) with partial remission, 31 (54.4%) with stable disease,
and 14 (24.6%) with disease progression. The remission rate was 21.1% and the
disease control rate was 75.4%. The median progression-free survival (PFS) time
and the median overall survival time were 10 months and 15.2 months. The
one-year, two-year and three- year survival rates were 47.4%, 23.3% and 10.0%.
Gender and pathological types were the independent risk factors influencing PFS
time (P=0.028, P=0.009). Tumor pathological type and early efficacy were
independent factors for the prognosis (P=0.018, P=0.000). Adverse reactions were 
mostly rashes of I~II degree and diarrhea and slightly increasing level of
aminopherase. The skin adverse event incidence of III degree or above was 1.8%
(1/57) and brain metastasis was foudn in 31.6% (18/57).
CONCLUSIONS: Gefitinib combined with cisplatin andgemcitabine, is effective for
patients with IIIb~IV NSCLC who received multiple cycles of chemotherapy.


PMID: 25605210  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


474. Clin Cancer Res. 2015 Jan 15;21(2):428-38. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-14-1150.

DUSP1 expression induced by HDAC1 inhibition mediates gefitinib sensitivity in
non-small cell lung cancers.

Lin YC(1), Lin YC(2), Shih JY(3), Huang WJ(4), Chao SW(4), Chang YL(5), Chen
CC(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, College of Medicine, National Taiwan University,
Taipei, Taiwan. (2)Department of Pharmacology, College of Medicine, National
Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan. Division of Oncology and Hematology,
Department of Internal Medicine, Far-Eastern Memorial Hospital, New Taipei City, 
Taiwan. Department of Oncology, National Taiwan University Hospital and National 
Taiwan University, College of Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan. (3)Department of Internal
Medicine, National Taiwan University Hospital and National Taiwan University,
College of Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan. (4)Graduate Institute of Pharmacognosy,
Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan. (5)Department of Pathology, National
Taiwan University Hospital and National Taiwan University, College of Medicine,
Taipei, Taiwan. (6)Department of Pharmacology, College of Medicine, National
Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan. chingchowchen@ntu.edu.tw.

PURPOSE: Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is a leading cause of cancer-related 
death worldwide. Patients with NSCLC with EGFR-activating mutation benefit
greatly by gefitinib, an EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor. However, acquired
resistance limits its clinical use. Histone deacetylases (HDAC) are oncoproteins 
associated with cancer progression and drug resistance. Here, we disclosed that
inhibition of HDAC1 induced protein phosphatase DUSP1 upregulation to overcome
gefitinib-acquired resistance.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: The effect of HDAC1 inhibition restored gefitinib
sensitivity was assessed by in vitro MTT and apoptotic assays, and in vivo
xenograft and orthotopic lung cancer mouse models. Protein phosphatase array was 
used to detect DUSP1 expression. Immunohistochemical staining and quantitative
PCR were used to analyze DUSP1 expression in clinical NSCLC specimens.
RESULTS: Gefitinib-resistant NSCLC cells showed HDAC1 overexpression, and its
knockdown sensitized resistant cells to gefitinib in vitro and in preclinical
models through DUSP1 expression. Overexpression of DUSP1 in resistant cells
restored gefitinib sensitivity by inhibiting EGFR signaling and inducing
apoptosis, whereas its knockdown in sensitive cells conferred gefitinib
resistance. A novel HDAC inhibitor, WJ-26210-2, in combination with gefitinib
upregulated DUSP1 expression to exert in vitro and in vivo synergistic effect on 
inactivation of EGFR signaling, growth inhibition, and apoptosis. Clinically,
high DUSP1 level was correlated with delayed emergence of gefitinib-acquired
resistance.
CONCLUSIONS: Decreased DUSP1 might be a mechanism responsible for gefitinib
resistance, and DUSP1 might be a biomarker for gefitinib efficacy. HDAC1
inhibition-induced DUSP1 upregulation could be a promising strategy to overcome
gefitinib-acquired resistance. Clin Cancer Res; 21(2); 428-38. ©2015 AACR.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-14-1150 
PMID: 25593344  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. Oncol Rep. 2015 Mar;33(3):1040-8. doi: 10.3892/or.2015.3716. Epub 2015 Jan 14.

A new rapid method for detecting epidermal growth factor receptor mutations in
non-small cell lung cancer.

Takata M(1), Chikumi H(1), Matsunami K(1), Kodani M(1), Sakamoto T(1), Hashimoto 
K(2), Nakamoto M(1), Okada K(1), Kitaura T(1), Matsumoto S(3), Kurai J(1),
Yamasaki A(1), Igishi T(1), Burioka N(1), Shimizu E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Oncology and Molecular Respirology, Department of
Multidisciplinary Internal Medicine, Tottori University, Yonago-shi, Tottori-ken,
Japan. (2)Trust Medical Co., Ltd., Hyogo, Japan. (3)Exploratory Oncology Research
and Clinical Trial Center, National Cancer Center, Kashiwa, Chiba, Japan.

Mutations in the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) gene are associated with
a favorable clinical response to the EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors gefitinib
and erlotinib in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). We present here, a new
method for the rapid detection of the two most common EGFR mutations
(delE746-A750 and L858R) from clinical samples. The methodology involves the
combination of newly designed mutation-specific primers and a novel real-time PCR
machine with an innovative thermo-control mechanism that enables ultrarapid PCR. 
We evaluated this method using a cell mixture composed of various ratios of lung 
cancer cells harboring mutated or wild-type EGFR, lung cancer tissues obtained by
surgery, and a cytology sample obtained by bronchoscopy from a lung cancer
patient. In the cell mixture analysis, our method detected 0.1% of cells with
delE746-A750 and 1% of cells with L858R among cells with wild-type EGFR. In 143
lung cancer tissues, the result of this assay was concordant with those of direct
sequencing in 138 samples. The five samples with discordant results were tested
using a PCR-Invader assay and the result matched those of our method at 100%. We 
also successfully detected EGFR mutations in the lavage obtained from a lung
cancer patient. The turnaround time for this method was <10 min, and all steps
could be accomplished in <50 min after sample collection. Thus, our novel PCR
method offers a rapid, simple, and less expensive test for EGFR mutations and can
be applied as a point-of-care diagnostic test.

DOI: 10.3892/or.2015.3716 
PMCID: PMC4324484
PMID: 25591975  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. Neoplasma. 2015;62(2):302-7. doi: 10.4149/neo_2015_036.

Gefitinib maintenance therapy in Chinese advanced-stage lung adenocarcinoma
patients with EGFR mutations treated with prior chemotherapy.

Cai KC, Liu DG, Wang YY, Wu H, Huang ZY, Cai RJ, Wang HF, Xiong G, Zhang ZL.

The aim of this study was to determine the response of advanced-stage non-small
cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients with or without EGFR mutations to
platinum-based chemotherapy with or without gefitinib maintenance. Patients were 
treated with four cycles of platinum-based chemotherapy. Patients with wild-type 
EGFR were observed (group 1; n=15). EGFR mutation-positive patients were randomly
assigned to observation (group 2; n=7) or gefitinib maintenance (group 3; n=7).
The median patient age was 59 years. The 1-year progression-free survival rates
in groups 1, 2, and 3 were 6.7%, 28.6%, and 57.1%, respectively (p = 0.049); the 
1-year overall survival rates were 53.3%, 57.1 %, and 100%, respectively (p =
0.111). The results indicate that patients with advanced-stage NSCLC with EGFR
mutations have a better response to chemotherapy followed by gefitinib than
chemotherapy alone and a better response to chemotherapy than wild-type
patients.KEYWORDS: chemotherapy, gefitinib, NSCLC, tyrosine kinase inhibitors.

DOI: 10.4149/neo_2015_036 
PMID: 25591596  [PubMed]


477. Eur Radiol. 2015 Jun;25(6):1801-13. doi: 10.1007/s00330-014-3579-x. Epub 2015 Jan
11.

Prognostic potential of initial CT changes for progression-free survival in
gefitinib-treated patients with advanced adenocarcinoma of the lung: a
preliminary analysis.

Wu YC(1), Hsu HH, Chang WC, Tung HJ, Ko KH, Hsu YC, Huang TW, Ho CL, Chang H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiology, Tri-Service General Hospital, National Defense
Medical Center, 325, Section 2, Cheng-Gong Road, Nei-Hu, Taipei, 114, Taiwan,
Republic of China.

OBJECTIVES: We aimed to determine whether initial tumour responses measured
during short-term follow-up computed tomography (CT) examinations after baseline 
examinations would correlate with clinical outcomes in patients with non-small
cell lung cancer (NSCLC) who received epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR)-targeted therapy.
METHODS: A total of 86 gefitinib-treated patients with advanced adenocarcinoma of
the lung were retrospectively reviewed. All patients underwent baseline and
short-term follow-up CT examinations. The new response criteria (NRC) by Lee et
al. were used for the response evaluations. A Cox proportional hazards multiple
regression model and Kaplan-Meier survival analyses were used to evaluate
correlations between the initial tumour changes and progression-free and overall 
survival (PFS, OS).
RESULTS: Better separation and smaller p values were observed for both PFS and OS
when good and poor disease responses (as defined by NRC) were compared after
excluding tumours with characteristic morphologies. Early tumour changes
correlated with PFS in a size-dependent manner. Moreover, a stronger association 
was observed between size changes and PFS when characteristic morphology was also
considered.
CONCLUSIONS: Initial changes in tumour size during short-term post-treatment CT
examinations could act as a potential prognostic imaging surrogate for PFS in
gefitinib-treated patients with advanced adenocarcinoma of the lung.
KEY POINTS: • Initial responses to gefitinib on computed tomography significantly
correlate with clinical outcomes. • Regardless of morphology, size decrease
greater than 30 % predicts prolonged progression-free and overall survival. •
Combination of size and morphological changes yields prognostic independence
regarding progression-free survival.

DOI: 10.1007/s00330-014-3579-x 
PMID: 25577523  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. Mol Cancer Res. 2015 Apr;13(4):765-74. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-14-0326. Epub
2015 Jan 8.

Differential Effects of Tyrosine Kinase Inhibitors on Normal and Oncogenic EGFR
Signaling and Downstream Effectors.

Kim Y(1), Apetri M(1), Luo B(1), Settleman JE(2), Anderson KS(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven,
Connecticut. (2)Center for Molecular Therapeutics, Massachusetts General Hospital
Cancer Center and Harvard Medical School, Charlestown, Massachusetts.
(3)Department of Pharmacology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven,
Connecticut. karen.anderson@yale.edu.

Constitutive activation of EGFR due to overexpression or mutation in tumor cells 
leads to dysregulated downstream cellular signaling pathways. Therefore, EGFR as 
well as its downstream effectors have been identified as important therapeutic
targets. The FDA-approved small-molecule inhibitors of EGFR, gefitinib (Iressa)
and erlotinib (Tarceva), are clinically effective in a subset of patients with
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) whose tumors harbor activating mutations
within the kinase domain of EGFR. The current study examined effects of these
drugs in 32D cells expressing native (WT) or oncogenic (L858R) EGFR as well as in
cancer cell lines A431 and H3255. Distinct patterns for gefitinib and erlotinib
inhibition of EGFR autophosphorylation at individual tyrosines were revealed for 
wild-type (WT) and L858R EGFR. Phosphorylation of Y845 has been shown to be
important in cancer cells and Y1045 phosphorylation is linked to Cbl-mediated
ubiquitination and degradation. Dramatic differences were observed by greater
potency of these drugs for inhibiting downstream effectors for L858R EGFR
including Cbl and STAT5. Selective targeting of Cbl may play a role in oncogene
addiction and effects on STAT5 identify features of signaling circuitry for L858R
EGFR that contribute to drug sensitivity and clinical efficacy. These data
provide new understanding of the EGFR signaling environment and suggest useful
paradigms for predicting patient response to EGFR-targeted therapy as well as
combination treatments.IMPLICATIONS: This study offers fundamental insights for
understanding molecular mechanisms of drug sensitivity on oncogenic forms of EGFR
and downstream signaling components as well as considerations for further drug
optimization and design of combination therapy.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-14-0326 
PMCID: PMC4398619
PMID: 25573954  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. J Am Board Fam Med. 2015 Jan-Feb;28(1):124-33. doi: 10.3122/jabfm.2015.01.140072.

Improvement in lung cancer outcomes with targeted therapies: an update for family
physicians.

Rolfo C(1), Passiglia F(2), Ostrowski M(2), Farracho L(2), Ondøichová T(2),
Dolcan A(2), Castiglia M(2), Remmen R(2), Papadimitriou K(2), Pauwels P(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Phase I Early Clinical Trials Unit, Department of Oncology, Antwerp
University Hospital, Edegem, Belgium (CR, FP, KP); European Cancer Organisation, 
Antwerp University Hospital, Edegem, Belgium (MO, LF, TO, AD); Molecular
Pathology Unit, Department of Pathology, Antwerp University Hospital, Edegem,
Belgium (MC, PP); and the Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Antwerp
University Hospital, Edegem, Belgium (RR). christian.rolfo@uza.be. (2)From the
Phase I Early Clinical Trials Unit, Department of Oncology, Antwerp University
Hospital, Edegem, Belgium (CR, FP, KP); European Cancer Organisation, Antwerp
University Hospital, Edegem, Belgium (MO, LF, TO, AD); Molecular Pathology Unit, 
Department of Pathology, Antwerp University Hospital, Edegem, Belgium (MC, PP);
and the Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Antwerp University Hospital,
Edegem, Belgium (RR).

In the past decade the advent of target therapy has led to a silent revolution in
the treatment of lung cancer. Thanks to the specificity of their target, new
tailored drugs are able to achieve a larger benefit and lower toxicity and
provide better quality of life than cytotoxic drugs in a limited number of
patients, selected by molecular profile. Nowadays, the epidermal growth factor
receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors erlotinib and gefitinib, and the anaplastic
lymphoma kinase inhibitor crizotinib, are targeted agents approved for treatment 
of non-small-cell lung cancer. Family physicians play an important role in the
treatment, detection, and management of common toxicities and in providing
emotional support. Therefore this review integrates molecular profile assessment 
with evidence of the efficacy and toxicity of tyrosine kinase inhibitors to
provide an updated overview of the treatment of non-small-cell lung cancer, which
radically changed after the advent of targeted therapies. It also aims to promote
a more intensive and interactive collaboration between specialists and family
physicians in the management of all phases of cancer care.

© Copyright 2015 by the American Board of Family Medicine.

DOI: 10.3122/jabfm.2015.01.140072 
PMID: 25567833  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. Clin Cancer Res. 2015 Feb 15;21(4):670-4. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-14-1291.
Epub 2015 Jan 6.

Ceritinib for the treatment of late-stage (metastatic) non-small cell lung
cancer.

Massarelli E(1), Papadimitrakopoulou V(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic/Head and Neck Medical Oncology, The University of Texas
MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas. (2)Department of Thoracic/Head and
Neck Medical Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, Texas. vpapadim@mdanderson.org.

Erratum in
    Clin Cancer Res. 2015 May 15;21(10):2412.

Over the past decade, the non-small cell lung cancer therapeutics landscape has
been dominated by the increasing focus on identification and validation of
molecular targets, as well as the identification of the best candidate agents to 
address these targets. Among the notable successes have been the approval of
erlotinib, gefitinib, and afatinib for the EGFR mutation, and more recently
crizotinib for anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) gene rearrangement. Despite the
excellent efficacy of crizotinib, several mechanisms of resistance, including
secondary mutation in the ALK gene, eventually result in disease progression, and
several second-generation ALK inhibitors, notably ceritinib, have demonstrated
evidence of clinical activity in this setting. This review discusses the data
associated with the recent accelerated approval of ceritinib for treatment of
patients with ALK-positive, metastatic lung adenocarcinoma with disease
progression on or who are intolerant to crizotinib.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-14-1291 
PMID: 25564153  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. Cancer Genomics Proteomics. 2015 Jan-Feb;12(1):31-7.

Usefulness of nanofluidic digital PCR arrays to quantify T790M mutation in
EGFR-mutant lung adenocarcinoma.

Isobe K(1), Hata Y(2), Tochigi N(3), Kaburaki K(1), Kobayashi H(1), Makino T(2), 
Otsuka H(2), Ishida F(1), Hirota N(1), Sano G(1), Sugino K(1), Sakamoto S(1),
Takai Y(1), Shibuya K(3), Iyoda A(2), Homma S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Respiratory Medicine, Toho University School of Medicine, Tokyo,
Japan. (2)Division Chest Surgery, Toho University School of Medicine, Tokyo,
Japan. (3)Department of Surgical Pathology, Toho University School of Medicine,
Tokyo, Japan.

AIM: The present pilot study assessed the usefulness of nanofluidic digital
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) arrays in epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR)-mutant lung adenocarcinoma after tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI)
resistance.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We enrolled 12 patients with primary lung adenocarcinoma
with sensitive EGFR mutation-confirmed T790M status by re-biopsy after TKI
resistance. Nanofluidic digital PCR arrays were used to quantify T790M in genomic
DNA from the pre-treatment primary site and in serum cell-free DNA (cfDNA).
RESULTS: On digital PCR, quantified T790M at the pre-treatment primary site was
higher in re-biopsy-positive T790M patients (n=4) than in re-biopsy-negative
patients (n=8) (0.78%±0.36% vs. 0.07%±0.09%, p<0.01). T790M at the pre-treatment 
primary site correlated with progression-free survival (PFS) after gefitinib
therapy (r=0.67, p=0.016).
CONCLUSION: Use of digital PCR to quantify T790M at the primary site of
EGFR-mutant lung adenocarcinoma predicted T790M emergence in re-biopsies after
TKI resistance and PFS after gefitinib therapy.

Copyright© 2015, International Institute of Anticancer Research (Dr. John G.
Delinasios), All rights reserved.


PMID: 25560642  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. Clin Lung Cancer. 2015 Jul;16(4):274-81. doi: 10.1016/j.cllc.2014.12.004. Epub
2014 Dec 11.

Relationship Among Gefitinib Exposure, Polymorphisms of Its Metabolizing Enzymes 
and Transporters, and Side Effects in Japanese Patients With Non-Small-Cell Lung 
Cancer.

Kobayashi H(1), Sato K(2), Niioka T(1), Miura H(2), Ito H(2), Miura M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy, Akita University Hospital, Akita, Japan. (2)Department
of Cardiovascular and Respiratory Medicine, Akita University Graduate School of
Medicine, Akita, Japan. (3)Department of Pharmacy, Akita University Hospital,
Akita, Japan. Electronic address: m-miura@hos.akita-u.ac.jp.

INTRODUCTION: The present study investigated the effects of patients' genetic
variations in the pharmacokinetics of gefitinib at steady-state. We analyzed 31
Japanese patients with non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) who had been treated
with gefitinib. We focused on common polymorphisms within important gefitinib
exposure genes, including cytochromes P450 (CYPs) CYP3A4*1G, CYP3A5 (*3), and
CYP2D6 (*5 and *10) and ATP-binding cassette (ABC) ABCG2 (421C>A) and ABCB1
(1236C>T, 2677G>T/A, and 3435C>T).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Fourteen days after beginning 250 mg of gefitinib therapy,
when the patients were in steady-state, blood samples were collected just before 
and 1, 2, 4, 6, 8, 12, and 24 hours after oral gefitinib administration. The
plasma concentrations of gefitinib were measured using high-performance liquid
chromatography.
RESULTS: The median area under the concentration-time curve from 0 to 24 hours
(AUC0-24) and trough plasma concentration (C0) of gefitinib was 10,086 ng · h/mL 
(range, 3247-24,726 ng · h/mL) and 334 ng/mL (range, 77.9-813 ng/mL),
respectively. No significant differences were found in the AUC0-24 or C0 for
gefitinib or in the frequency of diarrhea, skin rash or hepatotoxicity among the 
CYP3A4, CYP3A5, CYP2D6, ABCG2 (421C>A), and ABCB1 (1236C>T, 2677G>T/A, and
3435C>T) genotype groups. However, the AUC0-24 and C0 levels of gefitinib in the 
patients with diarrhea or hepatotoxicity were significantly greater than in those
without (diarrhea: AUC0-24, 14,246 vs. 8918 ng · h/mL, P = .006; C0: 421 vs. 261 
ng/mL, P = .002; hepatotoxicity: AUC0-24, 12,967 vs. 8473 ng · h/mL, P = .024;
C0: 420 vs. 248 ng/mL, P = .002).
CONCLUSION: The side effects from gefitinib were related to exposure but not
genetic polymorphism. Therefore, therapeutic drug monitoring after beginning
gefitinib therapy rather than the analysis of polymorphism before initiating
therapy might be beneficial.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cllc.2014.12.004 
PMID: 25554506  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol. 2015 Mar;75(3):475-83. doi:
10.1007/s00280-014-2664-9. Epub 2015 Jan 1.

Phase I/II study of gefitinib (Iressa(®)) and vorinostat (IVORI) in previously
treated patients with advanced non-small cell lung cancer.

Han JY(1), Lee SH, Lee GK, Yun T, Lee YJ, Hwang KH, Kim JY, Kim HT.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Lung Cancer, Research Institute and Hospital, National Cancer
Center, 323 Ilsan-ro, Ilsandong-gu, Goyang-si, Gyeonggi-do, 410-769, Republic of 
Korea, jymama@ncc.re.kr.

PURPOSE: Vorinostat has been shown to overcome resistance to gefitinib. We
performed a phase I/II study combining gefitinib with vorinostat in previously
treated non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC).
METHODS: A 3 + 3 dose-escalation design was used to determine maximum tolerated
dose (MTD) and recommended phase II dose (RP2D). Three dose levels were tested:
250 mg/day gefitinib on days 1-28 and 200, 300 or 400 mg/day vorinostat on days
1-7, and 15-21 out of every 28 days. The primary endpoint was median
progression-free survival (PFS).
RESULTS: Fifty-two patients were enrolled and treated (43 in phase II). The
median age was 59 years, 28 patients were male, 44 had adenocarcinoma, 29 had
never smoked, and 36 had undergone one prior treatment. Twenty-two patients
exhibited sensitive EGFR mutations. Planned dose escalation was completed without
reaching the MTD. The RP2D was 250 mg gefitinib and 400 mg vorinostat. In 43
assessable patients in phase II, the median PFS was 3.2 months; the overall
survival (OS) was 19.0 months. There were 16 partial responses and six cases of
stable disease. In EGFR-mutant NSCLC, response rate was 77 %, median PFS was
9.1 months, and median OS was 24.1 months. The most common adverse events were
anorexia and diarrhea.
CONCLUSIONS: Treatment with 250 mg gefitinib daily with biweekly 400 mg/day
vorinostat was feasible and well tolerated. In an unselected patient population, 
this combination dose did not improve PFS. However, this combination showed a
potential for improving efficacy of gefitinib in EGFR-mutant NSCLC (NCT01027676).

DOI: 10.1007/s00280-014-2664-9 
PMCID: PMC4341018
PMID: 25552401  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


484. Clinicoecon Outcomes Res. 2014 Dec 15;7:9-15. doi: 10.2147/CEOR.S43328.
eCollection 2015.

Economic evaluation of first-line and maintenance treatments for advanced
non-small cell lung cancer: a systematic review.

Chouaïd C(1), Crequit P(2), Borget I(3), Vergnenegre A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Service de Pneumologie et de Pathologie Professionnelle, Centre Hospitalier
Intercommunal Créteil et Université de Paris Est Créteil, Paris, France.
(2)Service de Pneumologie, Hôpital Tenon, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, 
Paris, France. (3)Service de Biostatistique et d'Epidémiologie, Institut Gustave 
Roussy, Villejuif, France. (4)Unité d'Oncologie Thoracique et Cutanée, Centre
Hospitalier Universitaire Limoges, Limoges, France.

During these last years, there have been an increased number of new drugs for
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), with a growing financial effect on patients
and society. The purpose of this article was to review the economics of
first-line and maintenance NSCLC treatments. We reviewed economic analyses of
NSCLC therapies published between 2004 and 2014. In first-line settings, in
unselected patients with advanced NSCLC, the cisplatin gemcitabine doublet
appears to be cost-saving compared with other platinum doublets. In patients with
nonsquamous NSCLC, the incremental cost-effectiveness ratios (ICERs) per
life-year gained (LYG) were $83,537, $178,613, and more than $300,000 for
cisplatin-pemetrexed compared with, respectively, cisplatin-gemcitabine,
cisplatin-carboplatin-paclitaxel, and carboplatin-paclitaxel-bevacizumab. For all
primary chemotherapy agents, use of carboplatin is associated with slightly
higher costs than cisplatin. In all the analysis, bevacizumab had an ICER greater
than $150,000 per quality-adjusted life-year (QALY). In epidermal growth factor
receptor mutated advanced NSCLC, compared with carboplatin-paclitaxel doublet,
targeted therapy based on testing available tissue yielded an ICER of $110,644
per QALY, and the rebiopsy strategy yielded an ICER of $122,219 per QALY.
Compared with the triplet carboplatin-paclitaxel-bevacizumab, testing and
rebiopsy strategies had ICERs of $25,547 and $44,036 per QALY, respectively. In
an indirect comparison, ICERs per LYG and QALY of erlotinib versus gefitinib were
$39,431 and $62,419, respectively. In anaplastic lymphoma kinase-positive
nonsquamous advanced NSCLC, the ICER of first-line crizotinib compared with that 
of chemotherapy was $255,970 per QALY. For maintenance therapy, gefitinib had an 
ICER of $19,214 per QALY, erlotinib had an ICER of $127,343 per LYG, and
pemetrexed had an ICER varying between $183,589 and $205,597 per LYG. Most recent
NSCLC strategies are based on apparently no cost-effective strategies if we
consider an ICER below $50,000 per QALY an acceptable threshold. We need,
probably on a countrywide level, to have a debate involving public health
organizations and pharmaceutical companies, as well as clinicians and patients,
to challenge the rising costs of managing lung cancer.

DOI: 10.2147/CEOR.S43328 
PMCID: PMC4271788
PMID: 25548525  [PubMed]


485. J Thorac Oncol. 2015 Apr;10(4):655-64. doi: 10.1097/JTO.0000000000000445.

Final overall survival results from a phase III, randomized, placebo-controlled, 
parallel-group study of gefitinib versus placebo as maintenance therapy in
patients with locally advanced or metastatic non-small-cell lung cancer (INFORM; 
C-TONG 0804).

Zhao H(1), Fan Y, Ma S, Song X, Han B, Cheng Y, Huang C, Yang S, Liu X, Liu Y, Lu
S, Wang J, Zhang S, Zhou C, Wang M, Zhang L; INFORM investigators.

Author information: 
(1)*Department of Medical Oncology, State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South
China, Guangzhou, China †Department of Medical Oncology, Collaborative Innovation
Center for Cancer Medicine, Guangzhou, China; ‡Department of Medical Oncology,
Sun-Yat Sen University Cancer Center, Guangzhou, China; §Department of Medical
Oncology, Zhejiang Cancer Hospital, Hangzhou, China; ‖Department of Radiation
Therapy, Hangzhou First Pepole's Hospital, Hangzhou, China; ¶Department of
Medical Oncology, Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region Tumour Hospital, Nanning City,
China; #Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Shanghai Chest Hospital, Shanghai,
China; **Department of Medical Oncology, Jilin Province Tumour Hospital,
Changchun, China; ††Department of Respiratory Medicine, Fujian Provincial Tumor
Hospital, Fuzhou, China; ‡‡Department of Chemotherapy, Henan Province Tumour
Hospital, Zhengzhou, China; §§Department of Oncology, 307 Hospital of The People'
Liberation Army, Beijing, China; ‖‖Department of Medical Oncology, First Hospital
of China Medical University, Shenyang, China; ¶¶Department of Shanghai Lung
Cancer Center, Shanghai Chest Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, ##Department of Thoracic Medical Oncology, Beijing Cancer Hospital,
Beijing, China; ***Department of Medical Oncology, Beijing Chest Hospital,
Beijing, China; †††Department of Oncology, Shanghai Pulmonary Hospital, School of
Medicine, Tongji University, Shanghai, China; and ‡‡‡Department of Respiratory
Disease, Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, China.

Comment in
    J Thorac Oncol. 2015 Aug;10(8):e82-3.
    J Thorac Oncol. 2015 Aug;10(8):e81-2.

BACKGROUND: The results of the Iressa in NSCLC for maintenance study
(NCT00770588; C-TONG 0804), which compared gefitinib and placebo as maintenance
therapy in patients with advanced non-small-cell lung cancer without disease
progression after first-line chemotherapy, were published previously. The
objective of this report is to provide a mature analysis of overall survival (OS)
for Iressa in NSCLC for maintenance study in intention to treat (ITT) population 
and in subgroups according to epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutation
status.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: A total of 296 patients were randomly assigned. EGFR
mutations were detected using an amplification mutation refractory system.
Seventy-nine patients were assessable for EGFR mutations. OS was analyzed by a
Cox proportional hazards model adjusted for the same covariates in ITT population
and subgroups according to EGFR mutation status.
RESULTS: OS was similar for gefitinib and placebo arm with no significant
difference between treatments in ITT population (hazard ratio [HR], 0.88; 95%
confidence interval [CI], 0.68-1.14; p = 0.335) and in subgroups with wild type
EGFR (HR, 1.27; 95% CI, 0.7-2.3; p = 0.431) or unknown EGFR mutations (HR, 0.92; 
95% CI, 0.68, 1.25; p = 0.603). In the EGFR mutation-positive subgroup, the
gefitinib arm showed a higher OS than the placebo arm (HR, 0.39; 95% CI, 0.15,
0.97; p = 0.036).
CONCLUSION: EGFR mutation was the strongest predictive biomarker for OS benefit
of gefitinib as maintenance treatment. The analyses of OS showed that patients
achieve a clear and significant survival benefit if they receive EGFR tyrosine
kinase inhibitors as maintenance treatment in EGFR mutation-positive patients.

DOI: 10.1097/JTO.0000000000000445 
PMID: 25546556  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. Front Oncol. 2014 Dec 8;4:350. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2014.00350. eCollection 2014.

EGFR Mutation Positive Stage IV Non-Small-Cell Lung Cancer: Treatment Beyond
Progression.

Van Assche K(1), Ferdinande L(2), Lievens Y(3), Vandecasteele K(3), Surmont V(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Ghent University Hospital , Ghent ,
Belgium. (2)Department of Pathology, Ghent University Hospital , Ghent , Belgium.
(3)Department of Radiation Oncology, Ghent University Hospital , Ghent , Belgium.

Non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is the leading cause of death from cancer for 
both men and women. Chemotherapy is the mainstay of treatment in advanced
disease, but is only marginally effective. In about 30% of patients with advanced
NSCLC in East Asia and in 10-15% in Western countries, epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR) mutations are found. In this population, first-line treatment
with the tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) erlotinib, gefitinib, or afatinib is
recommended. The treatment beyond progression is less well-defined. In this
paper, we present three patients, EGFR mutation positive, with local progression 
after an initial treatment with TKI. These patients were treated with local
radiotherapy. TKI was temporarily stopped and restarted after radiotherapy. We
give an overview of the literature and discuss the different treatment options in
case of progression after TKI: TKI continuation with or without chemotherapy, TKI
continuation with local therapy, alternative dosing or switch to next-generation 
TKI or combination therapy. There are different options for treatment beyond
progression in EGFR mutation positive metastatic NSCLC, but the optimal strategy 
is still to be defined. Further research on this topic is ongoing.

DOI: 10.3389/fonc.2014.00350 
PMCID: PMC4259002
PMID: 25538894  [PubMed]


487. J Korean Neurosurg Soc. 2014 Nov;56(5):431-5. doi: 10.3340/jkns.2014.56.5.431.
Epub 2014 Nov 30.

Total en bloc thoracic and lumbar spondylectomy for non-small cell lung cancer
with favorable prognostic indicators: is it merely indicated for solitary spinal 
metastasis?

Park JH(1), Hyun SJ(1), Kim KJ(1), Jahng TA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Spine Center, Seoul National University Bundang
Hospital, Seoul National University College of Medicine, Seongnam, Korea.

A fifty-year-old female non-smoker with no other specific medical history visited
our institute. She complained of axial back pain with no other neurological
deficit. Chest X-ray, chest computed tomography (CT) scan, CT-guided needle
aspiration biopsy, whole-body positron emission tomography, spine CT and spine
magnetic resonance image findings suggested NSCLC with epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR) mutation, multiple brain metastases, and two isolated metastases 
to the T3 and L3 vertebral bodies. She underwent chemotherapy with gefitinib
(Iressa™) for NSCLC and gamma knife surgery for multiple brain metastases. We
performed a two-staged, total en bloc spondylectomy of the T3 and L3 vertebral
bodies based on several good prognostic characteristics, such as the lack of
metastases to the appendicular bone, good preoperative performance status, and
being an excellent responder (Asian, never-smoker and adenocarcinoma histology)
to EGFR inhibitors. Improved axial back pain after the surgery enabled her to
walk with the aid of a thoracolumbosacral orthosis brace on the third
postoperative day. Her Karnofsky performance status score (KPS) was 90 at the
time of discharge and has been maintained to date 3 years after surgery. In
selected NSCLC patients with good prognostic characteristics, we suggest that
locally curative treatment such as total en bloc spondylectomy or radiosurgery
should be emphasized to achieve longer term survival for the selected cases.

DOI: 10.3340/jkns.2014.56.5.431 
PMCID: PMC4273004
PMID: 25535523  [PubMed]


488. Int J Oncol. 2015 Feb;46(2):497-504. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2014.2787. Epub 2014 Dec 1.

A peptide antigen derived from EGFR T790M is immunogenic in non‑small cell lung
cancer.

Ofuji K(1), Tada Y(1), Yoshikawa T(1), Shimomura M(1), Yoshimura M(1), Saito
K(1), Nakamoto Y(2), Nakatsura T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cancer Immunotherapy, Exploratory Oncology Research and Clinical
Trial Center, National Cancer Center, Kashiwa, Chiba, Japan. (2)Second Department
of Internal Medicine, Faculty of Medical Sciences, University of Fukui, Fukui,
Japan.

Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer‑related deaths worldwide. Epidermal
growth factor receptor-tyrosine kinase inhibitors (EGFR-TKIs), such as gefitinib 
and erlotinib, have demonstrated marked clinical activity against non-small cell 
lung cancer (NSCLC) harboring activating epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) 
mutations. However, in most cases, patients develop acquired resistance to
EGFR‑TKI therapy. The threonine to methionine change at codon 790 of EGFR (EGFR
T790M) mutation is the most common acquired resistance mutation, and is present
in ~50% cases of TKI resistance. New treatment strategies for NSCLC patients
harboring the EGFR T790M mutation are required. We evaluated the immunogenicity
of an antigen derived from EGFR with the T790M mutation. Using BIMAS we selected 
several EGFR T790M‑derived peptides bound to human leukocyte antigen
(HLA)-A*02:01. T790M-A peptide (789-797) (IMQLMPFGC)-specific cytotoxic T
lymphocytes (CTLs) were induced from peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs)
of HLA-A2+ healthy donors. An established T790M-A-specific CTL line showed
reactivity against the NCSLC cell line, H1975-A2 (HLA-A2+, T790M+), but not H1975
(HLA-A2-, T790M+), and the corresponding wild-type peptide (ITQLMPFGC)-pulsed T2 
cells using an interferon-γ (IFN-γ) enzyme-linked immuno spot (ELISPOT) assay.
This CTL line also demonstrated peptide-specific cytotoxicity against H1975-A2
cells. This finding suggests that the EGFR T790M mutation-derived antigen could
be a new target for cancer immunotherapy.

DOI: 10.3892/ijo.2014.2787 
PMCID: PMC4277252
PMID: 25532027  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. Oncotarget. 2015 Jan 20;6(2):814-24.

Short-hairpin RNA library: identification of therapeutic partners for
gefitinib-resistant non-small cell lung cancer.

Sudo M(1), Mori S(2), Madan V(1), Yang H(1), Leong G(1), Koeffler HP(3).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Science Institute of Singapore, NUS, Singapore. (2)Division of Cancer
Genomics, The Cancer Institute of Japanese Foundation for Cancer Research, Tokyo,
Japan. (3)Cancer Science Institute of Singapore, NUS, Singapore.Department of
Hematology and Oncology, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA,
USA.National University Cancer Institute, National University Hospital,
Singapore.

Somatic mutations of the epidermal growth factor receptor often cause resistance 
to therapy with tyrosine kinase inhibitor in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). 
In this study, we aimed to identify partner drugs and pathways that can induce
cell death in combination with gefitinib in NSCLC cells. We undertook a
genome-wide RNAi screen to identify synthetic lethality with gefitinib in
tyrosine kinase inhibitor resistant cells. The screening data were utilized in
different approaches. Firstly, we identified PRKCSH as a candidate gene,
silencing of which induces apoptosis of NSCLC cells treated with gefitinib. Next,
in an in silico gene signature pathway analysis of shRNA library data, a strong
correlation of genes involved in the CD27 signaling cascade was observed. We
showed that the combination of dasatinib (NF-κB pathway inhibitor) with gefitinib
synergistically inhibited the growth of NSCLC cells. Lastly, utilizing the
Connectivity Map, thioridazine was identified as a top pharmaceutical
perturbagen. In our experiments, it synergized with gefitinib to reduce p-Akt
levels and to induce apoptosis in NSCLC cells. Taken together, a pooled
short-hairpin library screen identified several potential pathways and drugs that
can be therapeutic targets for gefitinib resistant NSCLC.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.2891 
PMCID: PMC4359257
PMID: 25528770  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. J Thorac Oncol. 2014 Oct;9(10):1523-31. doi: 10.1097/JTO.0000000000000275.

Safety and efficacy of dacomitinib in korean patients with KRAS wild-type
advanced non-small-cell lung cancer refractory to chemotherapy and erlotinib or
gefitinib: a phase I/II trial.

Park K(1), Cho BC, Kim DW, Ahn MJ, Lee SY, Gernhardt D, Taylor I, Campbell AK,
Zhang H, Giri N, Letrent SP, O'Connell J, Heo DS.

Author information: 
(1)*Division of Hematology & Oncology, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan
University School of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea; †Division of Medical
Oncology, Yonsei Cancer Center, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul,
Republic of Korea; ‡Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul National University
Hospital, Seoul, Republic of Korea; §Pfizer Korea, Seoul, Republic of Korea;
‖Pfizer Oncology, Groton, Connecticut; ¶Pfizer (China) Research & Development Co.
Ltd, Shanghai, China; #Pfizer Oncology, La Jolla, California; and **Pfizer
Oncology, New York, New York.

INTRODUCTION: Dacomitinib (PF-00299804), an irreversible pan-human epidermal
growth factor receptor ([HER]-1/EGFR, HER-2, and HER-4) tyrosine kinase
inhibitor, demonstrated antitumor activity in Western patients with
non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) at a dose of 45 mg once daily. We report data 
from a phase I/II, multicenter, open-label study of Korean patients with
refractory KRAS wild-type adenocarcinoma NSCLC (defined as patients with evidence
of disease progression during or within 6 months of treatment with chemotherapy
and gefitinib or erlotinib).
METHODS: The phase I dose-finding portion identified the recommended phase II
dose (RP2D) in Korean patients, evaluated safety, and characterized the
pharmacokinetics of dacomitinib. In the phase II portion, patients received
dacomitinib at the RP2D. The primary end point was progression-free survival at 4
months (PFS4m).
RESULTS: Twelve patients enrolled in phase I, and 43 patients enrolled in phase
II at the RP2D of 45 mg once daily. In phase II, PFS4m was 47.2% (95% confidence 
interval [CI], 31.6-61.3; one-sided p-value = 0.0007). Median PFS was 15.4 weeks 
(95% CI, 9.7-17.6); median overall survival was 46.3 weeks (95% CI, 32.7-not
reached); and the objective response rate was 17.1% (95% CI, 7.2-32.1). Common
treatment-related adverse events were dermatitis acneiform, diarrhea, and
paronychia; there were no treatment-related grade 4 or 5 adverse events.
Pharmacokinetic parameters of dacomitinib in Korean patients were similar to
those reported in Western patients. By patient report, NSCLC symptoms "cough" and
"pain" showed improvement within 3 weeks of initiating treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: Dacomitinib was well tolerated and had antitumor activity in Korean 
patients with NSCLC who had previously progressed on chemotherapy and an
epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor.

DOI: 10.1097/JTO.0000000000000275 
PMID: 25521398  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. Clin Med Insights Oncol. 2014 Nov 25;8:121-8. doi: 10.4137/CMO.S15172.
eCollection 2014.

Phase II Clinical Trial of Gefitinib for the Treatment of Chemonaïve Patients
with Advanced Non-small Cell Lung Cancer with Poor Performance Status.

Karim NA(1), Musaad S(2), Zarzour A(3), Patil S(4), Jazieh AR(5).

Author information: 
(1)University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH, USA. (2)University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign, IL, USA. (3)Cleveland Clinic Foundation, Cleveland, OH, USA.
(4)University of Tennessee Cancer Institute, Memphis, TN, USA. (5)King Saud bin
Abdul-Aziz University for Health Sciences, King Abdullah International Medical
Research Center, Riyadh, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.

BACKGROUND: Patients with advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) have no
curative treatment options; therefore, improving their quality of life (QOL) is
an important goal. Gefitinib, an epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)
inhibitor, is a safe oral agent that may be of benefit to a specific population
of NSCLC.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: A Phase II clinical trial included chemonaïve patients with
advanced NSCLC and poor performance status (PS). Response rate, progression-free 
survival, overall survival, QOL using the Functional Assessment of Cancer Therapy
- Lung (FACT-L) questionnaire, and Trial Outcome Index (TOI) were evaluated.
RESULTS: Twelve out of 19 enrolled patients were evaluable. The median age for
the evaluable patients was 68.8 years (59.7-74.6). Out of all the patients, 7
(58.3%) had adenocarcinoma and 5 (41.7%) had squamous cell carcinoma. The median 
duration of treatment was 62.5 days (26.5-115.0) in the evaluable patients. Grade
3/4 toxicities included fatigue, rash, diarrhea, and nausea. One patient had
partial response, eight patients had stable disease (SD), and three patients
progressed. The median overall survival for the evaluable population was 4.9
months (2.3-16). The median progression-free survival was 3.7 months (1.9-6.6).
TOI was marginally associated with the overall survival, with a hazard ratio of
0.92 (95% confidence interval: 0.84, 1.0) (P = 0.061). FACT-L score and the TOI
were highly correlated (r = 0.96, P < 0.0001). TOI scores were higher in African 
Americans compared to Caucasians and increased with age.
CONCLUSION: Our results suggest that gefitinib use in patients with NSCLC and
poor PS may improve the QOL of older patients and African American patients.

DOI: 10.4137/CMO.S15172 
PMCID: PMC4245085
PMID: 25520566  [PubMed]


492. Gen Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2016 Jul;64(7):429-33. doi:
10.1007/s11748-014-0508-5. Epub 2014 Dec 16.

Long-term outcome of surgical resection for residual or regrown advanced
non-small cell lung carcinomas following EGFR-TKI treatment: report of four
cases.

Hishida T(1), Yoshida J(2), Aokage K(2), Nagai K(2), Tsuboi M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Surgery, National Cancer Center Hospital East, 6-5-1,
Kashiwanoha, Kashiwa, Chiba, 277-8577, Japan. thishida@nifty.com. (2)Department
of Thoracic Surgery, National Cancer Center Hospital East, 6-5-1, Kashiwanoha,
Kashiwa, Chiba, 277-8577, Japan.

We report the long-term outcome of 4 patients who underwent pulmonary resection
for residual or regrown primary lesion of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
treated with a epidermal growth factor receptor-tyrosine kinase inhibitor
(EGFR-TKI) gefitinib. Two patients underwent surgical resection for localized
regrown primary lesion after gefitinib for stage IV disease. The remaining two
patients underwent surgery for localized residual primary lesion that was
downstaged to N0 after gefitinib for initially inoperable cN2 (stage IIIA)
disease. Three patients developed recurrence with a median progression-free
period of 1.2 years (0.2-2.2), but they survived more than 5 years
postoperatively with good local control. One patient who initially had cN2
disease is alive without recurrence after 4 years with continued postoperative
gefitinib. Although our series is small, the relatively favorable long-term
survival indicates the need for further investigation of the role of surgery
during molecular-targeted therapy for advanced NSCLC.

DOI: 10.1007/s11748-014-0508-5 
PMID: 25512091  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


493. Transl Respir Med. 2014 Jan 6;2:2. doi: 10.1186/2213-0802-2-2. eCollection 2014.

Second generation tyrosine kinase inhibitors for the treatment of metastatic
non-small-cell lung cancer.

Stasi I(1), Cappuzzo F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Oncology Department, IstitutoToscanoTumori, OspedaleCivile, Livorno,
Italy.

BACKGRUOND: Since their first description, activating epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR) mutations identify a distinct clinical entity of patients with
non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC).
FINDINGS: New targeted therapies for molecularly selected NSCLC are changing the 
natural history of the disease, with results superior to standard chemotherapy as
demonstrated in large phase III studies with first generation EGFR tyrosine
kinase inhibitors (TKIs) erlotinib and gefitinib. However, after an initial
response, all patients inevitably progress and several mechanisms including a
secondary mutation in exon 20 of the EGFR gene (T790M) or MET or HER2
amplifications are responsible for acquired resistance (AR). In clinical practice
few options are available for patients with AR, and several new agents or
strategies are currently under investigation, including second generation TKIs.
CONCLUSIONS: Aim of the present review is to present available data on new
EGFR-TKIs and to discuss how these agents could overcome AR to erlotinib or
gefitinib.

DOI: 10.1186/2213-0802-2-2 
PMCID: PMC4215821
PMID: 25505694  [PubMed]


494. Med Sci Monit. 2014 Dec 15;20:2666-76. doi: 10.12659/MSM.892476.

Efficacy of EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors in non-small-cell lung cancer
patients with/without EGFR-mutation: evidence based on recent phase III
randomized trials.

Zhang WQ(1), Li T(1), Li H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Beijing Institute of Respiratory Diseases,
Beijing Chaoyang Hospital, Capital Medical University, Bejing, China (mainland).

BACKGROUND: EGFR mutation might be a predictive factor for applying EGFR-tyrosine
kinase inhibitors (EGFR-TKIs, including gefitinib, erlotinib and afatinib) in
non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLS) patients. Thus, it is necessary to pool
previous trials to compare the effect of EGFR-TKIs versus cytotoxic chemotherapy 
in EGFR mutation positive (mut+) and negative (mut-) patients.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: This study identified 8 first-line and 9 second-line phase 
III trials in databases. Hazard ratio (HR) was pooled to assess the risk of
progression-free survival (PFS), and overall survival (OS), while odds ratio (OR)
was pooled to assess objective response, disease control, and toxicity of
EGFR-TKIs verses chemotherapy.
RESULTS: In EGFR mut+ patients, EGFR-TKIs were associated with significantly
lower risk of disease progression in the first-line setting, but this trend was
only observed in the gefitinib group, not in the erlotinib group in the
second-line setting. In EGFR mut- patients, gefitinib and erlotinib had
significantly higher risk of disease progression in first-line and second-line
setting, respectively. Compared with chemotherapy, the effects of EGFR-TKIs on OS
in both first-line and second-line settings were not evident. Regarding toxicity,
EGFR-TKIs had significantly higher risk of rash and lower hematological toxicity 
compared with chemotherapy.
CONCLUSIONS: All of the 3 EGFR-TKIs and gefitinib alone regimens had better
effects in prolonging PFS in EGFR mut+ patients in first-line and second-line
setting, respectively, but chemotherapy seemed more effective in EGFR mut-
patients than EGFR-TKIs. Therefore, accurate identification of EGFR mutation
status is useful to decide on an appropriate regimen for treatment of NSCLC
patients.

DOI: 10.12659/MSM.892476 
PMCID: PMC4271800
PMID: 25503781  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


495. World J Clin Oncol. 2014 Dec 10;5(5):858-64. doi: 10.5306/wjco.v5.i5.858.

Erlotinib usage after prior treatment with gefitinib in advanced non-small cell
lung cancer: A clinical perspective and review of published literature.

Singh N(1), Jindal A(1), Behera D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Navneet Singh, Aditya Jindal, Digambar Behera, Department of Pulmonary
Medicine, Postgraduate Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh
160012, India.

Erlotinib and gefitinib are among the most widely researched, used and available 
molecularly targeted therapies for treatment of advanced non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC). They are both tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) of the epidermal 
growth factor receptor (EGFR). In the past decade, there have been reports on
clinical benefit from use of erlotinib after gefitinib failure in NSCLC patients.
A review of published literature on this focussed topic is provided herein.
Pooled analysis of published literature shows that majority of patients were
female (60.6%), non-smokers (64.5%), had adenocarcinoma histology (88.3%) and
were of East Asian ethnicity (92.3%). Presence of sensitizing EGFR mutation was
detected in 48.4% of subjects. Disease control rates with prior gefitinib therapy
and with subsequent erlotinib treatment were 79.4% and 45.4% respectively. Based 
upon our review, the most important predictive factor for clinical benefit from
erlotinib identified was previous response to gefitinib. The exact explanations
for the potential benefit from erlotinib use in this patient population is still 
not known and further studies are required to determine the role of molecular
mechanisms especially those related to resistance to initial EGFR TKI therapy.

DOI: 10.5306/wjco.v5.i5.858 
PMCID: PMC4259947
PMID: 25493223  [PubMed]


496. Curr Oncol. 2014 Dec;21(6):329-36. doi: 10.3747/co.21.2241.

Management of diarrhea induced by epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine
kinase inhibitors.

Hirsh V(1), Blais N(2), Burkes R(3), Verma S(4), Croitoru K(5).

Author information: 
(1)Hematology-Oncology Services, Santa Cabrini Hospital, and Department of
Oncology, Faculty of Medicine, McGill University, Montreal, QC. (2)Department of 
Medicine, University of Montreal, Montreal, QC. (3)Division of Hematology/Medical
Oncology, University of Toronto, Mount Sinai Hospital, and The Princess Margaret 
Hospital Cancer Centre, Toronto, ON. (4)University of Toronto and Medical
Oncology/Hematology, Sunnybrook Health Sciences Centre, Toronto, ON.
(5)University of Toronto, and Division of Gastroenterology, Zane Cohen Centre for
Digestive Diseases, Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, ON.

Treatment for non-small-cell lung cancer (nsclc) is moving away from traditional 
chemotherapy toward personalized medicine. The reversible tyrosine kinase
inhibitors (tkis) erlotinib and gefitinib were developed to target the epidermal 
growth factor receptor (egfr). Afatinib, an irreversible ErbB family blocker, was
developed to block egfr (ErbB1), human epidermal growth factor receptor 2
(ErbB2), and ErbB4 signalling, and transphosphorylation of ErbB3. All of the
foregoing agents are efficacious in treating nsclc, and their adverse event
profile is different from that of chemotherapy. Two of the most common adverse
events with egfr tkis are rash and diarrhea. Here, we focus on diarrhea. The key 
to successful management of diarrhea is to treat early and aggressively using
patient education, diet, and antidiarrheal medications such as loperamide. We
also present strategies for the effective assessment and management of egfr
tki-induced diarrhea.

DOI: 10.3747/co.21.2241 
PMCID: PMC4257116
PMID: 25489260  [PubMed]


497. Oncol Rep. 2015 Feb;33(2):833-9. doi: 10.3892/or.2014.3643. Epub 2014 Dec 2.

Microarray expression profile of long non-coding RNAs in EGFR-TKIs resistance of 
human non-small cell lung cancer.

Cheng N(1), Li X(2), Zhao C(2), Ren S(1), Chen X(1), Cai W(1), Zhao M(1), Zhang
Y(1), Li J(1), Wang Q(1), Zhou C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Shanghai Pulmonary Hospital, Tongji
University, Tongji University Medical School Cancer Institute, Shanghai 200433,
P.R. China. (2)Department of Lung Cancer and Immunology, Shanghai Pulmonary
Hospital, Tongji University, Tongji University Medical School Cancer Institute,
Shanghai 200433, P.R. China.

The application of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase
inhibitors (TKIs) is limited by drug resistance in non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC). Long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) are known to be involved in tumor
development and metastasis, as well as chemotherapy resistance. To gain insight
into the molecular mechanisms of EGFR-TKIs resistance, EGFR-TKIs‑sensitive and
‑resistant human lung cancer cells were analyzed by lncRNA microarray. In the
present study, we found a total of 22,587 lncRNAs expressed in lung cancer cells.
Of these, the expression level of 1,731 lncRNAs was upregulated >2-fold compared 
with gefitinib-sensitive cells while that of 2,936 was downregulated.
Bioinformatics analysis (GO and pathway analyses) revealed that some classical
pathways participating in cell proliferation and apoptosis were aberrantly
expressed in these cells (P-value cut-off was 0.05). Enhancer-like lncRNAs and
their nearby coding genes were analyzed. Six lncRNAs were identified as potential
enhancers. Several lncRNAs were validated in lung cancer cell lines using
RT-qPCR. To the best of our knowledge, the results showed for the first time that
differentially expressed lncRNAs responded to EGFR-TKIs resistance in NSCLC
cells. LncRNAs may therefore be novel candidate biomarkers and potential targets 
for EGFR-TKIs therapy in the future.

DOI: 10.3892/or.2014.3643 
PMID: 25482516  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


498. PLoS One. 2014 Dec 4;9(12):e114074. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0114074.
eCollection 2014.

Sequence-dependent antiproliferative effects of gefitinib and docetaxel on
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cells and the possible mechanism.

Chen B(1), Zheng J(1), Zeng Y(1), Li B(1), Xie B(1), Zheng J(1), Zhou J(1), Zhang
W(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Guangzhou General Hospital of Guangzhou Military
Command, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China.

PURPOSE: Recent clinical trials showed that the sequential combination of
epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors (EGFR-TKIs) and
chemotherapy could prolong the PFS and/or OS of advanced non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC) patients with EGFR mutation. The aim of present study was to
assess the optimal combination sequence and to explore its possible mechanism.
METHODS: PC-9 cells and A549 cells, the lung adenocarcinoma cells with mutant and
wide-type EGFR respectively, were treated with docetaxel/gefitinib alone or in
different combination schedules. The EGFR and K-ras gene status was determined by
qPCR-HRM technique. Cell proliferation was detected by MTT assay. The expression 
and phosphorylation of EGFR, ERK, Akt and IGF-1R were detected by western blot.
Cell cycle distribution was observed by flow cytometry.
RESULTS: Only sequential administration of docetaxel followed by gefitinib (D →
G) induced significant synergistic effect in both cell lines (Combination
Index<0.9). The reverse sequence (G → D) resulted in an antagonistic interaction 
in both cell lines (CI>1.1), whereas the concurrent administration (D+G) showed
additive (0.9<CI<1.1)-synergistic effect in PC-9 cells and antagonistic-additive 
effect in A549 cells. Mechanism studies showed that docetaxel-induced
phosphorylation of EGFR and ERK was repressed by subsequently used gefitinib, but
not by concurrent exposure of gefitinib. The gefitinib-repressed phosphorylation 
of EGFR and ERK was reversed neither by concurrent nor by subsequent
administration of docetaxel. D+G reinforced their inhibition on the
phosphorylation of IGF-1R in PC-9 cells.
CONCLUSIONS: The cytotoxic drugs followed by EGFR-TKIs may be the optimal
combination for antiproliferative effects in EGFR-mutant NSCLC cells, and the
phosphorylation of EGFR and ERK might contribute to this effect.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0114074 
PMCID: PMC4256223
PMID: 25474307  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. BMC Pulm Med. 2014 Dec 4;14:192. doi: 10.1186/1471-2466-14-192.

A systematic review of the cost-effectiveness of targeted therapies for
metastatic non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC).

Lange A(1), Prenzler A, Frank M, Golpon H, Welte T, von der Schulenburg JM.

Author information: 
(1)Leibniz University Hannover, Center for Health Economics Research Hannover
(CHERH), Otto-Brenner-Str, 1, D-30159 Hannover, Germany. al@ivbl.uni-hannover.de.

BACKGROUND: Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) imposes a substantial burden on
patients, health care systems and society due to increasing incidence and poor
survival rates. In recent years, advances in the treatment of metastatic NSCLC
have resulted from the introduction of targeted therapies. However, the
application of these new agents increases treatment costs considerably. The
objective of this article is to review the economic evidence of targeted
therapies in metastatic NSCLC.
METHODS: A systematic literature review was conducted to identify
cost-effectiveness (CE) as well as cost-utility studies. Medline, Embase,
SciSearch, Cochrane, and 9 other databases were searched from 2000 through April 
2013 (including update) for full-text publications. The quality of the studies
was assessed via the validated Quality of Health Economic Studies (QHES)
instrument.
RESULTS: Nineteen studies (including update) involving the MoAb bevacizumab and
the Tyrosine-kinase inhibitors erlotinib and gefitinib met all inclusion
criteria. The majority of studies analyzed the CE of first-line maintenance and
second-line treatment with erlotinib. Five studies dealt with bevacizumab in
first-line regimes. Gefitinib and pharmacogenomic profiling were each covered by 
only two studies. Furthermore, the available evidence was of only fair quality.
CONCLUSION: First-line maintenance treatment with erlotinib compared to Best
Supportive Care (BSC) can be considered cost-effective. In comparison to
docetaxel, erlotinib is likely to be cost-effective in subsequent treatment
regimens as well. The insights for bevacizumab are miscellaneous. There are
findings that gefitinib is cost-effective in first- and second-line treatment,
however, based on only two studies. The role of pharmacogenomic testing needs to 
be evaluated. Therefore, future research should improve the available evidence
and consider pharmacogenomic profiling as specified by the European Medicines
Agency. Upcoming agents like crizotinib and afatinib need to be analyzed as well.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2466-14-192 
PMCID: PMC4269853
PMID: 25471553  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. Mol Clin Oncol. 2015 Jan;3(1):145-150. Epub 2014 Sep 22.

Indirect comparison of the efficacy and safety of gefitinib and cetuximab-based
therapy in patients with advanced non-small-cell lung cancer.

Tang J(1), Zhang H(1), Yan J(2), Shao R(2).

Author information: 
(1)The Research Center of National Drug Policy and Ecosystem, China
Pharmaceutical University, Nanjing, Jiangsu 211198, P.R. China ; School of
International Pharmaceutical Business, China Pharmaceutical University, Nanjing, 
Jiangsu 211198, P.R. China. (2)The Research Center of National Drug Policy and
Ecosystem, China Pharmaceutical University, Nanjing, Jiangsu 211198, P.R. China ;
The Research Center of National Drug Policy and Ecosystem, China Pharmaceutical
University, Nanjing, Jiangsu 211198, P.R. China.

The aim of this study was to systematically evaluate the efficacy and safety of
gefitinib and cetuximab-based therapies in patients with advanced non-small-cell 
lung cancer (NSCLC). The studies to be used for the comparisons were selected
from the available literature on gefitinib and cetuximab-based therapies compared
to conventional chemotherapy in patients with advanced NSCLC. The meta-analysis
was performed with RevMan 5.0 software and the Bucher approach was applied to
conduct the indirect comparisons. A total of 4 studies, including 935 patients,
on gefitinib therapy vs. conventional chemotherapy and 4 studies, including 1,015
patients, on cetuximab-based therapy vs. conventional chemotherapy, were used for
indirect comparisons. As regards efficacy, the risk ratio (RR) of objective
response rate and 1-year survival rate between gefitinib and cetuximab-based
therapies in patients with advanced NSCLC were 0.99 [95% confidence interval
(CI): 0.75-1.32; P=0.9584] and 0.85 (95% CI: 0.71-1.01; P=0.0696), respectively, 
and the mean difference of progression-free survival and overall survival (OS)
were -0.15 (95% CI: -0.90 to 0.60; P=0.6946) and -1.84 (95% CI: -3.53 to -0.15;
P=0.0331), respectively. As regards safety, the RR of grade 3/4 adverse events
(AEs) was 0.29 (95% CI: 0.19-0.44; P=0.0001). The results demonstrated that
cetuximab-based therapy was superior to gefitinib therapy in terms of OS and
inferior to gefitinib therapy in terms of AEs, whereas there were no significant 
differences in terms of efficacy and safety between the two therapies on other
endpoints adopted for advanced NSCLC. However, further well-designed randomized
controlled trials and continuous studies are required to confirm our findings.

DOI: 10.3892/mco.2014.424 
PMCID: PMC4251263
PMID: 25469285  [PubMed]


501. Mol Cancer. 2014 Dec 2;13:259. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-13-259.

P7170, a novel inhibitor of mTORC1/mTORC2 and Activin receptor-like Kinase 1
(ALK1) inhibits the growth of non small cell lung cancer.

Venkatesha VA, Joshi A, Venkataraman M, Sonawane V, Bhatia D, Tannu P, Bose J,
Choudhari S, Srivastava A, Pandey PK, Lad VJ, Sangana R, Ahmed T, Damre A, Deore 
V, Sahu B, Kumar S, Sharma S, Agarwal VR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Piramal Life Sciences Ltd, # 1 Nirlon Complex, Off: Western Express Highway,
Goregaon (East), Mumbai, Maharashtra 400063, India. veena_828@yahoo.com.

BACKGROUND: Lung cancer is the major cause of cancer-related deaths and many
cases of Non Small Cell Lung Cancer (NSCLC), a common type of lung cancer, have
frequent genetic/oncogenic activation of EGFR, KRAS, PIK3CA, BRAF, and others
that drive tumor growth. Some patients though initially respond, but later
develop resistance to erlotinib/gefitinib with no option except for cytotoxic
therapy. Therefore, development of novel targeted therapeutics is imperative to
provide improved survival benefit for NSCLC patients. The mTOR cell survival
pathway is activated in naïve, or in response to targeted therapies in NSCLC.
METHODS: We have discovered P7170, a small molecule inhibitor of
mTORC1/mTORC2/ALK1 and investigated its antitumor efficacy using various in vitro
and in vivo models of human NSCLC.
RESULTS: P7170 inhibited the phosphorylation of AKT, S6 and 4EBP1 (substrates for
mTORC2 and mTORC1) levels by 80-100% and growth of NSCLC cells. P7170 inhibited
anchorage-independent colony formation of NSCLC patient tumor-derived cells
subsistent of disease sub-types. The compound also induced apoptosis in NSCLC
cell lines. P7170 at a well-tolerated daily dose of 20 mg/kg significantly
inhibited the growth of NSCLC xenografts independent of different mutations
(EGFR, KRAS, or PIK3CA) or sensitivity to erlotinib.
Pharmacokinetic-pharmacodynamic (PK-PD) analysis showed sub-micro molar tumor
concentrations along with mTORC1/C2 inhibition.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results provide evidence of antitumor activity of P7170 in the
erlotinib -sensitive and -insensitive models of NSCLC.

DOI: 10.1186/1476-4598-13-259 
PMCID: PMC4289333
PMID: 25466244  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


502. Lancet Oncol. 2014 Dec;15(13):1433-41. doi: 10.1016/S1470-2045(14)70461-9. Epub
2014 Nov 5.

Dacomitinib as first-line treatment in patients with clinically or molecularly
selected advanced non-small-cell lung cancer: a multicentre, open-label, phase 2 
trial.

Jänne PA(1), Ou SH(2), Kim DW(3), Oxnard GR(4), Martins R(5), Kris MG(6), Dunphy 
F(7), Nishio M(8), O'Connell J(9), Paweletz C(10), Taylor I(11), Zhang H(12),
Goldberg Z(13), Mok T(14).

Author information: 
(1)Lowe Center for Thoracic Oncology, Dana Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA,
USA; Belfer Institute for Applied Cancer Science, Dana Farber Cancer Institute,
Boston, MA, USA. Electronic address: pasi_janne@dfci.harvard.edu. (2)Chao Family 
Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of California Irvine School of Medicine, 
Orange, CA, USA. (3)Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul National University
Hospital, Seoul, South Korea. (4)Lowe Center for Thoracic Oncology, Dana Farber
Cancer Institute, Boston, MA, USA. (5)Department of Medicine, Division of
Oncology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA. (6)Memorial Sloan Kettering
Cancer Center, New York, NY, USA. (7)Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC, 
USA. (8)Department of Thoracic Medical Oncology, Cancer Institute Hospital of
JFCR, Tokyo, Japan. (9)Pfizer Oncology, New York, NY, USA. (10)Belfer Institute
for Applied Cancer Science, Dana Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA, USA.
(11)Pfizer Oncology, Point Road, Groton, CT, USA. (12)Pfizer (China) Research &
Development Co Ltd, Shanghai, China. (13)Pfizer Oncology, San Diego, CA, USA.
(14)State Key Laboratory in Oncology in South China, Hong Kong Cancer Institute, 
Department of Clinical Oncology, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Prince of
Wales Hospital, Shatin NT, Hong Kong SAR, China.

Comment in
    Lancet Oncol. 2014 Dec;15(13):1408-9.
    Nat Rev Clin Oncol. 2015 Jan;12(1):3.

BACKGROUND: Patients with EGFR-mutant non-small-cell lung cancer generally have a
progression-free survival of 9-13 months while being treated with the EGFR
tyrosine-kinase inhibitors gefitinib or erlotinib. However, resistance inevitably
develops, and more effective EGFR inhibitors are needed. Dacomitinib is a
covalent pan-HER inhibitor that has shown clinical activity in patients
previously treated with gefitinib or erlotinib. We did a trial of dacomitinib as 
initial systemic therapy in clinically and molecularly selected patients with
advanced non-small-cell lung cancer.
METHODS: In this open-label, multicentre, phase 2 trial, we enrolled
treatment-naive patients with advanced lung cancer who had clinical
(never-smokers [<100 cigarettes per lifetime] or former light smokers [<10
pack-years per lifetime] and ≥15 years since last cigarette) or molecular (EGFR
mutation, regardless of smoking status) characteristics associated with response 
to EGFR inhibitors. We gave dacomitinib orally once daily (45 mg or 30 mg) until 
progressive disease, unacceptable toxicity, or patient withdrawal. We used
Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors criteria (version 1.0) to
investigate the activity of dacomitinib in all patients with a baseline scan and 
at least one post-treatment scan, with investigator assessment of response and
progression. The primary endpoint was progression-free survival at 4 months in
the as-enrolled population, with a null hypothesis of progression-free survival
at 4 months of 50% or less. The study is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov,
number NCT00818441, and is no longer accruing patients.
FINDINGS: Between March 11, 2009, and April 1, 2011, we enrolled 89 patients from
25 centres, including 45 (51%) with EGFR-activating mutations in exon 19 (n=25)
or exon 21 (n=20). Progression-free survival at 4 months was 76·8% (95% CI
66·4-84·4) in the as-enrolled population, and was 95·5% (95% CI 83·2-98·9) in the
EGFR-mutant population. The most common all-grade treatment-related adverse
events were diarrhoea in 83 (93%) patients, dermatitis acneiform in 69 (78%)
patients, dry skin in 39 (44%) patients, and stomatitis in 36 (40%) patients. Two
patients (2%) had grade 4 treatment-related events (one with hypokalaemia and one
with dyspnoea). No grade 5 toxicities were recorded.
INTERPRETATION: Dacomitinib had encouraging clinical activity as initial systemic
treatment in clinically or molecularly selected patients with advanced
non-small-cell lung cancer.
FUNDING: Pfizer.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S1470-2045(14)70461-9 
PMID: 25456362  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


503. Complement Ther Med. 2014 Dec;22(6):1010-8. doi: 10.1016/j.ctim.2014.10.001. Epub
2014 Oct 12.

Effect of gefitinib plus Chinese herbal medicine (CHM) in patients with advanced 
non-small-cell lung cancer: a retrospective case-control study.

Yang XB(1), Wu WY(2), Long SQ(1), Deng H(1), Pan ZQ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Guangdong Provincial Hospital of Traditional Chinese
Medicine, No 36, Huadi Yong'An Street, Liwan District, Guangzhou 510120, China.
(2)Department of Oncology, Guangdong Provincial Hospital of Traditional Chinese
Medicine, No 36, Huadi Yong'An Street, Liwan District, Guangzhou 510120, China.
Electronic address: wwanyin@126.com.

BACKGROUND: Some patients with non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) respond well to
the EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor gefitinib. Chinese herbal medicine (CHM) was
effective in improving the quality of life and prolonging overall survival in
patient with NSCLC. We aim to determine whether gefitinib plus CHM could prolong 
the progression-free survival (PFS) or median survival time (MST) in patients
with NSCLC than gefitinib alone.
METHODS: We retrospectively analyzed 159 non-small-cell lung cancer patients with
the method of retrospective case-control study, matching factors included gender,
age categories (30-39,40-49,50-59,60-69,70-79), pathological stage (IIIB or IV), 
smoking status (never: <100 lifetime cigarettes, or ever: ≥100 lifetime
cigarettes), pathology, and performance status. Among the 159 patients, 100
patients treated with gefitinib (250mg/day orally) plus CHM ("Fuzheng Kang'ai"
decoction, a Chinese herbal medicine, 250ml/bid/day orally), 59 patients treated 
with gefitinib (250mg/day orally) only. PFS and MST were analyzed for the whole
population.
RESULTS: 58 pairs were matched successfully. 1 patient (treated with gefitinib)
with the age of 27 years failed to be matched. Progression-free survival was
significantly longer in patients treated with gefitinib plus CHM than with
gefitinib: median PFS was 13.1 months (95% CI 6.50-19.70) with gefitinib plus CHM
versus 11.43 months (95% CI 7.95-14.91) with gefitinib (log-rank P=0.013). Median
overall survival was longer with gefitinib plus CHM than with gefitinib: median
MST was 22.83 months (95% CI 17.51-28.16) with gefitinib plus CHM versus 18.7
months (95% CI 16.83-20.57) with gefitinib (log-rank P=0.049). The most common
adverse event was rash, the incidence in the gefitinib plus CHM group was 41.38% 
while in the gefitinib group was 24.14% (P=0.048).
CONCLUSIONS: This case-control analysis suggested that treatment with gefitinib
plus CHM prolonged PFS and MST compared with gefitinib in patients with NSCLC,
and it is worthy of further study.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ctim.2014.10.001 
PMID: 25453521  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


504. Clin Lung Cancer. 2015 Mar;16(2):121-7. doi: 10.1016/j.cllc.2014.09.007. Epub
2014 Sep 30.

Prospective assessment of pemetrexed or pemetrexed plus platinum in combination
with gefitinib or erlotinib in patients with acquired resistance to gefitinib or 
erlotinib: a phase II exploratory and preliminary study.

Yu S(1), Zhang B(1), Xiang C(1), Shu Y(1), Wu H(1), Huang X(1), Yu Q(1), Yin
Y(1), Guo R(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical
University, Nanjing, Jiangsu Province, China. (2)Department of Medical Oncology, 
First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, Jiangsu
Province, China. Electronic address: yushaominmed@163.com.

PURPOSE: To evaluate the efficacy and safety of alternating gefitinib and
erlotinib, tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) of the epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR), with chemotherapy in non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients
with acquired TKI resistance.
METHODS: Forty-two patients with lung cancer that responded to TKIs for as least 
6 months before developing TKI resistance were enrolled and received sequential
pemetrexed or pemetrexed plus platinum followed by gefitinib or erlotinib.
Chemotherapy was intravenously administered on day 1, and patients were provided 
oral EGFR-TKIs between days 6 and 21. The treatment was repeated every 3 weeks
for 2 to 4 cycles. At the end of the specified treatment regimen, patients
continued to receive EGFR-TKIs for maintenance until disease progression or
unacceptable toxicity. The primary end point was the disease control rate.
Secondary end points included overall remission rate, median progression-free
survival, and survival rate.
RESULTS: The disease control rate was 78.6%, the overall remission rate was
23.8%, and survival rate was 73.8%. Progression-free survival was 8 months, and
median survival time was 11 months. The treatment protocol was generally well
tolerated. Treatment interruption was required in 2 patients. Grade 3/4
hematologic toxicities included neutropenia (23.8%), leukopenia (16.7%), anemia
(4.8%), and thrombocytopenia (4.8%). Common grade 3 nonhematologic toxicities
included nausea (7.1%), vomiting (9.5%), anorexia (11.9%), rash (7.1%), fatigue
(9.5%), infection (16.7%), and oral mucositis (2.4%). No toxicity-related deaths 
occurred.
CONCLUSIONS: For patients with acquired TKI resistance, pemetrexed or pemetrexed 
plus platinum administration followed by gefitinib or erlotinib was well
tolerated and associated with a fair response.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cllc.2014.09.007 
PMID: 25450874  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


505. Life Sci. 2014 Dec 5;119(1-2):28-33. doi: 10.1016/j.lfs.2014.10.008. Epub 2014
Oct 31.

EGFR inhibitor-driven endoplasmic reticulum stress-mediated injury on intestinal 
epithelial cells.

Hong S(1), Gu Y(2), Gao Z(2), Guo L(1), Guo W(1), Wu X(1), Shen Y(1), Sun Y(1),
Wu X(3), Xu Q(4).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, School of Life Sciences,
Nanjing University, Nanjing 210093, China. (2)Department of Clinical Oncology,
The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing 210029,
China. (3)State Key Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, School of Life
Sciences, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210093, China. Electronic address:
wuxf@nju.edu.cn. (4)State Key Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, School 
of Life Sciences, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210093, China. Electronic address: 
molpharm@163.com.

AIMS: The aim of this study is to understand the underlying mechanisms regulating
the adverse effect of diarrhea caused by epidermal growth factor receptor
tyrosine kinase inhibitors (EGFR-TKIs).
MAIN METHODS: We comparatively examined the effects of two EGFR-TKIs, gefitinib
and icotinib, on intestinal epithelial cells (IEC-6). Cell proliferation was
measured using MTT analysis. Expression of multiple cytokines was assayed by
real-time PCR. Cell cycle and apoptosis of IEC were evaluated using flow
cytometry. Protein levels were determined by Western blot.
KEY FINDINGS: These two EGFR-TKIs exerted cytotoxicity to inhibit proliferation
and induce apoptosis in IEC-6 cells. These effects are due to the ability of
these EGFR-TKIs to cause cell cycle arrest at G0/G1 by regulating the expression 
of cyclin D1 and p27. In addition, gefitinib and icotinib significantly
suppressed the levels of cell adhesion molecules while increasing the expression 
of the proinflammatory cytokines interleukin (IL)-6 and IL-25. Finally, these
EGFR-TKIs triggered an endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress response, characterized 
by the activation of the RNA dependent protein kinase-like ER kinase (PERK)
pathway and the transcriptional induction of XBP-1 signaling, resulting in
ER-mediated cell death. Moreover, gefitinib exerted more cytotoxicity than
icotinib on IEC-6 cells.
SIGNIFICANCE: Because diarrhea is a common adverse event occurring in patients
receiving small-molecular EGFR-TKI chemotherapy, the results of this study are
clinically significant. The finding that icotinib exerts less cytotoxic activity 
than gefitinib on IEC-6 cells indicates its usefulness as a less toxic treatment 
option for non-small-cell lung cancer.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lfs.2014.10.008 
PMID: 25445223  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


506. Lancet Oncol. 2014 Nov;15(12):1379-88. doi: 10.1016/S1470-2045(14)70472-3. Epub
2014 Oct 15.

Dacomitinib compared with placebo in pretreated patients with advanced or
metastatic non-small-cell lung cancer (NCIC CTG BR.26): a double-blind,
randomised, phase 3 trial.

Ellis PM(1), Shepherd FA(2), Millward M(3), Perrone F(4), Seymour L(5), Liu G(2),
Sun S(6), Cho BC(7), Morabito A(8), Leighl NB(2), Stockler MR(9), Lee CW(10),
Wierzbicki R(11), Cohen V(12), Blais N(13), Sangha RS(14), Favaretto AG(15), Kang
JH(16), Tsao MS(2), Wilson CF(5), Goldberg Z(17), Ding K(5), Goss GD(18),
Bradbury PA(5); NCIC CTG; Australasian Lung Cancer Trials Group; NCI Naples
Clinical Trials Unit.

Author information: 
(1)Juravinski Cancer Centre, Hamilton, ON, Canada. Electronic address:
Peter.Ellis@jcc.hhsc.ca. (2)Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(3)University of Western Australia, Perth, WA, Australia; Australasian Lung
Cancer Trials Group, Sydney, NSW, Australia. (4)Clinical Trials Unit, Istituto
Nazionale per lo Studio e la Cura dei Tumori-Fondazione G Pascale IRCCS, Napoli, 
Italy. (5)NCIC Clinical Trials Group, Queen's University, ON, Canada. (6)British 
Columbia Cancer Agency, Vancouver Centre, Vancouver, BC, Canada. (7)Yonsei Cancer
Centre, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul, South Korea.
(8)Thoraco-Pulmonary Medical Oncology, Istituto Nazionale Tumori "Fondazione G
Pascale"-IRCCS, Napoli, Italy. (9)NHMRC Clinical Trials Centre, University of
Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia. (10)British Columbia Cancer Agency, Fraser Valley
Centre, Surrey, BC, Canada. (11)R S MacLaughlin Durham RegionalCancer Centre,
Oshawa, ON, Canada. (12)Jewish General Hospital and Segal Cancer Centre, McGill
University, Montreal, QC, Canada. (13)Centre Hospitalier de l'Université de
Montréal, Montreal, QC, Canada. (14)Cross Cancer Institute, Edmonton, AB, Canada.
(15)Istituto Oncologico Veneto, Padua, Italy. (16)Seoul St Mary's Hospital, The
Catholic University, Seoul, South Korea. (17)Pfizer Oncology, La Jolla, CA, USA. 
(18)Division of Medical Oncology, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada.

Comment in
    Lancet Oncol. 2014 Nov;15(12):1289-90.

BACKGROUND: Dacomitinib is an irreversible pan-HER tyrosine-kinase inhibitor with
preclinical and clinical evidence of activity in non-small-cell lung cancer. We
designed BR.26 to assess whether dacomitinib improved overall survival in heavily
pretreated patients with this disease.
METHODS: In this double-blind, randomised, placebo-controlled, phase 3 trial, we 
enrolled adults (aged ≥18 years) with advanced or metastatic non-small-cell lung 
cancer from 75 centres in 12 countries. Eligible patients had received up to
three previous lines of chemotherapy and either gefitinib or erlotinib, and had
assessable disease (RECIST 1.1) and tumour tissue samples for translational
studies. Patients were stratified according to centre, performance status,
tobacco use, best response to previous EGFR tyrosine-kinase inhibitor, weight
loss within the previous 3 months, and ethnicity, and were then randomly
allocated 2:1 to oral dacomitinib 45 mg once-daily or matched placebo centrally
via a web-based system. Treatment continued until disease progression or
unacceptable toxicity. The primary outcome was overall survival in the
intention-to-treat population; secondary outcomes included overall survival in
predefined molecular subgroups, progression-free survival, the proportion of
patients who achieved an objective response, safety, and quality of life. This
study is completed, although follow-up is ongoing for patients on treatment. This
study is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, number NCT01000025.
FINDINGS: Between Dec 23, 2009, and June 11, 2013, we randomly assigned 480
patients to dacomitinib and 240 patients to placebo. At the final analysis
(January, 2014), median follow-up was 23·4 months (IQR 15·6-29·6) for patients in
the dacomitinib group and 24·4 months (11·5-38·9) for those in the placebo group.
Dacomitinib did not improve overall survival compared with placebo (median 6·83
months [95% CI 6·08-7·49] for dacomitinib vs 6·31 months [5·32-7·52] for placebo;
hazard ratio [HR] 1·00 [95% CI 0·83-1·21]; p=0·506). However, patients in the
dacomitinib group had longer progression-free survival than those in the placebo 
group (median 2·66 months [1·91-3·32] vs 1·38 months [0·99-1·74], respectively;
HR 0·66 [95% CI 0·55-0·79]; p<0·0001), and a significantly greater proportion of 
patients in the dacomitinb group achieved an objective response than in the
placebo group (34 [7%] of 480 patients vs three [1%] of 240 patients,
respectively; p=0·001). Compared with placebo, the effect of dacomitinib on
overall survival seemed similar in patients with EGFR-mutation-positive tumours
(HR 0·98, 95% CI 0·67-1·44) and EGFR wild-type tumours (0·93, 0·71-1·21;
pinteraction=0·69). However, we noted qualitative differences in the effect of
dacomitinib on overall survival for patients with KRAS-mutation-positive tumours 
(2·10, 1·05-4·22) and patients with KRAS wild-type tumours (0·79, 0·61-1·03;
pinteraction=0·08). Compared with placebo, patients allocated dacomitinib had
significantly longer time to deterioration of cough (p<0·0001), dyspnoea
(p=0·049), and pain (p=0·041). 185 (39%) of 477 patients who received dacomitinib
and 86 (36%) of 239 patients who received placebo had serious adverse events. The
most common grade 3-4 adverse events were diarrhoea (59 [12%] patients on
dacomitinib vs no controls), acneiform rash (48 [10%] vs one [<1%]), oral
mucositis (16 [3%] vs none), and fatigue (13 [3%] vs four [2%]).
INTERPRETATION: Dacomitinib did not increase overall survival and cannot be
recommended for treatment of patients with advanced non-small-cell lung cancer
previously treated with chemotherapy and an EGFR tyrosine-kinase inhibitor.
FUNDING: Canadian Cancer Society Research Institute and Pfizer.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S1470-2045(14)70472-3 
PMID: 25439692  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


507. Oncol Lett. 2015 Jan;9(1):257-261. Epub 2014 Nov 4.

Clinical significance of gefitinib antitumor activity in patients with lung
adenocarcinoma.

Wang Z(1), Han QB(1), Gu JL(1), Yu XM(2), Sun XJ(1), Lin QR(1), Fang J(1), Wang
YZ(1), Xu YP(1), Mao WM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Zhejiang Cancer Hospital, Hangzhou, Zhejiang
310022, P.R. China. (2)Department of Medical Oncology, Zhejiang Cancer Hospital, 
Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310022, P.R. China. (3)Department of Thoracic Surgery,
Zhejiang Cancer Hospital, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310022, P.R. China.

Non-small cell lung cancer is a subtype of adenocarcinoma, which has previously
shown positive responses to gefitinib. The aim of the current study was to
determine a clinical profile of gefitinib-induced disease controls for patients
with lung adenocarcinoma. Retrospective evaluation of the clinical
characteristics of 52 lung adenocarcinoma patients, enrolled at the Zhejiang
Cancer Hospital (Hangzhou, China) between October 2004 and August 2008, was
undertaken. All patients received gefitinib (250 mg/day orally) until disease
progression or until an unacceptable toxicity was observed. Of the 52 patients,
complete response (CR) and partial response (PR) rates were 23.1% (12/52) and
57.7% (30/52), respectively. An additional 19.2% (10/52) of patients demonstrated
stable disease (SD) after three months of treatment with gefitinib. Disease
control was observed in the primary lesion, and tumor metastasis to the lungs,
brain, adrenal glands, pleura, peritoneum, pericardium, bone and lymph nodes was 
identified. The one-year progression-free survival (PFS) and overall survival
(OS) rates were 74.8 and 78.0%, respectively. Multivariate analysis revealed that
female patients were associated with significantly longer survival times when
compared with males (hazard ratio, 0.077; 95% confidence interval [CI],
0.007-0.083; P=0.035). One-year PFS and OS rates in CR, PR and SD patients were
77.8, 73.9 and 33.3%, and 89.2, 79.8 and 33.7%, respectively, although neither
difference was identified to be statistically significant. In addition, the
median OS of SD patients was 12 months (95% CI, 7.2-16.8 months). Brain
metastasis was the major site of disease progression (23.1%). Gefitinib treatment
for patients with lung adenocarcinoma showed a marked long-term survival benefit,
even in SD patients. However, further studies are required to analyze the
efficacy of gefitinib in penetrating the blood-brain barrier in order to prolong 
PFS in patients with lung adenocarcinoma.

DOI: 10.3892/ol.2014.2664 
PMCID: PMC4246704
PMID: 25435970  [PubMed]


508. Chin J Cancer. 2015 Feb;34(2):94-8. doi: 10.5732/cjc.014.10151. Epub 2014 Nov 21.

Toxic epidermal necrolysis related to AP (pemetrexed plus cisplatin) and
gefitinib combination therapy in a patient with metastatic non-small cell lung
cancer.

Huang JJ(1), Ma SX, Hou X, Wang Z, Zeng YD, Qin T, Dinglin XX, Chen LK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center, State
Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Collaborative Innovation Center for
Cancer Medicine, Guangzhou, Guangdong 510060, P. R. China. chenlk@sysucc.org.cn.

Toxic epidermal necrolysis (TEN) is a rare acute life-threatening mucocutaneous
disorder that is mostly drug-related (80%-95%). It is clinically characterized as
a widespread sloughing of the skin and mucosa. AP regimen (pemetrexed plus
cisplatin) has been the preferred first-line chemotherapy for metastatic
non-squamous non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Gefitinib, a small-molecule
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI), has
already been recommended as a first-line treatment in EGFR-mutant metastatic
NSCLC. We report rare presentation of TEN involving adverse effects of AP and
gefitinib combination treatment in a 42-year-old woman diagnosed with metastatic 
NSCLC harboring an EGFR mutation. On the 21st day after administration of the
first cycle of AP regimen and the 8th day after the initiation of gefitinib
treatment, she developed an acne-like rash, oral ulcer, and conjunctivitis, which
later became blisters and ultimately denuded. The characteristic clinical courses
were decisive for the diagnosis of TEN. Treatment with systemic steroids and
immunoglobulin as well as supportive treatment led to an improvement of her
general condition and a remarkable recovery.

DOI: 10.5732/cjc.014.10151 
PMCID: PMC4360078
PMID: 25418188  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


509. Expert Rev Anticancer Ther. 2014 Dec;14(12):1391-406. doi:
10.1586/14737140.2014.983083.

Afatinib and lung cancer.

Jain P(1), Khanal R, Sharma A, Yan F, Sharma N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hospital Medicine, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH, USA.

Epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors (EGFR-TKI) have an
established role in the treatment of non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC).
First-generation reversible ATP-competitive EGFR-TKIs are approved for the
initial treatment of patients with EGFR mutation-positive advanced NSCLC.
Afatinib is an irreversible second-generation EGFR-TKI with potent preclinical
activity against EGFR (wild type and mutant), HER2, HER4 and EGFR-mutant NSCLC
with acquired resistance to reversible EGFR-TKI. LUX-Lung 3 trial demonstrated
superiority of afatinib to cisplatin and pemetrexed in the frontline treatment of
treatment-naïve patients with advanced adenocarcinoma of the lung and EGFR
mutation. Based on these results, afatinib was recently approved for the
first-line treatment of NSCLC patients with EGFR mutation. This article
summarizes current status of preclinical and clinical development of afatinib in 
NSCLC.

DOI: 10.1586/14737140.2014.983083 
PMID: 25417728  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


510. BMC Cancer. 2014 Nov 19;14:848. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-14-848.

Expressions of MUC1 and vascular endothelial growth factor mRNA in blood are
biomarkers for predicting efficacy of gefitinib treatment in non-small cell lung 
cancer.

Li J(1), Hu YM, Du YJ, Zhu LR, Qian H, Wu Y, Shi WL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Affiliated Hospital of Jiangsu University,
438 North Jiefang Street, Zhenjiang 212001, China. lijian541226@163.com.

BACKGROUND: Gefitinib, an EGFR-tyrosine kinase inhibitor, significantly improve
prognosis in patients with advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). The aim
of this study was to evaluate the usefulness of MUC1 and vascular endothelial
growth factor (VEGF) mRNA expression in peripheral blood as means of predicting
benefit from gefitinib therapy in NSCLC patients.
METHODS: MUC1 and VEGF mRNA expressions were detected in peripheral blood of 66
patients with advanced NSCLC before (B0) and 4 weeks after treatment (B4w) with
gefitinib, using real-time quantitative-PCR assay. Correlations between blood
MUC1 and VEGF mRNA expression at B0 and B4w and the response to gefitinib
treatment and survival were analyzed.
RESULTS: Blood levels of MUC1 and VEGF mRNA at B0 and at B4w were significantly
higher in patients with progressive disease than in those with partial response
and stable disease. Furthermore, blood MUC1 and VEGF mRNA positivity at two time 
points were strongly associated with shorter progression-free survival (PFS) and 
overall survival (OS) (P = 0.005 and P = 0.008 at B0, and P < 0.001 and P = 0.001
at B4w, respectively, for MUC1; P = 0.004 and P = 0.009 at B0, and P = 0.001 and 
P < 0.001 at B4w, respectively, for VEGF). Multivariate analyses demonstrated
that blood MUC1 and VEGF mRNA positivity at B0 and B4w were independent factors
for predicting worse PFS and OS.
CONCLUSIONS: MUC1 and VEGF mRNA positivity in blood seem to be indicators of
unfavorable response and poor PFS and OS in patients with advanced NSCLC treated 
with gefitinib and may be promising noninvasive and repeatable markers for
predicting efficacy of gefitinib treatment.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2407-14-848 
PMCID: PMC4246503
PMID: 25410981  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


511. BMC Cancer. 2014 Nov 18;14:834. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-14-834.

Non-small cell lung cancer with EML4-ALK translocation in Chinese male
never-smokers is characterized with early-onset.

Guo Y, Ma J, Lyu X, Liu H, Wei B, Zhao J, Fu S, Ding L, Zhang J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Hematology Laboratory of Hematology Malignancy Treatment Center, Shengjing
Hospital of China Medical University, No, 39 Huaxiang Road, Tiexi District,
Shenyang, Liaoning 100022, China. zhangjihong2014@126.com.

BACKGROUND: The translocations of the anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) gene with 
the echinoderm microtubule-associated protein-like 4 (EML4) gene on chromosome 2p
have been identified in non-small-cell lung cancers (NSCLCs) as oncogenic driver 
mutations. It has been suggested that EML4-ALK fusion is associated with the
resistance in NSCLCs to epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase
inhibitors (EGFR TKIs), such as gefitinib and erlotinib. In contrast, ALK
tyrosine kinase inhibitor (ALK TKI) crizotinib has shown superior effects in
combating NSCLCs with EML4-ALK. Thus, characterization of EML4-ALK fusion genes
and clinical features of resulting carcinomas would be a great benefit to disease
diagnosis and designing customized treatment plans. Studies have suggested that
EML4-ALK translocation occurs more frequently in never-smokers with NSCLC,
especially in female patients. However, it is not clear whether this is the case 
in male patients, too. In this study, we have determined the frequency of
EML4-ALK translocation in male never-smokers with NSCLC in a cohort of Chinese
patients. The clinical features associated with EML4-ALK translocation were also 
investigated.
METHODS: A cohort of 95 Chinese male never-smokers with NSCLC was enrolled in
this study. EML4-ALK fusion genes were detected using one-step real time RT-PCR
and DNA sequencing. We further determined the expression levels of ALK mRNA by
RT-PCR and ALK protein by immunohistochemistry in these specimens. The clinical
features of EML4-ALK-positive carcinomas were also determined.
RESULTS: We have identified EML4-ALK fusion genes in 8 out of 95 carcinoma cases,
accounting for 8.42% in Chinese male never-smokers with NSCLC. It is
significantly higher than that in all Chinese male patients (3.44%) regardless
smoking habit. It is also significantly higher than that in all Chinese smokers
(8/356 or 2.25%) or in smokers worldwide (2.9%) by comparing to published data.
Interestingly, EML4-ALK fusion genes are more frequently found in younger
patients and associated with less-differentiated carcinomas.
CONCLUSIONS: The frequency of EML4-ALK translocation is strongly associated with 
smoking habits in Chinese male patients with higher frequency in male
never-smokers. EML4-ALK translocation is associated with early-onset and
less-differentiated carcinomas.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2407-14-834 
PMCID: PMC4240865
PMID: 25407901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


512. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2014 Sep 15;7(10):7304-11. eCollection 2014.

Mig-6 overcomes gefitinib resistance by inhibiting EGFR/ERK pathway in non-small 
cell lung cancer cell lines.

Li ZX(1), Qu LY(2), Wen H(3), Zhong HS(4), Xu K(4), Qiu XS(5), Wang EH(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiology and Key Laboratory of Diagnostic Imaging and
Interventional Radiology, The First Affiliated Hospital of China Medical
University Shenyang 110001, P. R. China ; Department of Pathology, The First
Affiliated Hospital of China Medical University and College of Basic Medical
Sciences, China Medical University Shenyang 110001, P. R. China. (2)Department of
Pharmacy, The First Affiliated Hospital of China Medical University Shenyang
110001, P. R. China. (3)Department of Pathology, The First Affiliated Hospital of
China Medical University and College of Basic Medical Sciences, China Medical
University Shenyang 110001, P. R. China ; Shiyan Taihe Hospital Shiyan 442000, P.
R. China. (4)Department of Radiology and Key Laboratory of Diagnostic Imaging and
Interventional Radiology, The First Affiliated Hospital of China Medical
University Shenyang 110001, P. R. China. (5)Department of Pathology, The First
Affiliated Hospital of China Medical University and College of Basic Medical
Sciences, China Medical University Shenyang 110001, P. R. China.

Non small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) accounts for 85% of all lung cancers and is
the most common cause of lung cancer death. Currently, the epidermal growth
factor receptor inhibitor gefitinib is widely used for patients with advanced
NSCLC. However, drug resistance is a major obstacle. Mig-6 is a feedback
inhibitor of EGFR and its down-stream pathway; it has been shown to play a role
in gefitinib sensitivity. There is neither systematical research on the
relationship between Mig-6 expression and gefitinib sensitivity, nor has the
contribution of up-regulated Mig-6 on the gefitinib-resistant cell lines. In the 
present work, four NSCLC cell lines (H1299, A549, PC-9, and PC-9/AB11) with
different sensitivities to gefitinib were subjected to analysis of the expression
of Mig-6. We found that Mig-6 is over-expressed in gefitinib-sensitive NSCLC cell
lines, but is low in gefitinib-resistant NSCLC cell lines. Further analysis
revealed that over-expression of Mig-6 increased cell apoptosis and inhibited
proliferation of gefitinib-resistant NSCLC cells treated with gefitinib, whereas 
lowering the expression of Mig-6 decreased cell apoptosis and promoted cell
proliferation after treatment with gefitinib in gefitinib-sensitive NSCLC cell
lines. These results suggest that Mig-6 is involved in mediating the response to 
gefitinib in NSCLC cell lines. Additionally we demonstrated that Mig-6 could
reverse gefitinib resistance through inhibition of EGFR/ERK pathway in NSCLC
cells. Our work uncovered that Mig-6 may be an effective therapeutic target in
gefitinib-resistant lung cancer patients.


PMCID: PMC4230080
PMID: 25400829  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


513. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2014 Aug 13;94(30):2337-41.

[Efficacies of gefitinib versus paclitaxel/carboplatin for patients with advanced
pulmonary adenocarcinoma].

[Article in Chinese]

Lou N(1), Yang J(1), Yan H(1), Zhou Q(1), Liao R(1), Xu C(1), Huang Y(1), Yang
X(1), Yang Y(1), Gan B(1), Wu Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonary Oncology, Guangdong General Hospital, Guangdong Lung
Cancer Institute, Guangdong Academy of Medical Science, Guangzhou 510080, China. 
(2)Department of Pulmonary Oncology, Guangdong General Hospital, Guangdong Lung
Cancer Institute, Guangdong Academy of Medical Science, Guangzhou 510080, China. 
Email: syylwu@live.cn.

OBJECTIVE: To compare the clinical efficacies of gefitinib versus
paclitaxel/carboplatin in patients with advanced pulmonary adenocarcinoma.
METHODS: A total of 51 advanced pulmonary adenocarcinoma patients were recruited 
from Guangdong General Hospital during October 2006 to September 2007. Eligible
patients were ≥ 18 years old, either non-smokers or former light smokers and
receiving no prior chemotherapy or biological/immunological therapy. According to
performance status, smoking status and gender, they were selected with dynamic
equilibrium randomized method 1: 1 to receive first-line gefitinib (250 mg/d) in 
gefitinib arm or carboplatin/paclitaxel (carboplatin, area under the curve 5 mg ×
ml⁻¹ × min⁻¹, 21-day cycle; paclitaxel, 200 mg/m², 21-day cycle in chemotherapy
arm. The primary endpoint was progression free survival (PFS). And the secondary 
endpoints were objective response rate (ORR) and overall survival (OS).
RESULTS: They were randomized into gefitinib arm (n = 25) and
paclitaxel/carboplatin arm (n = 26). The median PFS was 4.2 months in gefitinib
arm and 8.3 months in paclitaxel/carboplatin arm (P = 0.422); ORR 36.0% in
gefitinib arm and 42.3% in paclitaxel/carboplatin arm (P = 0.645); Median OS 14.4
months in gefitinib arm and 15.0 months in paclitaxel/carboplatin arm (P =
0.290). Multifactorial Cox regression analysis showed that age (P = 0.004),
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) gene mutation status (P = 0.012) and
subsequent treatments (platinum-based chemotherapy, P = 0.001; EGFR-tyrosine
kinase inhibitors (TKI), P = 0.005) were the significant predictors of OS.
CONCLUSIONS: No significant differences exist in terms of efficacy and survival
between first-line gefitinib and paclitaxel/carboplatin for Chinese patients with
pulmonary adenocarcinoma who are non-smokers or former light smokers. And age,
EGFR gene mutation status and subsequent treatments are significant predictor of 
OS. However, first-line gefitinib should not be recommended for advanced
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients only based on clinical factors, due
to a very small sample-size in our study.


PMID: 25399973  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


514. Clin Cancer Res. 2015 Feb 1;21(3):642-51. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-14-0846.
Epub 2014 Nov 11.

Podoplanin-positive cancer-associated fibroblasts in the tumor microenvironment
induce primary resistance to EGFR-TKIs in lung adenocarcinoma with EGFR mutation.

Yoshida T(1), Ishii G(2), Goto K(3), Neri S(4), Hashimoto H(4), Yoh K(3), Niho
S(3), Umemura S(3), Matsumoto S(3), Ohmatsu H(3), Iida S(5), Niimi A(5), Nagai
K(3), Ohe Y(3), Ochiai A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pathology, Research Center for Innovative Oncology, National
Cancer Center Hospital East, Kashiwa, Chiba, Japan. Division of Thoracic
Oncology, National Cancer Center Hospital East, Kashiwa, Chiba, Japan. Department
of Medical Oncology and Immunology, Nagoya City University Graduate School of
Medical Sciences, Nagoya, Aichi, Japan. (2)Division of Pathology, Research Center
for Innovative Oncology, National Cancer Center Hospital East, Kashiwa, Chiba,
Japan. gishii@east.ncc.go.jp. (3)Division of Thoracic Oncology, National Cancer
Center Hospital East, Kashiwa, Chiba, Japan. (4)Division of Pathology, Research
Center for Innovative Oncology, National Cancer Center Hospital East, Kashiwa,
Chiba, Japan. (5)Department of Medical Oncology and Immunology, Nagoya City
University Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Nagoya, Aichi, Japan.

PURPOSE: The biologic characteristics of microenvironmental constituents,
especially cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAF), can be key regulators of the
cellular sensitivity to molecular-targeted therapy. Epidermal growth factor
receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors (EGFR-TKI) have marked therapeutic effects
against non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) with EGFR mutations, but some patients
have exhibited primary resistance to EGFR-TKIs. We recently reported that
podoplanin-positive fibroblasts are associated with a tumor-promoting phenotype
of CAFs in lung adenocarcinoma. The aim of this study was to evaluate whether the
susceptibility of NSCLC to EGFR-TKIs could be affected by podoplanin-expressing
CAFs.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We evaluated the EGFR-TKI sensitivity of EGFR-mutant lung
adenocarcinoma cell lines cocultured with podoplanin-expressing CAFs. We also
examined the association between the expression of podoplanin in CAFs in surgical
specimens and EGFR-TKI response of postoperative recurrent patients with EGFR
mutations (N = 106).
RESULTS: Lung adenocarcinoma cell lines became more resistant to EGFR-TKI when
cocultured with podoplanin-expressing CAFs, compared with control CAFs in vitro. 
The knockdown of podoplanin expression on CAFs cancelled the resistance to
EGFR-TKIs in cancer cells. Compared with control CAFs, the cancer cells that were
cocultured with podoplanin-positive CAFs continued to exhibit significantly
higher p-ERK levels after treatment with gefitinib. Furthermore, postoperative
recurrent patients with podoplanin-positive CAFs had a significantly lower
overall response rate to EGFR-TKIs compared with those with podoplanin-negative
CAFs (53% vs. 83%; P < 0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: Podoplanin-positive CAFs play an important role in primary
resistance to EGFR-TKIs and may be an ideal therapeutic target for use in
combination therapy with EGFR-TKIs.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-14-0846 
PMID: 25388165  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


515. Curr Drug Targets. 2014;15(14):1263-72.

Clinical pharmacology of EGFR/Met inhibitors in non-small cell lung cancer.

Yagishita S, Hamada A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacology, Group for Translational Research Support 
Core, National Cancer Center Research Institute, 5-1-1, Tsukiji, Chuo-ku, Tokyo
104-0045, Japan. akhamad@ncc.go.jp.

Development of molecular targeting agents, starting with imatinib for chronic
myeloid leukemia or gefitinib for non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), has
recently progressed at a rapid rate. Epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine
kinase inhibitors (EGFR-TKIs) have already been developed to the 2nd and 3rd
generation, and novel drug development targeted towards Met activation, which is 
an EGFR-TKI resistance mechanism, is ongoing. Although the era of new anticancer 
agents is moving towards an era of molecular targeting agents, the methods used
for drug development are not different than before. In addition to the importance
of pharmacokinetics (PK) and pharmacodynamics (PD) for drug development, emerging
evidence is also demonstrating the significance of pharmacogenomics, since
certain types of gene alteration may greatly affect drug metabolism, excretion,
and notably, clinical efficacy. It is desirable to determine optimal doses of
anticancer drugs by taking into account these factors that could potentially
influence PK/PD. The following article reviews the clinical development of
EGFR/Met inhibitors for NSCLC and the clinical pharmacology of these drugs.


PMID: 25382203  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


516. Genet Mol Res. 2014 Oct 27;13(4):8657-60. doi: 10.4238/2014.October.27.5.

Long-term survival of non-small-cell lung cancer patients with EGFR inhibitor
treatment.

Zhang MX(1), Tan W(1), Zhang RX(2), Tian YL(1), Gao HM(1), Gao Z(1), Zhang N(1), 
Zhao JQ(1), Jia YF(1), Wang YS(3).

Author information: 
(1)Jinan Central Hospital Affiliated to Shandong University, Jinan, Shandong,
China. (2)Nursing Department of Shandong Medical College, Jinan, Shandong, China.
(3)Jinan Central Hospital Affiliated to Shandong University, Jinan, Shandong,
China sdjnwys@163.com.

The epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) inhibitors gefitinib and erlotinib
are effective in the treatment of advanced non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC),
but the median survival of patients is short. Here, we describe 2 patients with
NSCLC receiving conventional chemotherapy and alternative treatment with
gefitinib or erlotinib as second-line therapy. The first patient was alive at 8
years with alternative conventional chemotherapy and gefitinib, and the second
patient was alive at long-term follow-up with conventional chemotherapy and
gefitinib or erlotinib. Gefitinib, erlotinib, and conventional chemotherapy can
be combined for satisfactory therapy for NSCLC.

DOI: 10.4238/2014.October.27.5 
PMID: 25366755  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


517. Asia Pac J Clin Oncol. 2014 Oct 31. doi: 10.1111/ajco.12273. [Epub ahead of
print]

Elevated neutrophil-to-lymphocyte ratio predicts poor outcome in patients with
advanced non-small-cell lung cancer receiving first-line gefitinib or erlotinib
treatment.

Lin GN(1), Peng JW, Liu PP, Liu DY, Xiao JJ, Chen XQ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Zhongshan Hospital of Sun Yat-sen University, 
Zhongshan City People's Hospital, Zhongshan, China.

AIM: Elevated neutrophil-to-lymphocyte ratio (NLR) has been demonstrated to be a 
poor prognostic factor in multiple types of malignancies, whereas the effect of
NLR on the prognosis of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)-mutated advanced 
non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients treated with first-line EGFR tyrosine
kinase inhibitors (TKIs) is not fully addressed.
METHODS: 81 metastatic NSCLC patients harboring EGFR mutation treated with
first-line EGFR TKIs were retrospectively included. The associations between
baseline clinical characteristics, including NLR, and tumor response, progression
and survival were investigated.
RESULTS: Elevated NLR (≥3.5) was observed in 33 of 81 patients. The
progression-free and overall survival of the patients with increased NLR was
significantly worse than that of the patients with decreased NLR (8.20 vs 10.60
months, P < 0.001 and 17.20 vs 23.20 months, P < 0.001, respectively). Elevated
NLR was confirmed to be an independent prognostic factor for worse
progression-free and overall survival in Cox multivariate analysis.
CONCLUSION: Elevated NLR is likely to be associated with poor outcome in
EGFR-mutated advanced NSCLC patients treated with first-line EGFR TKIs.

© 2014 Wiley Publishing Asia Pty Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/ajco.12273 
PMID: 25359280  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


518. Value Health. 2014 Nov;17(7):A737. doi: 10.1016/j.jval.2014.08.116. Epub 2014 Oct
26.

Measuring the Trend of Use of Targeted Therapy and Economic Evaluation of
Gefitinib for Advanced Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer (Nsclc) in Singapore.

Lim PS(1), Chan YH(2), Chew L(1).

Author information: 
(1)NATIONAL UNIVERISITY OF SINGAPORE, Singapore. (2)National University Health
System, Singapore.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jval.2014.08.116 
PMID: 27202646  [PubMed]


519. Br J Cancer. 2015 Jan 6;112(1):95-102. doi: 10.1038/bjc.2014.555. Epub 2014 Oct
28.

PD-1 and PD-L1 expression in molecularly selected non-small-cell lung cancer
patients.

D'Incecco A(1), Andreozzi M(2), Ludovini V(3), Rossi E(1), Capodanno A(4), Landi 
L(1), Tibaldi C(1), Minuti G(1), Salvini J(1), Coppi E(1), Chella A(4), Fontanini
G(5), Filice ME(1), Tornillo L(2), Incensati RM(1), Sani S(1), Crinò L(3),
Terracciano L(2), Cappuzzo F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Istituto Toscano Tumori, Civil Hospital, Viale
Alfieri 36, 57124 Livorno, Italy. (2)Department of Pathology, Basel Hospital
University, Schönbeinstrasse 40, 4003 Basel, Switzerland. (3)Division of Medical 
Oncology, Santa Maria della Misericordia Hospital, Località S. Andrea delle
Fratte 1, 06134 Perugia, Italy. (4)Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria Pisana,
University Hospital, via Roma 57, 56126 Pisa, Italy. (5)Department of Surgical,
Medical, Molecular Pathology and Critical Area, Pisa University, via Roma 57,
56126 Pisa, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Agents targeting programmed death-1 receptor (PD-1) and its ligand
(PD-L1) are showing promising results in non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC). It
is unknown whether PD-1/PD-L1 are differently expressed in oncogene-addicted
NSCLC.
METHODS: We analysed a cohort of 125 NSCLC patients, including 56 EGFR mutated,
29 KRAS mutated, 10 ALK translocated and 30 EGFR/KRAS/ALK wild type. PD-L1 and
PD-1 expression were assessed by immunohistochemistry. All cases with moderate or
strong staining (2+/3+) in >5% of tumour cells were considered as positive.
RESULTS: PD-1 positive (+) was significantly associated with current smoking
status (P=0.02) and with the presence of KRAS mutations (P=0.006), whereas PD-L1+
was significantly associated to adenocarcinoma histology (P=0.005) and with
presence of EGFR mutations (P=0.001). In patients treated with EGFR tyrosine
kinase inhibitors (N=95), sensitivity to gefitinib or erlotinib was higher in
PD-L1+ vs PD-L1 negative in terms of the response rate (RR: P=0.01) time to
progression (TTP: P<0.0001) and survival (OS: P=0.09), with no difference in PD1+
vs PD-1 negative. In the subset of 54 EGFR mutated patients, TTP was
significantly longer in PD-L1+ than in PD-L1 negative (P=0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: PD-1 and PD-L1 are differentially expressed in oncogene-addicted
NSCLC supporting further investigation of specific checkpoint inhibitors in
combination with targeted therapies.

DOI: 10.1038/bjc.2014.555 
PMCID: PMC4453606
PMID: 25349974  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


520. Am J Health Syst Pharm. 2014 Nov 15;71(22):1933-8. doi: 10.2146/ajhp130654.

Afatinib: A first-line treatment for selected patients with metastatic
non-small-cell lung cancer.

Engle JA(1), Kolesar JM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Jeff A. Engle, B.S., is a Pharm.D. student, School of Pharmacy, University of 
Wisconsin (UW)-Madison, Madison. Jill M. Kolesar, Pharm.D., BCPS, FCCP, is
Professor, School of Pharmacy, UW-Madison, and Faculty Supervisor, Analytical
Laboratory for Pharmacokinetics, Pharmacodynamics, and Pharmacogenomics, UW
Carbone Comprehensive Cancer Center, Madison. (2)Jeff A. Engle, B.S., is a
Pharm.D. student, School of Pharmacy, University of Wisconsin (UW)-Madison,
Madison. Jill M. Kolesar, Pharm.D., BCPS, FCCP, is Professor, School of Pharmacy,
UW-Madison, and Faculty Supervisor, Analytical Laboratory for Pharmacokinetics,
Pharmacodynamics, and Pharmacogenomics, UW Carbone Comprehensive Cancer Center,
Madison. jmkolesar@pharmacy.wisc.edu.

Comment in
    Am J Health Syst Pharm. 2015 May 1;72(9):686-7.
    Am J Health Syst Pharm. 2015 May 1;72(9):686.

PURPOSE: The pharmacology, pharmacokinetics, clinical efficacy, safety, adverse
effects, dosage and administration, and role in therapy of afatinib in the
management of non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) are reviewed.
SUMMARY: Afatinib (Gilotrif, Boehringer Ingelheim) is a novel oral tyrosine
kinase inhibitor (TKI) recently approved for the first-line treatment of patients
with NSCLC whose tumors are driven by activating mutations of genes coding for
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR). Afatinib is also an inhibitor of a
specific EGFR mutation (T790M) that causes resistance to first-generation
EGFR-targeted TKIs in about half of patients receiving those drugs. The
recommended dosage is 40 mg once daily. In a Phase III trial completed last year,
patients with EGFR-mutated NSCLC who were treated with afatinib had a twofold
higher response rate than those receiving standard combination chemotherapy (56% 
versus 23%) and significantly longer progression-free survival (11.0 months
versus 5.6 months). Other studies indicated that afatinib may offer advantages
over standard chemotherapy for NSCLC in terms of enhanced symptom control and
quality of life and is modestly effective in cases involving EGFRT790M-related
acquired resistance to the TKIs erlotinib and gefitinib. Among clinical trial
participants, afatinib was generally well tolerated, with the most common grade I
or II adverse events being diarrhea and rash or acne; grade III or IV events were
infrequent.
CONCLUSION: Afatinib is a novel TKI that is efficacious and well tolerated in
patients with NSCLC associated with activating EGFR mutations, including cases
involving the T790M resistance mutation. It has possible applications in other
EGFR mutation- positive cancers.

Copyright © 2014 by the American Society of Health-System Pharmacists, Inc. All
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.2146/ajhp130654 
PMID: 25349236  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


521. Int J Clin Oncol. 2015 Aug;20(4):668-73. doi: 10.1007/s10147-014-0761-8. Epub
2014 Oct 25.

The effect of gefitinib in patients with postoperative recurrent non-small cell
lung cancer harboring mutations of the epidermal growth factor receptor.

Ko R(1), Kenmotsu H, Hisamatsu Y, Akamatsu H, Omori S, Nakashima K, Oyakawa T,
Wakuda K, Shukuya T, Ono A, Imai H, Taira T, Naito T, Murakami H, Mori K, Endo M,
Ohde Y, Takahashi K, Takahashi T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Thoracic Oncology, Shizuoka Cancer Center, 1007 Shimonagakubo,
Nagaizumi-cho, Sunto-gun, Shizuoka, 411-8777, Japan.

BACKGROUND: It is unclear whether there is a difference in the effect of
gefitinib treatment between patients with postoperative recurrent non-small cell 
lung cancer (NSCLC) and those with stage IV NSCLC harboring mutations in the
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR).
METHODS: We retrospectively reviewed the medical records of consecutive patients 
with postoperative recurrent NSCLC (postoperative group) or stage IV NSCLC (stage
IV group) harboring EGFR mutations who were treated with gefitinib at the
Shizuoka Cancer Center between September 2002 and March 2012 to compare the
effect of gefitinib on survival from treatment initiation.
RESULTS: A total of 168 patients were treated with gefitinib (postoperative
group, 49 patients; stage IV group, 119 patients). The response rate of gefitinib
treatment in the postoperative group was similar to that in the stage IV group
(58 vs. 61 %, p = 0.613). In contrast, median progression-free survival (PFS;
15.8 vs. 9.8 months, p < 0.001) and median overall survival (OS; 51.1 vs. 22.2
months, p < 0.001) were significantly longer in the postoperative group. In
addition, postoperative recurrent disease, performance status (0-1), and a single
metastatic organ were independent favorable prognostic factors in the
multivariate analysis of survival.
CONCLUSIONS: PFS and OS were superior in patients with postoperative recurrent
NSCLC harboring EGFR mutations treated by gefitinib than in those with stage IV
disease. These results suggest that postoperative recurrent disease may be
considered a stratification factor in clinical trials for NSCLC with EGFR
mutations.

DOI: 10.1007/s10147-014-0761-8 
PMID: 25343946  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


522. Mol Cancer. 2014 Oct 24;13:240. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-13-240.

Pim-1 kinase is a target of miR-486-5p and eukaryotic translation initiation
factor 4E, and plays a critical role in lung cancer.

Pang W, Tian X, Bai F, Han R, Wang J, Shen H, Zhang X, Liu Y, Yan X, Jiang F,
Xing L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Hebei Medical University, Shijiazhuang, Hebei, China.
xinglingxiao@hotmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Pim-1 kinase is a proto-oncogene and its dysregulation contributes to
tumorigenesis and progression of a variety of malignancies. Pim-1 was suggested
as a therapeutic target of cancers. The functional relevance of Pim-1 and the
mechanism underlying its dysregulation in lung tumorigenesis remained unclear.
This study aimed to investigate if Pim-1 has important functions in
non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) by: 1) evaluating the clinicopathologic
significance of Pim-1 through analysing its expression in 101 human NSCLCs
tissues using quantitative PCR, Western Blot and immunohistochemical studies, 2) 
determining its role in NSCLC and drug resistance using in vitro assays, and 3)
investigating the regulatory mechanism of Pim-1 dysregulation in lung
tumorigenesis.
RESULTS: Pim-1 was upregulated in 66.2% of the lung tumor tissues and its
expression was significantly related to advanced stage (P = 0.019) and lymph node
metastasis (P = 0.026). Reduced Pim-1 expression suppressed NSCLC cell growth,
cell cycle progression and migration in vitro. Pim-1 was a novel target of
miR-486-5p determined by luciferase report assay, and ectopic miR-486-5p
expression in cancer cells reduced Pim-1 expression. Furthermore, eukaryotic
translation initiation factor 4E (eIF4E) controlled the synthesis of Pim-1 in
NSCLC cells, and its expression was positively associated with that of Pim-1 in
NSCLC tissue specimens (r = 0.504, p < 0.001). The downregulated miR-486-5p and
upregulated eIF4E in NSCLC cells led to the overexpression of Pim-1 by relieving 
the inhibitory effect of the 3'-UTR or 5'-UTR of Pim-1 mRNA, respectively.
Moreover, Pim-1 knockdown sensitized NSCLC cells to cisplatin and EGFR tyrosine
kinase inhibitor, gefitinib.
CONCLUSIONS: Pim-1 kinase could be a critical survival signaling factor in NSCLC,
and regulated by miR-486-5p and eIF4E. Pim-1 kinase may provide a potential
target for diagnosis and treatment for lung cancer.

DOI: 10.1186/1476-4598-13-240 
PMCID: PMC4213487
PMID: 25342548  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


523. Curr Med Res Opin. 2015 Jan;31(1):25-33. doi: 10.1185/03007995.2014.978448. Epub 
2014 Oct 30.

Anti-epidermal-growth-factor-receptor agents and complete responses in the
treatment of advanced non-small-cell lung cancer: a meta-analysis of 17 phase III
randomized controlled trials.

Qi WX(1), Fu S, Zhang Q, Guo XM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Shanghai Proton and Heavy Ion Center (SPHIC)
, Shanghai , China.

PURPOSE: Currently, the anti-epidermal-growth-factor-receptor (EGFR) agents have 
shown encouraging treatment benefits in patients with various types of solid
tumors including non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Despite these advances,
radiological complete response to these therapies is rare. We meta-analyze the
incidence of complete response (CR) in advanced NSCLC patients treated with
anti-EGFR agents and controls in randomized controlled trials (RCTs).
METHODS: PubMed, Web of Science, Embase and Cochrane library databases were
reviewed for phase III RCTs with EGFR-targeted agents vs. non-EGFR-targeted
agents in patients with advanced NSCLC. We calculated the odds ratio of CR in
patients assigned to anti-EGFR agents compared to controls.
RESULTS: A total of 11,568 patients from 17 RCTs were included for analysis. The 
incidence of CR in patients treated with anti-EGFR agents was 1.1% (95% CI,
0.7-1.7%) compared to 0.6% (95% CI, 0.4-0.9%) in control arms. Comparing the
different types of anti-EGFR agents, the incidence of CR was 1.9% for gefitinib
(95% CI: 1.4-2.6%), 1.4% for cetuximab (95% CI: 0.8-2.7%) and 0.9% for erlotinib 
(95% CI: 0.6-1.5%), respectively. The use of anti-EGFR agents significantly
increased the odds ratio of obtaining a CR (OR 2.12, 95% CI: 1.28-3.49,
p = 0.003) compared to controls. This was found to be higher in treatment arms
involving more than 50% of: female patients, patients who had never smoked
tobacco, patients of Asian descent or patients with adenocarcinoma or EGFR
mutation. No significant differences in ORs were observed in any prespecified
sub-groups.
CONCLUSION: Although a CR is rare in advanced NSCLC patients receiving anti-EGFR 
agents, these drugs significantly increase the OR of a CR compared to controls,
especially for patients with EGFR mutations. Further studies are needed to
investigate whether the increase of CR with anti-EGFR therapy would be translated
into survival benefits.

DOI: 10.1185/03007995.2014.978448 
PMID: 25329826  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


524. Cell Biochem Biophys. 2015 Mar;71(2):1261-5. doi: 10.1007/s12013-014-0286-9.

Comparison of Gefitinib versus VMP in the combination with radiotherapy for
multiple brain metastases from non-small cell lung cancer.

Wang F(1), Ning F, Liu C, Hao Y, Li L, Yu Z, Chen S, Li B.

Author information: 
(1)Shandong Cancer Hospital, Shandong University, Ji Yan Road No. 440, Jinan,
250117, Shandong, China.

The purpose of this study is to compare the efficacy and safety of Gefitinib
versus VMP in combination with three-dimensional conformal radiotherapy (3D-CRT) 
for multiple brain metastases from non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). A total of
73 NSCLC patients with brain metastases from January 2010 to August 2013 were
randomly divided into Gefitinib group (37 patients) and VMP chemotherapy group
(36 patients). Patients in VMP group received VM-26 100 mg/day by intravenous
injection, from day 1 to day 3, cisplatin 25 mg/m2 by intravenous injection, from
day 1 to day 3. One cycle was defined as a 21-day therapy duration, with a total 
of 3 cycles; 2 cycles were used for consolidation. Patients in Gefitinib group
received Gefitinib orally. Both groups received 3D-CRT, DT50 Gy/25f/35d from
first day and target areas were treated with whole brain radiotherapy. The
results of the study are listed below: There was no significant difference in the
short-term effects of the two groups (P > 0.05). Median survival time (MST) of
Gefitinib was 13.3 months whereas median survival time of VMP group is 12.7
months (P < 0.05). In Gefitinib group, we did not observe any difference of the
median survival time between the patients with and without mutation EGFR.
Toxicity of Gefitinib groups were characterized by rash, whereas chemotherapy
resulted in hematologic toxicities, which included 6 cases of III/IV leucopenia
(17.6 %), 3 cases of anemia (8.8 %), and 5 cases of thrombocytopenia (14.7 %),
and non-hematological toxicity which was less serious symptoms for
gastrointestinal disorders, hair loss, etc. These adverse reactions can be
released after symptomatic treatment. No treatment-related deaths occurred. Two
patients in VMP group quit due to IV leucopenia. Both oral Gefitinib and systemic
VMP chemotherapy in combination with three-dimensional conformal radiotherapy
(3D-CRT) could be used to treat brain metastases from non-small cell lung cancer.
There were no difference in the short-term effects of the two groups, but
long-term effect of Gefitinib group was slightly better than VMP group. Moreover,
Gefitinib group showed low toxicity. All together, our finding implicated that
Gefitinib is an effective method for patients with brain metastases from NSCLC.

DOI: 10.1007/s12013-014-0286-9 
PMID: 25319074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


525. Front Oncol. 2014 Sep 15;4:244. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2014.00244. eCollection 2014.

Review of EGFR TKIs in Metastatic NSCLC, Including Ongoing Trials.

Melosky B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Oncology, British Columbia Cancer Agency - Vancouver Centre ,
Vancouver, BC , Canada.

Recent clinical trials have demonstrated the efficacy of epidermal growth factor 
receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKI) in the treatment of patients
with advanced metastatic non-small cell lung cancer. Most of these recent trials 
were conducted in patients with EGFR mutation-positive tumors. As our knowledge
of the EGFR mutation and its resistant pathways develops, the complexity of the
situation expands. This article briefly reviews the pivotal trials leading to
approval of EGFR TKIs in the first-line setting for patients with EGFR
mutation-positive non-small cell lung carcinomas. It discusses the historical use
of EGFR TKIs after the first-line setting in unselected patients and briefly
describes ongoing trials.

DOI: 10.3389/fonc.2014.00244 
PMCID: PMC4164005
PMID: 25309870  [PubMed]


526. World J Clin Oncol. 2014 Oct 10;5(4):646-59. doi: 10.5306/wjco.v5.i4.646.

Epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors for non-small cell
lung cancer.

Asami K(1), Atagi S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Kazuhiro Asami, Shinji Atagi, Department of Clinical Oncology, National
Hospital Organization Kinki-chuo Chest Medical Center, Sakai City, Osaka
591-8555, Japan.

First-generation epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors
(EGFR-TKIs), including gefitinib and erlotinib, have proven to be highly
effective agents for advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) in patients
harboring an activating EGFR mutation such as the exon 19 deletion mutation and
L858R. Although those reversible small molecular targeted agents provide a
significant response and survival benefit, all responders eventually acquire
resistance. Second-generation EGFR-targeting agents, such as irreversible
EGFR/HER2 tyrosine kinase inhibitors and pan-HER TKIs, may improve survival
further and be useful for patients who acquired resistance to ﬁrst-generation
EGFR-TKIs. This review discusses novel therapeutic strategies for EGFR-mutated
advanced NSCLC using first- and second-generation EGFR-TKIs.

DOI: 10.5306/wjco.v5.i4.646 
PMCID: PMC4129529
PMID: 25302168  [PubMed]


527. World J Clin Oncol. 2014 Oct 10;5(4):576-87. doi: 10.5306/wjco.v5.i4.576.

Review of the current targeted therapies for non-small-cell lung cancer.

Nguyen KS(1), Neal JW(1), Wakelee H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Kim-Son H Nguyen, Joel W Neal, Heather Wakelee, Division of Oncology,
Department of Medicine, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA
94305, United States.

The last decade has witnessed the development of oncogene-directed targeted
therapies that have significantly changed the treatment of non-small-cell lung
cancer (NSCLC). In this paper we review the data demonstrating efficacy of
gefitinib, erlotinib, and afatinib, which target the epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR), and crizotinib which targets anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK).
We discuss the challenge of acquired resistance to these small-molecular tyrosine
kinase inhibitors and review promising agents which may overcome resistance,
including the EGFR T790M-targeted agents CO-1686 and AZD9291, and the
ALK-targeted agents ceritinib (LDK378), AP26113, alectinib (CH/RO5424802), and
others. Emerging therapies directed against other driver oncogenes in NSCLC
including ROS1, HER2, and BRAF are covered as well. The identification of
specific molecular targets in a significant fraction of NSCLC has led to the
personalized deployment of many effective targeted therapies, with more to come.

DOI: 10.5306/wjco.v5.i4.576 
PMCID: PMC4129523
PMID: 25302162  [PubMed]


528. Braz J Med Biol Res. 2014 Nov;47(11):929-39. Epub 2014 Sep 5.

Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutations in lung cancer: preclinical and
clinical data.

Jorge SE(1), Kobayashi SS(1), Costa DB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess
Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.

Lung cancer leads cancer-related mortality worldwide. Non-small-cell lung cancer 
(NSCLC), the most prevalent subtype of this recalcitrant cancer, is usually
diagnosed at advanced stages, and available systemic therapies are mostly
palliative. The probing of the NSCLC kinome has identified numerous
nonoverlapping driver genomic events, including epidermal growth factor receptor 
(EGFR) gene mutations. This review provides a synopsis of preclinical and
clinical data on EGFR mutated NSCLC and EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs).
Classic somatic EGFR kinase domain mutations (such as L858R and exon 19
deletions) make tumors addicted to their signaling cascades and generate a
therapeutic window for the use of ATP-mimetic EGFR TKIs. The latter inhibit these
kinases and their downstream effectors, and induce apoptosis in preclinical
models. The aforementioned EGFR mutations are stout predictors of response and
augmentation of progression-free survival when gefitinib, erlotinib, and afatinib
are used for patients with advanced NSCLC. The benefits associated with these
EGFR TKIs are limited by the mechanisms of tumor resistance, such as the
gatekeeper EGFR-T790M mutation, and bypass activation of signaling cascades.
Ongoing preclinical efforts for treating resistance have started to translate
into patient care (including clinical trials of the covalent EGFR-T790M TKIs
AZD9291 and CO-1686) and hold promise to further boost the median survival of
patients with EGFR mutated NSCLC.


PMCID: PMC4230282
PMID: 25296354  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


529. Clin Cancer Res. 2014 Dec 15;20(24):6551-8. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-14-1337.
Epub 2014 Oct 7.

Identification of recurrent FGFR3-TACC3 fusion oncogenes from lung
adenocarcinoma.

Capelletti M(1), Dodge ME(1), Ercan D(1), Hammerman PS(1), Park SI(2), Kim J(3), 
Sasaki H(4), Jablons DM(5), Lipson D(6), Young L(6), Stephens PJ(6), Miller
VA(6), Lindeman NI(7), Munir KJ(8), Richards WG(8), Jänne PA(9).

Author information: 
(1)Lowe Center for Thoracic Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston,
Massachusetts. (2)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Asan Medical Center, University
of Ulsan College of Medicine, Seoul, South Korea. (3)Department of Thoracic
Surgery, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine,
Seoul, South Korea. (4)Department of Oncology, Immunology and Surgery, Nagoya
City University Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Nagoya, Japan. (5)Department
of Surgery, Helen Diller Family Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of
California, San Francisco, California. (6)Foundation Medicine, Inc., Cambridge,
Massachusetts. (7)Department of Pathology and Center for Advanced Molecular
Diagnostics, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts. (8)Division of 
Thoracic Surgery, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts. (9)Lowe
Center for Thoracic Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston,
Massachusetts. Belfer Institute for Applied Cancer Science, Dana-Farber Cancer
Institute, Boston, Massachusetts. pasi_janne@dfci.harvard.edu.

PURPOSE: Targetable oncogenic alterations are detected more commonly in patients 
with non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) who never smoked cigarettes. For such
patients, specific kinase inhibitors have emerged as effective clinical
treatments. However, the currently known oncogenic alterations do not account for
all never smokers who develop NSCLC. We sought to identify additional oncogenic
alterations from patients with NSCLC to define additional treatment options.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We analyzed 576 lung adenocarcinomas from patients of Asian 
and Caucasian ethnicity. We identified a subset of cancers that did not harbor
any known oncogenic alteration. We performed targeted next-generation sequencing 
(NGS) assay on 24 patients from this set with >75% tumor cell content.
RESULTS: EGFR mutations were the most common oncogenic alteration from both Asian
(53%) and Caucasian (41.6%) patients. No known oncogenic alterations were present
in 25.7% of Asian and 31% of Caucasian tumor specimens. We identified a
FGFR3-TACC3 fusion event in one of 24 patients from this subset using targeted
NGS. Two additional patients harboring FGFR3-TACC3 were identified by screening
our entire cohort (overall prevalence, 0.5%). Expression of FGFR3-TACC3 led to
IL3 independent growth in Ba/F3 cells. These cells were sensitive to
pan-fibroblast growth factor receptor (pan-FGFR) inhibitors but not the epidermal
growth factor (EGFR) inhibitor gefitinib.
CONCLUSIONS: FGFR3-TACC3 rearrangements occur in a subset of patients with lung
adenocarcinoma. Such patients should be considered for clinical trials featuring 
FGFR inhibitors.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-14-1337 
PMID: 25294908  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


530. Ann Oncol. 2014 Dec;25(12):2385-91. doi: 10.1093/annonc/mdu463. Epub 2014 Oct 3.

Pemetrexed versus gefitinib as a second-line treatment in advanced nonsquamous
nonsmall-cell lung cancer patients harboring wild-type EGFR (CTONG0806): a
multicenter randomized trial.

Zhou Q(1), Cheng Y(2), Yang JJ(1), Zhao MF(3), Zhang L(4), Zhang XC(1), Chen
ZH(1), Yan HH(1), Song Y(5), Chen JH(6), Feng WN(7), Xu CR(1), Wang Z(1), Chen
HJ(1), Zhong WZ(1), Liu YP(3), Wu YL(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonary Oncology, Guangdong Lung Cancer Institute, Guangdong
General Hospital and Guangdong Academy of Medical Sciences, Guangzhou.
(2)Department of Pulmonary Oncology, Jilin Provincial Cancer Hospital, Changchun.
(3)Department of Medical Oncology, The First Hospital of China Medical
University, Shenyang. (4)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Perking Union
Medical Hospital, Beijing. (5)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Jinling
Hospital, Nanjing University School of Medicine, Nanjing. (6)Department of
Medical Oncology, Hunan Cancer Hospital, Changsha. (7)Department of Medical
Oncology, The First People's Hospital of Foshan, Foshan, China. (8)Department of 
Pulmonary Oncology, Guangdong Lung Cancer Institute, Guangdong General Hospital
and Guangdong Academy of Medical Sciences, Guangzhou syylwu@live.cn.

Comment in
    Ann Oncol. 2015 Mar;26(3):448-50.

BACKGROUND: CTONG0806 assessed the efficacy of pemetrexed versus gefitinib as
second-line treatment in advanced nonsquamous nonsmall-cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
harboring wild-type epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR).
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Patients with locally advanced or metastatic nonsquamous
NSCLC harboring wild-type EGFR, detected by direct sequencing, and previously
treated with platinum-based chemotherapy were randomized to receive gefitinib
(250 mg/day) orally or pemetrexed (500 mg/m(2)) i.v. on day 1 of a 21-day cycle
until disease progression or unacceptable toxicity. The primary end point was
progression-free survival (PFS). The Independent Review Committee (IRC) evaluated
all pictorial data.
RESULTS: From February 2009 to August 2012, 161 patients were enrolled, and 157
were assessable (81 in the gefitinib arm, 76 in the pemetrexed arm). Baseline
characteristics were balanced between the two arms. The median PFSs were 4.8
versus 1.6 months in the pemetrexed and gefitinib arms, respectively [hazard
ratio (HR) 0.54, 95% confidence interval (CI) 0.40-0.75, P < 0.001] as confirmed 
by IRC evaluation (5.6versus 1.7 months, HR 0.53, 95% CI 0.38-0.75, P < 0.001).
The median overall survival (OS) showed a trend of superiority in the pemetrexed 
arm (12.4 versus 9.6 months, HR 0.72, 95% CI 0.49-1.04, P = 0.077).
Quality-of-life assessment showed no marked difference between the arms. No
unexpected adverse events were found. Of 108 patients with sufficient DNA
samples, EGFR mutation status was re-tested by Scorpion amplification refractory 
mutation system (ARMS); 32 (29.6%) tested positive (19 in the pemetrexed arm, 13 
in the gefitinib arm; median PFS: 8.1 versus 7.0 months, HR 0.94, 95% CI
0.43-2.08, P = 0.877).
CONCLUSIONS: CTONG0806 is the first trial to show significant improvement in PFS 
and an improved OS trend with pemetrexed compared with gefitinib as second-line
setting treatment of EGFR wild-type advanced nonsquamous NSCLC. ARMS is superior 
to direct sequencing in excluding false-negative patients.
CLINICALTRIALSGOV IDENTIFIER: NCT00891579.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the European
Society for Medical Oncology. All rights reserved. For permissions, please email:
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/annonc/mdu463 
PMID: 25281710  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


531. Pharmgenomics Pers Med. 2014 Sep 19;7:285-95. doi: 10.2147/PGPM.S55339.
eCollection 2014.

Toward precision medicine with next-generation EGFR inhibitors in non-small-cell 
lung cancer.

Yap TA(1), Popat S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Lung Cancer Unit, Department of Medicine, The Royal Marsden National Health
Service Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom ; The Institute of Cancer
Research, London, United Kingdom. (2)Lung Cancer Unit, Department of Medicine,
The Royal Marsden National Health Service Foundation Trust, London, United
Kingdom ; National Heart and Lung Institute, London, United Kingdom.

The use of genomics to discover novel targets and biomarkers has placed the field
of oncology at the forefront of precision medicine. First-generation epidermal
growth factor receptor (EGFR) inhibitors have transformed the therapeutic
landscape of EGFR mutant non-small-cell lung carcinoma through the genetic
stratification of tumors from patients with this disease. Somatic EGFR mutations 
in lung adenocarcinoma are now well established as predictive biomarkers of
response and resistance to small-molecule EGFR inhibitors. Despite early patient 
benefit, primary resistance and subsequent tumor progression to first-generation 
EGFR inhibitors are seen in 10%-30% of patients with EGFR mutant non-small-cell
lung carcinoma. Acquired drug resistance is also inevitable, with patients
developing disease progression after only 10-13 months of antitumor therapy. This
review details strategies pursued in circumventing T790M-mediated drug resistance
to EGFR inhibitors, which is the most common mechanism of acquired resistance,
and focuses on the clinical development of second-generation EGFR inhibitors,
exemplified by afatinib (BIBW2992). We discuss the rationale, mechanism of
action, clinical efficacy, and toxicity profile of afatinib, including the
LUX-Lung studies. We also discuss the emergence of third-generation irreversible 
mutant-selective inhibitors of EGFR and envision the future management of EGFR
mutant lung adenocarcinoma.

DOI: 10.2147/PGPM.S55339 
PMCID: PMC4178554
PMID: 25278773  [PubMed]


532. Oncotarget. 2014 Sep 15;5(17):7902-16.

miR-200c overexpression is associated with better efficacy of EGFR-TKIs in
non-small cell lung cancer patients with EGFR wild-type.

Li J(1), Li X(2), Ren S(1), Chen X(1), Zhang Y(1), Zhou F(1), Zhao M(1), Zhao
C(2), Chen X(3), Cheng N(1), Zhao Y(4), Zhou C(1), Hirsch FR(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Shanghai Pulmonary Hospital, Tongji University
School of Medicine, Tongji University Medical School Cancer Institute, Shanghai, 
China. (2)Department of Lung Cancer and Immunology, Shanghai Pulmonary Hospital, 
Tongji University, Tongji University Medical School Cancer Institute, Shanghai,
China. (3)Department of Respiration, Zaozhuang Municipal Hospital, Zaozhuang,
Shandong, China. (4)Department of Central Laboratory, Shanghai Pulmonary
Hospital, Tongji University, Shanghai, China. (5)Departments of Medicine and
Pathology, University of Colorado Cancer Center, Aurora, Colorado, USA.

Several randomized trials have demonstrated non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
patients with activating epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutations can
achieve favorable clinical outcomes on treatment with EGFR tyrosine kinase
inhibitors (TKIs). EGFR mutation is considered as a predictive marker for
efficacy of EGFR-TKIs in NSCLC. Here we show miR-200c overexpression was
correlated with the epithelial phenotype and sensitivity to gefitinib in EGFR
wild-type NSCLC cell lines. Up-regulated miR-200c could regain the sensitivity to
gefitinib in the EGFR wild-type cell lines and miR-200c could regulate epithelial
to mesenchymal transition through PI3K/AKT and MEK/ERK pathways. NSCLC patients
at advanced stage (N=150) who received EGFR-TKIs (gefitinib or erlotinib) as
second- or third-line therapy from September 2008 to December 2012 were included 
in the study. In 66 NSCLC patients with wild-type EGFR, high levels of miR-200c
expression was associated with higher disease control rate (DCR), longer
progression-free survival (PFS) and longer overall survival (OS) compared with
low miR-200c expression subgroup. In the subgroup with EGFR mutation, the trend
remained the same but not statistically significant. Overall, these findings
indicated that miR-200c might be a predictive biomarker for sensitivity to
EGFR-TKIs in advanced NSCLC patients with wild-type EGFR.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.2302 
PMCID: PMC4202169
PMID: 25277203  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


533. Cancers (Basel). 2014 Sep 30;6(4):2035-48. doi: 10.3390/cancers6042035.

Gefitinib plus interleukin-2 in advanced non-small cell lung cancer patients
previously treated with chemotherapy.

Bersanelli M(1), Buti S(2), Camisa R(3), Brighenti M(4), Lazzarelli S(5), Mazza
G(6), Passalacqua R(7).

Author information: 
(1)Oncology Unit, University Hospital of Parma, Via Gramsci, 14, 43126 Parma,
Italy. melissa.bersanelli@alice.it. (2)Oncology Unit, University Hospital of
Parma, Via Gramsci, 14, 43126 Parma, Italy. sebabuti@libero.it. (3)Oncology Unit,
University Hospital of Parma, Via Gramsci, 14, 43126 Parma, Italy.
rcamisa@ao.pr.it. (4)Oncology Unit, Azienda Istituti Ospitalieri di Cremona,
Largo Priori, 1, 26100 Cremona, Italy. m.brighenti@ospedale.cremona.it.
(5)Oncology Unit, Azienda Istituti Ospitalieri di Cremona, Largo Priori, 1, 26100
Cremona, Italy. s.lazzarelli@ospedale.cremona.it. (6)Radiology Division, Spedali 
Civili di Brescia, P.le Spedali Civili,1, 25123 Brescia, Italy.
radiologia1@spedalicivili.brescia.it. (7)Oncology Unit, Azienda Istituti
Ospitalieri di Cremona, Largo Priori, 1, 26100 Cremona, Italy.
r.passalacqua@ospedale.cremona.it.

The activation of lymphocytes by gefitinib treatment has been described. In this 
phase II pilot trial, we explored the possible synergism between IL-2 and
gefitinib for non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) treatment. From September, 2003,
to November, 2006, 70 consecutive patients with advanced, progressive NSCLC,
previously treated with chemotherapy, received oral gefitinib 250 mg daily. The
first 39 patients received gefitinib alone (G group). The other 31 also received 
subcutaneous IL-2 (GIL-2 group): 1 MIU/m2 (Million International Unit/m2)twice a 
day on Days 1 and 2, once a day on Days 3, 4, 5 every week for four consecutive
weeks with a four-week rest period. Median follow-up was 25.2 months. Grade 3-4
toxicity of gefitinib was represented by skin rash (7%), asthenia/anorexia (6%)
and diarrhea (7%); patients treated with IL-2 showed grade 2-3 fever (46%),
fatigue (21%) and arthralgia (13%). In the GIL-2 group and G-group, we
respectively observed: an overall response rate of 16.1% (6.4% complete response)
and 5.1% (only partial response); a disease control rate of 41.9% and 41%; a
median time to progression of 3.5 (CI 95% = 3.2-3.8) and 4.1 (CI 95% = 2.6-5.7)
months; a median overall survival of 20.1 (CI 95% = 5.1-35.1) and 6.9 (CI 95% =
4.9-8.9) months (p = 0.002); and an actuarial one-year survival rate of 54% and
30%. Skin toxicity (p < 0.001; HR = 0.29; CI 95% = 0.16-0.54) and use of IL-2 (p 
< 0.001; HR = 0.33; CI 95% = 0.18-0.60) were independently associated with
improvement of survival. In this consecutive, non-randomized, series of advanced 
NSCLC patients, the use of IL-2 increased the efficacy of gefitinib.

DOI: 10.3390/cancers6042035 
PMCID: PMC4276955
PMID: 25271833  [PubMed]


534. Lung Cancer. 2014 Nov;86(2):207-12. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2014.08.014. Epub 2014
Sep 16.

A single-arm, multicenter, safety-monitoring, phase IV study of icotinib in
treating advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC).

Hu X(1), Han B(2), Gu A(2), Zhang Y(3), Jiao SC(4), Wang CL(5), He J(6), Jia
X(7), Zhang L(8), Peng J(9), Wu M(10), Ying K(11), Wang J(12), Ma K(13), Zhang
S(14), You C(15), Tan F(16), Wang Y(16), Ding L(16), Sun Y(17).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Cancer Institute/Hospital, Chinese Academy of 
Medical Sciences & Peking Union Medical College, Beijing Key Laboratory of
Clinical Study on Anticancer Molecular Targeted Drugs, Beijing, China.
(2)Shanghai Chest Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong University, Shanghai, China.
(3)Department of Chemotherapy, Zhejiang Cancer Hospital, Key Laboratory Diagnosis
and Treatment Technology on Thoracic Oncology, Hangzhou, China. (4)General
Hospital of People's Liberation Army, Beijing, China. (5)Department of Lung
Cancer, Cancer Institute and Hospital, Tianjin Medical University, Key Laboratory
of Cancer Prevention and Therapy, Tianjin, China. (6)Sichuan Cancer Hospital and 
Institute, Chengdu, China. (7)Baoding Hengxing Medicine Integrative Hospital,
Baoding, China. (8)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Peking Union Medical
College Hospital, Peking Union Medical College & Chinese Academy of Medical
Sciences, Beijing, China. (9)Department of Medical Oncology, Zhongshan City
Pepole's Hospital, Zhongshan, China. (10)Department of Thoracic Medical Oncology 
Peking University School of Oncology, Beijing Cancer Hospital & Institute,
Beijing, China. (11)Zhejiang Sir Run Run Shaw Hospital, Department of Medicine,
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China. (12)State Key Laboratory of Oncology in
South China, Sun Yat-Sen University Cancer Center, Guangzhou, China. (13)Cancer
Center of the First Hospital of Jilin University, Changchun, China. (14)Beijing
Key Laboratory of Drug Resistance Tuberculosis Research, Beijing Chest Hospital, 
Capital Medical University, Beijing Tuberculosis and Thoracic Tumor Research
Institute, Beijing, China. (15)Department of Medical Oncology, Nanfang Hospital, 
Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, China. (16)Betta Pharmaceuticals Co.,
Ltd, Hangzhou, China. (17)Department of Medical Oncology, Cancer
Institute/Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences & Peking Union Medical
College, Beijing Key Laboratory of Clinical Study on Anticancer Molecular
Targeted Drugs, Beijing, China. Electronic address: suny@csco.org.cn.

BACKGROUND: The phase 3 ICOGEN trial established the non-inferiority of icotinib 
to gefitinib in terms of progression-free survival (PFS) in non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC) patients, and this led to the approval of icotinib for NSCLC by
the China Food and Drug Administration. A phase 4 study was conducted to assess
the safety and efficacy of icotinib in a broad range of patients with advanced
NSCLC across China.
METHODS: This study retrospectively analyzed data from unresectable, recurrent,
and/or advanced NSCLC patients who received oral icotinib 125 mg three times per 
day. The primary endpoint was safety. The secondary endpoints included objective 
response rate (ORR) and disease control rate (DCR), which were investigated
overall and in subgroups such as patients with an EGFR mutation and elderly
patients.
RESULTS: Between August, 2011 and August, 2012, a total of 6087 advanced NSCLC
patients were registered in this study, of which 5549 were evaluable for safety
and tumor response. The median age was 63 years (range 21-95 years), and 1571
(28.3%) patients were over the age of 70. The majority of patients were
non-smokers, and had adenocarcinoma and stage IV disease. The overall incidence
of adverse drug reactions (ADRs) of any grade was 31.5%. The most common ADRs
included rash (17.4%) and diarrhea (8.5%), and three patients experienced
interstitial lung disease (ILD). The ORR and DCR were 30.0% and 80.6%,
respectively, for the overall population, and 33.4% and 81.2%, 30.3% and 80.3%,
and 30.4% and 89.3%, for first-line, second-line, and third-line or multiple line
subsets, respectively. In 665 EGFR-mutated patients who were evaluable for tumor 
response, the ORR and DCR were 49.2% (327/665) and 92.3% (614/665), respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: The data from over 6000 patients was consistent with the results of 
the ICOGEN study. Icotinib demonstrated a favorable toxicity profile and efficacy
in the routine clinical setting.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2014.08.014 
PMID: 25261231  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


535. Zhongguo Fei Ai Za Zhi. 2014 Sep 20;17(9):685-8. doi:
10.3779/j.issn.1009-3419.2014.09.08.

[Drug induced hepatotoxicity in targeted therapy for lung cancer].

[Article in Chinese; Abstract available in Chinese from the publisher]

Chen X(1), Yang S(1), Ma S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Affiliated Hangzhou Hospital (Hangzhou First
People's Hospital), Nanjing Medical University, Hangzhou 310006, China.

Targeted drugs aimed at driver gene, such as Gefitinib, Erlotinib and Crizotinib,
have an irreplaceable position in the therapy of advanced non-small cell lung
cancer. These drugs bring benefit to patients, however, higher hepatotoxicity is 
also presented. Now, drug induced hepatotoxicity and its mechanism are reviewed.

Publisher:
针对驱动基因的靶向药物吉非替尼、厄洛替尼及克唑替尼等在晚期非小细胞肺癌治疗中有着不可替代的地位，然而此类药物给患者带来益处的同时也出现较高的肝脏毒性，现就其肝脏毒
性及机制作一综述。
DOI: 10.3779/j.issn.1009-3419.2014.09.08 
PMID: 25248711  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


536. J Thorac Oncol. 2014 Dec;9(12):1750-62. doi: 10.1097/JTO.0000000000000379.

NSCLC and HER2: between lights and shadows.

Ricciardi GR(1), Russo A, Franchina T, Ferraro G, Zanghì M, Picone A, Scimone A, 
Adamo V.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Oncology Unit AOOR Papardo-Piemonte, Department of Human Pathology,
University of Messina, Messina, Italy.

The therapeutic landscape of non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) has dramatically 
changed in the last few years with the introduction of molecularly targeted
agents, leading to unprecedented results in lung tumors with a paradigmatic shift
from a "one size fits all" approach to an histologic and molecular-based
approach. The discovery of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutations in
NSCLC in 2004 and the marked response to the EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor
gefitinib, in a small subset of patients harboring these genetic abnormalities,
stimulated the study of other kinase mutants involvement in NSCLC. The incredible
story of ALK rearranged tumors, with the rapid Food and Drug Administration
approval of Crizotinib after only 4 years from the discovery of EML4-ALK
translocation in NSCLC, has profoundly influenced the concept of drug development
in NSCLC, paving the way to a novel series of molecularly selected studies with
specific inhibitors. The identification of these oncogenic drivers has
dramatically changed the genetic landscape of NSCLC moving away from the old
concept of a large indistinct histological entity to a combination of rare
clinically relevant molecular subsets. Recently, a renewed interest has been
emerging on the human epidermal growth factor-2 (HER2) pathway. Genetic
aberrations of this signaling pathway have been reported over time to be
associated in NSCLC with different sensitivity to the EGFR tyrosine kinase
inhibitors, to have a possible prognostic role and more recently HER2
amplification has been emerged as a possible mechanism in EGFR-mutated tumors of 
acquired resistance to the EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors. In addition,
dysregulation of the HER2 pathway, in particular HER2 mutations (mostly, in-frame
exon 20 insertions), may represent a possible novel therapeutic target in NSCLC, 
paving the way for a new generation of targeted agents in NSCLC. Since anecdotal 
case reports of clinical activity of anti-HER2 agents in NSCLC patients with HER2
mutations, several targeted agents have been evaluated in HER2-mutated patients, 
generating a growing interest upon this oncogenic driver, leading to the design
of molecularly selected trials with anti-HER2 compounds and the rediscover of
hastily thrown out drugs, such as neratinib. The aim of this article is to
provide an overview of the role of HER2 dysregulation in NSCLCs, trying to throw 
a light not only on the strengths but also the weaknesses of the studies
conducted so far. It is a long way to the clinical implementation of these
biomarkers and probably the increasing use of next generation sequencing
techniques, the creation of large multi-institutional molecular testing platforms
and the design of rationally based trials can get closer personalized medicine in
NSCLC.

DOI: 10.1097/JTO.0000000000000379 
PMID: 25247338  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


537. Clin Lung Cancer. 2015 Jan;16(1):60-6. doi: 10.1016/j.cllc.2014.07.008. Epub 2014
Aug 15.

Rationale and study design of the IRENE-trial (NVALT-16): a phase II trial to
evaluate iressa rechallenge in advanced NSCLC patients with an activating EGFR
mutation who responded to an EGFR-TKI used as first-line or previous treatment.

Kuiper JL(1), Heideman DA(2), Würdinger T(3), Grünberg K(2), Groen HJ(4), Smit
EF(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonary Diseases, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands. Electronic address: jl.kuiper@vumc.nl. (2)Department of Pathology,
VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. (3)Department of
Neurosurgery, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands;
Department of Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, MA; ThromboDX BV, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. (4)Department of Pulmonary 
Diseases, University Medical Center of Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.
(5)Department of Pulmonary Diseases, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase inhibitors
(TKIs) have shown improved progression-free survival (PFS) and overall survival
(OS) over chemotherapy in a molecularly defined subgroup of advanced
non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients (ie, patients with an activating
mutation in the EGFR gene). Nevertheless, all EGFR-mutated NSCLC patients develop
TKI resistance eventually and there is no registered treatment or therapeutic
strategy available for these patients. Several retrospective or small cohort
studies have described patients who re-responded to EGFR-TKI treatment after a
TKI-free interval ('drug holiday'). To date, no large prospective evaluation of
the clinical effects of EGFR-TKI rechallenge in EGFR-mutated NSCLC patients has
been performed.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: The IRENE (Iressa RE-challenge in advanced, EGFR-mutated
NSCLC patients who responded to an EGFR-TKI used as first-line or previous
treatment) (Dutch association for pulmonologists [NVALT]-16) trial is a
multicenter, open-label, single-arm, single-stage, phase II study to evaluate
gefitinib rechallenge in EGFR-mutated NSCLC patients who were previously treated 
with a TKI followed by a subsequent line of treatment (excluding EGFR-TKIs). The 
primary objective is disease control rate according to Response Evaluation
Criteria in Solid Tumors criteria. Secondary objectives are objective response
rate, PFS, OS, mutation characterization of sequential biopsies, VeriStrat
correlation to PFS and OS, analysis of tumor-derived RNA in blood platelets and
analysis of cell-free DNA in blood plasma.
RESULTS: The IRENE (NVALT-16) trial will evaluate the safety, efficacy, and
feasibility of readministration of gefitinib after an EGFR-TKI-free interval in
EGFR-mutated NSCLC patients.
CONCLUSION: The study will evaluate gefitinib re-challenge in EGFR-mutated NSCLC 
patients. The study will also provide more insight into the dynamic development
of molecular characteristics of EGFR-mutated NSCLC along the course of the
disease.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cllc.2014.07.008 
PMID: 25242669  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


538. Adv Med Sci. 2014 Sep;59(2):308-13. doi: 10.1016/j.advms.2014.08.008. Epub 2014
Aug 29.

Treatment algorithm in 2014 for advanced non-small cell lung cancer: therapy
selection by tumour histology and molecular biology.

Manegold C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Faculty Mannheim, University of Heidelberg, Mannheim, Germany;
Visiting Professor Medical University of Bialystok, Bialystok, Poland. Electronic
address: prof.manegold@t-online.de.

The availability of antineoplastic monoclonal antibodies, small molecules and
newer cytotoxics such as pemetrexed, the EGFR-tyrosine kinase inhibitors
erlotinib, gefitinib, afatinib as well as the anti-angiogenic bevacizumab and the
ALK-inhibitor crizotinib has recently changes the treatment algorithm of advanced
non-small cell lung cancer. Decision making in 2014 is characterized by
customizing therapy, by selecting a specific therapeutic regimen based on the
histotype and the genotype of the tumour. This refers to first-line induction
therapy and maintenance therapy as well, but also to subsequent lines of therapy 
since anti-neoplastic drugs and regimens used upfront clinically influence the
selection of agents/regimes considered for second-/third-line treatment.
Consequently, therapy customization through tumour histology and molecular
markers has significantly influenced the work of pathologists around the globe
and the process of obtaining an extended therapeutically relevant tumour
diagnosis. Not only histological sub-typing became standard but molecular
information is also considered of increasing importance for treatment selection. 
Routine molecular testing in certified laboratories must be established, and the 
diagnostic process should ideally be performed under the guidance of evidence
based recommendation. The process of investigating and implementing medical
targeting in lung cancer therefore, requires advanced diagnostic techniques and
expertise and because of its large dimension is costly and influenced by the
limitation of financial and clinical resources.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier Urban & Partner Sp. z o.o.

DOI: 10.1016/j.advms.2014.08.008 
PMID: 25240504  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


539. Am J Cancer Res. 2014 Sep 6;4(5):411-35. eCollection 2014.

EGFR-TKI resistance in NSCLC patients: mechanisms and strategies.

Lin Y(1), Wang X(1), Jin H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Sir Runrun Shaw Hospital, Medical School of
Zhejiang University Hangzhou, China.

The epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is a kind of receptor tyrosine kinase
(RTK) that plays a critical role in the initiation and development of malignant
tumors via modulating downstream signaling pathways. In non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC), the activating mutations located in the tyrosine kinase domains
of EGFR have been demonstrated in multiple researches as the "Achilles' heel" of 
this deadly disease since they could be well-targeted by epidermal growth factor 
receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors (EGFR-TKIs). However, it's still too early to
celebrate since the first-generation EGFR-TKIs such as gefitinib and erlotinib
have only achieved limited clinical benefits and acquired resistance to this kind
of drugs occurred inevitably in almost all the NSCLC patients. In order to make
the most of EGFR-TKIs and develop more effective regimens for the NSCLC patients,
researchers majoring in different aspects start a battle against EGFR-TKI
resistance. Challenging as it is, we still progress stably and step firmly toward
the final victory. This review will summarize the major mechanisms of acquired
resistance to EGFR-TKIs, and then discuss the development of rationally designed 
molecular target drugs in accordance with each mechanism, in the hope of shedding
light on the great achievements we have obtained and tough obstacles we have to
overcome in the battle against this deadly disease.


PMCID: PMC4163608
PMID: 25232485  [PubMed]


540. Chin J Cancer Res. 2014 Aug;26(4):466-70. doi:
10.3978/j.issn.1000-9604.2014.08.09.

Predictive factors associated with gefitinib response in patients with advanced
non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC).

Chen L(1), Chen R(1), Zhu Z(1), Zhang Y(1), Wen Z(1), Li Y(1), Li X(1), Luo Y(1),
Ma L(1), Lin S(1), Chen X(1).

Author information: 
(1)1 Southern Medical University, Guangzhou 510515, China ; 2 Guangdong General
Hospital, Guangdong Academy of Medical Sciences, Guangzhou 510080, China ; 3
Department of Respiratory Diseases, SUN Yat-sen Memorial Hospital, SUN Yat-sen
University, Guangzhou 510120, China ; 4 Department of Respiratory Medicine,
Zhujiang Hospital, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou 510282, China.

PURPOSE: A number of different clinical characteristics have been reported to
singly correlate with therapeutic activity of epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR) tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) in advanced non-small-cell lung cancer
(NSCLC). This study aimed to identify predictive factors associated with
prognostic benefits of gefitinib.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: EGFR gene typing in 33 advanced NSCLC patients received
gefitinib (250 mg/day) were analyzed with mutant-enriched PCR assay. Gefitinib
response was evaluated with potential predictive factors retrospectively.
RESULTS: The overall objective response rate (ORR) and median progression-free
survival (PFS) in the 33 patients treated by gefitinib were 45.5% and 3.0
(2.0-4.0) months. The ORR and median PFS in EGFR gene mutation patients were
significantly higher/longer than those in EGFR gene wild-type patients (P<0.01). 
Similarly, the ORR and median PFS in non-smoker patients were significantly
higher/longer than those in smoker patients (P<0.05, P<0.01, respectively).
However, no difference for ORR and median PFS occurred between male and female
patients. Logistic multivariate analysis showed that only EGFR mutated gene was
significantly associated with the ORR (P<0.01). Both EGFR mutated gene and
non-smoker were the major factors that contributed to PFS (P<0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: EGFR mutated gene and non-smoker status are potential predictors for
gefitinib response in NSCLC patients.

DOI: 10.3978/j.issn.1000-9604.2014.08.09 
PMCID: PMC4153923
PMID: 25232221  [PubMed]


541. Oncologist. 2014 Oct;19(10):1100-9. doi: 10.1634/theoncologist.2014-0103. Epub
2014 Sep 17.

Experience with afatinib in patients with non-small cell lung cancer progressing 
after clinical benefit from gefitinib and erlotinib.

Schuler M, Fischer JR, Grohé C, Gütz S, Thomas M, Kimmich M, Schneider CP, Laack 
E, Märten A; Afatinib Compassionate Use Consortium.

Collaborators: Abdollahi A, Ammon A, Aries SP, Arntzen C, Achenbach HJ,
Atanackovic D, Atmaca A, Basara N, Binder D, Borchard B, Bos M, Brugger W,
Budweiser S, Conrad K, Corduan K, Cortes-Incio D, Dallmeier B, Denzlinger C,
Derigs HG, Dickgreber N, Dittrich I, Düll T, Engel-Riedel W, Faehling M, Fertl A,
Fischer JR, Fleckenstein D, Folprecht G, Forstbauer A, France Y, Frickhofen N,
Frühauf S, Gardizi M, Gauler T, Gessner C, Gleiber W, Gökkurt E, Görner M, Grah
C, Greeve J, Greiner J, Griesinger F, Grohé C, Grüning W, Guggenberger D, Gütz S,
Hannig C, Heigener D, Heilmann M, Heinrich B, Hense G, Hoiczyk M, Huber RM,
Illerhaus G, Jacobs G, Jung P, Kambartel KO, Kern J, Kersten J, Kiehl M, Kimmich 
M, Kisro J, Knipp H, Ko YD, Koch JU, Koehne CH, Kollmeier J, Kommer A, Körber W, 
Kratz-Albers K, Krause G, Krügel R, Laack E, Leistner R, Liebers U, Lommatzsch M,
Maintz C, Mozek C, Matzdorff A, Mohr M, Neumeister W, Nolte H, Overbeck T,
Östreicher M, Panse J, Pelzer T, Peters K, Planker M, Reissig A, Ritter M,
Rittmeyer A, Rösel S, Sadjadian P, Sandritter B, Schatz M, Scheffler M,
Schmid-Bindert G, Schmittel A, Schneider CP, Schneider-Kappus W, Schneller F,
Schorb E, Schreiber J, Schöler F, Schuler M, Schulz-Abelius A, Schumann C,
Schütte W, Schötz S, Schütz M, Sebastian M, Serke M, Spissinger D, Spengler W,
Staiger H, Steffen U, Stehle I, Steiniger H, Stengele K, Steppert S,
Stöhlmacher-Williams J, Strapatsas T, Sulzbach B, Tessmer A, Thomas M, Thöming B,
Ukena D, Wagner B, Wagner T, Wagner-Hug D, Wahn H, Wehler T, Wiewrodt R, Witt C, 
Wohlleber M, Wolf J, Wolf M, Wricke K, Zaba O, Zander I.

BACKGROUND: Afatinib, an irreversible ErbB family blocker, demonstrated
superiority to chemotherapy as first-line treatment in patients with EGFR-mutated
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Afatinib is also active in patients
progressing on EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors (EGFR-TKIs). We report the results
of a large cohort of NSCLC patients receiving afatinib within a compassionate-use
program (CUP).
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Patients with advanced NSCLC progressing after one line or 
more of chemotherapy and one line or more of EGFR-TKI treatment with either an
EGFR mutation or documented clinical benefit were enrolled. Data collection was
not monitored or verified by central review. The intention of this CUP was to
provide controlled preregistration access to afatinib for patients with
life-threatening diseases and no other treatment option.
RESULTS: From May 2010 to October 2013, 573 patients (65% female; median age: 64 
years [range: 28-89 years]) were enrolled, with strong participation of community
oncologists. Comorbidities were allowed, including second malignancies in 11% of 
patients. EGFR mutation status was available in 391 patients (72%), and 83%
tested mutation positive. Median time to treatment failure (TTF) of 541 patients 
treated with afatinib was 3.7 months (range: 0.0 to >29.0 months). Median TTF was
4.0 and 2.7 months in patients with adenocarcinomas and squamous cell carcinomas,
respectively, and 4.6 months in patients with EGFR-mutated NSCLC. Adverse events 
were generally manageable.
CONCLUSION: Afatinib was able to be given in a real-world setting to heavily
pretreated patients with EGFR-mutated or EGFR-TKI-sensitive NSCLC. Acknowledging 
the constraints of data collection in a CUP, afatinib appears to be safe and to
confer some clinical benefit in this population.

©AlphaMed Press.

DOI: 10.1634/theoncologist.2014-0103 
PMCID: PMC4200993
PMID: 25232040  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


542. Cell Oncol (Dordr). 2014 Oct;37(5):377-86. doi: 10.1007/s13402-014-0198-0. Epub
2014 Sep 17.

Gefitinib induces cytoplasmic translocation of the CDK inhibitor p27 and its
binding to a cleaved intermediate of caspase 8 in non-small cell lung cancer
cells.

Ahn SH(1), Jeong EH, Lee TG, Kim SY, Kim HR, Kim CH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonology, Department of Internal Medicine, Korea Cancer Center 
Hospital, 215-4, Gongneung-Dong, Nowon-Gu, Seoul, 139-706, South Korea.

BACKGROUND: The epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) represents one of the
first rationally selected molecules for targeted therapy in non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC). Gefitinib is a reversible and highly selective tyrosine kinase
inhibitor that competitively blocks the binding of adenosine triphosphate to its 
binding site in the tyrosine kinase domain of the EGFR. It has been found that
treatment with gefitinib induces cell cycle arrest and apoptosis in NSCLC cells
harboring activating EGFR mutations. Despite its clinical relevance, however, the
mechanism underlying gefitinib-induced apoptosis has remained largely unknown.
METHODS: We used the gefitinib-sensitive NSCLC cell line HCC827, which harbors a 
deletion in exon 19 of the EGFR gene, to examine the effect of gefitinib on the
apoptotic machinery.
RESULTS: We found that gefitinib treatment caused the NSCLC cells to undergo
apoptosis following activation of the caspase 8 cascade. Expression of p27, a
cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) inhibitor whose major target is the cyclin E/CDK2
complex, was found to increase during this process, and this increase was
accompanied by translocation of p27 from the nucleus to the cytoplasm. Moreover, 
we found that cytoplasmic p27 bound to a cleaved intermediate (p43/p41) of
caspase 8 and that inhibition of cytoplasmic translocation of p27 reduced
gefitinib-induced cell death in HCC827 cells.
CONCLUSION: Based on our results, we conclude that gefitinib-induced apoptosis is
mediated by the interaction of p27 and caspase 8 in NSCLC cells carrying an
activating EGFR mutation.

DOI: 10.1007/s13402-014-0198-0 
PMID: 25228008  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


543. Med Oncol. 2014 Oct;31(10):220. doi: 10.1007/s12032-014-0220-4. Epub 2014 Sep 13.

Lifestyle risks exposure and response predictor of gefitinib in patients with
non-small cell lung cancer.

Ying H(1), Yang XD, Sun Z, Ning X, Wang Y, Bai C, Chen S, Wang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Peking 
Union Medical College, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing, 100730,
China.

Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)-tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) have
been shown to improve the prognosis of EGFR-mutated (exon 19/21) non-small cell
lung carcinoma (NSCLC). Positive EGFR mutation status is associated with NSCLC in
non-smokers. Genetic and environmental factors have been linked to the etiology
of EGFR mutations and sensitivity to EGFR-TKIs in non-smoking NSCLC patients.
Cooking fume exposure (CFE) has also been proposed as an etiologic factor for
NSCLC in non-smokers; however, the association of CFE with EGFR mutation status
and EGFR-TKI response is unclear. The objective of this study was to determine
the association between CFE and clinical response to EGFR-TKI therapy in NSCLC.
The association of CFE, smoking history, occupational hazard exposure, tumor
pathological type, EGFR mutation status, environmental exposure, living
environment, and performance status with EGFR-TKI efficacy was determined in
metastatic NSCLC patients who were treated with EGFR-TKIs (gefitinib or
erlotinib). Objective response rate (ORR) and progression-free survival (PFS)
were used to evaluate EGFR-TKI response. A total of 273 patients with a median
age of 60.97 years (range 27-86 years) were included in this study. The
proportion of patients receiving gefitinib and erlotinib was 72.53% (198/273) and
27.47% (75/273), respectively. ORRs (complete+partial responses) to gefitinib and
erlotinib treatment were 20.70% (41/198) and 14.67% (11/75), respectively. Of the
273 patients, 98 (36.03%) had CFE and 112 (44.69%) had exposed to tobacco smoke. 
EGFR mutations were present in 55 patients, including exon 19 deletion (n=43) and
exon 21 point mutations (n=12). Of the 55 EGFR mutation-positive patients, 52
(94.5%) had CFE. In the multivariate conditional logistic analysis, clinical
response to EGFR-TKI was associated with non-smoking status, EGFR mutation, and
CFE. Among these factors, CFE was the strongest predictor of EGFR-TKI response
(odds ratio 13.66; 95% confidence interval (CI) 5.66-32.98; P<0.001). PFS was
associated with a performance status of 0/1, adenocarcinoma pathological type,
non-smoking status, EGFR mutation, and CFE. Among these, CFE was the most
important factor for longer PFS (hazard ratio 0.37; 95% CI 0.26-0.52; P<0.001).
The median PFS was 15.15 months in patients with CFE and 4.37 months in those
without (P<0.0001). Knowledge of CFE history might be useful as a response
predictor to EGFR-TKI treatment in NSCLC. Furthermore, CFE history might help to 
assess EGFR mutation status when genetic testing is not available.

DOI: 10.1007/s12032-014-0220-4 
PMID: 25216867  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


544. J Nat Prod. 2014 Sep 26;77(9):2044-53. doi: 10.1021/np500385b. Epub 2014 Sep 12.

Polyoxypregnane steroids from the stems of Marsdenia tenacissima.

Yao S(1), To KK, Wang YZ, Yin C, Tang C, Chai S, Ke CQ, Lin G, Ye Y.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Drug Research and Natural Products Chemistry
Department, Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Sciences ,
555 Zu-Chong-Zhi Road, Zhangjiang Hi-Tech Park, Shanghai 201203, People's
Republic of China.

A new polyoxypregnane aglycone, tenacigenin D (1), and seven new C21 steroid
glycosides, tenacissimosides D-J (2-8), were isolated from the stems of Marsdenia
tenacissima. Their structures were determined by interpretation of their 1D and
2D NMR and other spectroscopic data, as well as by comparison with published
values for related known compounds. Compound 1 was found to circumvent
P-glycoprotein (P-gp)-mediated multidrug resistance through an inhibitory effect 
on P-gp with a similar potency to verapamil. In addition, compound 1 potentiated 
the activity of erlotinib and gefitinib in epidermal growth factor receptor
tyrosine kinase inhibitor (EGFR TKI)-resistant non-small-cell lung cancer cells.

DOI: 10.1021/np500385b 
PMID: 25215856  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


545. Braz J Med Biol Res. 2014 Sep 5;0:0. [Epub ahead of print]

Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutations in lung cancer: preclinical and
clinical data.

Jorge SE(1), Kobayashi SS(1), Costa DB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess
Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.

Lung cancer leads cancer-related mortality worldwide. Non-small-cell lung cancer 
(NSCLC), the most prevalent subtype of this recalcitrant cancer, is usually
diagnosed at advanced stages, and available systemic therapies are mostly
palliative. The probing of the NSCLC kinome has identified numerous
nonoverlapping driver genomic events, including epidermal growth factor receptor 
(EGFR) gene mutations. This review provides a synopsis of preclinical and
clinical data on EGFR mutated NSCLC and EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs).
Classic somatic EGFR kinase domain mutations (such as L858R and exon 19
deletions) make tumors addicted to their signaling cascades and generate a
therapeutic window for the use of ATP-mimetic EGFR TKIs. The latter inhibit these
kinases and their downstream effectors, and induce apoptosis in preclinical
models. The aforementioned EGFR mutations are stout predictors of response and
augmentation of progression-free survival when gefitinib, erlotinib, and afatinib
are used for patients with advanced NSCLC. The benefits associated with these
EGFR TKIs are limited by the mechanisms of tumor resistance, such as the
gatekeeper EGFR-T790M mutation, and bypass activation of signaling cascades.
Ongoing preclinical efforts for treating resistance have started to translate
into patient care (including clinical trials of the covalent EGFR-T790M TKIs
AZD9291 and CO-1686) and hold promise to further boost the median survival of
patients with EGFR mutated NSCLC.


PMID: 25211582  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


546. Oncol Lett. 2014 Oct;8(4):1563-1566. Epub 2014 Jul 28.

A new receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor, icotinib, for patients with lung
adenocarcinoma cancer without indication for chemotherapy.

Zheng X(1), Liu G(1), Wang S(1), Zhang Y(2), Bao W(3), Deng D(3), Mao W(4), Fang 
M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Zhejiang Cancer Hospital, Hangzhou, Zhejiang
310021, P.R. China. (2)Department of Surgical Oncology, Zhejiang Cancer Hospital,
Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310021, P.R. China. (3)Integrated Chinese Traditional Medicine
and Western Medicine, Zhejiang Cancer Hospital, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310021, P.R.
China. (4)Department of Surgical Oncology, Zhejiang Cancer Hospital, Hangzhou,
Zhejiang 310021, P.R. China ; Zhejiang Thoracic Oncology Institute, Zhejiang
Cancer Hospital, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310021, P.R. China.

Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is an important therapeutic target in
lung cancer. Gefitinib and erlotinib, two reversible EGFR receptor tyrosine
kinases inhibitors (TKIs), have been approved for the treatment of patients with 
metastatic non small-cell lung cancer. Icotinib, which is a selective EGFR-TKI,
provides a similar efficacy to gefitinib. The present study aimed to investigate 
the survival and safety of icotinib in patients with lung adenocarcinoma with a
poor performance status (PS). A total of 42 cases of lung adenocarcinoma,
including 35 females and 7 males, were enrolled. Icotinib was used as the
first-line of treatment due to poor PS of the patient or a more advanced age.
Icotinib (125 mg) was orally administered three times per day. The overall
response rate and disease control rates were 33.3 and 85.7%, respectively. The
median survival time was 13.0 months (95% CI, 5.6-20.4), The median
progression-free survival time was 7.0 months, and the 1-year survival rate was
71.4%. A total of 79% of patients had an improved PS following icotinib
treatment. Grade 1 to 2 rashes and diarrhea were the most frequent side effects. 
One patient succumbed during the study due to interstitial pneumonia. In
conclusion, this is the first study indicating that patients with lung
adenocarcinoma and poor PS may benefit from first-line icotinib therapy, but
should be cautious of the occurrence of interstitial lung disease.

DOI: 10.3892/ol.2014.2386 
PMCID: PMC4156212
PMID: 25202368  [PubMed]


547. Case Rep Oncol. 2014 Jul 16;7(2):491-6. doi: 10.1159/000365325. eCollection 2014.

A novel insertion mutation on exon 20 of epidermal growth factor receptor,
conferring resistance to erlotinib.

Khan NA(1), Mirshahidi S(2), Mirshahidi HR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Loma Linda University Cancer Center, Loma Linda University Cancer Center, Loma
Linda, Calif., USA. (2)Biospecimen Laboratory, Loma Linda University Cancer
Center, Loma Linda, Calif., USA.

The epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is a transmembrane glycoprotein
tyrosine kinase receptor. The small-molecule tyrosine kinase receptor inhibitors 
(TKIs) are in clinical use to treat non-small cell lung cancer with EGFR
mutations. Variable tumor responses to erlotinib and gefitinib have been
observed. The response to these TKIs varies by the type of EGFR mutations found
in the tumor. The deletion on exon 19 and the L858R substitution on exon 21
constitute the most frequent mutations and are known to show good response to
TKIs. However, mutations on exon 20 are less common and seem to respond poorly to
TKIs. In clinical settings, the reported response of exon 20 mutations to
reversible TKIs (both gefitinib and erlotinib) remains inconstant. The type of
coexisting mutation seems to affect the response of these insertions to TKIs. We 
herein present a case of disease progression despite the use of erlotinib in a
female patient who had a novel insertion mutation on exon 20. Our patient was a
never-smoker and was identified to have a Pro772_His773insGlnCysPro mutation on
exon 20. She had previously been treated with cisplatin and gemcitabine and then 
with carboplatin and pemetrexed. She was treated with erlotinib upon intolerance 
to second-line chemotherapy and did not respond. Our patient had a novel
insertion mutation on exon 20, which was found to be resistant to erlotinib.

DOI: 10.1159/000365325 
PMCID: PMC4154193
PMID: 25202264  [PubMed]


548. Case Rep Oncol. 2014 Jul 16;7(2):478-83. doi: 10.1159/000365413. eCollection
2014.

Tyrosine Kinase Inhibitors in EGFR-Mutated Large-Cell Neuroendocrine Carcinoma of
the Lung? A Case Report.

Aroldi F(1), Bertocchi P(1), Meriggi F(1), Abeni C(1), Ogliosi C(1), Rota L(1),
Zambelli C(2), Bnà C(3), Zaniboni A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Oncology Department, Poliambulanza Foundation, Brescia, Italy. (2)Pathologic
Anatomy Department, Poliambulanza Foundation, Brescia, Italy. (3)Radiology
Department, Poliambulanza Foundation, Brescia, Italy.

Large-cell neuroendocrine carcinoma (LCNEC) of the lung is a high-grade carcinoma
belonging to the neuroendocrine tumors of the lung and is different from typical 
lung large-cell carcinoma. It represents about 3% of all pulmonary malignancies
and is characterized by neuroendocrine cytologic features. The treatment usually 
is platinum-based chemotherapy, however the outcome remains poor. Therefore new
therapeutic options are needed. Tyrosine kinase inhibitors have demonstrated
greater efficacy and better tolerability than standard chemotherapy in
non-small-cell lung cancer harboring epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)
mutations. EGFR gene mutations were also rarely identified in LCNEC. We report a 
patient with lung LCNEC activating EGFR mutations who showed an impressive
response to gefitinib.

DOI: 10.1159/000365413 
PMCID: PMC4154195
PMID: 25202262  [PubMed]


549. Anticancer Res. 2014 Sep;34(9):5211-5.

Erlotinib is a well-tolerated alternate treatment for non-small cell lung cancer 
in cases of gefitinib-induced hepatotoxicity.

Yonesaka K(1), Suzumura T(2), Tsukuda H(2), Hasegawa Y(2), Ozaki T(2), Sugiura
T(2), Fukuoka M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Izumi Municipal Hospital, Department of Medical Oncology, Izumi, Osaka, Japan 
yonesaka2002@yahoo.co.jp. (2)Izumi Municipal Hospital, Department of Medical
Oncology, Izumi, Osaka, Japan.

AIM: To evaluate the tolerability and efficacy of erlotinib treatment in advanced
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients who had previously experienced severe
hepatotoxicity after gefitinib treatment.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Twenty-five NSCLC patients with epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR) mutation were initially treated with gefitinib (250 mg/day).
However, 7 of these experienced severe hepatotoxicity. After recovery from
hepatotoxicity, treatment was switched to erlotinib (150 mg/day) in all 7
patients. Toxicity and efficacy of erlotinib were analyzed.
RESULTS: None of the 7 patients reported severe hepatotoxicity with erlotinib
despite gefitinib-induced severe hepatotoxicity. All patients achieved response
with gefitinib or following erlotinib treatment. The response achieved with
gefitinib was maintained after switching to erlotinib. Therefore, an excellent
median progression-free survival of 372 days was achieved although gefitinib
induced severe hepatotoxicity.
CONCLUSION: Erlotinib treatment was efficient and well-tolerated in NSCLC
patients with EGFR mutation, despite their severe hepatotoxicity with prior
gefitinib treatment.

Copyright© 2014 International Institute of Anticancer Research (Dr. John G.
Delinassios), All rights reserved.


PMID: 25202117  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


550. Anticancer Res. 2014 Sep;34(9):5193-8.

The role of neuron-specific enolase (NSE) and thymidine kinase (TK) levels in
prediction of efficacy ofEGFR-TKIs in patients with advanced-stage NSCLC
[corrected].

Fiala O(1), Pesek M(2), Finek J(3), Benesova L(4), Minarik M(4), Bortlicek Z(5), 
Topolcan O(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology and Radiotherapy, Medical School and Teaching Hospital 
in Pilsen, Charles University in Prague, Pilsen, Czech Republic
fiala.o@centrum.cz. (2)Department of Pneumology, Medical School and Teaching
Hospital in Pilsen, Charles University in Prague, Pilsen, Czech Republic.
(3)Department of Oncology and Radiotherapy, Medical School and Teaching Hospital 
in Pilsen, Charles University in Prague, Pilsen, Czech Republic. (4)Center for
Applied Genomics of Solid Tumours, Genomac Research Institute, Prague, Czech
Republic. (5)Institute of Biostatistics and Analyses, Masaryk University, Brno,
Czech Republic. (6)Department of Nuclear Medicine, Medical School and Teaching
Hospital in Pilsen, Charles University in Prague, Pilsen, Czech Republic.

Erratum in
    Anticancer Res. 2014 Nov;34(11):6859.
    Anticancer Res. 2014 Dec;34(12):7485.

BACKGROUND/AIM: Tumor biomarkers are used for diagnostics and follow-up
monitoring of patients with non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). We focused on the
predictive role of neuron-specific enolase (NSE) and thymidine [corrected] kinase
(TK) in patients with advanced-stage NSCLC treated with epidermal growth factor
tyrosine kinase inhibitors (EGFR-TKIs).
PATIENTS AND METHODS: In a total of 163 patients with advanced-stage (IIIB or IV)
NSCLC treated with EGFR-TKIs (erlotinib or gefitinib), pre-treatment levels of
NSE and TK were measured.
RESULTS: We observed significantly shorter progression-free (PFS) and overall
survival (OS) in patients with high NSE levels (p=0.002; p=0.003) and also in
those with high TK levels (p=0.026; p=0.020). The multivariate Cox proportional
hazards model confirmed that high NSE is a strong independent predictive factor
for short PFS (hazard ratio; HR=2.36; p=0.003).
CONCLUSION: High pre-treatment serum levels of NSE is an independent biomarker
predicting poor outcome of patients with NSCLC treated with EGFR-TKIs.

Copyright© 2014 International Institute of Anticancer Research (Dr. John G.
Delinassios), All rights reserved.


PMID: 25202114  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


551. Cell Physiol Biochem. 2014;34(3):865-72. doi: 10.1159/000366305. Epub 2014 Aug
21.

Melatonin sensitizes H1975 non-small-cell lung cancer cells harboring a
T790M-targeted epidermal growth factor receptor mutation to the tyrosine kinase
inhibitor gefitinib.

Yun M(1), Kim EO, Lee D, Kim JH, Kim J, Lee H, Lee J, Kim SH.

Author information: 
(1)College of Korean Medicine, Kyung Hee University, Seoul, South Korea.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: The use of tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) to target active
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)-harbouring mutations has been effective
in patients with advanced non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC). However, the use of
TKIs in NSCLS patients with somatic EGFR mutations, particularly T790M, causes
drug resistance. Thus, in the present study, we investigated overcoming
resistance against the TKI gefitinib by combination treatment with melatonin in
H1975 NSCLC cells harbouring the T790M somatic mutation.
METHODS: H1975 and HCC827 cells were treated with melatonin in combination with
gefitinib, and cell viability, cell cycle progression, apoptosis, and EGFR, AKT, 
p38, Bcl-2, Bcl-xL, caspase 3 and Bad protein levels were examined.
RESULTS: Treatment with melatonin dose-dependently decreased the viability of
H1975 cells harbouring the T790M somatic mutation compared to HCC827 cells with
an EGFR active mutation. Melatonin-mediated cell death resulted in decreased
phosphorylation of EGFR and Akt, leading to attenuated expression of survival
proteins, such as Bcl-2, Bcl-xL and survivin, and activated caspase 3 in H1975
cells, but not in HCC827 cells. However, we did not observe a significant change 
in expression of cell cycle proteins, such as cyclin D, cyclin A, p21 and CDK4 in
H1975 cells. Surprisingly, co-treatment of gefitinib with melatonin effectively
decreased the viability of H1975 cells, but not HCC827 cells. Moreover,
co-treatment of H1975 cells caused consistent down-regulation of EGFR
phosphorylation and induced apoptosis compared to treatment with gefitinib or
melatonin alone.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings demonstrate that melatonin acts as a potent
chemotherapeutic agent by sensitising to gefitinib TKI-resistant H1975 cells that
harbour a EGFR T790M mutation.

© 2014 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000366305 
PMID: 25199820  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


552. Oncol Rep. 2014 Oct;32(4):1401-8.

Induced IGF-1R activation contributes to gefitinib resistance following combined 
treatment with paclitaxel, cisplatin and gefitinib in A549 lung cancer cells.

Ge X, Chen Q, Wu YP, Zhang Y, Xia H, Yuan D, Chen Q, Leng W, Chen L, Tang Q, Pang
X, Bi F.

Gefitinib demonstrates excellent performance in the treatment of lung
adenocarcinoma patients; yet, there was no added benefit in combination with
chemotherapy as reported in a phase III clinical trial. For exploring the
mechanism of the failed combination therapy in lung cancer, in the present study,
four therapy assessment groups, including a control group, a chemotherapy group
[paclitaxel+cisplatin (TP)], a gefitinib monotherapy group (G) and a combination 
group[paclitaxel+cisplatin+gefitinib (TP+G)], were established in an A549 cell
line and mouse xenotransplanted tumor models.By HPLC, we found that the gefitinib
concentration was significantly higher in the combination group when compared to 
that in the G group in the non-small cell lung cancer cell line, A549 (p<0.05).
Following the treatment time extension,an increased cell growth rate was observed
in the combination group, while the cellular concentration of gefitinib was not
decreased. The expression levels of P-IGF-1R, P-SRC and P-ERK in the fourth
combination treatment group were significantly higher than levels in the fourth G
treatment and control groups (p<0.05). Following downregulating of IGF-1R in the 
fourth combination treatment group, drug sensitivity was recovered in vitro. In
the mouse model, compared with the gefitinib monotherapy group, the combination
group exhibited a smaller tumor volume, lower body weight and reduced survival
rate (p<0.05). Gefitinib concentrations in the serum and tumor tissues in the
combination therapy group were also decreased when compared with these
concentrations in the gefitinib alone group. The present study is the first to
demonstrate that the decreased gefitinib concentration in serum and tumor tissues
is one of the reasons resulting in the failed combination treatment
(chemotherapy+gefitinib) in vivo study. Frequent use of the combination treatment
in A549 lung cancer cells induced IGF-1R activation which contributed to
gefitinib resistance and gave rise to the failure of the combination therapy.

DOI: 10.3892/or.2014.3331 
PMID: 25198583  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


553. Front Oncol. 2014 Aug 19;4:213. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2014.00213. eCollection 2014.

Maintenance therapies for non-small cell lung cancer.

Blais N(1), Kassouf E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Oncology, Centre Hospitalier de l'Université de Montréal , Montreal,
QC , Canada.

Treatment of lung cancer had evolved during the last decade with the introduction
of new chemotherapeutic regimens and targeted therapies. However, the maximum
benefit reached after first-line therapy is limited by the cumulative toxicity of
platinum drugs and the subsequent deterioration in performance status in a high
percentage of patients who end up receiving not more than one line of treatment. 
Maintenance therapy had been introduced and evaluated in many large randomized
trials showing a delay in tumor progression and an improvement in overall
survival. This effective strategy should be taken into account when discussing
the initial treatment plan and tailored according to the preferences of both
patients and physicians.

DOI: 10.3389/fonc.2014.00213 
PMCID: PMC4137404
PMID: 25191641  [PubMed]


554. Clin Cancer Res. 2014 Nov 1;20(21):5423-34. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-13-3168.
Epub 2014 Sep 4.

Targeting the oncogenic MUC1-C protein inhibits mutant EGFR-mediated signaling
and survival in non-small cell lung cancer cells.

Kharbanda A(1), Rajabi H(1), Jin C(1), Tchaicha J(1), Kikuchi E(1), Wong KK(1),
Kufe D(2).

Author information: 
(1)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts.
(2)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts.
donald_kufe@dfci.harvard.edu.

PURPOSE: Non-small cell lung cancers (NSCLC) that express EGF receptor with
activating mutations frequently develop resistance to EGFR kinase inhibitors. The
mucin 1 (MUC1) heterodimeric protein is aberrantly overexpressed in NSCLC cells
and confers a poor prognosis; however, the functional involvement of MUC1 in
mutant EGFR signaling is not known.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Targeting the oncogenic MUC1 C-terminal subunit (MUC1-C) in 
NSCLC cells harboring mutant EGFR was studied for effects on signaling, growth,
clonogenic survival, and tumorigenicity.
RESULTS: Stable silencing of MUC1-C in H1975/EGFR(L858R/T790M) cells resulted in 
downregulation of AKT signaling and inhibition of growth, colony formation, and
tumorigenicity. Similar findings were obtained when MUC1-C was silenced in
gefitinib-resistant PC9GR cells expressing EGFR(delE746_A750/T790M). The results 
further show that expression of a MUC1-C(CQC → AQA) mutant, which blocks MUC1-C
homodimerization, suppresses EGFR(T790M), AKT and MEK → ERK activation, colony
formation, and tumorigenicity. In concert with these results, treatment of H1975 
and PC9GR cells with GO-203, a cell-penetrating peptide that blocks MUC1-C
homodimerization, resulted in inhibition of EGFR, AKT, and MEK → ERK signaling
and in loss of survival. Combination studies of GO-203 and afatinib, an
irreversible inhibitor of EGFR, further demonstrate that these agents are
synergistic in inhibiting growth of NSCLC cells harboring the activating
EGFR(T790M) or EGFR(delE746-A750) mutants.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings indicate that targeting MUC1-C inhibits mutant EGFR
signaling and survival, and thus represents a potential approach alone and in
combination for the treatment of NSCLCs resistant to EGFR kinase inhibitors.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-13-3168 
PMCID: PMC4219601
PMID: 25189483  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


555. Biomed J. 2015 May-Jun;38(3):221-8. doi: 10.4103/2319-4170.138320.

Early radiographic response to epidermal growth factor receptor-tyrosine kinase
inhibitor in non-small cell lung cancer patients with epidermal growth factor
receptor mutations: A prospective study.

Chang JW, Hou MM, Hsieh JJ, Cheung YC, Wang HM, Chen JS, Wang CH, Chen CH, Yeh
KY, Ou LY, Hsieh CH, Wu HD, Chen YT, Chang IC, Huang SF(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular and Genomic Medicine, National Health Research
Institutes, Zhunan; Department of Pathology, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital at
Linkou, Chang Gung University College of Medicine, Taoyuan; Department of
Pathology, Tzu-Chi Medical Center, Taipei Branch, Tzu-Chi University, Taipei,
Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: The time schedules for response evaluation of epidermal growth factor
receptor-tyrosine kinase Inhibitor (EGFR-TKI) in non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC) patients are still ill-defined.
METHODS: Stage IIIB/IV patients with histologically proven NSCLC were enrolled in
this study if the tumor cells bore EGFR mutations other than T790M. Eligible
patients were treated with either 250 mg of gefitinib or 150 mg of erlotinib once
daily. The early response rate [computed tomography (CT) scan on Day 14],
definitive response rate determined on Day 56, progression-free survival (PFS),
overall survival (OS), and toxicity profile were assessed prospectively.
RESULTS: Thirty-nine patients were enrolled in this study. A total of 29 patients
(29/39, 74.4%) achieved partial response (PR). Twenty-one patients (21/39, 53.8%)
had early radiological response on Day 14. The early radiological response rate
in patients with PR was 72.4% (21/29). Only eight patients without a PR on early 
CT still ended with PR. Among the 29 patients with PR, the PFS (8.1 months) and
OS (18.3 months) of the 21 patients with early CT response were shorter than
those of the 8 patients without early CT response (11.9 and 24.0 months for PFS
and OS, respectively). But the survival differences were statistically
non-significant.
CONCLUSIONS: A very high percentage (72.4%, 21/29) of NSCLC patients with EGFR
mutations with PR demonstrates early radiological response to EGFR-TKIs, which
would advocate early radiological examination for EGFR-TKI therapy in NSCLC
patients.

DOI: 10.4103/2319-4170.138320 
PMID: 25179728  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


556. Anticancer Agents Med Chem. 2015;15(2):267-73.

Design, synthesis and biological evaluation of quinoxalin-2(1H)-one derivatives
as EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors.

Qin X, Han X, Hu L, Li Z, Geng Z, Wang Z, Zeng C, Xiao X(1).

Author information: 
(1)College of Life Science and Bioengineering, Beijing University of Technology, 
Beijing 100124, China. huliming@bjut.edu.cn.

With the successful use of gefitinib and erlotinib in clinic, some potent EGFR
tyrosine kinase receptor inhibitors have gained widespread concern in the
treatment of ovarian or non-small-cell lung cancer. However, the emergence of
EGFR-activating mutations resist to the drugs, there is an impending need to
design new inhibitor targeted EGFR. Furthermore, the understanding of mutual
effect between EGFR and drug has been available, it has become a hot spot for the
research of anticancer drugs. We have designed and synthesized a series of
6-methoxy-7-(3-morpholinopropoxy)-1-(2- phenoxyethyl)-quinoxalin-2(1H)-one
derivatives as novel EGFR inhibitors. Most of the compounds have showed
inhibitory activity toward EGFR kinase. This work has demonstrated it is possible
to construct a new type of EGFR protein kinase inhibitor using a designin
strategy.


PMID: 25175686  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


557. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol. 2014 Nov;74(5):939-46. doi:
10.1007/s00280-014-2570-1. Epub 2014 Aug 31.

Evaluation of gefitinib efficacy according to body surface area in patients with 
non-small cell lung cancer harboring an EGFR mutation.

Igawa S(1), Kasajima M, Ishihara M, Kimura M, Hiyoshi Y, Niwa H, Kusuhara S,
Harada S, Asakuma M, Otani S, Katono K, Sasaki J, Masuda N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Kitasato University School of Medicine,
1-15-1, Kitasato, Minami-ku, Sagamihara-City, Kanagawa, 252-0374, Japan,
igawa@kitasato-u.ac.jp.

BACKGROUND: Exon 19 deletions and L858R point mutation are the most commonly
encountered active epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutations in non-small
cell lung cancer (NSCLC), and they predict greater efficacy of gefitinib therapy.
The objective of this study was to evaluate whether body surface area (BSA)
affects the efficacy of gefitinib in patients with NSCLC harboring an active EGFR
mutation.
METHODS: We reviewed the medical records of consecutive patients with advanced
NSCLC harboring an active EGFR mutation who received gefitinib monotherapy. The
median BSA value was used as the cutoff value to evaluate the impact of BSA on
the efficacy of gefitinib.
RESULTS: The median BSA of the 103 NSCLC patients harboring an active EGFR
mutation was 1.45 m(2). The overall response rate, progression-free survival
(PFS), and median survival time (MST) were 65.0 %, 11.3 months, and 26.2 months, 
respectively. There were no significant differences in clinical outcomes between 
the high-BSA group (BSA ≥ 1.45 m(2)) and low-BSA group (BSA < 1.45 m(2)), i.e.,
the response rates was 60.0 % and 69.8 %, respectively (P = 0.20), and their MST 
was 24.7 and 26.2 months, respectively (P = 0.78). Although BSA was predictive of
PFS between high-BSA group and low-BSA group in the univariate analysis (9.0 and 
12.2 months, P = 0.04), the multivariate analysis identified only performance
status and smoking status as independent predictors of PFS.
CONCLUSIONS: The efficacy of gefitinib in patients with NSCLC harboring an EGFR
mutation does not differ according to their BSA.

DOI: 10.1007/s00280-014-2570-1 
PMID: 25173459  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


558. Mol Cancer Ther. 2014 Nov;13(11):2607-17. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-14-0363.
Epub 2014 Aug 20.

Anti-MET immunoPET for non-small cell lung cancer using novel fully human
antibody fragments.

Li K(1), Tavaré R(1), Zettlitz KA(1), Mumenthaler SM(2), Mallick P(3), Zhou Y(4),
Marks JD(4), Wu AM(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Medical Pharmacology, Crump Institute for
Molecular Imaging, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles,
California. (2)Center for Applied Molecular Medicine, Keck School of Medicine,
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California. (3)Center for Applied
Molecular Medicine, Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern California,
Los Angeles, California. Department of Radiology, School of Medicine, Stanford
University, Stanford, California. (4)Department of Anesthesia, University of
California, San Francisco, San Francisco General Hospital, San Francisco,
California. (5)Department of Molecular and Medical Pharmacology, Crump Institute 
for Molecular Imaging, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles,
California. awu@mednet.ucla.edu.

MET, the receptor of hepatocyte growth factor, plays important roles in
tumorigenesis and drug resistance in numerous cancers, including non-small cell
lung cancer (NSCLC). As increasing numbers of MET inhibitors are being developed 
for clinical applications, antibody fragment-based immunopositron emission
tomography (immunoPET) has the potential to rapidly quantify in vivo MET
expression levels for drug response evaluation and patient stratification for
these targeted therapies. Here, fully human single-chain variable fragments
(scFvs) isolated from a phage display library were reformatted into bivalent
cys-diabodies (scFv-cys dimers) with affinities to MET ranging from 0.7 to 5.1
nmol/L. The candidate with the highest affinity, H2, was radiolabeled with (89)Zr
for immunoPET studies targeting NSCLC xenografts: low MET-expressing Hcc827 and
the gefitinib-resistant Hcc827-GR6 with 4-fold MET overexpression. ImmunoPET at
as early as 4 hours after injection produced high-contrast images, and ex vivo
biodistribution analysis at 20 hours after injection showed about 2-fold
difference in tracer uptake levels between the parental and resistant tumors (P <
0.01). Further immunoPET studies using a larger fragment, the H2 minibody
(scFv-CH3 dimer), produced similar results at later time points. Two of the
antibody clones (H2 and H5) showed in vitro growth inhibitory effects on
MET-dependent gefitinib-resistant cell lines, whereas no effects were observed on
resistant lines lacking MET activation. In conclusion, these fully human antibody
fragments inhibit MET-dependent cancer cells and enable rapid immunoPET imaging
to assess MET expression levels, showing potential for both therapeutic and
diagnostic applications.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-14-0363 
PMCID: PMC4221648
PMID: 25143449  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


559. J Biol Chem. 2014 Oct 10;289(41):28192-201. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.593475. Epub
2014 Aug 13.

3,6,2',4',5'-Pentahydroxyflavone, an orally bioavailable multiple protein kinase 
inhibitor, overcomes gefitinib resistance in non-small cell lung cancer.

Sheng Y(1), Li W(2), Zhu F(3), Liu K(4), Chen H(3), Yao K(3), Reddy K(3), Lim
DY(3), Oi N(3), Li H(3), Peng C(5), Ma WY(3), Bode AM(3), Dong Z(6), Dong Z(7).

Author information: 
(1)From the The Hormel Institute, University of Minnesota, Austin, Minnesota
55912, the Department of Physiology and Pathophysiology, Basic Medical College,
Zhengzhou University, Henan 450001, China, and The First Affiliated Hospital,
Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, Henan 450001, China, and. (2)From the The Hormel
Institute, University of Minnesota, Austin, Minnesota 55912, the Cancer Research 
Institute, Xiangya School of Medicine and. (3)From the The Hormel Institute,
University of Minnesota, Austin, Minnesota 55912. (4)From the The Hormel
Institute, University of Minnesota, Austin, Minnesota 55912, the Department of
Physiology and Pathophysiology, Basic Medical College, Zhengzhou University,
Henan 450001, China, and. (5)From the The Hormel Institute, University of
Minnesota, Austin, Minnesota 55912, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University,
Changsha, Hunan 410078, China. (6)the Department of Physiology and
Pathophysiology, Basic Medical College, Zhengzhou University, Henan 450001,
China, and Dongzm@zzu.edu.cn. (7)From the The Hormel Institute, University of
Minnesota, Austin, Minnesota 55912, zgdong@hi.umn.edu.

Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is the most lethal cancer, causing more than
150,000 deaths in the United States in 2013. The receptor tyrosine kinase
inhibitors such as gefitinib are not perfect clinical therapeutic agents for
NSCLC treatment due to primary or acquired tyrosine kinase inhibitor resistance. 
Herein, 3,6,2',4',5'-pentahydroxyflavone (36245-PHF) was identified as a multiple
kinase inhibitor for NSCLC treatment based on the computational screening of a
natural products database. 36245-PHF was shown to inhibit PI3K and Aurora A and B
kinases and overcome gefitinib-resistant NSCLC growth. Our data clearly showed
that 36245-PHF markedly inhibited anchorage-independent growth of
gefitinib-resistant NSCLC cell lines and exerted a substantial chemotherapeutic
effect following oral administration in a gefitinib-resistant NSCLC xenograft
model. The evidence from three different subsequent methodological approaches, in
vitro, ex vivo, and in vivo, all confirmed that 36245-PHF as a multiple protein
kinase inhibitor. Overall, we identified 36245-PHF as a multiple protein kinase
inhibitor and as a novel therapeutic agent to overcome gefitinib-resistant NSCLC 
growth, which could provide a new option for clinical NSCLC oral treatment.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M114.593475 
PMCID: PMC4192475
PMID: 25122774  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


560. J Thorac Oncol. 2014 Sep;9(9):1345-53. doi: 10.1097/JTO.0000000000000263.

Gefitinib treatment in EGFR mutated caucasian NSCLC: circulating-free tumor DNA
as a surrogate for determination of EGFR status.

Douillard JY(1), Ostoros G, Cobo M, Ciuleanu T, Cole R, McWalter G, Walker J,
Dearden S, Webster A, Milenkova T, McCormack R.

Author information: 
(1)*Institut de Cancerologie, Centre René Gauducheau, Nantes, France; †National
Koranyi Institute of Pulmonology, Budapest, Hungary; ‡Hospital Regional
Universitario, Malaga, Spain; §Institutul Oncologic Prof. Dr. Ion Chiricuta and
University of Medicine and Pharmacy Iuliu Hatieganu, Cluj-Napoca, Romania; and
‖AstraZeneca, Macclesfield, United Kingdom.

INTRODUCTION: In the phase IV, open-label, single-arm study NCT01203917,
first-line gefitinib 250 mg/d was effective and well tolerated in Caucasian
patients with epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutation-positive
non-small-cell lung cancer (previously published). Here, we report EGFR mutation 
analyses of plasma-derived, circulating-free tumor DNA.
METHODS: Mandatory tumor and duplicate plasma (1 and 2) baseline samples were
collected (all screened patients; n = 1060). Preplanned, exploratory analyses
included EGFR mutation (and subtype) status of tumor versus plasma and between
plasma samples. Post hoc, exploratory analyses included efficacy by tumor and
plasma EGFR mutation (and subtype) status.
RESULTS: Available baseline tumor samples were 1033 of 1060 (118 positive of 859 
mutation status known; mutation frequency, 13.7%). Available plasma 1 samples
were 803 of 1060 (82 positive of 784 mutation status known; mutation frequency,
10.5%). Mutation status concordance between 652 matched tumor and plasma 1
samples was 94.3% (95% confidence interval [CI], 92.3-96.0) (comparable for
mutation subtypes); test sensitivity was 65.7% (95% CI, 55.8-74.7); and test
specificity was 99.8% (95% CI, 99.0-100.0). Twelve patients of unknown tumor
mutation status were subsequently identified as plasma mutation-positive.
Available plasma 2 samples were 803 of 1060 (65 positive of 224 mutation
status-evaluable and -known). Mutation status concordance between 224 matched
duplicate plasma 1 and 2 samples was 96.9% (95% CI, 93.7-98.7). Objective
response rates are as follows: mutation-positive tumor, 70% (95% CI, 60.5-77.7); 
mutation-positive tumor and plasma 1, 76.9% (95% CI, 65.4-85.5); and
mutation-positive tumor and mutation-negative plasma 1, 59.5% (95% CI,
43.5-73.7). Median progression-free survival (months) was 9.7 (95% CI, 8.5-11.0; 
61 events) for mutation-positive tumor and 10.2 (95% CI, 8.5-12.5; 36 events) for
mutation-positive tumor and plasma 1.
CONCLUSION: The high concordance, specificity, and sensitivity demonstrate that
EGFR mutation status can be accurately assessed using circulating-free tumor DNA.
Although encouraging and suggesting that plasma is a suitable substitute for
mutation analysis, tumor tissue should remain the preferred sample type when
available.

DOI: 10.1097/JTO.0000000000000263 
PMCID: PMC4224589
PMID: 25122430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


561. Oncol Lett. 2014 Sep;8(3):1320-1322. Epub 2014 Jun 19.

High efficacy of gefitinib in the treatment of EGFR mutation-positive advanced
non-small cell lung adenocarcinoma: A case report.

Wang Z(1), Chu J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiotherapy, Xinyi People's Hospital, Xuzhou, Jiangsu 221400,
P.R. China ; Department of Radiotherapy, The Fourth Affiliated Hospital of
Soochow University, Wuxi, Jiangsu 214062, P.R. China. (2)Department of
Radiotherapy, The Fourth Affiliated Hospital of Soochow University, Wuxi, Jiangsu
214062, P.R. China.

Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs), such
as gefitinib and erlotinib, are known to play a significant role in EGFR
mutation-positive non-small cell lung cancer. When an EGFR mutation is found,
gefitinib and erlotinib have been shown to have significant roles in the
treatment of untreated advanced NSCLC. This study reports an EGFR mutation in
NSCLC treated with gefitinib and is notable due to the patient's marked
improvement following a shorter than average duration of treatment with
gefitinib. The present study reports the case of a 58-year-old male smoker with a
dry cough. Computed tomography revealed a mass in the left inferior lobe of the
lung. The patient was subsequently diagnosed with advanced lung adenocarcinoma,
and an EGFR mutation (in-frame deletions of E746-A750 in exon 19) was found. The 
patient received multiple rounds of chemotherapy, followed by gefitinib
maintenance therapy for 3 months. Later on, a grade 1 acne-like rash developed on
the face and back that lasted throughout the treatment. Currently, the patient is
stable, with no evidence of disease progression. The present study describes the 
disease and the treatment using gefitinib.

DOI: 10.3892/ol.2014.2269 
PMCID: PMC4114712
PMID: 25120716  [PubMed]


562. Oncol Lett. 2014 Sep;8(3):1039-1042. Epub 2014 Jul 4.

Lung adenocarcinoma harboring L858R and T790M mutations in epidermal growth
factor receptor, with poor response to gefitinib: A case report.

Wang YF(1), Xiang X(2), Pei X(3), Li S(1), Tang C(1), Wang L(1), Ke ZF(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen
University, Guangzhou, Guangdong 510080, P.R. China. (2)Department of
Interventional Radiology, Huizhou Municipal Central Hospital, Huizhou, Guangdong 
516001, P.R. China. (3)Department of Pathology, Huizhou Municipal Central
Hospital, Huizhou, Guangdong 516001, P.R. China.

Lung cancer is the leading cause of mortality among malignant diseases in humans 
worldwide. During the last decade, molecular targeted therapies for non-small
cell lung cancer using first-generation, reversible epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs), including gefitinib, have been
shown to be a promising approach for patients harboring activating mutations in
EGFR. The current study reports a 77-year-old patient diagnosed with
adenocarcinoma harboring L858R and T790M point mutations in the EGFR gene. The
patient was treated with gefitinib as the second-line therapy, but no clinical
benefit was observed. As the majority of patients with lung cancer receiving
EGFR-TKI therapy acquire resistance, repeated biopsies and detection of the EGFR 
mutation state are beneficial for selecting appropriate treatments.

DOI: 10.3892/ol.2014.2321 
PMCID: PMC4114585
PMID: 25120654  [PubMed]


563. Cancer Sci. 2014 Oct;105(10):1245-53. doi: 10.1111/cas.12497. Epub 2014 Sep 25.

Anti-tumor activity of WK88-1, a novel geldanamycin derivative, in
gefitinib-resistant non-small cell lung cancers with Met amplification.

Jang WJ(1), Jung SK, Kang JS, Jeong JW, Bae MK, Joo SH, Park GH, Kundu JK, Hong
YS, Jeong CH.

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmacy, Keimyung University, Daegu, South Korea.

Although epidermal growth factor receptor-tyrosine kinase inhibitors (EGFR-TKIs) 
have been introduced for the treatment of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), the
emergence of secondary T790M mutation in EGFR or amplification of the Met
proto-oncogene restrain the clinical success of EGFR-TKIs. Since heat shock
protein-90 (Hsp90) stabilizes various oncoproteins including EGFR and c-Met, the 
inhibition of Hsp90 activity appears as a rational strategy to develop anticancer
drugs. Despite preclinical efficacy of geldanamycin-anasamycin (GA)-derivatives
containing benzoquinone moiety as Hsp90 inhibitors, the hepatotoxicity of these
GA-derivatives restricts their therapeutic benefit. We have prepared WK-88 series
of GA-derivatives, which lack the benzoquinone moiety. In this study, we have
examined the anticancer effects of WK88-1 in Met-amplified- and
gefitinib-resistant (HCC827GR) NSCLC cells and its parental HCC827 cells.
Treatment with WK88-1 reduced the cell viability in both HCC827 and HCC827GR
cells, which was associated with marked decrease in the constitutive expression
of Hsp90 client proteins, such as EGFR, ErbB2, ErbB3, Met and Akt. Moreover,
WK88-1 attenuated phosphorylation of these Hsp90 client proteins and reduced the 
anchorage-independent growth of HCC827GR cells. Administration of WK88-1 did not 
cause hepatotoxicity in animals and significantly reduced the growth of HCC827GR 
cells xenograft tumors in nude mice. Our study provides evidence that ErbB3 might
be a client for Hsp90 in Met-amplified NSCLCs. In conclusion, we demonstrate that
inhibition of Hsp90 dampens the activation of EGFR- or c-Met-mediated survival of
Met-amplified NSCLCs and that WK88-1 as a Hsp90 inhibitor alleviates gefitinib
resistance in HCC827GR cells.

© 2014 The Authors. Cancer Science published by Wiley Publishing Asia Pty Ltd on 
behalf of Japanese Cancer Association.

DOI: 10.1111/cas.12497 
PMCID: PMC4462346
PMID: 25117641  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


564. Drug Des Devel Ther. 2014 Jul 31;8:1037-46. doi: 10.2147/DDDT.S50358. eCollection
2014.

Clinical utility of erlotinib for the treatment of non-small-cell lung cancer in 
Japanese patients: current evidence.

Togashi Y(1), Hayashi H(2), Nakagawa K(3), Nishio K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genome Biology, Kindai University Faculty of Medicine, Osaka,
Japan. (2)Department of Genome Biology, Kindai University Faculty of Medicine,
Osaka, Japan ; Department of Medical Oncology, Kindai University Faculty of
Medicine, Osaka, Japan ; Department of Medical Oncology, Kishiwada Municipal
Hospital, Osaka, Japan. (3)Department of Medical Oncology, Kindai University
Faculty of Medicine, Osaka, Japan.

Gefitinib, an epidermal growth factor tyrosine kinase inhibitor (EGFR-TKI), has
been approved in Japan for the treatment of patients with advanced non-small-cell
lung cancer (NSCLC) based on Phase II clinical trials since 2002. Erlotinib,
another EGFR-TKI, was also approved a few years thereafter. In 2004, activating
mutations in the EGFR gene were discovered to be a predictive biomarker for
EGFR-TKI treatment, and gefitinib, which is not effective for patients with EGFR 
wild-type NSCLC, has since been used only in patients with EGFR-mutated NSCLC. In
contrast, erlotinib is potentially effective for the treatment of EGFR wild-type 
NSCLC. Similar to gefitinib, erlotinib is also effective for EGFR-mutated NSCLC
and has been used as an initial treatment for patients with advanced EGFR-mutated
NSCLC. Both gefitinib and erlotinib can be used in a Japanese clinical setting.
The approved daily dose of erlotinib (150 mg) is equal to the maximum tolerated
dose of erlotinib. In contrast, the daily dose of gefitinib has been set at 250
mg, which is approximately one-third of the maximum tolerated dose of gefitinib. 
Accordingly, a higher serum concentration can be achieved using erlotinib,
compared with gefitinib. This advantage can be applied to the treatment of
central nervous system metastases (brain metastasis and carcinomatous
meningitis), the treatment of which is complicated by the difficulty drugs have
penetrating the blood-brain barrier. Although patients with EGFR-mutated NSCLC
respond dramatically to EGFR-TKIs, some patients have a poor response and the
majority eventually undergo disease progression. To overcome such resistance,
several novel treatment strategies, such as combination therapy and
next-generation EGFR-TKIs, have been attempted.

DOI: 10.2147/DDDT.S50358 
PMCID: PMC4124069
PMID: 25114510  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


565. J Cell Mol Med. 2014 Aug;18(8):1519-39. doi: 10.1111/jcmm.12278. Epub 2014 Aug 6.

Pooled analysis of clinical outcome for EGFR TKI-treated patients with EGFR
mutation-positive NSCLC.

Paz-Ares L(1), Soulières D, Moecks J, Bara I, Mok T, Klughammer B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Instituto de Biomedicina de Sevilla (HUVR, US 
and CSIC) and Hospital Universitario Virgen del Rocio, Seville, Spain.

Patients with non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) appear to gain particular
benefit from treatment with epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)
tyrosine-kinase inhibitors (TKI) if their disease tests positive for EGFR
activating mutations. Recently, several large, controlled, phase III studies have
been published in NSCLC patients with EGFR mutation-positive tumours. Given the
increased patient dataset now available, a comprehensive literature search for
EGFR TKIs or chemotherapy in EGFR mutation-positive NSCLC was undertaken to
update the results of a previously published pooled analysis. Pooling eligible
progression-free survival (PFS) data from 27 erlotinib studies (n = 731), 54
gefitinib studies (n = 1802) and 20 chemotherapy studies (n = 984) provided
median PFS values for each treatment. The pooled median PFS was: 12.4 months (95%
accuracy intervals [AI] 11.6-13.4) for erlotinib-treated patients; 9.4 months
(95% AI 9.0-9.8) for gefitinib-treated patients; and 5.6 months (95% AI 5.3-6.0) 
for chemotherapy. Both erlotinib and gefitinib resulted in significantly longer
PFS than chemotherapy (permutation testing; P = 0.000 and P = 0.000,
respectively). Data on more recent TKIs (afatinib, dacomitinib and icotinib) were
insufficient at this time-point to carry out a pooled PFS analysis on these
compounds. The results of this updated pooled analysis suggest a substantial
clear PFS benefit of treating patients with EGFR mutation-positive NSCLC with
erlotinib or gefitinib compared with chemotherapy.

© 2014 The Authors. Journal of Cellular and Molecular Medicine published by John 
Wiley & Sons Ltd and Foundation for Cellular and Molecular Medicine.

DOI: 10.1111/jcmm.12278 
PMCID: PMC4190899
PMID: 25100284  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


566. Sci Rep. 2014 Aug 5;4:5868. doi: 10.1038/srep05868.

Structural signature of the G719S-T790M double mutation in the EGFR kinase domain
and its response to inhibitors.

Doss GP(1), Rajith B(1), Chakraborty C(2), NagaSundaram N(1), Ali SK(1), Zhu
H(3).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Biotechnology Division, School of Biosciences and Technology, VIT
University, Vellore, Tamil Nadu, India. (2)Department of Bio-informatics, School 
of Computer and Information Sciences, Galgotias University, India. (3)Department 
of Computer Science, Hong Kong Baptist University, Kowloon Tong, Hong Kong.

Some individuals with non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) benefit from therapies
targeting epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), and the characterization of a 
new mechanism of resistance to the EGFR-specific antibody gefitinib will provide 
valuable insight into how therapeutic strategies might be designed to overcome
this particular resistance mechanism. The G719S and T790M mutations and their
combination were involved in causing different conformational redistribution of
EGFR. In the present computational study, we analyzed the impact and structural
influence of G719S/T790M double mutation (DM) in EGFR with ligand (gefitinib)
through molecular dynamic simulation (50 ns) and docking analysis. We observed
the escalation in distance between the functional loop and activation loop with
respect to T790M mutation compared to the G719S mutation. Furthermore, we
confirmed that the G719S mutation causes the ligand to move closer to the hinge
region, whereas T790M makes the ligand escape from the binding pocket. Obtained
results provide with an explanation for the resistance induced by T790M and a
vital clue for the design of drugs to combat gefitinib resistance.

DOI: 10.1038/srep05868 
PMCID: PMC4121614
PMID: 25091415  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


567. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol. 2014 Oct;74(4):721-7. doi: 10.1007/s00280-014-2548-z.
Epub 2014 Aug 3.

First-line gefitinib therapy for elderly patients with non-small cell lung cancer
harboring EGFR mutation: Central Japan Lung Study Group 0901.

Takahashi K(1), Saito H, Hasegawa Y, Ando M, Yamamoto M, Kojima E, Sugino Y,
Kimura T, Nomura F, Ogasawara T, Shindoh J, Yoshida N, Suzuki R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Aichi Cancer Center Aichi Hospital, 18
Kuriyado Kake-machi, Okazaki, Aichi, 444-0011, Japan, ktakahashi@acc-aichi.com.

BACKGROUND: The population of elderly patients with lung cancer is increasing
worldwide. Although first-line gefitinib is one of the standard treatments for
advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) harboring epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR) mutation, few data have been reported regarding gefitinib and
elderly patients.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Chemotherapy-naïve patients aged 70 years or older with
stage IIIB or IV NSCLC harboring EGFR-activating mutation were enrolled and
treated with 250 mg of gefitinib daily until disease progression. The primary end
point was response rate, and secondary end points were survival, safety, and
quality of life.
RESULTS: Twenty patients were enrolled, and the median age was 79.5 years (range 
72-90). Overall response rate was 70% (95% CI 45.7-88.1%), and the disease
control rate was 90% (95% CI 68.3-98.7%). The median progression-free survival
and overall survival time were 10.0 and 26.4 months, respectively. The Functional
Assessment of Cancer Therapy-Lung Cancer Subscale (FACT-LCS) scores improved
significantly 4 weeks after the initiation of gefitinib (P = 0.037) and
maintained favorably over a 12-week assessment period. Among the seven items of
FACT-LCS, shortness of breath and cough improved significantly after 4 weeks of
treatment (P = 0.046 and P = 0.008, respectively). The most common adverse events
were rash and liver dysfunction. Although Grade 1 pneumonitis developed in one
patient, no treatment-related death was observed.
CONCLUSION: First-line gefitinib therapy is effective and feasible for elderly
patients harboring EGFR mutation, and improves disease-related symptoms,
especially pulmonary symptoms like shortness of breath and cough.

DOI: 10.1007/s00280-014-2548-z 
PMID: 25087097  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


568. Target Oncol. 2015 Jun;10(2):235-45. doi: 10.1007/s11523-014-0329-6. Epub 2014
Aug 1.

The HSP90 inhibitor ganetespib potentiates the antitumor activity of EGFR
tyrosine kinase inhibition in mutant and wild-type non-small cell lung cancer.

Smith DL(1), Acquaviva J, Sequeira M, Jimenez JP, Zhang C, Sang J, Bates RC,
Proia DA.

Author information: 
(1)Synta Pharmaceuticals Corp, 125 Hartwell Ave, Lexington, MA, 02421, USA.

Small molecule inhibitors of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine
kinase activity, such as erlotinib and gefitinib, revolutionized therapy for
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients whose tumors harbor activating EGFR
mutations. However, mechanisms to overcome the invariable development of acquired
resistance to such agents, as well as realizing their full clinical potential
within the context of wild-type EGFR (WT-EGFR) disease, remain to be established.
Here, the antitumor efficacy of targeted EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs)
and the HSP90 inhibitor ganetespib, alone and in combination, were evaluated in
NSCLC. Ganetespib potentiated the efficacy of erlotinib in TKI-sensitive, mutant 
EGFR-driven NCI-HCC827 xenograft tumors, with combination treatment causing
significant tumor regressions. In erlotinib-resistant NCI-H1975 xenografts,
concurrent administration of ganetespib overcame erlotinib resistance to
significantly improve tumor growth inhibition. Ganetespib co-treatment also
significantly enhanced antitumor responses to afatinib in the same model. In
WT-EGFR cell lines, ganetespib potently reduced cell viability. In NCI-H1666
cells, ganetespib-induced loss of client protein expression, perturbation of
oncogenic signaling pathways, and induction of apoptosis translated to robust
single-agent activity in vivo. Dual ganetespib/erlotinib therapy induced
regressions in NCI-H322 xenograft tumors, indicating that the sensitizing
properties of ganetespib for erlotinib were conserved within the WT-EGFR setting.
Mechanistically, combined ganetespib/erlotinib exposure stabilized EGFR protein
levels in an inactive state and completely abrogated
extracellular-signal-regulated kinase (ERK) and AKT signaling activity. Thus,
selective HSP90 blockade by ganetespib represents a potentially important
complementary strategy to targeted TKI inhibition alone for inducing substantial 
antitumor responses and overcoming resistance, in both the mutant and WT-EGFR
settings.

DOI: 10.1007/s11523-014-0329-6 
PMCID: PMC4457934
PMID: 25077897  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


569. Langenbecks Arch Surg. 2014 Oct;399(7):879-88. doi: 10.1007/s00423-014-1235-1.
Epub 2014 Jul 29.

Esophageal carcinoma cell line with high EGFR polysomy is responsive to
gefitinib.

Drenckhan A(1), Grob T, Dupree A, Dohrmann T, Mann O, Izbicki JR, Gros SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General, Visceral, Thoracic Surgery, University Medical Center
Hamburg-Eppendorf, Martinistr. 52, 20246, Hamburg, Germany.

PURPOSE: It has previously been shown that gefitinib-treated patients with
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) gene amplification or high polysomy had a
statistically significant improvement in response, time to progression, and
survival in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Only few studies utilizing
anti-EGFR treatment in advanced esophageal adenocarcinomas have been performed
and the results have been heterogeneous. The aim of this study was to evaluate
EGFR-targeted therapy with gefitinib in esophageal adenocarcinoma with a high
EGFR polysomy.
METHODS: Novel esophageal cell lines PT6216 and LN6216c were established from
primary tumor and lymph node metastasis of a patient with highly aggressive and
metastatic adenocarcinoma. Pathological examination including tumor
differentiation and prognostic marker analysis, immunohistochemical EGFR
expression analysis, EGFR fluorescence in situ hybridization, and mutation
analysis were performed. Response of novel cell lines to gefitinib treatment was 
evaluated by cell proliferation and vitality assays. Fifty-four esophageal
adenocarcinoma specimens were evaluated for EGFR gene copy gain.
RESULTS: The primary tumor cell line PT6216 and the lymph node cell line LN6216c 
show a homogenously high polysomy for EGFR determined by FISH analysis. Cell
proliferation and vitality are highly sensitive to the tyrosine kinase inhibitor 
gefitinib compared to esophageal control cells without a high polysomy for EGFR. 
High polysomy for EGFR was found in 35 % of patients.
CONCLUSION: We show for the first time a significant treatment response to the
EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor gefitinib in esophageal tumor cells with a high
polysomy for EGFR, suggesting a future role of anti-EGFR therapy for esophageal
adenocarcinoma patients with a high EGFR polysomy.

DOI: 10.1007/s00423-014-1235-1 
PMID: 25070024  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


570. PLoS One. 2014 Jul 24;9(7):e103305. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0103305.
eCollection 2014.

Alteration in Mir-21/PTEN expression modulates gefitinib resistance in non-small 
cell lung cancer.

Shen H(1), Zhu F(1), Liu J(2), Xu T(1), Pei D(1), Wang R(1), Qian Y(1), Li Q(3), 
Wang L(3), Shi Z(3), Zheng J(3), Chen Q(3), Jiang B(3), Shu Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical
University, Nanjing, Jiangsu Province, China. (2)Department of Cardiothoracic
Surgery, First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing,
Jiangsu Province, China. (3)Department of Pathology, Cancer Center, Nanjing
Medical University, Nanjing, Jiangsu Province, China.

Resistance to TKI treatment is a major obstacle in effective treatment of NSCLC. 
Besides EGFR mutation status, the mechanisms involved are largely unknown. Some
evidence supports a role for microRNA 21 in modulating drug sensitivity of
chemotherapy but its role in NSCLC TKI resistance still remains unexplored. This 
study aimed to investigate whether NSCLC miR-21 mediated resistance to TKIs also 
results from Pten targeting. Here, we show miR-21 promotes cancer by negatively
regulating Pten expression in human NSCLC tissues: high miR-21 expression levels 
were associated with shorter DFS in 47 NSCLC patients; high miR-21/low Pten
expression levels indicated a poor TKI clinical response and shorter overall
survival in another 46 NSCLC patients undergoing TKI treatment. In vitro assays
showed that miR-21 was up-regulated concomitantly to down-regulation of Pten in
pc-9/GR cells in comparison with pc-9 cells. Moreover, over-expression of miR-21 
significantly decreased gefitinib sensitivity by down-regulating Pten expression 
and activating Akt and ERK pathways in pc-9 cells, while miR-21 knockdown
dramatically restored gefitinib sensitivity of pc-9/GR cells by up-regulation of 
Pten expression and inactivation of AKT and ERK pathways, in vivo and in vitro.
We propose alteration of miR-21/Pten expression as a novel mechanism for TKI
resistance in NSCLC cancer. Our findings provide a new basis for using miR
21/Pten-based therapeutic strategies to reverse gefitinib resistance in NSCLC.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0103305 
PMCID: PMC4110008
PMID: 25058005  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


571. Mol Clin Oncol. 2014 Sep;2(5):731-736. Epub 2014 Jul 1.

Surrogate endpoints for overall survival in advanced non-small-cell lung cancer
patients with mutations of the epidermal growth factor receptor gene.

Yoshino R(1), Imai H(2), Mori K(3), Takei K(1), Tomizawa M(1), Kaira K(4), Yoshii
A(1), Tomizawa Y(1), Saito R(1), Yamada M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, National Hospital Organization Nishigunma 
Hospital, Shibukawa, Gunma 377-8511, Japan. (2)Department of Medicine and
Molecular Science, Gunma University Graduate School of Medicine, Maebashi, Gunma 
371-8511, Japan. (3)Clinical Trial Coordination Office, Shizuoka Cancer Center,
Nagaizumi, Shizuoka 411-8777, Japan. (4)Department of Oncology Clinical
Development, Gunma University Graduate School of Medicine, Maebashi, Gunma
371-8511, Japan.

Subsequent therapies confound the ability to discern the effect of first-line
chemotherapy on overall survival (OS). We investigated whether progression-free
survival (PFS), post-progression survival (PPS) and tumor response were valid
surrogate endpoints for OS following first-line chemotherapy in individual
patients with advanced non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) harboring sensitive
epidermal growth factor receptor gene mutations. We retrospectively analyzed 35
patients with advanced NSCLC treated with first-line gefitinib. The associations 
of PFS, PPS and tumor response with OS were analyzed. PPS was found to be
strongly correlated with OS, unlike PFS and tumor shrinkage. The factors
significantly associated with PPS were performance status (PS) after first-line
treatment, best response to second-line treatment and number of regimens used
after disease progression. PPS may be a surrogate for OS in this patient
population and further therapy after disease progression following first-line
chemotherapy may significantly affect OS. However, a larger study is required to 
validate these results.

DOI: 10.3892/mco.2014.334 
PMCID: PMC4106738
PMID: 25054038  [PubMed]


572. Oncology. 2014;87(4):215-23. doi: 10.1159/000362603. Epub 2014 Jul 15.

Comparison of the efficacy of gefitinib in patients with non-small cell lung
cancer according to the type of epidermal growth factor receptor mutation.

Igawa S(1), Kasajima M, Ishihara M, Kimura M, Hiyoshi Y, Asakuma M, Otani S,
Katono K, Sasaki J, Masuda N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Kitasato University School of Medicine,
Sagamihara-City, Japan.

Erratum in
    Oncology. 2015;89(1):66.

BACKGROUND: Exon 19 deletion and L858R point mutation of the epidermal growth
factor receptor (EGFR) are the most commonly encountered EGFR mutations in
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), and predict higher clinical outcomes
following treatment with gefitinib. The objective of this study was to evaluate
the differential clinical outcomes of gefitinib in patients with NSCLC according 
to the type of active EGFR mutation, i.e. exon 19 deletion or L858R point
mutation.
METHODS: We identified patients with advanced NSCLC harboring the exon 19
deletion or the L858R point mutation of EGFR who were on gefitinib treatment. The
clinical outcomes were evaluated.
RESULTS: Of the 124 patients with NSCLC harboring active EGFR mutations, the
overall response rate, progression-free survival and overall survival were 60.5%,
11.3 and 27.3 months, respectively, and did not differ significantly between
patients with the exon 19 deletion (61.8%, 11.3 and 32.2 months, respectively)
and those with the L858R point mutation (58.9%, 9.0 and 27.7 months,
respectively).
CONCLUSION: It may be considered that there is no difference in the clinical
efficacy of gefitinib between NSCLC patients who harbor the exon 19 deletion and 
those with the L858R point mutation.

© 2014 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000362603 
PMID: 25034225  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


573. Onco Targets Ther. 2014 Jul 10;7:1261-6. doi: 10.2147/OTT.S65961. eCollection
2014.

Randomized double-blind trial of prophylactic topical Evozac(®) Calming Skin
Spray for gefitinib-associated acne-like eruption.

Wang Y(1), Yang Y(1), Xu J(1), Yu J(1), Liu X(1), Gao R(1), Zhang L(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Collaborative Innovation
Center for Cancer Medicine, Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center, Guangzhou,
Guangdong, People's Republic of China.

BACKGROUND: "Gefitinib" is a first-generation epidermal growth factor receptor
tyrosine-kinase inhibitor. More than half of patients receiving gefitinib develop
acne-like eruption. Evozac(®) Calming Skin Spray (Evaux Laboratoires,
Évaux-les-Bains, France) is made of Évaux thermal spring water and commonly used 
for the treatment of dermatological toxicities caused by anti-epidermal growth
factor receptor therapy. The aim of the study reported here was to test the
effect of Evozac Calming Skin Spray on the prevention of rash in patients
receiving gefitinib.
METHODS: Non-small-cell lung cancer patients preparing to initiate gefitinib
therapy were randomly assigned to apply Evozac Calming Skin Spray or
physiological saline to the face three times a day. The treatment was started on 
the same day as initiation of gefitinib therapy and continued for 4 weeks.
RESULTS: A total of 51 patients in the Evozac Calming Skin Spray group and 50
patients in the physiological saline group completed the study per the protocol. 
The number of facial lesions peaked at the end of 3 weeks in both groups. There
were significantly fewer lesions in the Evozac Calming Skin Spray group than in
the physiological saline group at the end of 1 week (0.25 versus [vs] 1.10,
P=0.031) and 3 weeks (6.67 vs 12.26, P=0.022). Patients from the Evozac Calming
Skin Spray group also developed fewer facial lesions at the end of 2 weeks and 4 
weeks, however, the difference was not statistically significant. At the end of 4
weeks, fewer patients from the Evozac Calming Skin Spray group developed rash of 
grade 2 or greater severity (17.6% vs 36.0%, P=0.037), or experienced
rash-associated symptoms (13.7% vs 34.0%, P=0.017).
CONCLUSION: Prophylactic treatment with Evozac Calming Skin Spray appears to
decrease the number of facial lesions at the peak of the rash, reduce the
incidence of grade 2 or more severe rash and relieve rash-associated symptoms.

DOI: 10.2147/OTT.S65961 
PMCID: PMC4096493
PMID: 25031540  [PubMed]


574. Cancer Treat Rev. 2014 Sep;40(8):917-26. doi: 10.1016/j.ctrv.2014.06.010. Epub
2014 Jul 1.

Oral epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors for the
treatment of non-small cell lung cancer: comparative pharmacokinetics and
drug-drug interactions.

Peters S(1), Zimmermann S(2), Adjei AA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Lausanne University Hospital (CHUV), Lausanne,
Switzerland. Electronic address: solange.peters@chuv.ch. (2)Department of
Oncology, Lausanne University Hospital (CHUV), Lausanne, Switzerland.
(3)Department of Medicine, Katherine Anne Gioia Chair in Cancer Medicine, Roswell
Park Cancer Institute, Buffalo, NY, USA.

The development of orally active small molecule inhibitors of the epidermal
growth factor receptor (EGFR) has led to new treatment options for non-small cell
lung cancer (NSCLC). Patients with activating mutations of the EGFR gene show
sensitivity to, and clinical benefit from, treatment with EGFR tyrosine kinase
inhibitors (EGFR-TKls). First generation reversible ATP-competitive EGFR-TKls,
gefitinib and erlotinib, are effective as first, second-line or maintenance
therapy. Despite initial benefit, most patients develop resistance within a year,
50-60% of cases being related to the appearance of a T790M gatekeeper mutation.
Newer, irreversible EGFR-TKls - afatinib and dacomitinib - covalently bind to and
inhibit multiple receptors in the ErbB family (EGFR, HER2 and HER4). These agents
have been mainly evaluated for first-line treatment but also in the setting of
acquired resistance to first-generation EGFR-TKls. Afatinib is the first ErbB
family blocker approved for patients with NSCLC with activating EGFR mutations;
dacomitinib is in late stage clinical development. Mutant-selective EGFR
inhibitors (AZD9291, CO-1686, HM61713) that specifically target the T790M
resistance mutation are in early development. The EGFR-TKIs differ in their
spectrum of target kinases, reversibility of binding to EGFR receptor,
pharmacokinetics and potential for drug-drug interactions, as discussed in this
review. For the clinician, these differences are relevant in the setting of
polymedicated patients with NSCLC, as well as from the perspective of innovative 
anticancer drug combination strategies.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ctrv.2014.06.010 
PMID: 25027951  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


575. J Mol Histol. 2014 Dec;45(6):641-52. doi: 10.1007/s10735-014-9583-2. Epub 2014
Jul 10.

The reverse effect of X-ray irradiation on acquired gefitinib resistance in
non-small cell lung cancer cell line NCI-H1975 in vitro.

Wang J(1), Wei H, Zhao B, Li M, Lv W, Lv L, Song B, Lv S.

Author information: 
(1)Dalian Medical University, Dalian, 116044, People's Republic of China.

The clinical efficacy of gefitinib in the treatment of non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC) with mutations in exon 18, 19 or 21 of epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR) is limited by the acquired resistance to the drug. To explore whether
X-ray irradiation could reverse the acquired gefitinib resistance in NSCLC cell
in vitro. We chose a human NSCLC cell line NCI-H1975 to establish acquired
gefitinib-resistant cell line named as NCI-H1975/GR. NCI-H1975/GR was irradiated 
with X-ray and then named as NCI-H1975/GR/XR. In the three cell lines,
subsequently cell growth curves and cell population doubling time were calculated
by cell proliferation assay, the changes of cell viability were evaluated by
trypan blue dye exclusion method and MTT assay, the cell cycle distribution and
apoptosis were investigated by flow cytometry, the expressions of E-cadherin and 
vimentin used to indicate epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) were determined
by western blot analysis, the protein expressions in EGFR/KRAS/BRAF transduction 
pathway were detected by immunocytochemistry, and the mutations of EGFR, KRAS and
BRAF were detected by high resolution melting analysis and direct sequencing. We 
found that the X-ray irradiation enhanced the growth inhibitory effects of
gefitinib on the acquired gefitinib-resistant cell line. Of NCI-H1975/GR/XR
following gefitinib treatment, the IC50 decreased significantly, the cell
proportion of phase G0/G1 was slightly higher, and the apoptosis cell proportion 
was significantly higher than those of NCI-H1975/GR. In addition, the reversal of
EMT being present in NCI-H1975/GR cells was likely appearing in NCI-H1975/GR/XR
cells. These results indicated that the acquired gefitinib resistance could be
reversed by X-ray irradiation in NSCLC cell line NCI-H1975 harboring both the
L858R and T790M mutation in vitro.

DOI: 10.1007/s10735-014-9583-2 
PMID: 25008024  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


576. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol. 2014 Dec;140(12):2135-42. doi:
10.1007/s00432-014-1768-2. Epub 2014 Jul 9.

The gefitinib dose reduction on survival outcomes in epidermal growth factor
receptor mutant non-small cell lung cancer.

Sim SH(1), Keam B, Kim DW, Kim TM, Lee SH, Chung DH, Heo DS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul,
Korea.

PURPOSE: Gefitinib is safe for the treatment of non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC), but some patients experience toxicities and require dose reduction. The 
purpose of this study was to evaluate the effect of gefitinib dose reduction on
survival.
METHODS: We retrospectively analyzed 263 patients with NSCLC harboring sensitive 
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutation. All patients had recurred or
metastatic disease and received gefitinib 250 mg daily as palliative
chemotherapy.
RESULTS: Of the 263 patients, 23 had gefitinib dose reduction due to toxicities
(1 due to mucositis, 5 due to skin rash, 11 due to hepatotoxicity and 6 for both 
skin and hepatotoxicity). In the dose reduction group, the mean dose intensity
was 0.84 (range 0.48-0.98). Patients with dose reduction showed significantly
prolonged progression-free survival (PFS) and overall survival (OS) compared to
those receiving the standard dose (median PFS: 14.0 vs. 10.6 months, P = 0.042,
median OS: 54.5 vs. 29.6, P = 0.020). In multivariate analysis, the effect of
dose reduction was not significantly associated with prolonged PFS [hazard ratio 
(HR) 0.619, 95 % confidence interval (CI) 0.357-1.073, P = 0.085], or OS (HR
0.625, 95 % CI 0.287-1.362, P = 0.237). However, patients receiving low-dose
gefitinib tended to have superior survival outcomes compared to those receiving
standard-dose gefitinib.
CONCLUSIONS: The patients experiencing gefitinib dose reduction or short-term
treatment interruption due to toxicities did not show inferior survival, compared
to those receiving full dose of gefitinib in NSCLC patients with EGFR mutation.

DOI: 10.1007/s00432-014-1768-2 
PMID: 25005787  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


577. Cancer Lett. 2014 Sep 1;351(2):265-71. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2014.06.010. Epub
2014 Jun 28.

MicroRNA-34a overcomes HGF-mediated gefitinib resistance in EGFR mutant lung
cancer cells partly by targeting MET.

Zhou JY(1), Chen X(1), Zhao J(2), Bao Z(1), Chen X(1), Zhang P(1), Liu ZF(3),
Zhou JY(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Diseases, Thoracic Disease Diagnosis and Treatment
Center, The First Affiliated Hospital, School of Medicine, Zhejiang University,
Hangzhou, China. (2)Department of Pathology, The First Affiliated Hospital,
School of Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China. (3)PET Center, The
First Affiliated Hospital, School of Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou,
China. (4)Department of Respiratory Diseases, Thoracic Disease Diagnosis and
Treatment Center, The First Affiliated Hospital, School of Medicine, Zhejiang
University, Hangzhou, China. Electronic address: zjyhz@zju.edu.cn.

In non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) that harbours an activating epidermal
growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutation, over-expression of hepatocyte growth
factor (HGF) is an important mechanism involved in the acquired resistance to
EGFR-tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) by restoring activity of the PI3K/Akt
pathway via phosphorylation of MET. In our study, we found that the forced
expression of miR-34a inhibited cell growth and induced apoptosis partly by
targeting MET in HGF-induced gefitinib-resistant HCC827 and PC-9 cells.
Furthermore, dramatic tumour regression was observed in the miR-34a plus
gefitinib group in HGF-induced gefitinib resistant mouse xenograft models. This
study demonstrates for the first time that miR-34a rescues HGF-induced gefitinib 
resistance in EGFR mutant NSCLC cells.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.canlet.2014.06.010 
PMID: 24983493  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


578. Am J Nucl Med Mol Imaging. 2014 Jun 7;4(4):293-302. eCollection 2014.

Relationship between uptake of a radioiodinated quinazoline derivative and
radiosensitivity in non-small cell lung cancer.

Zhu HJ(1), Ogawa M(2), Magata Y(2), Hirata M(3), Ohmomo Y(3), Sakahara H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiology, Hamamatsu University School of Medicine Hamamatsu,
Shizuoka, Japan. (2)Medical Photonics Research Center, Hamamatsu University
School of Medicine Hamamatsu, Shizuoka, Japan. (3)Osaka University of
Pharmaceutical Sciences Takatsuki, Osaka, Japan.

The aim of this study was to determine whether the uptake of radioiodinated
6-(3-morpholinopropoxy)-7-ethoxy-4-(3'-iodophenoxy) quinazoline ([(125)I]PYK)
could predict the response of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cells to
radiotherapy in vitro. Four NSCLC cell lines, PC9, HCC827, A549, and H1975 were
used. Cells were irradiated with doses ranging from 2 Gy to 8 Gy and/or exposed
to 1 μM gefitinib. The effects of radiation and gefitinib were assessed by the
CCK-8 assay and confirmed by reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction and 
immunoflorescence microscopy. The uptake of [(125)I]PYK was determined by
incubating cells with a tracer. The cell cycle was assessed by flow cytometry.
The expression of EGFR was measured by western blotting. The results obtained
revealed that the uptake of [(125)I]PYK was higher in PC9 and HCC827 cells than
in A549 and H1975 cells. PC9 cells and HCC827 cells were also more radiosensitive
than A549 and H1975 cells. The gefitinib pretreatment reduced the S phase
fraction and enhanced radiation effects in PC9 and HCC827 cells. These results
indicate that the uptake of [(125)I]PYK is related to the effects of radiation in
NSCLC cells. Radioiodinated PYK may be useful in predicting the response of NSCLC
in patients to radiotherapy.


PMCID: PMC4074495
PMID: 24982815  [PubMed]


579. Bull Cancer. 2014 Jun;101(6):647-52. doi: 10.1684/bdc.2014.1986.

[A new perspective in the treatment of non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Role
of afatinib: An oral and irreversible ErbB family blocker].

[Article in French]

Wislez M(1), Malka D(2), Bennouna J(3), Mortier L(4), Bensadoun RJ(5), Sicard
J(6), Dielenseger P(7), Rey JB(8), Moro-Sibilot D(9), Scotté F(10).

Author information: 
(1)AP-HP, Hôpital Tenon, Service de pneumologie, 4, rue de la Chine, 75020 Paris,
France. (2)Hôpital Gustave-Roussy, Service d'oncologie digestive, 94800
Villejuif, France. (3)Institut de cancérologie de l'Ouest-CRLCC René-Gauducheau, 
Service d'oncologie médicale, 44805 Nantes Saint-Herblain cedex, France.
(4)Centre hospitalier régional universitaire de Lille, Service de dermatologie,
59000 Lille, France. (5)Centre hospitalier universitaire de Poitiers, Service
d'oncologie médicale et de radiologie, 86000 Poitiers, France. (6)Pharmacie
d'officine, 51000 Châlons-en-Champagne, France. (7)Hôpital Gustave-Roussy,
Département des innovations thérapeutiques et des essais précoces, 94800
Villejuif, France. (8)Institut Jean-Godinot, Service de la pharmacie, 51100
Reims, France. (9)Centre hospitalier universitaire de Grenoble, Unité d'oncologie
thoracique, 38000 Grenoble, France. (10)AP-HP, Hôpital européen Georges-Pompidou,
Service d'oncologie médicale et de soins de support, 75015 Paris, France.

Tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKI) that block epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR) pathway have demonstrated a clinical benefit for patients with
non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) harboring EGFR mutations. The currently
available TKI (gefitinib and erlotinib) are EGFR reversible inhibitors. Afatinib 
is an oral, irreversible ErbB family blocker that covalently binds and blocks
signaling from EGFR (ErbB1), HER2 (ErbB2) and ErbB4. The compound inhibits also
the transphosphorylation of ErbB3. With this mode of action, afatinib is thought 
to have a mechanistic advantage over EGFR blockade alone, in that it provides a
sustained, covalent inhibition of ErbB homo- and hetero-dimers. In the pivotal
LUX-Lung 3 study, afatinib demonstrated a prolonged progression free survival
over standard pemetrexed plus cisplatin chemotherapy (11.1 versus 6.9 months; HR 
= 0.58, 95% CI: 0.43-0.78; P = 0.001) in EGFR mutation positive NSCLC patients.
The compound has recently been granted a marketing authorization (MA) for the
treatment of patients with locally advanced or metastatic NSCLC with activating
EGFR mutation(s) and EGFR TKI-naive. In this paper are summarized the efficacy
and safety data in this indication.

DOI: 10.1684/bdc.2014.1986 
PMID: 24977454  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


580. Mol Carcinog. 2015 Apr;54(4):322-31. doi: 10.1002/mc.22191. Epub 2014 Jun 29.

Butein, a novel dual inhibitor of MET and EGFR, overcomes gefitinib-resistant
lung cancer growth.

Jung SK(1), Lee MH, Lim DY, Lee SY, Jeong CH, Kim JE, Lim TG, Chen H, Bode AM,
Lee HJ, Lee KW, Dong Z.

Author information: 
(1)The Hormel Institute, University of Minnesota, Austin, Minnesota; Department
of Agricultural Biotechnology, Seoul National University, Seoul, Republic of
Korea; Functional Food Resources Research Group, Korea Food Research Institute,
Seongnam, Republic of Korea.

Lung cancer is a leading cause of death worldwide and MET amplification is a
major therapeutic limitation in acquired-resistance lung cancer. We hypothesized 
that butein, a phytochemical, can overcome gefitinib-induced resistance by
targeting both EGFR and MET in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). To investigate
the ability of butein to target EGFR and MET, we used in silico docking, a
library of natural compounds and kinase assays. The effects of butein on growth, 
induction of apoptosis and expression of EGFR/MET signaling targets were examined
in HCC827 (gefitinib-sensitive) and HCC827GR (gefitinib-resistant) NSCLC cells.
Results were confirmed in vivo by a HCC827 or HCC827GR cell xenograft mouse
model, each treated with vehicle, butein or gefitinib. Butein inhibited
phosphorylation and kinase activity of EGFR and MET as well as soft agar colony
formation and decreased viability of HCC827 and HCC827GR cells. Butein increased 
apoptosis-related protein expression in these cells. Results were confirmed by
co-treatment with inhibitors of EGFR/MET or double knock-down. Finally, xenograft
study results showed that butein strongly suppressed HCC827 and HCC827GR tumor
growth. Immunohistochemical data suggest that butein inhibited Ki-67 expression. 
These results indicate that butein has potent anticancer activity and targets
both EGFR and MET in acquired-resistance NSCLC.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/mc.22191 
PMID: 24974831  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


581. J Nucl Med. 2014 Sep;55(9):1417-23. doi: 10.2967/jnumed.114.140913. Epub 2014 Jun
26.

Assessment of simplified methods to measure 18F-FLT uptake changes in
EGFR-mutated non-small cell lung cancer patients undergoing EGFR tyrosine kinase 
inhibitor treatment.

Frings V(1), Yaqub M(1), Hoyng LL(1), Golla SS(1), Windhorst AD(1), Schuit RC(1),
Lammertsma AA(1), Hoekstra OS(1), Smit EF(2), Boellaard R(3); QuIC-ConCePT
Consortium.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiology and Nuclear Medicine, VU University Medical Center,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands; and. (2)Department of Pulmonology, VU University
Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. (3)Department of Radiology and
Nuclear Medicine, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands; and
r.boellaard@vumc.nl.

3'-deoxy-3'-(18)F-fluorothymidine ((18)F-FLT) PET/CT provides a noninvasive
assessment of proliferation and, as such, could be a valuable imaging biomarker
in oncology. The aim of the present study was to assess the validity of
simplified quantitative parameters of (18)F-FLT uptake in non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC) patients before and after the start of treatment with a tyrosine
kinase inhibitor (TKI).METHODS: Ten patients with metastatic NSCLC harboring an
activating epidermal growth factor receptor mutation were included in this
prospective observational study. Patients underwent (15)O-H2O and (18)F-FLT
PET/CT scanning on 3 separate occasions: within 7 d before treatment, and 7 and
28 d after the first therapeutic dose of a TKI (gefitinib or erlotinib). Dynamic 
scans were acquired and venous blood samples were collected during the (18)F-FLT 
scan to measure parent fraction and plasma and whole-blood radioactivity
concentrations. Simplified measures (standardized uptake value [SUV] and
tumor-to-blood ratio [TBR]) were correlated with fully quantitative measures
derived from kinetic modeling.
RESULTS: Twenty-nine of thirty (18)F-FLT PET/CT scans were evaluable. According
to the Akaike criterion, a reversible 2-tissue model with 4 rate constants and
blood volume parameter was preferred in 84% of cases. Relative therapy-induced
changes in SUV and TBR correlated with those derived from kinetic analyses (r(2) 
= 0.83-0.97, P < 0.001, slope = 0.72-1.12). (18)F-FLT uptake significantly
decreased at 7 and 28 d after the start of treatment compared with baseline (P < 
0.01). Changes in (18)F-FLT uptake were not correlated with changes in perfusion,
as measured using (15)O-H2O.
CONCLUSION: SUV and TBR could both be used as surrogate simplified measures to
assess changes in (18)F-FLT uptake in NSCLC patients treated with a TKI, at the
cost of a small underestimation in uptake changes or the need for a blood sample 
and metabolite measurement, respectively.

© 2014 by the Society of Nuclear Medicine and Molecular Imaging, Inc.

DOI: 10.2967/jnumed.114.140913 
PMID: 24970910  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


582. J BUON. 2014 Apr-Jun;19(2):466-73.

Gefitinib, an EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor, activates autophagy through AMPK in
human lung cancer cells.

Xu Z(1), Hang J, Hu J, Gao B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Geriatrics, Ruijin Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong University,
Shanghai, China.

PURPOSE: To investigate the effects of autophagy on growth inhibition by
gefitinib in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cell lines and its probable
mechanism.
METHODS: The mRNA and protein levels of Beclin 1, authophagy related 5 (Atg5) and
Atg7 were assessed. H460 and Calu6 NSCLC cell lines were transfected with
plasmids expressing green fluorescent protein (GFP)-LC3 and the formation of
autophagosome was monitored under fluorescent microscope. In addition, H460 cells
were treated with agonists of autophagy (everolimus and 3-methyladenine/ 3MA),
AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) inhibitor (Compound C) and gefitinib,
respectively. Cells were stained and studied under microscope. Cell colonies were
counted and growth inhibition was calculated. Phosphorylated acetyl-Coenzyme A
carboxylase (ACC) and AMPK were detected. Moreover, H460 cells were transfected
with small interfering RNA (siRNA) against AMPK2 subunit and AMPK 2 was knocked
down.
RESULTS: LCII was accumulated to a higher level after treatment with gefitinib
than that without addition of gefitinib, and gefitinib increased GFP punctuated
cells. Besides, everolimus enhanced the autophagic process induced by gefitinib. 
Consistent with this, everolimus enhanced the growth inhibition of gefitinib on
H460 cells. Also, incubation with gefitinib could significantly increase AMPK
phosphorylation and phosphorylated ACC. Compound C AMPK inhibitor could reverse
the activation of gefitinib on autophagy, as determined by Beclin 1, Atg5 and
Atg7 mRNA levels. Knockdown of AMPK2 also significantly inhibited the activation 
of autophagy by gefitinib.
CONCLUSION: Inhibition of AMPK by its antagonist (Compound C) or siRNA
predominantly blocked the induction of autophagy by gefitinib.


PMID: 24965408  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


583. Med Oncol. 2014 Aug;31(8):78. doi: 10.1007/s12032-014-0078-5. Epub 2014 Jun 24.

Which tyrosine kinase inhibitor should be recommended as initial treatment for
non-small cell lung cancer patients with EGFR mutations?

Tartarone A(1), Lerose R, Lazzari C, Gregorc V, Aieta M.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Medical Oncology, Department of Onco-Hematology, IRCCS, Centro di
Riferimento Oncologico della Basilicata, I.R.C.C.S., Via Padre Pio 1, 85028,
Rionero in Vulture, PZ, Italy, tarta1@virgilio.it.

Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients with epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR) mutations derive greater benefits from first- and second-generation
tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) than from chemotherapy, especially in the
first-line setting. Thus, main treatment guidelines indicate to test all patients
with lung adenocarcinoma for these genetic abnormalities and recommend the
employment of TKIs in these patients. However, many unanswered questions about
the optimal use of TKIs in lung cancer remain; in particular, an open question is
which of the currently available TKIs (gefitinib, erlotinib and afatinib) might
be the best choice in untreated NSCLC patients. In the current review, we will
analyze the state of EGFR-TKIs therapy in untreated EGFR-mutated NSCLC patients
with a focus on both efficacy and toxicity.

DOI: 10.1007/s12032-014-0078-5 
PMID: 24958518  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


584. Med Oncol. 2014 Aug;31(8):63. doi: 10.1007/s12032-014-0063-z. Epub 2014 Jun 24.

Pemetrexed plus dendritic cells as second-line treatment for patients with stage 
IIIB/IV non-small cell lung cancer who had treatment with TKI.

Hu RH(1), Shi SB, Qi JL, Tian J, Tang XY, Liu GF, Chang CX.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Affiliated Hospital of Jining Medical
University, Jining, People's Republic of China.

The aim of this study was to determine the efficacy and toxicity of pemetrexed
plus dendritic cells (DCs) in patients suffering from stage IIIB or IV lung
adenocarcinoma, who had undergone maintenance treatment with gefitinib or
erlotinib. Patients who had failed gefitinib or erlotinib maintenance treatment
had ECOG performance statuses ranging from 0 to 2.27 patients received pemetrexed
plus DCs as second-line treatment. Dosage: 500 mg/m(2) pemetrexed was
administered on day 1 of a 21-day cycle. DCs were given for one cycle of 21 days.
Three patients (11.1 %) experienced a partial response and 14 patients (51.9 %)
showed stable disease. Ten patients (37.0 %) had progressive disease. The median 
time to progression-free survival (PFS) was 4.8 months [95 % confidence interval 
(CI) 4.4-5.2], and the median overall survival was 10.7 months (95 % CI
10.3-11.2). In the subgroup analysis, PFS had a significant difference between
the low ratio of CD4/CD8 and normal ratio of CD4/CD8, with 4.5 months (95 % CI
4.2-4.9) and 5.0 months (95 % CI 4.5-5.7), (Log Rank = 0.039), respectively. No
one patient experienced grade 4 toxicity. A regimen of pemetrexed combined with
DCs is marginally effective and well tolerated in patients with stage IIIB or IV 
lung adenocarcinoma who had received gefitinib or erlotinib first-line treatment.

DOI: 10.1007/s12032-014-0063-z 
PMID: 24958515  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


585. Lung Cancer. 2014 Aug;85(2):141-6. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2014.05.008. Epub 2014 
Jun 2.

AKT inhibition synergistically enhances growth-inhibitory effects of gefitinib
and increases apoptosis in non-small cell lung cancer cell lines.

Puglisi M(1), Thavasu P(2), Stewart A(2), de Bono JS(2), O'Brien ME(3), Popat
S(3), Bhosle J(3), Banerji U(4).

Author information: 
(1)The Drug Development Unit, Divisions of Cancer Therapeutics & Clinical
Studies, The Institute of Cancer Research & The Royal Marsden NHS Foundation
Trust, London, UK; The Lung Unit, The Royal Marsden NHS Foundation Trust, London,
UK. (2)The Drug Development Unit, Divisions of Cancer Therapeutics & Clinical
Studies, The Institute of Cancer Research & The Royal Marsden NHS Foundation
Trust, London, UK. (3)The Lung Unit, The Royal Marsden NHS Foundation Trust,
London, UK. (4)The Drug Development Unit, Divisions of Cancer Therapeutics &
Clinical Studies, The Institute of Cancer Research & The Royal Marsden NHS
Foundation Trust, London, UK. Electronic address: udai.banerji@icr.ac.uk.

OBJECTIVES: EGFR inhibitors are ineffective against most EGFR wild-type non-small
cell lung cancer, for which novel treatment strategies are needed. AKT signalling
is essential for mediating EGFR survival signals in NSCLC. We evaluated the
combination of gefitinib and two different AKT inhibitors, the allosteric
inhibitor AKTi-1/2 and the ATP-competitive pan-AKT inhibitor AZD5363, in
EGFR-mutant (HCC-827 and PC-9) and -wild-type (NCI-H522, NCI-H1651), non-small
cell lung cancer cell lines.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Drug interaction was studied in two EGFR mutant and two
EGFR wild-type non-small cell lung cancer cell lines by calculating combination
index (CI) using median effect analysis. The effects on p-EGFR, p-ERK, p-AKT,
p-S6 and apoptosis were studied by Western blot analysis.
RESULTS: The combination of gefitinib and AKTi-1/2 or AZD5363 showed synergistic 
growth inhibition in all cell lines. CI values for the combination of gefitinib
and AKTi-1/2 were 0.35 (p=0.0048), 0.56 (p=0.036), 0.75 (p=0.13) and 0.64
(p=0.0003) in NCI-H522, NCI-H1651, HCC-827 and PC-9 cell lines, respectively; CI 
values of 0.45 (p=0.0087) and 0.22 (p<0.0001) were observed in NCI-H522 and PC-9 
cells, respectively, when gefitinib was combined with AZD5363. Additive
inhibition of signalling output through AKT and key downstream proteins (S6) and 
increased apoptosis were demonstrated.
CONCLUSION: Dual inhibition of EGFR and AKT may be a useful up-front strategy for
patients with EGFR-mutant and -wild-type non-small cell lung cancer.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2014.05.008 
PMID: 24957682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


586. Clin Lung Cancer. 2014 Jul;15(4):307-12. doi: 10.1016/j.cllc.2014.04.006. Epub
2014 May 12.

management of nonhematologic toxicities associated with different EGFR-TKIs in
advanced NSCLC: a comparison analysis.

Passaro A(1), Di Maio M(2), Del Signore E(3), Gori B(4), de Marinis F(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Thoracic Oncology, European Institute of Oncology (IEO), Milan,
Italy. Electronic address: a-passaro@hotmail.it. (2)Istituto Nazionale Tumori -
Fondazione G. Pascale IRCCS, Naples, Italy. (3)Division of Thoracic Oncology,
European Institute of Oncology (IEO), Milan, Italy. (4)First Oncological
Pulmonary Unit, San Camillo, High Specialization Hospital, Rome, Italy.

INTRODUCTION: Nonhematologic toxicities are frequently observed in patients
receiving epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors (EGFR-TKIs)
in advanced non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: For the 2010-2013 period, the authors evaluated 158
patients diagnosed with advanced or metastatic NSCLC treated in first-, second-, 
or third-line with the EGFR-TKIs afatinib, erlotinib, or gefitinib. The study
assessed the incidence of cutaneous rash, diarrhea, and mucositis/stomatitis by
grade at initial assessment (< 30 days) compared with last assessment after
correct management, and the authors developed a proposal for a new modality of
evaluation and management of adverse events.
RESULTS: The incidence of adverse events (cutaneous rash, diarrhea, and
mucositis/stomatitis), classified by grade at the initial assessment and the
reevaluation after management, demonstrated a reduction of about 95% from the
starting toxicity grade for diarrhea, 65% for cutaneous rash, and approximately
70% for mucositis/stomatitis.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that the safety profiles regarding cutaneous
rash, diarrhea, and mucositis after afatinib, erlotinib, or gefitinib treatment
become similar after prompt and correct management. This analysis suggests that
immediate therapeutic approaches and continuous management are required to ensure
treatments without severe adverse events that could adversely affect survival and
the quality of life.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cllc.2014.04.006 
PMID: 24954231  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


587. Eur J Cancer. 2014 Sep;50(13):2219-30. doi: 10.1016/j.ejca.2014.05.011. Epub 2014
Jun 18.

First-line pemetrexed plus cisplatin followed by gefitinib maintenance therapy
versus gefitinib monotherapy in East Asian patients with locally advanced or
metastatic non-squamous non-small cell lung cancer: a randomised, phase 3 trial.

Yang JC(1), Kang JH(2), Mok T(3), Ahn MJ(4), Srimuninnimit V(5), Lin CC(1), Kim
DW(6), Tsai CM(7), Barraclough H(8), Altug S(9), Orlando M(10), Park K(11).

Author information: 
(1)National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan. (2)The Catholic
University of Korea, St. Mary's Hospital, Seoul, Republic of Korea. (3)State Key 
Laboratory of South China, Department of Clinical Oncology, The Chinese
University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong. (4)Samsung Medical Center, Seoul, Republic of
Korea. (5)Faculty of Medicine Siriraj Hospital, Mahidol University, Bangkok,
Thailand. (6)Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(7)Taipei Veterans General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan. (8)Eli Lilly and Company
Australia, Australia. (9)Eli Lilly and Company Turkey, Turkey. (10)Eli Lilly and 
Company Interamerica, Argentina. (11)Samsung Medical Center, Seoul, Republic of
Korea. Electronic address: keunchil.park@samsung.com.

BACKGROUND: In the Iressa Pan-ASia Study (IPASS), gefitinib claimed improved
progression-free survival (PFS) versus carboplatin-paclitaxel in clinically
selected lung cancer patients. The primary objective of this study was to assess 
the PFS of pemetrexed-cisplatin (PC) followed by gefitinib maintenance versus
gefitinib monotherapy in an IPASS-like population.
METHODS: In this open-label, randomised, phase 3 trial, eligible patients were
⩾18 years, chemonaïve, East Asian, light ex-smokers/never-smokers with advanced
non-squamous non-small cell lung cancer, an Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group
(ECOG) performance status 0-1 and unknown epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)
mutation status who enrolled at 12 sites in Asia. Patients randomly received
(1:1) pemetrexed (500 mg/m(2)) plus cisplatin (75mg/m(2)) for six 21-day cycles, 
followed by gefitinib maintenance or gefitinib monotherapy (250 mg/day). Patient 
tissue was retrospectively analysed for EGFR mutations. This study is registered 
with ClinicalTrials.gov, NCT01017874.
FINDINGS: Between 23rd November 2009 and 27th April 2012, 253 patients entered,
and 236 patients were randomly assigned to and treated with PC therapy (N=114)
and gefitinib monotherapy (N=118). Between-arm baseline characteristics were
balanced. PFS was not significantly different between treatment arms (p=0.217).
The unadjusted hazard ratio (HR) was 0.85 (95% confidence interval (CI)
0.63-1.13). The HR should be cautiously interpreted as it was not constant. EGFR 
mutation status was determined for 74 tissue samples; 50 (67.6%) had mutations.
In a pre-specified subgroup analysis, only the treatment-by-EGFR mutation
interaction was significant (p=0.008) for PFS. For the entire treatment period, a
higher proportion of patients in the PC/gefitinib arm versus gefitinib
experienced possibly drug-related grade 3-4 treatment-emergent adverse events (39
of 114 [34%] versus 19 of 118 [16%]; p=0.002).
INTERPRETATION: In the intention-to-treat (ITT) population, PFS was not
significantly different. In the biomarker-assessable population, front-line EGFR 
tyrosine kinase inhibitor monotherapy was not efficacious in patients with
wild-type EGFR. Identification of EGFR mutation status is key in the management
of advanced non-squamous non-small cell lung cancer.
FUNDING: Eli Lilly and Company.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejca.2014.05.011 
PMID: 24953333  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


588. Oncotarget. 2014 Jul 15;5(13):4765-78.

Combining AKT inhibition with chloroquine and gefitinib prevents compensatory
autophagy and induces cell death in EGFR mutated NSCLC cells.

Bokobza SM(1), Jiang Y, Weber AM, Devery AM, Ryan AJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Gray Institute for Radiation Oncology and Biology, Department of Oncology,
University of Oxford, Old Road Campus Research Building, Headington, Oxford, UK.

Although non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients with EGFR mutation positive 
(EGFR M+) tumors initially respond well to EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI)
monotherapy, the responses are usually incomplete. In this study we show that AKT
inhibition, most importantly AKT2 inhibition, synergises with EGFR TKI inhibition
to increase cell killing in EGFR M+ NSCLC cells. However, our data also suggest
that the synergistic pro-apoptotic effects may be stunted due to a prosurvival
autophagy response induced by AKT inhibition. Consequently, inhibiting autophagy 
with chloroquine significantly enhanced tumor cell death induced by gefitinib and
AKT inhibitors in EGFR M+ cells in vitro, and produced greater tumor shrinkage in
EGFR M+ xenografts in vivo. Together, our findings suggest that adding
chloroquine to EGFR and AKT inhibition has the potential to improve tumor
responses in EGFR M+ NSCLC, and that selective targeting of AKT2 may provide a
new treatment option in NSCLC.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.2017 
PMCID: PMC4148097
PMID: 24946858  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


589. Oncol Lett. 2014 Apr;7(4):1300-1304. Epub 2014 Feb 7.

Prognosis of recurrent non-small cell lung cancer following complete resection.

Sasaki H(1), Suzuki A(1), Tatematsu T(1), Shitara M(1), Hikosaka Y(1), Okuda
K(1), Moriyama S(1), Yano M(1), Fujii Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Immunology and Surgery, Nagoya City University
Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Nagoya, Aichi 467-8601, Japan.

Prognosis following recurrence subsequent to complete resection of non-small-cell
lung cancer (NSCLC) is considered a multifactorial process dependent on
clinicopathological, biological and treatment characteristics. Gefitinib was
approved for lung cancer treatment in Japan in 2002. The aim of the current study
was to quantify the prognostic effects of these characteristics on
post-recurrence prognosis. In total, 127 NSCLC patients were analyzed who
underwent complete resection and subsequently had recurrent cancer. The
correlation between characteristics of the initial and recurrent disease with
post-recurrence prognosis was investigated. The factors clearly associated with
post-recurrence prognosis using Cox proportional hazards models were age at
recurrence (those <65 years of age typically had better prognoses) and interval
between initial resection and recurrence (intervals of <1 year accompanied a
worse prognosis). Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutant patients treated
with EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs), exhibited the longest median
survival following recurrence (37.4 months) in the sample. Treatment,
particularly EGFR TKIs for recurrent NSCLC, was observed to significantly prolong
survival. The results of the study highlight that various treatment modalities
according to the clinical background of the patient should be considered in
patients with postoperative recurrent NSCLC.

DOI: 10.3892/ol.2014.1861 
PMCID: PMC3961426
PMID: 24944713  [PubMed]


590. Mol Clin Oncol. 2014 Jul;2(4):604-608. Epub 2014 Apr 16.

Efficacy of tyrosine kinase inhibitors in non-small-cell lung cancer patients
undergoing dose reduction and those with a low body surface area.

Sato S(1), Kurishima K(2), Miyazaki K(1), Kodama T(1), Ishikawa H(3), Kagohashi
K(4), Tamura T(2), Homma S(2), Satoh H(4), Hizawa N(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Respiratory Medicine, Ryugasaki Saiseikai General Hospital,
Ryugasaki, Ibaraki 301-0854, Japan. (2)Division of Respiratory Medicine, Faculty 
of Clinical Medicine, University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8575, Japan.
(3)Division of Respiratory Medicine, Tsukuba Medical Center Hospital and Regional
Cancer Center, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8558, Japan. (4)Division of Respiratory
Medicine, Mito Medical Center, University of Tsukuba, Mito, Ibaraki 310-0015,
Japan.

The objective of this study was to evaluate the efficacy of epidermal growth
factor receptor-tyrosine kinase inhibitors (EGFR-TKIs) in patients undergoing
dose reduction and in those with a low body surface area (BSA). The association
between dose reduction, low BSA and efficacy, including response rate (RR),
disease control rate (DCR), progression-free survival (PFS) and overall survival 
(OS), were evaluated in patients prescribed TKIs between September, 2002 and May,
2013. A total of 282 patients received EGFR-TKIs during the study period, 53
(18.8%) of whom underwent a dose reduction (21.4 and 31.6% of the patients with a
BSA of <1.5 and <1.25 m(2), respectively). Eleven (20.8%) of these 53 patients
had a dose reduction due to adverse events (AEs) >grade 3. In either gefitinib or
erlotinib treatment, the RR, DCR, PFS and OS in EGFR-mutated patients with a BSA 
of <1.5 m(2) were not different from those in patients with a BSA of >1.5 m(2).
In addition, there were no differences in these parameters between patients with 
and those without a dose reduction of TKIs. The dose of TKIs in patients with AEs
and in those with low BSA should be determined with caution. To confirm the equal
efficacy of TKIs in patients undergoing a dose reduction, prospective
observational studies with less patient heterogeneity are required.

DOI: 10.3892/mco.2014.281 
PMCID: PMC4051560
PMID: 24940504  [PubMed]


591. Mol Clin Oncol. 2014 Jul;2(4):535-538. Epub 2014 Apr 30.

Misjudgement of gefitinib efficacy in patients with central non-small-cell lung
cancer due to obstructive atelectasis caused by stereotactic radiotherapy.

Yang X(1), Xiong Y(1), Huang H(1), Peng B(1), Zhou Z(1), Xu M(1), Yang Y(1), Wang
D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Center, Daping Hospital, Third Military Medical University, Daping,
Yuzhong, Chongqing 400042, P.R. China.

Stereotactic body radiation therapy (SBRT) has been reported to be safe and
effective for the treatment of central lung cancer, with mostly tolerable early
complications. In this study, we report the development of severe obstructive
atelectasis as a late complication in two patients with central lung cancer who
received SBRT. This obstructive atelectasis interrupted the evaluation of
efficacy of the subsequent gefitinib treatment for non-small-cell lung cancer
(NSCLC). The two patients received a total dose of 40 Gy encompassing the
planning target volume in 10 fractions (5 fractions/week) at 4 Gy per fraction at
the central lesions. Obstructive atelectasis occurred when the patients received 
subsequent gefitinib treatment. Follow-up reviews or positron emission
tomography-computed tomography examination of the two patients confirmed that
obstructive atelectasis was actually caused by radiotherapy rather than disease
progression. Misjudgement of the cause of ostructive atelectasis in one of the
cases resulted in premature termination of gefitinib. Therefore, it is crucial to
accurately determine the cause of late complications in NSCLC patients receiving 
sequential SBRT and gefitinib.

DOI: 10.3892/mco.2014.284 
PMCID: PMC4051569
PMID: 24940490  [PubMed]


592. Lung Cancer. 2014 Aug;85(2):230-8. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2014.05.007. Epub 2014 
May 21.

Afatinib in the treatment of EGFR mutation-positive NSCLC--a network
meta-analysis.

Popat S(1), Mok T(2), Yang JC(3), Wu YL(4), Lungershausen J(5), Stammberger U(5),
Griebsch I(5), Fonseca T(6), Paz-Ares L(7).

Author information: 
(1)Royal Marsden Hospital, London, UK. Electronic address:
sanjay.popat@rmh.nhs.uk. (2)State Key Laboratory of Southern China, Hong Kong
Cancer Institute, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong. (3)National
Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan. (4)Guangdong Lung Cancer Institute, Guangdong 
General Hospital and Guangdong Academy of Medical Sciences, Guangzhou, China.
(5)Boehringer Ingelheim GmbH, Ingelheim, Germany. (6)IMS Health, London, UK.
(7)Instituto de Biomedicina de Sevilla - IBIS (University Hospital Virgen del
Rocío, US, CSIC), Seville, Spain.

OBJECTIVES: Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutation-positive non-small
cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is a specific lung cancer subtype characterized by
sensitivity to treatment with EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs). Two
reversible EGFR TKIs (gefitinib, erlotinib) and the irreversible ErbB family
blocker afatinib are currently approved for treatment of EGFR mutation-positive
NSCLC, but no head-to-head trials have been reported to date. We aimed to assess 
the relative efficacy of the three drugs by conducting a network meta-analysis
(NMA).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A systematic literature review was conducted to identify
all the available evidence. Outcomes of interest were progression-free survival
(PFS) and overall survival. For PFS, results by investigator review were
considered as not all trials assessed PFS independently. Results were analyzed
using Bayesian methods.
RESULTS: The literature search identified 246 articles that were assessed for
eligibility, of which 21 studies were included in the NMA, including eight trials
performed in an EGFR mutation-positive population. The estimated PFS HR (95%
credible interval, CrI) for afatinib compared with gefitinib was 0.70 (0.40-1.16)
and compared with erlotinib was 0.86 (0.50-1.50) in the total population. The
estimated probability of being best for afatinib over all other treatments for
PFS was 70% versus 27% for erlotinib and 3% for gefitinib; the estimated
probability of chemotherapy being the best treatment was 0%. Estimated HR (95%
CrI) in patients with common mutations was 0.73 (0.42-1.24) for afatinib compared
with erlotinib and 0.60 (0.34-0.99) for afatinib compared with gefitinib. OS
findings were not significantly different between treatments.
CONCLUSIONS: In the absence of direct head-to-head trial data comparing efficacy 
between the three EGFR TKIs, our analysis suggests that afatinib is a viable
treatment alternative to erlotinib or gefitinib in terms of PFS. A direct
trial-based comparison of the efficacy of these agents is warranted to clarify
their relative benefits.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2014.05.007 
PMID: 24929780  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


593. Therapie. 2014 Mar-Apr;69(2):163-8. doi: 10.2515/therapie/2014017. Epub 2014 Jun 
12.

[Treatment with erlotinib after gefitinib induced hepatotoxicity: literature
review and case report].

[Article in French]

Durand M(1), Logerot S(1), Fonrose X(2), Schir E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre régional de Pharmacovigilance de Grenoble, Pavillon E, CHU de Grenoble,
Grenoble, France. (2)Laboratoire de Pharmacologie et Toxicologie, Institut de
Biologie et de Pathologie, CHU de Grenoble, Grenoble, France.

Gefitinib and erlotinib are selective epidermal growth factor receptor-tyrosine
kinase (EGFR-TK) inhibitor. They are approved for the treatment of adults with
locally advanced or metastatic non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) with activating
mutations of EGFR-TK. We report the case of a hepatitis cytolytic during
gefitinib treatment with a positive rechallenge. A relay by erlotinib has been
initiated and doesn't give recurrence of hepatotoxicity. From a literature review
and this observation, arguments have been provided to justify erlotinib as a safe
and well-tolered alternative for patients who have to stop gefitinib after a
severe hepatotoxicity.

© 2014 Société Française de Pharmacologie et de Thérapeutique.

DOI: 10.2515/therapie/2014017 
PMID: 24926635  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


594. Anticancer Res. 2014 Jun;34(6):3185-8.

Gefitinib and afatinib treatment in an advanced non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC) patient undergoing hemodialysis.

Bersanelli M(1), Tiseo M(2), Artioli F(3), Lucchi L(4), Ardizzoni A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Oncology Unit, University Hospital of Parma, Parma, Italy
melissa.bersanelli@alice.it. (2)Medical Oncology Unit, University Hospital of
Parma, Parma, Italy. (3)Medical Oncology Unit, Hospitals of Carpi and Mirandola, 
Modena, Italy. (4)Nephrology and Dialysis Unit, University Hospital of Modena,
Modena, Italy.

Renal failure in cancer patients is not a rare clinical condition and often
contraindicates anticancer drug treatment; moreover, chemotherapeutic drugs are
frequently identified as possible iatrogenic cause of renal failure. Molecular
therapies, when appropriate, could represent a therapeutic option for cancer
patients with severe renal disease, but the lack of knowledge in this field, at
present, limits their use in patients undergoing dialysis. Herein we describe a
case, at our knowledge the first reported, of a patient with advanced lung
adenocarcinoma on maintenance hemodialysis treated with gefitinib and then with
afatinib; we also reviewed the literature on epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR) tyrosine-kinase inhibitors (TKIs) used in NSCLC patients with concomitant 
renal impairment.

Copyright© 2014 International Institute of Anticancer Research (Dr. John G.
Delinassios), All rights reserved.


PMID: 24922692  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


595. Onco Targets Ther. 2014 May 28;7:841-52. doi: 10.2147/OTT.S34124. eCollection
2014.

Critical appraisal of the role of gefitinib in the management of locally advanced
or metastatic non-small cell lung cancer.

Yuan Y(1), Li XF(1), Chen JQ(1), Dong CX(1), Weng SS(1), Huang JJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, the Second Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang
University School of Medicine, Hangzhou, People's Republic of China.

Past studies have demonstrated that epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)
tyrosine kinase inhibitors can significantly improve clinical outcomes in
patients with locally advanced or metastatic non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
and sensitive EGFR gene mutations. Gefitinib (Iressa(®)), the first oral EGFR
tyrosine kinase inhibitor, has been shown to be more effective and better
tolerated than chemotherapy either in first-line or second-line treatment for
patients with advanced NSCLC harboring sensitive EGFR mutations. Conversely,
among patients with wild-type EGFR, gefitinib is inferior to standard
chemotherapy in both the first-line and second-line settings. Further, gefitinib 
is effective in patients with brain metastases because of its low molecular
weight and excellent penetration of the blood-brain barrier. In this review, we
summarize the current data from clinical trials with gefitinib and appraise its
role in the management of locally advanced or metastatic NSCLC.

DOI: 10.2147/OTT.S34124 
PMCID: PMC4045263
PMID: 24920926  [PubMed]


596. Clin Cancer Res. 2014 Aug 1;20(15):4059-74. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-13-1559.
Epub 2014 Jun 11.

Tyrosine phosphoproteomics identifies both codrivers and cotargeting strategies
for T790M-related EGFR-TKI resistance in non-small cell lung cancer.

Yoshida T(1), Zhang G(2), Smith MA(2), Lopez AS(3), Bai Y(2), Li J(2), Fang B(4),
Koomen J(4), Rawal B(5), Fisher KJ(5), Chen YA(5), Kitano M(6), Morita Y(6),
Yamaguchi H(6), Shibata K(6), Okabe T(6), Okamoto I(6), Nakagawa K(6), Haura
EB(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Oncology, Department of Medical Oncology, Kinki
University Faculty of Medicine, Osaka-Sayama, Osaka, Japan. (2)Department of
Thoracic Oncology. (3)Tissue Core. (4)Proteomics and Molecular Oncology Program. 
(5)Biostatistics Program, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research Institute,
Tampa, Florida; and. (6)Department of Medical Oncology, Kinki University Faculty 
of Medicine, Osaka-Sayama, Osaka, Japan. (7)Department of Thoracic Oncology,
eric.haura@moffitt.org.

Erratum in
    Clin Cancer Res. 2015 Aug 1;21(15):3571. Chen, Ann Y [corrected to Chen, Y Ann].

PURPOSE: Irreversible EGFR-tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKI) are thought to be one
strategy to overcome EGFR-TKI resistance induced by T790M gatekeeper mutations in
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), yet they display limited clinical efficacy.
We hypothesized that additional resistance mechanisms that cooperate with T790M
could be identified by profiling tyrosine phosphorylation in NSCLC cells with
acquired resistance to reversible EGFR-TKI and harboring T790M.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We profiled PC9 cells with TKI-sensitive EGFR mutation and
paired EGFR-TKI-resistant PC9GR (gefitinib-resistant) cells with T790M using
immunoaffinity purification of tyrosine-phosphorylated peptides and mass
spectrometry-based identification/quantification. Profiles of erlotinib
perturbations were examined.
RESULTS: We observed a large fraction of the tyrosine phosphoproteome was more
abundant in PC9- and PC9GR-erlotinib-treated cells, including phosphopeptides
corresponding to MET, IGF, and AXL signaling. Activation of these receptor
tyrosine kinases by growth factors could protect PC9GR cells against the
irreversible EGFR-TKI afatinib. We identified a Src family kinase (SFK) network
as EGFR-independent and confirmed that neither erlotinib nor afatinib affected
Src phosphorylation at the activation site. The SFK inhibitor dasatinib plus
afatinib abolished Src phosphorylation and completely suppressed downstream
phosphorylated Akt and Erk. Dasatinib further enhanced antitumor activity of
afatinib or T790M-selective EGFR-TKI (WZ4006) in proliferation and apoptosis
assays in multiple NSCLC cell lines with T790M-mediated resistance. This
translated into tumor regression in PC9GR xenograft studies with combined
afatinib and dasatinib.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results identified both codrivers of resistance along with T790M
and support further studies of irreversible or T790M-selective EGFR inhibitors
combined with dasatinib in patients with NSCLC with acquired T790M.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-13-1559 
PMCID: PMC4119578
PMID: 24919575  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


597. Gan To Kagaku Ryoho. 2014 May;41(5):533-8.

[Treatment strategy for activating EGFR-mutated non-small cell lung cancer after 
failure of first-generation EGFR-TKIs].

[Article in Japanese]

Asami K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Clinical Oncology, National Hospital Organization Kinki-chuo Chest
Medical Center.

Somatic activating mutations such as a deletion in exon 19 or the missense
mutation L858R in the tyrosine kinase domain of the epidermal growth factor
receptor(EGFR)are important mediators of cancer cell oncogenesis, proliferation, 
and survival. In the last decade, two EGFR target agents have significantly
contributed to the understanding of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Gefitinib
and erlotinib are first-generation EGFR-tyrosine kinase inhibitors(EGFR-TKIs)that
play a key role in activating EGFR-mutated NSCLC. Although these reversible,
small, molecular target agents provide a significant response and survival
benefit, all responders eventually acquire resistance. Although various
mechanisms of resistance have been identified, nearly 3 0% of patients who
acquire resistance to EGFR-TKIs have an unknown mechanism of resistance.
Approximately half the patients with EGFR-mutated NSCLC who develop acquired
resistance to these molecular target agents have a secondary mutation T790M in
the threonine gatekeeper residue that coexists with a primary EGFR activating
mutation. The strategy for overcoming acquired resistance to first-generation
EGFR-TKIs is a major clinical concept. Afatinib is a second-generation
EGFR-targeting agent and an irreversible pan-HER inhibitor. It may improve
survival further and help in potentially overcoming resistance to
first-generation EGFR-TKIs in EGFR-mutated NSCLC. In patients harboring
activating EGFR mutations, certain treatments could be suggested for subsequent
therapy after failure of first-generation EGFR-TKIs. This review discusses novel 
therapeutic strategies for activating EGFR-mutated, advanced NSCLC after failure 
of first-generation EGFR-TKIs.


PMID: 24916999  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


598. Adv Clin Exp Med. 2014 Mar-Apr;23(2):191-5.

Identifying EGFR mutations from SCLC patient plasma by mutant-enriched liquidchip
technology.

Lu HY(1), Lu ZY(2), Cheng QY(3), Cai JF(4), Wang XJ(1), Zhang YP(1), Lou CJ(4),
Yu XM(4), Qin J(4), Ye WW(4), Lei L(4), Huang J(4), Yang HY(5), Mao WM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Zhejiang Key Laboratory of Diagnosis & Treatment Technology on Thoracic
Oncology, Zhejiang Cancer Hospital, Hangzhou 310022, PRC. (2)Department of
Oncology, Xiangshan First People's Hospital, Xiangshan 315700, PRC. (3)Department
of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Zhejiang Institute for Food and Drug Control,
Hangzhou 310004, PRC. (4)Department of Medical Oncology, Zhejiang Cancer
Hospital, Hangzhou 310022, PRC. (5)Surexam bio-Tech co. Ltd., Guangzhou
Technology Innovation Base, Science city, Guangzhou 510663, PRC.

BACKGROUND: Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase inhibitors
(TKI) such as erlotinib and gefitinib are targeted drugs for the kinase domain of
EGFR. They are widely used for the treatment of non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC). The EGFR exon 19 deletion mutation and the L858R mutation in exon 21
comprise approximately 90% of the somatic mutations in NSCLC patients that
respond to EGFR TKI. Several recent studies have also reported that small cell
lung cancer (SCLC) patients with EGFR mutations responded to gefitinib. Further
study, however, has been limited due to the difficulty obtaining tumor specimens 
from SCLC patients.
OBJECTIVES: The aim of this study was to explore the EGFR mutation status in SCLC
patients by plasma analysis.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Plasma samples from SCLC patients were collected for
mutant-enriched liquidchip (MEL) analysis to identify the EGFR mutations in exon 
19 and 21.
RESULTS: The exon 19 deletion mutation was detected in one out of 35 patients (a 
female non-smoker). No exon 21 mutations were found.
CONCLUSIONS: A prevalence of EGFR mutations in SCLC is rare, and occurs most
frequently in females and nonsmokers.


PMID: 24913109  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


599. J Clin Invest. 2014 Jul;124(7):3003-15. doi: 10.1172/JCI73048. Epub 2014 Jun 9.

CRIPTO1 expression in EGFR-mutant NSCLC elicits intrinsic EGFR-inhibitor
resistance.

Park KS, Raffeld M, Moon YW, Xi L, Bianco C, Pham T, Lee LC, Mitsudomi T, Yatabe 
Y, Okamoto I, Subramaniam D, Mok T, Rosell R, Luo J, Salomon DS, Wang Y, Giaccone
G.

The majority of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients harbor
EGFR-activating mutations that can be therapeutically targeted by EGFR tyrosine
kinase inhibitors (EGFR-TKI), such as erlotinib and gefitinib. Unfortunately, a
subset of patients with EGFR mutations are refractory to EGFR-TKIs. Resistance to
EGFR inhibitors reportedly involves SRC activation and induction of
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT). Here, we have demonstrated that
overexpression of CRIPTO1, an EGF-CFC protein family member, renders
EGFR-TKI-sensitive and EGFR-mutated NSCLC cells resistant to erlotinib in culture
and in murine xenograft models. Furthermore, tumors from NSCLC patients with
EGFR-activating mutations that were intrinsically resistant to EGFR-TKIs
expressed higher levels of CRIPTO1 compared with tumors from patients that were
sensitive to EGFR-TKIs. Primary NSCLC cells derived from a patient with
EGFR-mutated NSCLC that was intrinsically erlotinib resistant were CRIPTO1
positive, but gained erlotinib sensitivity upon loss of CRIPTO1 expression during
culture. CRIPTO1 activated SRC and ZEB1 to promote EMT via microRNA-205 (miR-205)
downregulation. While miR-205 depletion induced erlotinib resistance, miR-205
overexpression inhibited CRIPTO1-dependent ZEB1 and SRC activation, restoring
erlotinib sensitivity. CRIPTO1-induced erlotinib resistance was directly mediated
through SRC but not ZEB1; therefore, cotargeting EGFR and SRC synergistically
attenuated growth of erlotinib-resistant, CRIPTO1-positive, EGFR-mutated NSCLC
cells in vitro and in vivo, suggesting that this combination may overcome
intrinsic EGFR-inhibitor resistance in patients with CRIPTO1-positive,
EGFR-mutated NSCLC.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI73048 
PMCID: PMC4071378
PMID: 24911146  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


600. Mol Cancer. 2014 Jun 5;13:143. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-13-143.

Trastuzumab emtansine is active on HER-2 overexpressing NSCLC cell lines and
overcomes gefitinib resistance.

Cretella D, Saccani F, Quaini F, Frati C, Lagrasta C, Bonelli M, Caffarra C,
Cavazzoni A, Fumarola C, Galetti M, La Monica S, Ampollini L, Tiseo M, Ardizzoni 
A, Petronini PG, Alfieri RR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of Parma, Via
Gramsci 14, Parma, 43126, Italy. roberta.alfieri@unipr.it.

BACKGROUND: HER-2 represents a relatively new therapeutic target for non small
cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients. The incidence for reported HER-2
overexpression/amplification/mutations ranges from 2 to 20% in NSCLC. Moreover,
HER-2 amplification is a potential mechanism of resistance to tyrosine kinase
inhibitors of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR-TKI) (about 10% of
cases). T-DM1, trastuzumab emtansine is an antibody-drug conjugate composed by
the monoclonal antibody trastuzumab and the microtubule polymerization inhibitor 
DM1. The activity of T-DM1 has been studied in breast cancer but the role of
T-DM1 in lung cancer remains unexplored.
METHODS: Antiproliferative and proapoptotic effects of T-DM1 have been
investigated in different NSCLC cell lines by MTT, crystal violet staining,
morphological study and Western blotting. HER-2 expression and cell cycle were
evaluated by flow cytometry and Western blotting. Antibody dependent cell
cytotoxicity (ADCC) was measured with a CytoTox assay. Xenografted mice model has
been generated using a NSCLC cell line to evaluate the effect of T-DM1 on tumor
growth. Moreover, a morphometric and immunohistochemical analysis of tumor
xenografts was conducted.
RESULTS: In this study we investigated the effect of T-DM1 in a panel of NSCLC
cell lines with different HER-2 expression levels, in H1781 cell line carrying
HER-2 mutation and in gefitinib resistant HER-2 overexpressing PC9/HER2cl1 cell
clone. T-DM1 efficiently inhibited proliferation with arrest in G2-M phase and
induced cell death by apoptosis in cells with a significant level of surface
expression of HER-2. Antibody-dependent cytotoxicity assay documented that T-DM1 
maintained the same activity of trastuzumab. Our data also suggest that targeting
HER-2 with T-DM1 potentially overcomes gefitinib resistance. In addition a
correlation between cell density/tumor size with both HER-2 expression and T-DM1 
activity was established in vitro and in an in vivo xenograft model.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results indicate that targeting HER-2 with T-DM1 may offer a new
therapeutic approach in HER-2 over-expressing lung cancers including those
resistant to EGFR TKIs.

DOI: 10.1186/1476-4598-13-143 
PMCID: PMC4058446
PMID: 24898067  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


601. Indian J Dermatol. 2014 May;59(3):271-4. doi: 10.4103/0019-5154.131398.

Dermatological Side Effects of Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor Inhibitors:
'PRIDE' Complex.

Madke B(1), Gole P(1), Kumar P(2), Khopkar U(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Seth Gordhandas Sunderdas Medical College and King 
Edward Memorial Hospital, Parel, Mumbai, Maharashtra, India. (2)Department of
Medical Oncology, Tata Memorial Hospital, Parel, Mumbai, Maharashtra, India.

Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) inhibitor therapy has become the standard
treatment for non-small cell lung cancer and head neck malignancy. This class of 
drug comprises EGFR inhibitors (erlotinib and gefitinib) and monoclonal antibody 
(cetuximab). Use of this class of drugs has been associated frequently with
dermatological side effects termed as PRIDE complex-Papulopustules and/or
paronychia, Regulatory abnormalities of hair growth, Itching, Dryness due to EGFR
inhibitors. We hereby report the cutaneous side effects of EGFR inhibitor therapy
in 15 patients of lung and head/neck cancer. The major clinical findings being
acneiform eruption and severe xerosis of skin. Management of these dermatological
adverse effects rarely requires discontinuation of targeted therapy and can be
managed symptomatically.

DOI: 10.4103/0019-5154.131398 
PMCID: PMC4037949
PMID: 24891659  [PubMed]


602. Chin Med J (Engl). 2014;127(11):2091-6.

Fibroblasts weaken the anti-tumor effect of gefitinib on co-cultured non-small
cell lung cancer cells.

Yong X(1), Wang P(2), Jiang T(3), Yu W(4), Shang Y(1), Han Y(1), Zhang P(5), Li
Q(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pneumology, Changhai Hospital, Second Military Medical
University, Shanghai 200433, China. (2)Department of Gastroenterology, Changzheng
Hospital, Second Military Medical University, Shanghai 200003, China.
(3)Department of Emergency, Affiliated Hospital of Medical College Qingdao
University, Qingdao, Shandong 266000, China. (4)Department of Pneumology,
Affiliated Hospital of Medical College Qingdao University, Qingdao, Shandong
266000, China. (5)Department of Gastroenterology, Changzheng Hospital, Second
Military Medical University, Shanghai 200003, China. Email: sky110319@163.com.
(6)Department of Pneumology, Changhai Hospital, Second Military Medical
University, Shanghai 200433, China. Email: liqressh@hotmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is the most common lung malignancy
worldwide. The metastatic potential of NSCLC cells has been shown to be
associated with the tumor microenvironment, which consists of tumor cells,
stroma, blood vessels, immune infiltrates and the extracellular matrix.
Fibroblasts can produce numerous extracellular matrix molecules and growth
factors. Gefitinib has been evaluated as a first-line treatment in selected
patients, and it has shown favorable efficacy especially in NSCLC, but it is not 
effective for everyone.
METHODS: In this study, we examined the antitumor activity of gefitinib on lung
fibroblasts co-cultured of lung cancer cells. A series of co-culture experiments 
that employed cell counting kit-8 (CCK8), transwells, real-time polymerase chain 
reaction (RT-PCR) and Western blotting with HFL-1 fibroblasts and A549 human lung
carcinoma cells were performed to learn more about tumor cell proliferation,
migration and invasion; and to determine any change of epithelial mesenchymal
transition (EMT)-associated tumor markers vimentin, matrix metallopro-teinase 2
(MMP2) and chemotaxis cytokines receptor 4 (CXCR4) mRNA levels.
RESULTS: A549 cell proliferation in the presence of HFL-1 cells was not
significantly increased compared with A549 cells alone, but A549 cell spheroid
body formation was increased after co-culture, and treatment with gefitinib
increased further. Our study also revealed that fibroblasts attenuated the lung
cancer cell inhibition ratio of migration and invasion after gefitinib treatment 
in vitro. To further study this mechanism, RT-PCR analysis showed that vimentin, 
MMP2 and CXCR4 mRNA levels were more highly expressed in the lung cancer cells
after co-culture, but did not obviously decrease compared with the control cells 
following gefitinib treatment. This suggests the mechanism by which fibroblasts
attenuate gefitinib-induced expression of EMT-associated tumor markers. Finally, 
our results demonstrated that co-culture with A549 lung cancer cells does not
alter the cell cycle distribution of HFL-1 fibroblasts. Furthermore, HFL-1
fibroblasts had no effect on the cell cycle distribution of HFL-1 cells treated
with gefitinib.
CONCLUSION: Gefitinib has lower anti-tumor activity on A549 lung cancer cells
when co-cultured with HFL-1 fibroblasts.


PMID: 24890158  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


603. Int J Oncol. 2014 Aug;45(2):499-508. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2014.2475. Epub 2014 May
29.

ALK inhibitors and advanced non-small cell lung cancer (review).

Rossi A(1), Maione P(1), Sacco PC(1), Sgambato A(2), Casaluce F(2), Ferrara
ML(2), Palazzolo G(3), Ciardiello F(2), Gridelli C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Oncology, 'S.G. Moscati' Hospital, Avellino, Italy.
(2)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Second University of Naples,
Naples, Italy. (3)Division of Medical Oncology, 'ULSS 15 Cittadella', Padova,
Italy.

Treatment of unselected patients with advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
receiving third-generation platinum-based chemotherapy has reached a plateau of
effectiveness. Histology and molecular analyses are the cornerstone in the
initial diagnosis of NSCLC and are key determinants to address the appropriate
strategy of treatment. In non-squamous histology the combination of cisplatin
plus pemetrexed or carboplatin plus paclitaxel plus bevacizumab are considered
today the best regimens yielding better activity and efficacy. Epidermal growth
factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs), such as gefitinib,
erlotinib or afatinib are the standard-of-care for patients with advanced NSCLC
harbouring activating EGFR mutations. The identification of anaplastic lymphoma
kinase (ALK) rearrangements in 2-5% of NSCLC patients led to the rapid clinical
development of its oral TKI, crizotinib, also targeting the proto-oncogene MET
and ROS1. The results reported from the first phase III trial showed superiority 
of crizotinib compared with standard chemotherapy in second-line treatment of
ALK-positive NSCLC, which was recently approved in several countries in this
setting. Unfortunately, after initial activity of crizotinib, patients will
ultimately develop acquired resistances within 1 or 2 years of therapy. A second 
generation of ALK inhibitors, such as LDK378, alectinib and AP26113 may represent
a promising treatment approach: they are under investigation with very promising 
early results. This review discusses ALK rearrangements, the clinical development
and use of crizotinib, and other ALK-TKIs in advanced NSCLC.

DOI: 10.3892/ijo.2014.2475 
PMID: 24889366  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


604. BMC Complement Altern Med. 2014 May 22;14:165. doi: 10.1186/1472-6882-14-165.

Enhancement of gefitinib-induced growth inhibition by Marsdenia tenacissima
extract in non-small cell lung cancer cells expressing wild or mutant EGFR.

Han SY, Ding HR, Zhao W, Teng F, Li PP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Translational Research (Ministry of
Education), Department of Integration of Chinese and Western Medicine, Peking
University Cancer Hospital & Institute, No, 52 Fucheng Road, 100142 Haidian
District, Beijing, P,R, China. lppma123@sina.com.

BACKGROUND: Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) expressed high levels of epidermal
growth factor receptor (EGFR). Gefitinib (Iressa) has demonstrated clinical
efficacy in NSCLC patients harboring EGFR mutations or refractory to
chemotherapy. However, most of NSCLC patients are with wild type EGFR, and showed
limited response to gefitinib. Therefore, to develop new effective therapeutic
interventions for NSCLC is still required. Our previous study showed Marsdenia
tenacissima extract (MTE) restored gefitinib efficacy in the resistant NSCLC
cells, but whether MTE acts in the gefitinib-sensitive NSCLC cells is the same as
it in the resistant one is unknown.
METHODS: Dose response curves for gefitinib and MTE were generated for two
sensitive NSCLC cell lines with mutant or wild type EGFR status. Three different 
sequential combinations of MTE and gefitinib on cell growth were evaluated using 
IC50 and Combination Index approaches. The flow cytometric method was used to
detect cell apoptosis and cell cycle profile. The impact of MTE combined with
gefitinib on cell molecular network response was studied by Western blotting.
RESULTS: Unlike in the resistant NSCLC cells, our results revealed that low
cytotoxic dose of MTE (8 mg/ml) combined gefitinib with three different schedules
synergistically or additively enhanced the growth inhibition of gefitinib. Among 
which, MTE→MTE+gefitinib treatment was the most effective one. MTE markedly
prompted cell cycle arrest and apoptosis caused by gefitinib both in EGFR mutant 
(HCC827) and wild type of NSCLC cells (H292). The Western blotting results showed
that MTE→MTE+gefitinib treatment further enhanced the suppression of gefitinib on
cell growth and apoptosis pathway such as ERK1/2 and PI3K/Akt/mTOR. This
combination also blocked the activation of EGFR and c-Met which have cross-talk
with each other. Unlike in gefitinib-resistant NSCLC cells, MTE alone also
demonstrated certain unexpected modulation on EGFR related cell signal pathways
in the sensitive cells.
CONCLUSION: Our results suggest that MTE is a promising herbal medicine to
improve gefitinib efficacy in NSCLC regardless of EGFR status. However, why MTE
acted differently between gefitinib-sensitive and -resistant NSCLC cells needs a 
further research.

DOI: 10.1186/1472-6882-14-165 
PMCID: PMC4040364
PMID: 24884778  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


605. Onco Targets Ther. 2014 May 16;7:761-70. doi: 10.2147/OTT.S49233. eCollection
2014.

Treating advanced non-small-cell lung cancer in Chinese patients: focus on
icotinib.

Liang JL(1), Ren XC(2), Lin Q(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Hebei Medical University Fourth Hospital,
Shijiazhuang, People's Republic of China. (2)Department of Oncology, North China 
Petroleum Bureau General Hospital of Hebei Medical University, Renqiu, Hebei
Province, People's Republic of China.

Icotinib hydrochloride is an orally administered small-molecule reversible
tyrosine kinase inhibitor that has been independently researched and developed
and has independent intellectual property rights in the People's Republic of
China. Clinical trials have demonstrated that the response to icotinib among
advanced non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients who received at least one
platinum-based chemotherapy regimen was not inferior to gefitinib. Since being
launched August 2011 in the People's Republic of China, icotinib has been widely 
used in clinics, and has become an important treatment option for Chinese
patients with advanced NSCLC. The present study presents the Phase I, II, and III
clinical trials of icotinib and discusses current clinical applications in the
People's Republic of China and future research directions.

DOI: 10.2147/OTT.S49233 
PMCID: PMC4037325
PMID: 24876785  [PubMed]


606. Am Soc Clin Oncol Educ Book. 2014:e353-65. doi: 10.14694/EdBook_AM.2014.34.e353.

Management and future directions in non-small cell lung cancer with known
activating mutations.

Gerber DE(1), Gandhi L(1), Costa DB(1).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Medicine, Division of Hematology/Oncology, University
of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX; Department of Medical Oncology,
Thoracic Oncology Section, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, MA; Department of Medicine, Division of Hematology/Oncology, Beth Israel 
Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA.

Lung cancer accounts for a quarter of all cancer deaths. Non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC) is currently segregated by the presence of actionable driver
oncogenes. This review will provide an overview of molecular subsets of lung
cancer, including descriptions of the defining oncogenes (EGFR, ALK, KRAS, ROS1, 
RET, BRAF, ERBB2, NTRK1, FGFR, among others) and how these predict for response
to small molecule tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) that are either clinically
available or in clinical trial development for advanced NSCLC. Particular focus
will be placed on subsets with EGFR mutated and ALK rearranged NSCLC. Somatic
TKI-sensitizing EGFR mutations (such as exon 19 deletions and L858R
substitutions) are the most robust predictive biomarker for symptom improvement, 
radiographic response, and increment in progression-free survival (PFS) when EGFR
TKIs (gefitinib, erlotinib, and afatinib) are used for patients with advanced
NSCLC. However, the palliative benefits that EGFR TKIs afford are limited by
multiple biologic mechanisms of tumor adaptation/resistance (such as the
EGFR-T790M mutation and oncogene bypass tracks), and future efforts toward
delaying, preventing, and treating resistance are underway. Similar to EGFR
mutations, ALK rearrangements exemplify an oncogene-driven NSCLC that can be
effectively palliated with a precision TKI therapy (the multitargeted
ALK/MET/ROS1 TKI crizotinib). When resistance to first-line crizotinib therapy
occurs, multiple second generation ALK TKIs have demonstrated impressive rates of
disease control in clinical trials, and these may modify long-term outcomes for
patients with ALK-positive NSCLC. The development of TKIs for other
oncogene-driven NSCLCs may expand the portfolio of precision therapies for this
recalcitrant cancer.

DOI: 10.14694/EdBook_AM.2014.34.e353 
PMID: 24857124  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


607. Oncol Res Treat. 2014;37(5):262-5. doi: 10.1159/000362488. Epub 2014 Apr 14.

Afatinib with concurrent radiotherapy in a patient with metastatic non-small cell
lung cancer.

Atmaca A(1), Al-Batran SE, Allgäuer M, Jäger E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology and Hematology, Krankenhaus Nordwest, UCT University
Cancer Center, Frankfurt/M., Germany.

BACKGROUND: The combination of radiotherapy and epidermal growth factor receptor 
(EGFR) tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) such as erlotinib and gefitinib in
patients with advanced or metastatic non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) has not
been widely investigated. For afatinib, a new second generation irreversible
pan-EGFR TKI, no clinical trials in this setting have as yet been performed.
CASE REPORT: We report a patient with a pretreated metastatic NSCLC receiving
afatinib in combination with concomitant palliative radiotherapy to the
mediastinum and primary lung tumor. The treatment was feasible and well
tolerated. The patient achieved a partial response in the irradiated tumor region
and the metastatic sites.
CONCLUSION: The combination of afatinib and radiotherapy is promising and should 
be investigated further. However, because of the limited experience and potential
side effects known for other EGFR TKIs, a decision for treatment outside a
clinical trial has to be made very carefully, balancing the risk and benefit on
an individual patient basis.

DOI: 10.1159/000362488 
PMID: 24853786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


608. Recent Pat Anticancer Drug Discov. 2014;9(3):372-81.

Lung cancer chemotherapy, new treatment and related patents.

Cheepsattayakorn A, Cheepsattayakorn R(1).

Author information: 
(1)10th Zonal Tuberculosis and Chest Disease Center, 143 Sridornchai Road,
Changklan Muang, Chiang Mai 50100, Thailand and 10th Office of Disease Prevention
and Control, 447 Lumphun Road, Watgate Muang, Chiang Mai 50,000, Thailand.
attaponche@yahoo.com.

The majority of patients with lung cancer present with advanced stage which
contributes to death of more people than any other malignancy in the world. The
discovery of a number of lung cancer-molecular alterations contributes to
uniquely targeted therapies with specific inhibitors for non-small cell lung
cancer such as erlotinib, gefitinib and crizotinib. Pemetrexed has statistically 
shown significantly reduced adverse side effects of drug compared with docetaxel.
V1801, an analog of gefitinib may overcome gefitinib resistance in patients with 
non-small cell lung cancer. Thymosin α1, an immunomodulator significantly
improves patient's quality of life by enhancing T-cell function, stimulation of
Tcell maturation and differentiation. Various novel compounds and
chemotherapeutics were introduced in 2013 patents such as taxane, quinazoline,
arylamino purine, benzodiazepine, pyrrolopyrimidine, nitrobenzamide, cyclopropane
amide, 4-iodo-3-nitrobenzamide, heteroaryl (alkyl) dithiocarbamate, and histone
deacetylase in treating non-small-cell lung cancer and piperidine, piperazine,
picoplatin, and arsenic trioxide in treating small-cell lung cancer.


PMID: 24844233  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


609. Mol Med Rep. 2014 Aug;10(2):931-8. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2014.2243. Epub 2014 May 16.

Combined gefitinib and pemetrexed overcome the acquired resistance to epidermal
growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors in non-small cell lung cancer.

Wu M(1), Yuan Y(2), Pan YY(3), Zhang Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Geriatrics, The Third Affiliated Hospital of Anhui Medical
University, Hefei, Anhui 230061, P.R. China. (2)The Central Laboratory of Binhu
Hospital, The Third Affiliated Hospital of Anhui Medical University, Hefei, Anhui
230061, P.R. China. (3)Department of Oncology, The First Affiliated Hospital of
Anhui Medical University, Hefei, Anhui 230022, P.R. China.

Currently, chemotherapy and targeted therapies share the principal limitation of 
the emergence of drug resistance, which prevents these strategies from having
lasting clinical benefits. The combination of epidermal growth factor receptor
tyrosine kinase inhibitors (EGFR-TKIs) with concurrent chemotherapy has been
proposed as one strategy to overcome acquired resistance to EGFR-TKIs. The
purpose of the present study was to investigate the combined effects of gefitinib
and pemetrexed on EGFR-TKI-sensitive and EGFR‑TKI‑resistant human non-small cell 
lung cancer (NSCLC) cell lines. The antiproliferative effects of gefitinib and
pemetrexed, alone and in combination, on the growth of NSCLC cell lines, were
assessed using an MTT assay. The cytotoxic interaction between the two drugs was 
evaluated in vitro using the combination index (CI) method. Cell cycle
distribution and apoptosis were analyzed by flow cytometry and alterations in
signaling pathways were determined by western blot analysis. In the present
study, it was identified that when cells were concurrently exposed to pemetrexed 
and gefitinib, cytotoxic synergism was present in the gefitinib-resistant PC9/GR 
human NSCLC cell line and antagonistic interactions were observed in the
gefitinib-sensitive PC9 cell line. Synergism was associated with a combination of
cell cycle effects of the different agents. In addition, the combination of
pemetrexed and gefitinib decreased the levels of phosphorylated AKT,
phosphorylated extracellular-signal-regulated kinase and B-cell lymphoma 2 as
compared with those in the control. By contrast, antagonism was associated with
gefitinib-induced G0/G1-phase blockade of gefitinib-sensitive cells, which
interfered with the cell cycle-specific cytotoxicity of chemotherapy. The
combination of pemetrexed and gefitinib generated synergistic effects in
gefitinib-acquired resistant cells and antagonistic effects in
gefitinib-sensitive cells, suggesting that EGFR-TKIs combined with pemetrexed may
be a beneficial treatment strategy for NSCLC patients with acquired resistance to
EGFR-TKIs.

DOI: 10.3892/mmr.2014.2243 
PMID: 24840891  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


610. Bioinformatics. 2014 Sep 1;30(17):2393-8. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btu323.
Epub 2014 May 7.

Bioinformatics-driven discovery of rational combination for overcoming
EGFR-mutant lung cancer resistance to EGFR therapy.

Kim J(1), Vasu VT(1), Mishra R(1), Singleton KR(1), Yoo M(1), Leach SM(1),
Farias-Hesson E(1), Mason RJ(2), Kang J(1), Ramamoorthy P(1), Kern JA(2), Heasley
LE(1), Finigan JH(2), Tan AC(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Oncology, Department of Medicine, Translational
Bioinformatics and Cancer Systems Biology Laboratory, University of Colorado
Anschutz Medical Campus, 80045 Aurora, Department of Medicine, National Jewish
Health, 80206 Denver, Department of Craniofacial Biology, School of Dental
Medicine, Division of Pulmonary Sciences and Critical Care Medicine, University
of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, 80045 Aurora, CO, USA and Department of
Computer Science and Engineering, Korea University, Seoul 136-713, Korea.
(2)Division of Medical Oncology, Department of Medicine, Translational
Bioinformatics and Cancer Systems Biology Laboratory, University of Colorado
Anschutz Medical Campus, 80045 Aurora, Department of Medicine, National Jewish
Health, 80206 Denver, Department of Craniofacial Biology, School of Dental
Medicine, Division of Pulmonary Sciences and Critical Care Medicine, University
of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, 80045 Aurora, CO, USA and Department of
Computer Science and Engineering, Korea University, Seoul 136-713, Korea Division
of Medical Oncology, Department of Medicine, Translational Bioinformatics and
Cancer Systems Biology Laboratory, University of Colorado Anschutz Medical
Campus, 80045 Aurora, Department of Medicine, National Jewish Health, 80206
Denver, Department of Craniofacial Biology, School of Dental Medicine, Division
of Pulmonary Sciences and Critical Care Medicine, University of Colorado Anschutz
Medical Campus, 80045 Aurora, CO, USA and Department of Computer Science and
Engineering, Korea University, Seoul 136-713, Korea.

MOTIVATION: Non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is the leading cause of cancer
death in the United States. Targeted tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) directed
against the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) have been widely and
successfully used in treating NSCLC patients with activating EGFR mutations.
Unfortunately, the duration of response is short-lived, and all patients
eventually relapse by acquiring resistance mechanisms.
RESULT: We performed an integrative systems biology approach to determine
essential kinases that drive EGFR-TKI resistance in cancer cell lines. We used a 
series of bioinformatics methods to analyze and integrate the functional genetics
screen and RNA-seq data to identify a set of kinases that are critical in
survival and proliferation in these TKI-resistant lines. By connecting the
essential kinases to compounds using a novel kinase connectivity map (K-Map), we 
identified and validated bosutinib as an effective compound that could inhibit
proliferation and induce apoptosis in TKI-resistant lines. A rational combination
of bosutinib and gefitinib showed additive and synergistic effects in cancer cell
lines resistant to EGFR TKI alone.
CONCLUSIONS: We have demonstrated a bioinformatics-driven discovery roadmap for
drug repurposing and development in overcoming resistance in EGFR-mutant NSCLC,
which could be generalized to other cancer types in the era of personalized
medicine.
AVAILABILITY AND IMPLEMENTATION: K-Map can be accessible at:
http://tanlab.ucdenver.edu/kMap.
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: Supplementary data are available at Bioinformatics
online.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btu323 
PMCID: PMC4147888
PMID: 24812339  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


611. Curr Oncol Rep. 2014 Jun;16(6):390. doi: 10.1007/s11912-014-0390-4.

The efficacy and safety of EGFR inhibitor monotherapy in non-small cell lung
cancer: a systematic review.

Yang X(1), Yang K, Kuang K.

Author information: 
(1)Medical College of NanChang University, No.461 Bayi Road, NanChang, China.

Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) have
been extensively investigated in previously treated advanced non-small-cell lung 
cancer (NSCLC), but what it is still unclear is the efficacy of (EFGR-TKIs:
gefitinib or erlotinib) monotherapy in previously treated non-small-cell lung
cancer (NSCLC). In December 2013, we performed a search in the PubMed, EMBASE,
Cochrane library databases and Web of Science for randomized trials exploring the
role of gefitinib or erlotinib in advanced non-small cell lung cancer. Through
strict inclusion and exclusion criteria, fourteen trials (three front-line, two
second-line, nine maintenance, n = 8970 patients) were eligible. EGFR-TKIs
significantly increased overall survival (OS) [hazard ratio (HR) 0.88,
95%confidence interval (CI) 0.82-0.96, I (2) = 50.5%] and progression-free
survival (PFS) (HR 0.71, 95% CI 0.63-0.81, I (2) = 81.2%] compared with placebo
or best support care (BSC). Patients with clinical features such as never smoker,
adenocarcinoma, Asian ethnicity and EGFR mutation positive had more pronounced OS
and PFS benefit. The main adverse reactions were diarrhea, rashes, anorexia and
anemia, [odds ratio (OR) = 3.635, 95% confidence interval (CI) = (2.377 to
5.557)], [OR = 15.664, 95%CI = (8.869 to 27.665)], [OR = 1.555, 95%CI = (1.060 to
2.283)], [OR = 1.481, 95%CI = (1.114 to 1.969)], respectively. The results show
that monotherapy therapy with EFGR-TKIs produce a significant OS and PFS benefit 
for patients with NSCLC compared with placebo or BSC, especially for the patients
who had adenocarcinomas, non-smokers and patients with EGFR gene mutations.

DOI: 10.1007/s11912-014-0390-4 
PMID: 24807015  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


612. Profiles Drug Subst Excip Relat Methodol. 2014;39:239-64. doi:
10.1016/B978-0-12-800173-8.00005-2.

Gefitinib.

Rahman AF(1), Korashy HM(2), Kassem MG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, College of Pharmacy, King Saud
University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. (2)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology,
College of Pharmacy, King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.

Gefitinib (Iressa®) is a selective inhibitor of epidermal growth factor, a growth
factor that plays a pivotal role in the control of cell growth, apoptosis, and
angiogenesis. Gefitinib is clinically used for the treatment of chemoresistant
non-small cell lung cancer patients. Gefitinib is freely soluble in
dimethylsulphoxide but slightly soluble in methanol and ethanol. Several methods 
of gefitinib synthesis are included in this review. UV spectroscopy of gefitinib 
showed a λmax of approximately 331nm, whereas IR spectroscopy principal peaks
were observed at 3400cm(-1) (NH), 2956cm(-1) (CH2, CH, alkyl), 1625cm(-1) (CC,
CN), 1500cm(-1) (HCCH, aryl), 1110cm(-1) (CO), 1028cm(-1) (CF). In addition,
different analytical methods for determination of gefitinib are also described in
this review. Pharmacokinetically, after oral administration, gefitinib is slowly 
absorbed with bioavailability of approximately 60% in human. Gefitinib is
metabolized extensively in the liver into five metabolites by cytochrome P450s,
primarily by CYP3A4 and to a lesser extent by CYP3A5 and CYP2D6. Gefitinib is
eliminated mainly hepatically with total plasma clearance of 595mL/min after
intravenous administration. Most of the adverse effects associated with gefitinib
therapy are mild to moderate in severity and are usually reversible and
manageable with appropriate intervention, such as diarrhea, dry skin, rash,
nausea, and vomiting.

© 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-12-800173-8.00005-2 
PMID: 24794908  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


613. Biologics. 2014 Apr 23;8:183-92. doi: 10.2147/BTT.S40567. eCollection 2014.

Clinical and comparative utility of afatinib in non-small cell lung cancer.

D'Arcangelo M(1), Hirsch FR(1).

Author information: 
(1)University of Colorado Denver, Department of Medical Oncology, Aurora, CO,
USA.

The first targeted agents approved for non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
treatment, the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase inhibitors
(TKIs) gefitinib and erlotinib, have an impressive activity in the presence of
activating mutations of the EGFR gene. However, all patients develop acquired
resistance principally through secondary mutations (T790M), HER2 amplification,
MET amplification, and other molecular aberrations. An attempt to overcome EGFR
TKI resistance has been through the development of irreversible blockers.
Afatinib is an irreversible inhibitor of the tyrosine kinase activity of all
members of the HER family. The pharmacologic properties of afatinib (formation of
covalent bonds, inhibition of other family members, and in vitro and in vivo
activity on T790M mutation positive tumors) made this drug particularly appealing
to study in clinic. Therefore, an intense program of clinical research (LUX-Lung 
program) was started and clinical results have shown very encouraging activity
profiles in patients harboring EGFR activating mutations and in those with
acquired resistance to reversible TKIs.

DOI: 10.2147/BTT.S40567 
PMCID: PMC4003149
PMID: 24790411  [PubMed]


614. Int J Cancer. 2015 Jul 15;137(2):262-6. doi: 10.1002/ijc.28940. Epub 2014 May 12.

Personalised cancer medicine.

Jackson SE(1), Chester JD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cancer and Genetics, School of Medicine, Cardiff University,
Cardiff, United Kingdom.

The evolving field of personalised medicine is playing an increasingly important 
role in cancer prevention, diagnosis, prognosis and therapeutics. Its importance 
in clinical management is demonstrated by the recent introduction into routine
clinical practice of various individualised, molecularly targeted therapies with 
increased efficacy and/or reduced toxicity. The identification of cancer
predisposition genes, such as the BRCA genes in breast cancer, permits screening 
programmes to identify patients "at-risk" of developing cancer and helps them
make decisions on individual risk-modification behaviours. Personalised medicine 
also plays an increasingly important role in cancer treatment. It is increasingly
clear that there are molecularly distinct subtypes of various common cancers,
with different therapeutic approaches required for each subtype, for example, the
use of the monoclonal antibodies (trastuzumab and cetuximab) in HER2-positive
breast cancer and wild-type KRAS colorectal cancer; tyrosine kinase inhibitors
(imatinib, gefitinib, erlotinib and crizotinib) in chronic myeloid leukaemia,
gastrointestinal stromal tumours and non-small-cell lung cancer and intracellular
agents (vemurafenib and olaparib) in metastatic malignant melanoma and ovarian,
breast and prostate cancer. The efficacy of various targeted therapies in such
disparate tumours suggests that we are entering an era in which treatment
decisions will be based on tumour molecular abnormality profile or "signature,"
rather than tumour tissue type or anatomical site of origin, improving patient
prognosis and quality of life. This mini review focuses on the role of
personalised medicine in cancer prevention and treatment as well as its future
direction in oncology.

© 2014 UICC.

DOI: 10.1002/ijc.28940 
PMID: 24789362  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


615. J Thorac Oncol. 2014 Jun;9(6):805-11. doi: 10.1097/JTO.0000000000000156.

Meta-analysis of first-line therapies in advanced non-small-cell lung cancer
harboring EGFR-activating mutations.

Haaland B(1), Tan PS, de Castro G Jr, Lopes G.

Author information: 
(1)*Centre for Quantitative Medicine, Duke-NUS Graduate Medical School,
Singapore; †Department of Statistics and Applied Probability, National University
of Singapore, Singapore; ‡Health Services and Systems Research, Duke-NUS Graduate
Medical School, Singapore; §Clinical Oncology, Instituto do Cancer do Estado de
São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil; ‖Hospital do Coração Cancer Center (HCor Onco), São
Paulo, Brazil; and ¶Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland.

INTRODUCTION: Tyrosine kinase inhibitors gefitinib, erlotinib, and afatinib have 
been compared with chemotherapy as first-line therapies for patients with
advanced non-small-cell lung cancer harboring epidermal growth factor
receptor-activating mutations. This meta-analysis compares gefitinib, erlotinib, 
afatinib, and chemotherapy.
METHODS: Literature search was performed using relevant keywords. Direct and
indirect meta-estimates were generated using log-linear mixed-effects models,
with random effects for study. Study-to-study heterogeneity was summarized using 
I statistics and predictive intervals (PIs).
RESULTS: Literature search yielded eight randomized phase 3 clinical trials
comparing gefitinib, erlotinib, or afatinib with chemotherapy as first-line
therapy in patients with advanced non-small-cell lung cancer during the last 5
years. Hazard ratio meta-estimates for progression-free survival were for
gefitinib versus chemotherapy 0.44 (95% confidence interval [CI] 0.31-0.63; 95%
PI, 0.22-0.88), erlotinib versus chemotherapy 0.25 (95% CI, 0.15-0.42; 95% PI,
0.11-0.55), afatinib versus chemotherapy 0.44 (95% CI, 0.26-0.75; 95% PI,
0.20-0.98), erlotinib versus gefitinib 0.57 (95% CI, 0.30-1.08; 95% PI,
0.24-1.36), afatinib versus gefitinib 1.01 (95% CI, 0.53-1.92; 95% PI,
0.41-2.42), and erlotinib versus afatinib 0.56 (95% CI, 0.27-1.18; 95% PI,
0.22-1.46). Results for overall response rate and disease control rate were
similar. There was no evidence that gefitinib, erlotinib, or afatinib improved
overall survival compared with chemotherapy.
CONCLUSION: Gefitinib, erlotinib, and afatinib out-performed chemotherapy in
terms of progression-free survival, overall response rate, and disease control
rate. Differences among gefitinib, erlotinib, and afatinib were not statistically
significant.

DOI: 10.1097/JTO.0000000000000156 
PMCID: PMC4219539
PMID: 24787964  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


616. Lung Cancer. 2014 Jul;85(1):66-73. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2014.03.026. Epub 2014 
Apr 13.

Efficacy of epidermal growth factor receptor inhibitors versus chemotherapy as
second-line treatment in advanced non-small-cell lung cancer with wild-type EGFR:
a meta-analysis of randomized controlled clinical trials.

Zhao N(1), Zhang XC(2), Yan HH(2), Yang JJ(2), Wu YL(3).

Author information: 
(1)Guangdong Cardiovascular Institute, Guangdong General Hospital & Guangdong
Academy of Medical Science, Guangzhou, PR China; Guangdong Lung Cancer Institute,
Guangdong General Hospital & Guangdong Academy of Medical Science, Guangzhou, PR 
China. (2)Guangdong Lung Cancer Institute, Guangdong General Hospital & Guangdong
Academy of Medical Science, Guangzhou, PR China. (3)Guangdong Lung Cancer
Institute, Guangdong General Hospital & Guangdong Academy of Medical Science,
Guangzhou, PR China. Electronic address: syylwu@live.cn.

BACKGROUND: EGFR mutation status is closely related to the efficacy of EGFR-TKIs 
in advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). EGFR-TKIs have become the
standard first-line treatment for advanced EGFR-mutation NSCLC, while for EGFR
wild-type tumors, the preferred first-line treatment is chemotherapy. However,
the efficacy of EGFR-TKIs as second-line treatment in EGFR wild-type NSCLC
remains controversial. We sought to evaluate the effectiveness of EGFR-TKI as
second-line treatment in EGFR wild-type NSCLC.
METHODS: Randomized controlled trials that compared EGFR-TKIs with chemotherapy
in previously treated advanced NSCLC with wild-type EGFR were included. We
performed a meta-analysis to evaluate the effectiveness of EGFR-TKIs compared
with standard chemotherapy. The endpoints were progression-free survival (PFS),
overall survival (OS), and objective response rate (ORR).
RESULTS: Six randomized controlled trials with a total of 990 patients with
wild-type EGFR were included: 499 in the EGFR-TKIs group and 491 in the
chemotherapy group. The results indicated that in the second-line treatment of
EGFR wild-type advanced NSCLC, PFS was significantly inferior in the EGFR-TKIs
group versus the chemotherapy group (HR=1.37, 95% CI=1.20-1.56, P<0.00001).
However, this significant difference did not translate into OS (HR=1.02, 95%
CI=0.87-1.20, P=0.81). ORR tended to favor chemotherapy but there was no
significant difference compared with EGFR-TKI (RR=1.77, 95% CI=0.90-3.50,
P=0.10).
CONCLUSIONS: Chemotherapy improves PFS significantly but not OS, compared with
EGFR-TKIs as a second-line treatment in advanced NSCLC with wild-type EGFR.
Whether EGFR-TKIs should be used in EGFR wild-type patients should be considered 
carefully.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2014.03.026 
PMID: 24780111  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


617. Cell Biochem Biophys. 2014 Sep;70(1):553-8. doi: 10.1007/s12013-014-9955-y.

Effects of icotinib on advanced non-small cell lung cancer with different EGFR
phenotypes.

Pan H(1), Liu R, Li S, Fang H, Wang Z, Huang S, Zhou J.

Author information: 
(1)Gerontology Center, The First Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang University, No.
79, Qingchun Road, Hangzhou, 310003, Zhejiang, China.

Icotinib is the first oral epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine
kinase receptor inhibitor, which has been proven to exert significant inhibitory 
effects on non-small cell lung cancer in vitro. Clinical evidence has showed that
the efficacy of Icotinib on retreating advanced non-small cell lung cancer is
comparable to Gefitinib. However, different phenotypes of EGFR can affect the
therapeutic outcomes of EGFR tyrosine kinase receptor inhibitor. Therefore, our
study focused on efficacy and safety of Icotinib in patients with advanced
non-small cell lung cancer of different EGPR phenotypes. Clinical data of
patients with advanced non-small cell lung cancer who received Icotinib treatment
from August, 2011 to May, 2013 were retrospectively analyzed. Kaplan-Meier
analysis was used for survival analysis and comparison. 18 wild-type EGFR and 51 
mutant type were found in a total of 69 patients. Objective response rate of
patients with mutant type EGFR was 54.9 % and disease control rate was 86.3 %.
Objective response rate of wild-type patients was 11.1 % (P = 0.0013 vs mutant
type), disease control rate was 50.0 % (P = 0.0017). Median progression-free
survival (PFS) of mutant type and wild-type patients were 9.7 and 2.6 months,
respectively (P < 0.001). Median PFS of exon 19 mutated mutant patients was 11.3 
months, mean PFS of exon 21 L858R mutated mutant patients was 8.7 months (P =
0.3145). Median overall survival (OS) of EGFR mutated patients had not reached.
OS time of 13 wild-type patients was 12.9 months (P < 0.001). The common adverse 
reactions of Icotinib included rash, diarrhea, itching skin with occurrence rates
of 24.6 % (17/69), 13.0 % (9/69), and 11.6 % (8/69), respectively. Most adverse
reactions were grade I-II. Icotinib has great efficacy in EGFR mutated patients, 
making it an optimal regimen to treat EGFR mutated patients. Furthermore, most of
adverse reactions associated with Icotinib treatment were tolerable.

DOI: 10.1007/s12013-014-9955-y 
PMID: 24777808  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


618. Int J Cancer. 2014 Dec 15;135(12):2962-71. doi: 10.1002/ijc.28925. Epub 2014 May 
7.

Epithelial phenotype as a predictive marker for response to EGFR-TKIs in
non-small cell lung cancer patients with wild-type EGFR.

Ren S(1), Su C, Wang Z, Li J, Fan L, Li B, Li X, Zhao C, Wu C, Hou L, He Y, Gao
G, Chen X, Ren J, Li A, Xu G, Zhou X, Zhou C, Schmid-Bindert G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Shanghai Pulmonary Hospital, Tongji University
School of Medicine, Tongji University Medical School Cancer Institute, Shanghai, 
People's Republic of China.

Epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) has profound impacts on cancer
progression and also on drug resistance, including epidermal growth factor
receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors (EGFR-TKIs). Nowadays, there is still no
predictive biomarker identified for the use of EGFR-TKIs in non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC) patients with wild-type EGFR. To clarify the role of EMT phenotype
as a predictive marker for EGFR-TKI, we performed a retrospective study in 202
stage IV or recurrent NSCLC patients receiving gefitinib or erlotinib therapy
from June 2008 to September 2012 in our institute. Clinical data and EGFR
mutational status were collected, while epithelial, epithelial to mesenchymal,
not specified or mesenchymal phenotype were classified according to EMT markers
such as E-cadherin, fibronectin, N-cadherin and vimentin by immunohistochemistry.
Epithelial phenotype was more frequently found in patients with EGFR mutation (p 
= 0.044). Epithelial phenotype was associated with a significantly higher
objective response rate (23.5 vs. 11.1 vs. 0.0 vs. 2.4%, p = 0.011), longer
progression-free survival (4.4 vs. 1.9 vs. 1.7 vs. 1.0 months, p < 0.001) and
longer overall survival (11.5 vs. 8.9 vs. 4.5 vs. 4.9 months, p < 0.001) compared
to epithelial to mesenchymal, not specified and mesenchymal phenotype in the
wild-type EGFR subgroup. In the subgroup with EGFR mutation, the trend remained
but without a statistically significant difference. In conclusion, epithelial
phenotype was more likely expressed in patients with EGFR mutation and was
associated with a better outcome in advanced NSCLC patients with wild-type EGFR, 
which indicates that the EMT phenotype might be a potential marker to guide
EGFR-TKI therapy in this population.

© 2014 UICC.

DOI: 10.1002/ijc.28925 
PMID: 24771540  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


619. Exp Cell Res. 2014 Aug 15;326(2):201-9. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2014.04.012. Epub
2014 Apr 25.

Everolimus prolonged survival in transgenic mice with EGFR-driven lung tumors.

Yasugi M(1), Takigawa N(2), Ochi N(3), Ohashi K(1), Harada D(1), Ninomiya T(1),
Murakami T(1), Honda Y(1), Ichihara E(1), Tanimoto M(1), Kiura K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Oncology, and Respiratory Medicine, Okayama,
University Graduate School of Medicine, Dentistry and Pharmaceutical Sciences and
Okayama University Hospital, 2-5-1 Shikata-cho, Okayama 700-8558, Japan.
(2)Department of General Internal Medicine 4, Kawasaki Hospital, Kawasaki Medical
School, Okayama 700-8505, Japan. Electronic address: ntakigaw@gmail.com.
(3)Department of Hematology, Oncology, and Respiratory Medicine, Okayama,
University Graduate School of Medicine, Dentistry and Pharmaceutical Sciences and
Okayama University Hospital, 2-5-1 Shikata-cho, Okayama 700-8558, Japan;
Department of General Internal Medicine 4, Kawasaki Hospital, Kawasaki Medical
School, Okayama 700-8505, Japan.

Everolimus is an orally administered mTOR inhibitor. The effect, and mechanism of
action, of everolimus on lung cancers with an epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR) mutation remain unclear. Four gefitinib-sensitive and -resistant cell
lines were used in the present work. Growth inhibition was determined using the
MTT assay. Transgenic mice carrying the EGFR L858R mutation were treated with
everolimus (10 mg/kg/day), or vehicle alone, from 5 to 20 weeks of age, and were 
then sacrificed. To evaluate the efficacy of everolimus in prolonging survival,
everolimus (10 mg/kg/day) or vehicle was administered from 5 weeks of age. The
four cell lines were similarly sensitive to everolimus. Expression of
phosphorylated (p) mTOR and pS6 were suppressed upon treatment with everolimus in
vitro, whereas the pAKT level increased. The numbers of lung tumors with a long
axis exceeding 1mm in the everolimus-treated and control groups were 1.9 ± 0.9
and 9.4 ± 3.2 (t-test, p<0.001), respectively. pS6 was suppressed during eve r
olimus treatment. Although apoptosis and autophagy were not induced in
everolimus-treated EGFR transgenic mice, angiogenesis was suppressed. The median 
survival time in the everolimus-treated group (58.0 weeks) was significantly
longer than that in the control group (31.2 weeks) (logrank test, p<0.001). These
findings suggest that everolimus had an indirect effect on tumor formation by
inhibiting angiogenesis and might be effective to treat lung tumors induced by an
activating EGFR gene mutation.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2014.04.012 
PMID: 24768699  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


620. Zhongguo Fei Ai Za Zhi. 2014 Apr;17(4):321-6. doi:
10.3779/j.issn.1009-3419.2014.04.06.

[Association between GNAS1 T393C polymorphism and therapeutic efficacy of
tyrosine kinase inhibitor in pretreated advanced non-small cell lung cancer with 
unknown EGFR mutation status].

[Article in Chinese; Abstract available in Chinese from the publisher]

Hong W(1), Lin B(2), Zhang B(3), Mao W(1), Zhang Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Zhejiang Cancer Hospital, Zhejiang Key Laboratory of the Diagnosis and
Treatment Technology on Thoracic Oncology, Hangzhou 310022, China. (2)Department 
of Medical Oncology, the First Affiliated Hospital of WenZhou Medical College,
Wenzhou 325000, China. (3)The Second Clinical Medical College, Zhejiang Chinese
Medical University, Hangzhou 310053, China.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)-activating
mutation predicts excellent response to EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs).
However, lung cancer patients are often with unknown EGFR mutation status because
there are little tumor specimen to determine. TKIs induce tumor cell apoptosis
which associates with several apoptosis-related genes. To explore the association
between GNAS1 T393C polymorphism and therapeutic efficacy of TKI in pretreated
advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NCSLC) with unknown EGFR mutation status.
METHODS: A total of 116 patients were recruited for the study from Zhejiang
Cancer Hospital, all of whom were treated with gefitinib or erlotinib after
failure to prior chemotherapy. We detected the genotype of peripheral blood
lymphocytes of patients with GNAS1 T393C polymorphism through polymerase chain
reaction (PCR). Statistical analysis was performed by SPSS version 18.0.
RESULTS: The overall response rate was 29.3%. No significant associations were
found among GNAS1 T393C polymorphism and the objective response rate. The disease
control rate of patients with GNAS1 T393C CC genotype was lower than that of
patients with variant genotype (TT or CT) (46.2% vs 73.8%, P=0.039). Univariate
analysis identified gender, smoking history, histology and GNAS1 T393C
polymorphism as predictive marker of PFS (P=0.04, P<0.001, P<0.001 and P=0.005). 
Multivariate analysis of factors, including smoking history, performance status
score, histology, GNAS1 T393C polymorphism demonstrated that GNAS1 T393C
polymorphism was correlated independently with PFS (P=0.007).
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest the role of GNAS1 T393C CC genotype as a poor
predictive marker both of DCR and PFS in advanced NSCLC patients treated with
tyrosine kinase inhibitor.

Publisher: 背景与目的 晚期非小细胞肺癌（non-small cell lung cancer,
NSCLC）肿瘤组织表皮生长因子受体（epidermal growth factor recetor, EGFR）突变是酪氨酸激酶抑制剂（tyrosine
kinase inhibitor,
TKI）最重要的疗效预测指标，但患者常常因肿瘤组织量太少导致EGFR突变状态未明。TKI可以诱导肿瘤细胞凋亡，并与许多凋亡相关基因表达相关。通过检测GNAS1基因
T393C多态性，探讨其与EGFR突变状态未明的复治晚期NSCLC小分子TKI治疗疗效的关系。 方法
入组2009年1月1日-2012年4月30日就诊于浙江省肿瘤医院的116例复治晚期NSCLC患者，所有患者既往均接受过化疗，进展后接受吉非替尼或厄洛替尼靶向治疗。
采用多聚酶链反应方法检测患者外周血白细胞中GNAS1基因T393C多态性。采用SPSS 18.0统计软件分析。 结果
总有效率29.3%，GNAS1基因T393C各基因型患者间的有效率无明显差异。相比GNAS1基因其它基因型，CC型疾病控制率更低（46.2% vs 73.8%, 
P=0.039）。单因素分析中位PFS，CC型中位无进展时间短于其它基因型（2.3个月 vs 6.0个月，P=0.005），而女性长于男性（10.2个月 vs
4.6个月，P=0.04)；不吸烟者长于有吸烟史者（11.9个月 vs 2.5个月，P<0.001)；病理类型为腺癌长于其他类型（11.9个月 vs
4.1个月，P<0.001)，均达到统计学差异。多因素分析结果显示，包括吸烟史、ECOG评分和病理类型、GNAS1基因多态性为PFS的独立预后因素（P=0.006
）。结论 对复治晚期EGFR突变状态未明的NSCLC，GNAS1基因T393C基因型为CC者是提示近期疗效较差的指标。
DOI: 10.3779/j.issn.1009-3419.2014.04.06 
PMID: 24758907  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


621. Cancer Biol Ther. 2014 Jul;15(7):832-9. doi: 10.4161/cbt.28874. Epub 2014 Apr 22.

A phase II randomized trial evaluating gefitinib intercalated with
pemetrexed/platinum chemotherapy or pemetrexed/platinum chemotherapy alone in
unselected patients with advanced non-squamous non-small cell lung cancer.

Yu H(1), Zhang J(1), Wu X(1), Luo Z(1), Wang H(1), Sun S(1), Peng W(1), Qiao
J(1), Feng Y(1), Wang J(1), Chang J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology; Fudan University Shanghai Cancer Center;
Shanghai, PR China; Department of Oncology; Shanghai Medical College; Fudan
University; Shanghai, PR China.

Current pemetrexed/platinum chemotherapy does not produce a satisfactory
therapeutic response in advanced lung cancer patients. The aim of this study was 
to determine whether the administration of gefitinib, a tyrosine kinase inhibitor
(TKI), intercalated with pemetrexed/platinum could improve the efficacy in
chemotherapy-naïve patients with advanced non-squamous NSCLC without subsequent
gefitinib maintenance therapy. Treatment-naïve patients with stage IIIB or IV
NSCLC were randomly assigned to receive pemetrexed (500 mg/m (2) d1) and either
cisplatin (75 mg/m (2) d1) or carboplatin (AUC = 5 d1) plus gefitinib (250 mg/d
on days 3 to 16 of a 3-week cycle) (PC-G) or pemetrexed-platinum (PC) alone.
Randomization was stratified according to the tobacco smoking status and EGFR
mutational status of the patients. The primary endpoint was the non-progression
rate (NPR) at 12 weeks. Secondary endpoints included progression-free survival
(PFS), overall response rate (ORR), overall survival (OS), and biosafety. The NPR
at 12 weeks was 84.5% for the PC-G treatment arm and 83.1% for the PC treatment
arm (P = 0.87). Median PFS was 7.9 months for the PC-G arm and 7.0 months for the
PC arm (P = 0.57). The ORR was 50.0% for the PC-G arm and 47.4% for the PC arm (P
= 0.78). Median survival was 25.4 mo for the PC-G arm and 20.8 mo for the PC arm 
(P = 0.54). The incidence of adverse events was similar between the two treatment
arms, except for a higher incidence of skin rash with PC-G. Predefined subgroup
analyses demonstrated that PC-G significantly increased the PFS compared with the
PC regimen in patients with EGFR mutations (P = 0.017). Although gefitinib
intercalated with pemetrexed/platinum chemotherapy did not improve the NPR at 12 
weeks compared with chemotherapy, an improvement in the PFS for the intercalated 
treatment arm was seen in the subgroup of patients with EGFR mutations.

DOI: 10.4161/cbt.28874 
PMCID: PMC4100984
PMID: 24755888  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


622. Future Oncol. 2014 Mar;10(4):533-40. doi: 10.2217/fon.14.9.

LUX-Lung 3: redundancy, toxicity or a major step forward? Afatinib as front-line 
therapy for patients with metastatic EGFR-mutated lung cancer.

Köhler J(1), Schuler M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, West German Cancer Center, University Hospital
Essen, University Duisburg-Essen, Hufelandstraße 55, 45122 Essen, Germany.

Mutant EGF receptor (EGFR) is an attractive therapeutic target in patients with
metastatic non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). A new paradigm has been defined
using ATP-competitive EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs), gefitinib and
erlotinib, as the most effective first-line treatment. However, clinical benefit 
of EGFR-TKI is only transient and limited by primary or acquired resistance.
Afatinib has been developed as a highly potent, irreversible inhibitor of EGFR,
HER2 and ErbB4, as well as transphosphorylation of ErbB3. The clinical activity
of afatinib in lung cancer has been extensively studied in the LUX-Lung series of
trials. LUX-Lung 3 was a pivotal randomized Phase III study that recently led to 
the approval of afatinib (Gilotrif) in several countries for treatment of
patients with metastatic NSCLC harboring somatic EGFR gene mutations. Here, we
review the rationale, study design including end points, results and implications
of this trial for current and future EGFR genotype-directed lung cancer
therapies.

DOI: 10.2217/fon.14.9 
PMID: 24754585  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


623. Cancer Sci. 2014 Jul;105(7):788-94. doi: 10.1111/cas.12425. Epub 2014 May 15.

RAC1 inhibition as a therapeutic target for gefitinib-resistant non-small-cell
lung cancer.

Kaneto N(1), Yokoyama S, Hayakawa Y, Kato S, Sakurai H, Saiki I.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pathogenic Biochemistry, Institute of Natural Medicine, University
of Toyama, Toyama, Japan.

Although epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)-tyrosine kinase inhibitors
(EGFR-TKI), including gefitinib, provide a significant clinical benefit in
non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients, the acquisition of drug resistance
has been known to limit the efficacy of EGFR-TKI therapy. In this study, we
demonstrated the involvement of EGF-EGFR signaling in NSCLC cell migration and
the requirement of RAC1 in EGFR-mediated progression of NSCLC. We showed the
significant role of RAC1 pathway in the cell migration or lamellipodia formation 
by using gene silencing of RAC1 or induction of constitutive active RAC1 in
EGFR-mutant NSCLC cells. Importantly, the RAC1 inhibition suppressed EGFR-mutant 
NSCLC cell migration and growth in vitro, and growth in vivo even in the
gefitinib-resistant cells. In addition, these suppressions by RAC1 inhibition
were mediated through MEK or PI3K independent mechanisms. Collectively, these
results open up a new opportunity to control the cancer progression by targeting 
the RAC1 pathway to overcome the resistance to EGFR-TKI in NSCLC patients.

© 2014 The Authors. Cancer Science published by Wiley Publishing Asia Pty Ltd on 
behalf of Japanese Cancer Association.

DOI: 10.1111/cas.12425 
PMCID: PMC4317907
PMID: 24750242  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


624. Expert Opin Pharmacother. 2014 Jun;15(9):1203-13. doi:
10.1517/14656566.2014.909412. Epub 2014 Apr 19.

Protein kinase inhibitors to treat non-small-cell lung cancer.

Minuti G(1), D'Incecco A, Landi L, Cappuzzo F.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto Toscano Tumori, Ospedale Civile, Oncologia Medica , Viale Alfieri 36,
57100-Livorno , Italy +39 0586223189 ; +39 0586223457 ; f.cappuzzo@gmail.com.

INTRODUCTION: Activating mutations of the EGFR and rearrangement of anaplastic
lymphoma kinase (ALK) best illustrate the therapeutic relevance of molecular
characterization in NSCLC patients.
AREAS COVERED: For this review article, all published data on the most relevant
Phase III trials with tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) for the treatment of
NSCLC were collected and analyzed.
EXPERT OPINION: Eight Phase III trials clearly established EGFR TKIs as the best 
therapeutic option for front-line therapy in EGFR-mutated patients. In pretreated
NSCLC, EGFR TKIs are considered more effective than standard monotherapy with
cytotoxics in presence of classical EGFR mutations, whereas in the EGFR wild-type
population, a similar efficacy to docetaxel or pemetrexed in term of survival has
been demonstrated. In ALK-translocated NSCLC, a Phase III trial demonstrated the 
superiority of a multi-target TKI, including ALK, in terms of progression-free
survival, response rate and toxicity profile when compared to standard
second-line chemotherapy. New agents targeting EGFR or ALK are under evaluation
particularly in individuals with acquired resistance to EGFR TKIs or crizotinib.

DOI: 10.1517/14656566.2014.909412 
PMID: 24745764  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


625. Gan To Kagaku Ryoho. 2014 Apr;41(4):517-22.

[Prospective study of biotin treatment in patients with erythema due to gefitinib
or erlotinib].

[Article in Japanese]

Ogawa Y(1), Kiba T, Nakano K, Fujiwara K, Taniguchi H, Hosokawa A, Nakashima T,
Kimoto S, Kajiume S, Okada Y, Ichiba Y.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Pharmacy, National Hospital Organization Kure Medical Center and
Chugoku Cancer Center.

Gefitinib anderlotinib, which are epidermal growth factor receptor(EGFR)tyrosine 
kinase inhibitors(TKIs), have been usedfor the treatment of inoperable
andrecurrent non-small cell lung cancer(NSCLC)patients. These drugs are known to 
cause a skin rash, one of the major side effects, at a high frequency. Biotin is 
a water-soluble vitamin, andit belongs to the vitamin B family. It is well known 
that biotin deficiency increases the risk of skin dermatitis. We administered
biotin to four patients with skin rash, all of whom were treatedwith either
gefitinib or erlotinib andwere unable to be treatedby a steroid ointment alone.
In all patients, administration of biotin reduced the skin rash. Surprisingly, in
2 patients in whom EGFR-TKI therapy was discontinued because of the skin rash,
the administration of biotin allowed for long-term gefitinib or erlotinib
treatment. Biotin may be considereduseful for the treatment of skin rash causedby
EGFR-TKIs. Further trials may be needed to confirm the value of biotin in this
setting.


PMID: 24743373  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


626. Nutr Cancer. 2014;66(4):682-9. doi: 10.1080/01635581.2014.895392. Epub 2014 Apr
16.

Combined treatment with Epimedium koreanum Nakai extract and gefitinib overcomes 
drug resistance caused by T790M mutation in non-small cell lung cancer cells.

Song J(1), Zhong R, Huang H, Zhang Z, Ding D, Yan H, Sun E, Jia X.

Author information: 
(1)a Key Laboratory of Delivery Systems of Chinese Meteria Medica , Jiangsu
Provincial Academy of Chinese Medicine , Jiangsu , Nanjing , China.

Although the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase inhibitors, 
such as gefitinib, have shown promising therapeutic efficacy in nonsmall cell
lung cancer (NSCLC) patients harboring EGFR activating mutation, development of
acquired resistance is almost inevitable. We investigated whether the addition of
Epimedium koreanum Nakai extract (EEF) to gefitinib could overcome the resistance
of NSCLC cells to gefitinib. In our study, the growth inhibitory effects of
cotreatment differed between mutant EGFR and wild type EGFR. A synergistic
antiproliferative effect was observed in the combined treatments in H1975 and
PC-9GR cells carrying T790M EGFR. In addition, the cotreatment exhibited a much
greater inhibition than either agent alone on the following metastatic processes:
(a) invasion, (b) wound healing, and (c) tubule formation by endothelial cells.
The phosphorylations of EGFR family (EGFR, HER-2, and HER-3) and EGFR downstream 
PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway in H1975 and PC-9/GR cells were also attanuated, whereas
EEF or gefitinib alone had no obvious effects. Similarly, the combination
effectively suppressed tumor growth and increased mice survival in PC-9GR
xenografts. The results indicate that the addition of EEF to gefitinib is a
promising strategy to overcome T790M-mediated drug resistance.

DOI: 10.1080/01635581.2014.895392 
PMID: 24738693  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


627. J Thorac Oncol. 2014 Apr;9(4):506-11. doi: 10.1097/JTO.0000000000000095.

Comparison of clinical outcomes following gefitinib and erlotinib treatment in
non-small-cell lung cancer patients harboring an epidermal growth factor receptor
mutation in either exon 19 or 21.

Lim SH(1), Lee JY, Sun JM, Ahn JS, Park K, Ahn MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Department of Medicine, Samsung Medical
Center, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

BACKGROUND: Gefitinib and erlotinib, small-molecule kinase inhibitors that block 
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) signaling, have demonstrated a dramatic
response rate and prolonged progression-free survival (PFS) in patients harboring
an activating EGFR mutation. We compared the clinical outcomes in gefitinib- and 
erlotinib-treated patients harboring EGFR mutations who had recurrent or
metastatic non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC).
METHODS: A total of 375 patients with recurrent or metastatic stage IIIB/IV
NSCLC, who had either exon 19 deletion or the L858R mutation in exon 21, and had 
received either gefitinib (n = 228) or erlotinib (n = 147), were included in the 
study. A matched-pair case-control study design was implemented in the analysis, 
where 121 pairs of gefitinib-treated and erlotinib-treated patients were matched 
according to sex, smoking history, Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group performance
status, and types of EGFR mutation.
RESULTS: The median age of all patients was 58 years (range, 30-84), and more
than half of patients had never been smokers (63.6%). Most patients had
adenocarcinoma (98.3%) and good Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group performance
status (0, 1) (90.9%). The median number of cycles of EGFR tyrosine kinase
inhibitor (TKI) treatment was 12.7 in the gefitinib group and 10.8 in the
erlotinib group. Of the 242 patients, 63 (26%) received EGFR TKI as first-line
therapy. The overall response rates and disease control rates in the gefitinib-
or erlotinib-treated groups were 76.9% versus 74.4% (p = 0.575) and 90.1% versus 
86.8%, respectively (p = 0.305). There was no statistically significant
difference with regard to PFS (median, 11.7 versus 9.6; p = 0.056) between the
gefitinib- and erlotinib-treated groups. For patients receiving EGFR TKI as the
first-line treatment, there was no significant difference between the two
treatment groups in overall response rates (76.7% and 90.0%) (p = 0.431) and
median PFS (11.7 versus 14.5 months) (p = 0.507).
CONCLUSION: In NSCLC patients harboring EGFR mutation, treatment with gefitinib
and erlotinib resulted in similar effectiveness.

DOI: 10.1097/JTO.0000000000000095 
PMID: 24736073  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


628. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol. 2014 Jul;140(7):1087-95. doi: 10.1007/s00432-014-1671-x.
Epub 2014 Apr 13.

Schedule-dependent synergistic interaction between docetaxel and gefitinib in
NSCLC cell lines regardless of the mutation status of EGFR and KRAS and its
molecular mechanisms.

Jiang Y(1), Yuan Q, Fang Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Beijing Shijitan Hospital, Capital Medical
University, Beijing, 100038, People's Republic of China, jiangyanwen2009@163.com.

BACKGROUND: Tyrosine-kinase inhibitors (TKIs) and chemotherapy had different
pharmacological mechanisms and therefore combined administration of TKIs and
chemotherapy agents may have synergy. Our research aimed at exploring the
cytotoxic interactions between gefitinib and docetaxel with different
concentrations for non-small-cell lung cancer cell lines, and furthermore, the
mechanisms underlying the cytotoxic synergism.
METHODS: NCI-H1650 [epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutation and KRAS
wild-type], NCI-H292 (EGFR wild-type and KRAS wild-type) and A549 (EGFR wild-type
and KRAS mutation) cell lines were treated with docetaxel and/or gefitinib.
Cytotoxic interactions, cell cycle distribution and cell signal pathway were
analyzed, respectively.
RESULTS: Cytotoxic interactions between docetaxel and gefitinib were
dose-dependent and sequence-dependent in all these three cell lines. Docetaxel
followed by gefitinib treatment was optimum regimen regardless of the mutation
status of EGFR and KRAS. KRAS mutation and EGFR wild-type predicted insensitive
to gefitinib and docetaxel combined treatment as well as gefitinib alone. G1
arrest was inconsistently associated with combination index (CI). However,
apoptosis induction was schedule-dependent and can explain the synergism
completely. Mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) phosphorylation ratio was
also schedule-dependent and positively correlated with CI.
CONCLUSION: Cytotoxic interactions between docetaxel and gefitinib were
sequence-dependent regardless of the mutation status of EGFR and KRAS. Cell
characteristic, apoptosis induction and MAPK phosphorylation but not cell cycle
change may explain the molecular mechanisms of synergism.

DOI: 10.1007/s00432-014-1671-x 
PMID: 24728492  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


629. Eur J Cancer. 2014 Jul;50(10):1717-21. doi: 10.1016/j.ejca.2014.03.001. Epub 2014
Apr 10.

Afatinib use in non-small cell lung cancer previously sensitive to epidermal
growth factor receptor inhibitors: the United Kingdom Named Patient Programme.

Khan F(1), Ottensmeier C(2), Popat S(3), Dua D(4), Dorey N(5), Ellis S(6), Szabo 
M(2), Upadhyay S(7), Califano R(8), Chan S(9), Lee L(8), Ali CW(10), Nicolson
M(11), Bates AT(2), Button M(12), Chaudhuri A(13), Mulvenna P(14), Shaw HM(15),
Danson SJ(16).

Author information: 
(1)Academic Unit of Clinical Oncology, Weston Park Hospital, Sheffield S10 2SJ,
United Kingdom. (2)Southampton NIHR Experimental Cancer Medicine Center and
Southampton University Hospitals NHS Foundation, Southampton SO16 6YD, United
Kingdom. (3)Royal Marsden Hospital, London SW3 6JJ, United Kingdom. (4)Guy's and 
St. Thomas' NHS Foundation Trust, London SE1 9RT, United Kingdom. (5)Royal Devon 
and Exeter NHS Foundation Trust, Exeter EX2 5DW, United Kingdom. (6)Royal
Bournemouth Hospital, Bournemouth BH7 7DW, United Kingdom. (7)Hull and East
Yorkshire Hospitals NHS Trust, Hull HU16 5JQ, United Kingdom. (8)Department of
Medical Oncology, The Christie NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester M20 4BX, United
Kingdom. (9)Harrogate and District NHS Foundation Trust, Harrogate HG2 7SX,
United Kingdom. (10)Beatson West of Scotland Cancer Centre, Glasgow G12 0YN,
United Kingdom. (11)Aberdeen Royal Infirmary, Aberdeen AB25 2ZN, United Kingdom. 
(12)Velindre Cancer Centre, Cardiff CF14 2TL, United Kingdom. (13)United
Lincolnshire Hospitals NHS Trust, Lincoln LN2 5QY, United Kingdom. (14)Newcastle 
upon Tyne NHS Foundation Trust, Newcastle NE7 7DN, United Kingdom. (15)University
College London Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, London NW1 2PG, United Kingdom.
(16)Academic Unit of Clinical Oncology, Weston Park Hospital, Sheffield S10 2SJ, 
United Kingdom. Electronic address: s.danson@sheffield.ac.uk.

INTRODUCTION: Afatinib prolongs progression-free survival (PFS) in patients with 
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) who were previously sensitive to erlotinib or 
gefitinib. This study investigated experience of afatinib under a Named Patient
Use (NPU) programme.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Retrospective data for 63 patients were collected,
including demographics, dose, toxicity and clinical efficacy.
RESULTS: Response rate and median PFS were 14.3% and 2.6months, respectively.
Diarrhoea and rash were the most common toxicities; 46% of patients required a
dose reduction and 41% had a dose delay.
CONCLUSIONS: Efficacy and safety in the NPU programme are consistent with the
LUX-Lung 1 trial.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejca.2014.03.001 
PMID: 24726055  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


630. J Chemother. 2015 Feb;27(1):40-51. doi: 10.1179/1973947814Y.0000000189. Epub 2014
Apr 14.

Risk of interstitial lung disease associated with EGFR-TKIs in advanced
non-small-cell lung cancer: a meta-analysis of 24 phase III clinical trials.

Qi WX, Sun YJ, Shen Z, Yao Y.

PURPOSE: To assess the risk of interstitial lung disease (ILD) with epidermal
growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors (EGFR-TKIs) gefitinib,
erlotinib, and afatinib.
METHOD: PubMed databases were searched for relevant articles. Statistical
analyses were conducted to calculate the summary incidence, odds ratio (OR), and 
95% confidence intervals (CIs) by using either random-effects or fixed-effect
models.
RESULTS: The incidence of all-grade and high-grade (≧ grade 3) ILD associated
with EGFR-TKIs was 1.6% (95% CI, 1.0-2.4%) and 0.9% (95% CI, 0.6%-1.4%), with a
mortality of 13.0% (95% CI, 7.6-21.6%). Patients treated with EGFR-TKIs had a
significantly increased risk of developing all-grade (OR, 1.74; 95% CI,
1.25-2.43; P = 0.001) and high-grade (OR, 4.38; 95% CI, 2.18-8.79; P<0.001) ILD. 
No significant difference in the risk of ILD was found in sub-group analysis
according to EGFR-TKIs, percentage of EGFR mutation, study location,
EGFR-TKIs-based regimens, and controlled therapy.
CONCLUSIONS: Treatment with EGFR-TKIs is associated with a significantly
increased risk of developing ILD.

DOI: 10.1179/1973947814Y.0000000189 
PMID: 24724908  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


631. Ann Surg Oncol. 2014 Dec;21 Suppl 4:S555-63. doi: 10.1245/s10434-014-3673-y. Epub
2014 Apr 11.

Suppression of Dicer increases sensitivity to gefitinib in human lung cancer
cells.

Chen JC(1), Su YH, Chiu CF, Chang YW, Yu YH, Tseng CF, Chen HA, Su JL.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Cancer Research, National Health Research Institutes,
Zhunan, Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: Accumulating evidence is revealing an important role of microRNA
(miRNA) in tumor progression and chemotherapeutic resistance. Dicer is a
cytoplasmic endoribonuclease type III crucial for production of mature miRNAs.
The aberrant expression of Dicer has also been reportedly associated with
clinical aggressiveness, prognosis, and patient survival in various cancer types.
However, the molecular mechanisms of Dicer in acquired gefitinib resistance are
still not clear.
METHODS: In this study, we analyzed the protein level of Dicer between
gefitinib-sensitive (PC9) and gefitinib-resistant (PC9/GR) non-small-cell lung
cancer (NSCLC) cell lines by Western blot analysis. Silence and overexpression of
the Dicer were performed to investigate the effects on gefitinib sensitivity, as 
assessed by (3-[4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl]-2,5 diphenyl tetrazolium bromide) assay
and sub-G1 assay of flow cytometry. To further explore the mechanism of
chemoresistance, we examined whether Dicer knockdown led to modulating specific
miRNAs and its miRNA target genes.
RESULTS: Dicer expression was significantly increased in PC9/GR compared with PC9
cells. Knockdown of Dicer restores gefitinib sensitivity in resistant cells, and 
overexpression of Dicer enhances resistance to gefitinib in sensitive cells.
Silencing of Dicer induces sensitivity to gefitinib in NSCLC cells through the
downregulation of miR-30b/c and miR-221/222 to increase the protein level of
caspase-3, resulting in an increase in gefitinib-induced apoptosis.
CONCLUSIONS: Dicer contributes to the resistance to gefitinib in lung cancer.
These results indicate that Dicer may be a target for diagnosis and therapy of
patients with resistance to gefitinib.

DOI: 10.1245/s10434-014-3673-y 
PMID: 24723223  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


632. Mol Med Rep. 2014 Jun;9(6):2265-72. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2014.2108. Epub 2014 Apr 2.

Paris saponin I induces apoptosis via increasing the Bax/Bcl-2 ratio and
caspase-3 expression in gefitinib-resistant non-small cell lung cancer in vitro
and in vivo.

Jiang H(1), Zhao PJ(2), Su D(3), Feng J(4), Ma SL(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Zhejiang Hospital, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310013, P.R.
China. (2)Department of Radiation Oncology, Hangzhou Cancer Hospital, Hangzhou,
Zhejiang 310002, P.R. China. (3)Department of Oncology, Cancer Institute,
Zhejiang Cancer Hospital, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310022, P.R. China. (4)Department of
Oncology, Cancer Institute, Zhejiang Cancer Hospital, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310022, 
P.R. China. (5)Department of Oncology, Cancer Institute, Hangzhou First People's 
Hospital, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310006, P.R. China.

Polyphyllins, a major component of Rhizoma paridis, have been extensively used in
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). The aim of the present study was to evaluate 
the effects of Paris saponin I (PSI) on a panel of gefitinib-resistant NSCLC cell
lines and its inhibition of tumor growth in a nude mouse model. The MTT assay was
used to assess growth inhibition. The cell cycle was analyzed using flow
cytometry and apoptosis was assessed using Annexin V/propidium iodide staining.
The morphology of the apoptotic cells was determined by transmission electron
microscopy. The protein expression levels of B-cell lymphoma 2 (Bcl-2),
Bcl-2-associated X protein (Bax) and caspase-3 were detected using western blot
analysis. In addition, the glucose metabolism in tumor-bearing mice was evaluated
using 18F-fludeoxyglucose (FDG) micro-positron emission tomography imaging. The
PSI-induced growth inhibition rate was observed to significantly increase in a
time- and dose-dependent manner. Furthermore, PSI induced significant G2/M-phase 
arrest and apoptosis. The expression levels of Bcl-2 decreased, while those of
Bax and caspase-3 increased following PSI treatment. 18F-FDG-uptake in the PSI
treatment groups was significantly decreased compared with that in the control
group in vivo. In conclusion, PSI is a potent antitumor agent that acts by
inhibiting the proliferation of gefitinib-resistant cells, and has potential as a
candidate for a natural drug for gefitinib-resistant therapy. PSI-induced
apoptosis, which occurred via multiple pathways, including G2/M-phase arrest and 
upregulation of the Bax/Bcl-2 ratio and caspase-3 expression, ultimately led to
cell death and tumor inhibition.

DOI: 10.3892/mmr.2014.2108 
PMID: 24718383  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


633. Case Rep Oncol. 2014 Feb 20;7(1):126-31. doi: 10.1159/000360154. eCollection
2014.

Discrepancy between the Clinical Image and Pathological Findings of Non-Small
Cell Lung Cancer Harboring an Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor Gene Mutation That
Was Surgically Resected after Gefitinib Treatment.

Chikaishi Y(1), Uramoto H(1), Oka S(1), Nagata S(2), Shimokawa H(1), So T(1),
Yamada S(3), Hanagiri T(1), Mukae H(2), Tanaka F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Second Department of Surgery, University of Occupational and Environmental
Health, Kitakyushu, Japan. (2)Departments of Respiratory Medicine, University of 
Occupational and Environmental Health, Kitakyushu, Japan. (3)Departments of
Pathology, School of Medicine, University of Occupational and Environmental
Health, Kitakyushu, Japan.

We herein describe a discrepancy between the clinical image and pathological
findings in a non-small cell lung cancer patient with an epidermal growth factor 
receptor (EGFR) mutation who underwent surgical resection after gefitinib
treatment. The patient was a 66-year-old female with c-stage IIIA lung
adenocarcinoma harboring an EGFR gene mutation; she was surgically treated after 
receiving gefitinib. The pathological examination revealed adenocarcinoma, and
the pathologically therapeutic effect was considered to be slight or of no
response. EGFR T790M mutation and MET amplification were not present. The
pathologically therapeutic effect is generally well correlated with the response 
rate after induction therapy. In this case, there was a discrepancy between the
clinical image and pathological findings. Our findings, therefore, raise
questions about the role of surgery after EGFR-tyrosine kinase inhibitor
treatment.

DOI: 10.1159/000360154 
PMCID: PMC3975753
PMID: 24707260  [PubMed]


634. Anticancer Res. 2014 Apr;34(4):1975-81.

Phase II study of erlotinib for acquired resistance to gefitinib in patients with
advanced non-small cell lung cancer.

Horiike A(1), Yamamoto N, Tanaka H, Yanagitani N, Kudo K, Ohyanagi F, Ono A,
Naito T, Murakami H, Horai T, Nishio M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Medical Oncology, Cancer Institute Hospital, Japanese
Foundation for Cancer Research, 3-8-31 Ariake, Koto-ku, Tokyo 135-8550, Japan.
mnishio@jfcr.or.jp.

BACKGROUND: Gefitinib and erlotinib are used to treat advanced non-small cell
lung cancer (NSCLC). Gefitinib is a common first-line treatment, but most
patients develop resistance. This phase II study evaluated the efficacy of
erlotinib after acquired resistance to gefitinib.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Between January 2008 and September 2009, we enrolled 50
patients with advanced NSCLC who had received one or more chemotherapy regimens, 
including gefitinib monotherapy to which they had partial responses (PR) or
stable disease (SD). Erlotinib (150 mg) was administered until disease
progression or unacceptable toxicity. Patients were 11 males, 39 females; median 
age 65 years (range=36-81 years); 46 with adenocarcinoma; performance status
0/1/2: 24/19/7; and smoking status, never/former/current: 33/15/2. Prior
gefitinib response, PR/SD: 36/14. Median duration of prior gefitinib therapy was 
419 days (range=63-1,540 days). Median interval after gefitinib therapy was 29
days (range=13-1,198 days).
RESULTS: Of 47 patients on erlotinib, four showed PR and 29 showed SD [response
rate, 8.5%; disease control rate (DCR), 70.2%]. DCR for patients who continued
gefitinib treatment for more than one year was significantly higher (81.5%) than 
for patients who could not continue (57.1%; p=0.018); but was not affected by
prior gefitinib response or treatment interval. Median tiMETo treatment failure: 
100 days (95% confidence interval=90-110 days); median overall survival: 342 days
(95% confidence interval=242-442 days). Rash (78%) and diarrhea (68%) were the
most common adverse reactions; grade 5 pneumonitis occurred in one patient (2%).
CONCLUSION: Erlotinib treatment after gefitinib failure may prolong the efficacy 
of epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors treatment.


PMID: 24692734  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


635. Mol Med Rep. 2014 Jun;9(6):2417-22. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2014.2082. Epub 2014 Mar 28.

Antitumor activity of combination treatment with gefitinib and docetaxel in
EGFR-TKI-sensitive, primary resistant and acquired resistant human non-small cell
lung cancer cells.

Wu M(1), Yuan Y(2), Pan YY(3), Zhang Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Geriatrics, The Third Affiliated Hospital of Anhui Medical
University, Hefei, Anhui 230061, P.R. China. (2)The Central Laboratory of Binhu
Hospital, The Third Affiliated Hospital of Anhui Medical University, Hefei, Anhui
230061, P.R. China. (3)Department of Oncology, The First Affiliated Hospital of
Anhui Medical University, Hefei, Anhui 230022, P.R. China.

In a number of large clinical studies, concurrent administration of the epidermal
growth factor receptor-tyrosine kinase inhibitor (EGFR-TKI) with cytotoxic
chemotherapy has failed to improve the survival rate in unselected patients with 
advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). The purpose of the current study was
to investigate the antitumor effects of gefitinib in combination with docetaxel
in EGFR-TKI-sensitive, primary resistant and acquired resistant human lung cancer
cell lines and the associated molecular mechanisms. EGFR-TKI-sensitive and
EGFR-TKI-resistant human lung cancer cell lines were exposed to gefitinib or
docetaxel alone, or in combination. Cell viability was assessed using the MTT
assay. Cell cycle distribution and apoptosis were measured by flow cytometry and 
alterations in signaling pathways were examined by immunoblotting. The cytotoxic 
interaction between docetaxel and gefitinib was determined by combination index
(CI) analysis. Coadministration of gefitinib and docetaxel was observed to result
in superior inhibition of tumor cell proliferation, however, increased rates of
apoptosis were only observed in EGFR-TKI-sensitive cells, whereas, antagonistic
activity was observed in the EGFR-TKI-resistant cell lines. Gefitinib arrested
the cell cycle at the G1 phase, whereas docetaxel arrested the cell cycle at the 
S phase. In addition, in cells exhibiting a synergistic interaction between
gefitinib and docetaxel, an increase in p-EGFR and p-AKT was observed following
chemotherapy exposure. By contrast, in cells exhibiting no change or a decrease
in p-EGFR and p-AKT following docetaxel treatment, an antagonistic interaction
between the two agents was observed. In conclusion, the combination of docetaxel 
and gefitinib generated synergistic effects in EGFR-TKI-sensitive cells and
antagonistic effects in EGFR-TKI-primary and acquired resistant cells, suggesting
that EGFR-TKIs, combined with docetaxel, may be beneficial to NSCLC patients with
EGFR mutations. The results also indicate that the interactions between gefitinib
and docetaxel may be associated with the effect of docetaxel on EGFR
phosphorylation.

DOI: 10.3892/mmr.2014.2082 
PMID: 24682085  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


636. Int J Palliat Nurs. 2014 Mar;20(3):135-42.

Changes in symptom severity in Taiwanese lung cancer patients after gefitinib
treatment: a pilot study.

Wang SY(1), Tsai CM(2), Lin CC(3).

Author information: 
(1)Associate Professor, Regis University, Colorado, USA. (2)Medical Doctor, Chest
Department, Taipei Veterans General Hospital and School of Medicine, National
Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan. (3)Professor and Dean, College of Nursing, 
Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan.

AIM: The purpose of this study was to investigate symptom severity in advanced
non-small cell lung cancer patients prior to gefitinib treatment and at 1-, 3-
and 6-month intervals after starting treatment.
METHODOLOGY: Fifty seven patients completed the Taiwanese version of the M.D.
Anderson Symptom Inventory. The data were analysed using descriptive statistics, 
the Friedman non-parametric test, and Pearson correlation coefficients.
RESULTS: Symptoms of nausea, difficulty remembering, lack of appetite, sadness,
and vomiting increased at 1 month after treatment started, pain and shortness of 
breath increased at 3 months, and disturbed sleep, drowsiness, and numbness
increased after 6 months. Fatigue and dry mouth increased at 3 months after
treatment started and then decreased. Only distress decreased throughout the
course of treatment.
CONCLUSION: The findings may lead to the development of better clinical
guidelines and improved information for patients on when to expect the greatest
impact from their symptoms during the course of treatment.

DOI: 10.12968/ijpn.2014.20.3.135 
PMID: 24675540  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


637. Tumori. 2014 Jan-Feb;100(1):e20-3. doi: 10.1700/1430.15832.

Overcoming T790M-driven acquired resistance to EGFR-TKIs in NSCLC with afatinib: 
a case report.

Bordi P, Tiseo M, Bortesi B, Naldi N, Buti S, Ardizzoni A.

The identification of activating EGFR gene mutations and the availability of
effective target therapies such as gefitinib and erlotinib have radically changed
the therapeutic approach and prognosis for patients with advanced EGFR-mutated
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). However, despite an initial response to EGFR 
tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs), acquired resistance inevitably develops and
the way to overcome it is an open challenge. We report the first case, to our
knowledge, of a patient affected by metastatic EGFR-mutated NSCLC with
T790M-driven acquired TKI resistance who obtained a significant response to
afatinib. Considering the improvement achieved in all disease sites but those in 
the brain, this case puts a strain on afatinib's activity on brain metastases.

DOI: 10.1700/1430.15832 
PMID: 24675505  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


638. Exp Ther Med. 2014 Apr;7(4):855-859. Epub 2014 Jan 21.

Gefitinib-induced interstitial pneumonia: A case report and review of the
literature.

Luo C(1), Lv M(1), Li Y(1), Liu P(2), Yang J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Oncology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Xi'an
Jiaotong University College of Medicine, Xi'an, Shaanxi 710061, P.R. China.
(2)Center for Translational Medicine, The First Affiliated Hospital of Xi'an
Jiaotong University College of Medicine, Xi'an, Shaanxi 710061, P.R. China.

The aim of this study was to explore the clinical characteristics of and
treatment strategies for interstitial pneumonia induced by gefitinib in patients 
with advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). The detailed clinical data of
one patient with NSCLC and gefitinib-induced interstitial pneumonia were compiled
and a review of relevant previous studies was performed. Based on this case
report and the review, the clinical characteristics, mechanisms and treatment
strategies of this rare disease were analyzed. The analyses showed that older,
male patients with a long smoking history, high smoking index and adenocarcinoma 
(particularly bronchoalveolar carcinoma) were more likely to suffer from
interstitial pneumonia while taking gefitinib. The onset time of interstitial
pneumonia was 1-2 months subsequent to gefitinib administration. The clinical
manifestations included chest tightness, shortness of breath, progressive
dyspnea, severe hypoxemia and respiratory failure. Diffuse infiltration and
alveolar interstitial shadows were observed on the chest tomography scan. In such
circumstances, a timely judgment is required, in addition to the withdrawal of
gefitinib treatment and the administration of high-dose glucocorticoids, as well 
as oxygen inhalation and anti-infective therapies, in order to relieve the
symptoms. In conclusion, following the onset of gefitinib-induced interstitial
pneumonia, the discontinuation of gefitinib is likely to alleviate the suffering 
of the majority of patients. Early interstitial pneumonia is not an absolute
index for the permanent discontinuation of gefitinib treatment. It is necessary
to comprehensively consider the benefits and hazards of gefitinib for the
patients.

DOI: 10.3892/etm.2014.1495 
PMCID: PMC3961127
PMID: 24669240  [PubMed]


639. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol. 2014 May;73(5):1063-70. doi:
10.1007/s00280-014-2442-8. Epub 2014 Mar 25.

Is there any predictor for clinical outcome in EGFR mutant NSCLC patients treated
with EGFR TKIs?

Lee JY(1), Lim SH, Kim M, Kim S, Jung HA, Chang WJ, Choi MK, Hong JY, Lee SJ, Sun
JM, Ahn JS, Park K, Ahn MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Department of Medicine, Samsung Medical
Center, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, 50 Irwon-dong, Gangnam-gu,
Seoul, 135-710, Korea.

BACKGROUND: Tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) of the epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR) have demonstrated some dramatic response rate and prolonged
progression-free survival (PFS) in advanced non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
patients with activating EGFR mutation. However, PFS and overall survival (OS)
among those patients who were treated with EGFR TKIs are inconsistent and
unpredictable. In this study, we evaluated predictors of clinical outcome in EGFR
mutant NSCLC patients treated with EGFR TKIs.
METHODS: A total of 148 patients who had metastatic or recurrent NSCLC with
activating EGFR mutation treated with either erlotinib or gefitinib as a
first-line (n = 10) and a second-line or more treatment (n = 138) were
retrospectively reviewed.
RESULTS: The median follow-up duration was 21.9 months (range, 1.1-62.5). The
median PFS and OS for a total 148 patients were 10.6 months (95 % CI 9.0-12.2)
and 21.8 months (95 % CI 18.5-25.1), respectively. The survival outcomes were
similar between the first-line and second-line or more line of treatment of EGFR 
TKIs (P = 0.512 for PFS, P = 0.699 for OS). Although a high number of metastasis 
sites (3-6 vs. 1-2) were associated with shorter PFS and OS (median PFS 9.9 vs.
11.9 months, P = 0.019; median OS 16.4 vs. 22.2 months, P = 0.021, respectively) 
in univariate analysis, but not in multivariate analysis. According to the
clinical and molecular markers by multivariate analysis, there were no
significant differences in PFS. When PFS was dichotomized by median 11 months for
105 patients treated with EGFR TKIs as second-line therapy, no significant
differences in any clinical or molecular features were found between longer PFS
and shorter PFS groups.
CONCLUSIONS: Despite the inconsistencies in PFS among EGFR mutant patients
treated with EGFR TKIs, no significant differences of clinical features were
noted, thereby suggesting a need for more understanding of the heterogeneity of
underlying biology.

DOI: 10.1007/s00280-014-2442-8 
PMID: 24663503  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


640. Molecules. 2014 Mar 21;19(3):3508-22. doi: 10.3390/molecules19033508.

Celastrol induces apoptosis in gefitinib-resistant non-small cell lung cancer
cells via caspases-dependent pathways and Hsp90 client protein degradation.

Fan XX(1), Li N(1), Wu JL(1), Zhou YL(1), He JX(2), Liu L(1), Leung EL(3).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Quality Research in Chinese Medicine, Macau Institute 
For Applied Research in Medicine and Health, Macau University of Science and
Technology, Macau SAR, China. (2)Guangzhou Institute of Respiratory Disease,
State Key Laboratory of Respiratory Disease, The 1st Affiliated Hospital of
Guangzhou Medical College, Guangzhou 510120, China. (3)State Key Laboratory of
Quality Research in Chinese Medicine, Macau Institute For Applied Research in
Medicine and Health, Macau University of Science and Technology, Macau SAR,
China. lhleung@must.edu.mo.

Celastrol, a triterpene extracted from the Chinese herb Tripterygium wilfordii,
has been shown to have multiple bioactivities. Although among these activities,
its anti-cancer effects have attracted the most attention, the effect of
celastrol on gefitinib-resistant non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cells is not 
clearly known. Here, we examined the potency of celastrol in three different
NSCLC cell lines. We explored its treatment mechanism in two gefitinib-resistant 
NSCLC cell lines (H1650 and H1975). Our data demonstrated that celastrol exerted 
its apoptotic effect in a dose- and time-dependent manner. Also, the mitochondria
membrane potential was gradually lost and the ratio of Bax/Bcl-2 increased after 
the treatment of celastrol, both of which are indicators of mitochondria membrane
integrity. Although the caspases were activated, the treatment with pan-caspase
inhibitor could partially inhibit the level of apoptosis. Moreover, the protein
level of Hsp90 client proteins, EGFR and AKT, was measured. Interestingly, both
client proteins were remarkably down-regulated after the treatment of celastrol. 
Taken together, our data showed that celastrol may be developed as a promising
agent for treating gefitinib-resistant NSCLCs by inducing apoptosis through
caspase-dependent pathways and Hsp90 client protein degradation.

DOI: 10.3390/molecules19033508 
PMID: 24662070  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


641. Chin J Cancer Res. 2014 Feb;26(1):E5-9. doi: 10.3978/j.issn.1000-9604.2014.01.02.

Steatocystoma multiplex as initial impression of non-small cell lung cancer with 
complete response to gefitinib.

Tsai MH(1), Hsiao YP(1), Lin WL(1), Tseng SW(1).

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Internal Medicine, 2 Department of Dermatology, 3 Department
of Pathology, Chung Shan Medical University Hospital and School of Medicine,
Chung Shan Medical University, Taichung 402, Taiwan, China.

Cutaneous metastases are rare and seldom present at the time of first diagnosis
of cancer. Data from various studies show that 1-12% of lung cancer patients
experience tumor spread to the skin. The scalp, chest, and abdomen are favored
sites of skin metastases from lung cancers, but metastases to multiple skin sites
in a single patient are rarely reported. We describe a 56-year-old lung
adenocarcinoma patient, initially diagnosed with steatocystoma multiplex who
responded well to gefitinib treatment. The efficacy of conventional chemotherapy 
for cutaneous metastases has been limited because of the relatively poor blood
supply to the skin. It has been demonstrated that tyrosine kinase inhibitor
(TKI), gefitinib, has significant clinical benefit in lung cancer patients with
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutation even in metastases to the brain.
However, the therapeutic response to gefitinib in patients with skin metastases
is seldom mentioned in the literature. We report one case of lung adenocarcinoma 
with multiple skin metastases that were successfully treated with gefitinib.

DOI: 10.3978/j.issn.1000-9604.2014.01.02 
PMCID: PMC3937749
PMID: 24653640  [PubMed]


642. Mol Clin Oncol. 2014 Mar;2(2):282-284. Epub 2013 Dec 9.

Adenosquamous cell lung cancer successfully treated with gefitinib: A case
report.

Kurishima K(1), Ohara G(1), Kagohashi K(1), Watanabe H(1), Takayashiki N(2),
Ishibashi A(3), Satoh H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Respiratory Medicine, Mito Medical Center, University of Tsukuba, 
Mito, Ibaraki 310-0015, Japan. (2)Division of Pathology, Mito Medical Center,
University of Tsukuba, Mito, Ibaraki 310-0015, Japan. (3)Division of Surgery,
Mito Medical Center, University of Tsukuba, Mito, Ibaraki 310-0015, Japan.

Although adenosquamous cell lung cancer (ASCLC) is included in the non-small-cell
lung cancers (NSCLCs), the number of currently available studies on the response 
of this type of cancer to epidermal growth factor receptor-tyrosine kinase
inhibitors (EGFR-TKIs) is limited. This is the case report of a 66-year-old
female who was referred to the Mito Medical Center (Mito, Japan) with hemoptysis 
and the chest computed tomography (CT) scan revealed a large cavitary mass in the
lower lobe of the left lung. The patient underwent surgical resection of the
lesion and the final pathological diagnosis was ASCLC staged as pT2bN2M0.
Notably, an EGFR exon 19 deletion was identified in the adenocarcinomatous as
well as the squamous cell carcinomatous components of the tumor. Despite adjuvant
chemotherapy, the patient developed small cavitary metastases in the lungs
bilaterally. Therefore, treatment with gefitinib was initiated. The chest CT scan
revealed substantial regression of the metastatic cavitary tumors in both lungs, 
with thinning of the walls. The patient remains alive and recurrence-free 19
months following the initiation of gefitinib therapy. This case demonstrated an
optimal clinical response to gefitinib treatment for EGFR mutation-positive
ASCLC, suggesting that gefitinib is a therapeutic option for such a subset of
patients with ASCLC.

DOI: 10.3892/mco.2013.221 
PMCID: PMC3917782
PMID: 24649347  [PubMed]


643. Mol Clin Oncol. 2014 Jan;2(1):8-12. Epub 2013 Sep 18.

Cotargeting EGFR and autophagy signaling: A novel therapeutic strategy for
non-small-cell lung cancer.

Sui X(1), Kong N(1), Zhu M(2), Wang X(1), Lou F(1), Han W(3), Pan H(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Sir Run Run Shaw Hospital, Zhejiang
University, Hangshou, Zhejiang; (2)Department of Nephrology, Hebei Medical
University Affiliated North China Petroleum Bureau General Hospital, Renqiu,
Hebei; (3)Department of Medical Oncology, Sir Run Run Shaw Hospital, Zhejiang
University, Hangshou, Zhejiang; ; Biomedical Research Center and Key Laboratory
of Biotherapy of Zhejiang Province, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, P.R. China.

Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) somatic mutations are found in the
majority of non-small-cell lung cancers (NSCLCs) and patients with NSCLC who
harbor EGFR mutations have been shown to exhibit increased sensitivity to the
small-molecule EGFR-tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) gefitinib and erlotinib.
However, the majority of tumors develop acquired resistance to EGFR-TKIs after a 
median of 10-16 months, which limits the clinical efficacy of these drugs.
Autophagy, an important homeostatic cellular recycling mechanism, has emerged as 
a potential target for the acquired resistance phenotype. Recently, several
studies demonstrated that autophagy may be induced in a dose-dependent manner by 
treatment of multiple cancer cell lines with EGFR-TKIs in vitro. Furthermore, it 
was recently reported that autophagy, as a cytoprotective response, may be
activated by EGFR-TKIs in lung cancer cells and that the inhibition of autophagy 
enhanced the cytotoxic effect of EGFR-TKIs. In this review, we aimed to focus on 
the association between resistance to EGFR-TKIs and autophagy, and assess whether
autophagy inhibition represents a promising approach to improve the efficacy of
EGFR-TKIs in the treatment of NSCLC patients.

DOI: 10.3892/mco.2013.187 
PMCID: PMC3915646
PMID: 24649300  [PubMed]


644. Mol Clin Oncol. 2013 Sep;1(5):875-878. Epub 2013 Jul 23.

Efficacy of chemotherapy plus gefitinib treatment in advanced non-small-cell lung
cancer patients following acquired resistance to gefitinib.

Song Z(1), Zhang Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemotherapy, Zhejiang Cancer Hospital, Zhejiang 310022, P.R.
China ; Key Laboratory Diagnosis and Treatment Technology on Thoracic Oncology,
Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310022, P.R. China.

Non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) may exhibit oncogene addiction in patients who
benefited from prior treatment with epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR)-tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs). Preclinical data suggested that EGFR
addiction persists after the development of TKI resistance, leading many
clinicians to continue TKI treatment along with chemotherapy. However, this
strategy has not been adequately evaluated in clinical practice. Patients who
benefited from gefitinib followed by acquired resistance to this drug were
reviewed in the Zhejiang Cancer Hospital. Patients were included if they received
chemotherapy and gefitinib following failure of prior gefitinib treatment. A
total of 26 patients were included in the present study. Six patients (23.1%)
exhibited a partial response (PR), 13 (50%) achieved stable disease (SD) and 7
(26.9%) had progressive disease (PD) during the chemotherapy and gefitinib
treatment. The disease control rate (DCR) was 73.1% and the median
progression-free survival (PFS) was 4.6 months [95% confidence interval (CI):
3.8-5.4]. The toxicities associated with gefitinib and chemotherapy were
generally acceptable. In conclusion, continued concurrent gefitinib and
chemotherapy may be a valuable strategy, with acceptable and well-tolerated
toxicity. However, this treatment requires further investigation.

DOI: 10.3892/mco.2013.156 
PMCID: PMC3915312
PMID: 24649264  [PubMed]


645. Mol Clin Oncol. 2013 Jul;1(4):575-581. Epub 2013 Mar 29.

Target therapy in NSCLC patients: Relevant clinical agents and tumour molecular
characterisation.

Ulivi P(1), Zoli W(1), Capelli L(1), Chiadini E(2), Calistri D(1), Amadori D(1).

Author information: 
(1)IRCCS Istituto Scientifico Romagnolo per lo Studio e la Cura dei Tumori
(IRST), I-47014 Meldola; (2)Istituto Oncologico Romagnolo, I-47121 Forlì, Italy.

In recent years, a number of new agents that target specific molecular pathways
in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) have been investigated. Much effort has
been focused on identifying specific markers that are predictive of treatment
response, given that a tailored approach would maximise the therapeutic index and
cost-effectiveness. Gefitinib and erlotinib are selective epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase inhibitors (EGFR-TKIs) and have produced good
results in selected cases in terms of objective response rate and overall
survival. At present, EGFR gene mutations are considered the most important
predictors of clinical response to TKI therapy and tumour characterisation for
these alterations is mandatory prior to any decision making. Echinoderm
microtubule-like protein 4-anaplastic lymphoma kinase (EML4-ALK) translocation is
another alteration capable of predicting the efficacy of anti-ALK agents, such as
crizotinib. Moreover, emerging target agents, such as MET inhibitors, are likely 
to increase the amount of molecular characterisation required before a decision
is made on treatment. The main limiting factor for adequate characterisation of
metastatic NSCLC patients is the small quantity of tumour cells available for
molecular analysis. In this study, we provided an overview of the most important 
and clinically relevant target agents in NSCLC patients as well as the most
important mechanisms of resistance. The issue of the scant amount of biological
samples available for analysis as well as alternative sampling approaches such as
plasma- or serum-derived DNA were also examined.

DOI: 10.3892/mco.2013.100 
PMCID: PMC3915676
PMID: 24649213  [PubMed]


646. Expert Opin Pharmacother. 2014 Apr;15(6):889-903. doi:
10.1517/14656566.2014.902445.

Afatinib for the treatment of advanced non-small-cell lung cancer.

Genova C(1), Rijavec E, Barletta G, Burrafato G, Biello F, Dal Bello MG, Coco S, 
Truini A, Alama A, Boccardo F, Grossi F.

Author information: 
(1)UOS Tumori Polmonari, IRCCS AOU San Martino - IST Istituto Nazionale per la
Ricerca sul Cancro , L.go Benzi 10, Genova 16132 , Italy
carlo.genova1985@gmail.com.

INTRODUCTION: The inhibition of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)
through tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) represents an effective strategy for
EGFR-mutated NSCLC. Afatinib is an irreversible erythroblastosis oncogene B
(ErbB) family blocker, able to inhibit the kinase domains of EGFR, HER2 and HER4,
and the transphosphorylation of ErbB3 that has recently been approved in the
United States for the first-line treatment of EGFR-mutated NSCLC and in Europe
and Japan for the treatment of EGFR-mutated TKI-naive patients.
AREAS COVERED: The authors analyzed the pharmacology and the clinical activity of
afatinib in NSCLC through a review of the literature. Trials exploring different 
settings have been reported, including LUX-Lung 3 and LUX-Lung 6, where the drug 
achieved better outcomes in terms of response rate, progression-free survival and
quality of life compared with chemotherapy. The main toxicities of afatinib are
gastrointestinal and skin-related adverse events.
EXPERT OPINION: Afatinib showed remarkable efficacy as a first-line treatment in 
the presence of common EGFR mutations. Afatinib showed some activity in NSCLC
with acquired resistance to EGFR TKIs, although, currently, its efficacy after
the failure of erlotinib or gefitinib has not been clearly stated. Direct
clinical data comparing the activity and tolerability of different inhibitors are
still needed.

DOI: 10.1517/14656566.2014.902445 
PMID: 24646054  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


647. Clin Cancer Res. 2014 May 15;20(10):2714-26. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-13-2613. 
Epub 2014 Mar 18.

Metformin sensitizes EGFR-TKI-resistant human lung cancer cells in vitro and in
vivo through inhibition of IL-6 signaling and EMT reversal.

Li L(1), Han R(2), Xiao H(1), Lin C(1), Wang Y(1), Liu H(1), Li K(1), Chen H(1), 
Sun F(1), Yang Z(1), Jiang J(1), He Y(3).

Author information: 
(1)Authors' Affiliations: Departments of Respiratory Disease, Thoracic Surgery,
Pathology, and Oncology; and State Key Laboratory of Trauma, Burns and Combined
Injury, Daping Hospital, Third Military Medical University, Chongqing, China.
(2)Authors' Affiliations: Departments of Respiratory Disease, Thoracic Surgery,
Pathology, and Oncology; and State Key Laboratory of Trauma, Burns and Combined
Injury, Daping Hospital, Third Military Medical University, Chongqing,
ChinaAuthors' Affiliations: Departments of Respiratory Disease, Thoracic Surgery,
Pathology, and Oncology; and State Key Laboratory of Trauma, Burns and Combined
Injury, Daping Hospital, Third Military Medical University, Chongqing, China.
(3)Authors' Affiliations: Departments of Respiratory Disease, Thoracic Surgery,
Pathology, and Oncology; and State Key Laboratory of Trauma, Burns and Combined
Injury, Daping Hospital, Third Military Medical University, Chongqing, China
heyong@dphospital.tmmu.edu.cn.

PURPOSE: The EGF receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors (EGFR-TKI) have become a
standard therapy in patients with EGFR-activating mutations. Unfortunately,
acquired resistance eventually limits the clinical effects and application of
EGFR-TKIs. Studies have shown that suppression of epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT) and the interleukin (IL)-6/STAT3 pathway may abrogate this
acquired mechanism of drug resistance of TKIs. This study aims to investigate the
effect of metformin on sensitizing EGFR-TKI-resistant human lung cancer cells in 
vitro and in vivo through inhibition of IL-6 signaling and EMT reversal.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: The effect of metformin on reversing TKI resistance was
examined in vitro and in vivo using MTT, BrdUrd incorporation assay, invasion
assay, flow cytometry analysis, immunostaining, Western blot analysis, and
xenograft implantation.
RESULTS: In this study, metformin, a widely used antidiabetic agent, effectively 
increased the sensitivity of TKI-resistant lung cancer cells to erlotinib or
gefitinib. Metformin reversed EMT and decreased IL-6 signaling activation in
TKI-resistant cells, while adding IL-6 to those cells bypassed the
anti-TKI-resistance effect of metformin. Furthermore, overexpression or addition 
of IL-6 to TKI-sensitive cells induced TKI resistance, which could be overcome by
metformin. Finally, metformin-based combinatorial therapy effectively blocked
tumor growth in xenografts with TKI-resistant cancer cells, which was associated 
with decreased IL-6 secretion and expression, EMT reversal, and decreased
IL-6-signaling activation in vivo.
CONCLUSION: Metformin, generally considered nontoxic and remarkably inexpensive, 
might be used in combination with TKIs in patients with non-small cell lung
cancer, harboring EGFR mutations to overcome TKI resistance and prolong survival.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-13-2613 
PMID: 24644001  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


648. Korean J Radiol. 2014 Mar-Apr;15(2):300-4. doi: 10.3348/kjr.2014.15.2.300. Epub
2014 Mar 7.

Progressive multiple cystic changes in both lungs in a patient treated with
gefitinib for lung adenocarcinoma with multiple lung metastases.

Ryu YJ(1), Chun EM(1), Lee SN(2), Shim SS(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Internal
Medicine, Ewha Womans University School of Medicine, Seoul 158-710, Korea.
(2)Division of Hemato-Oncology, Department of Internal Medicine, Ewha Womans
University School of Medicine, Seoul 158-710, Korea. (3)Department of Radiology, 
Ewha Womans University School of Medicine, Seoul 158-710, Korea.

Gefitinib is regarded as a relatively safe agent for the treatment of an advanced
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Pulmonary toxicity such as interstitial lung 
disease associated with gefitinib is uncommon with an estimated all time
incidence around 1% worldwide. Moreover, a case of gefitinib associated with
pulmonary cystic changes has not been reported yet. In this report we present a
case of progressive multiple air cystic changes in both lungs in a patient with
NSCLC and intrapulmonary metastases who underwent a gefitinib therapy.

DOI: 10.3348/kjr.2014.15.2.300 
PMCID: PMC3955799
PMID: 24642811  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


649. Lung Cancer. 2014 May;84(2):203-5. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2014.02.010. Epub 2014 
Feb 28.

Response to pemetrexed rechallenge after acquired resistance of EGFR-TKI in a
patient with advanced NSCLC.

Li S(1), Zhou F(2), Ren S(3), Zhou C(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Lung Cancer and Immunology, Shanghai Pulmonary Hospital, Tongji 
University Medical School Cancer Institute, Tongji University School of Medicine,
No. 507 Zhengmin Road, Shanghai 200433, People's Republic of China. Electronic
address: rogerlee1989@foxmail.com. (2)Department of Lung Cancer and Immunology,
Shanghai Pulmonary Hospital, Tongji University Medical School Cancer Institute,
Tongji University School of Medicine, No. 507 Zhengmin Road, Shanghai 200433,
People's Republic of China. Electronic address: 191z@tongji.edu.cn. (3)Department
of Medical Oncology, Shanghai Pulmonary Hospital, Tongji University Medical
School Cancer Institute, Tongji University School of Medicine, No. 507 Zhengmin
Road, Shanghai 200433, People's Republic of China. Electronic address:
harry_ren@126.com. (4)Department of Medical Oncology, Shanghai Pulmonary
Hospital, Tongji University Medical School Cancer Institute, Tongji University
School of Medicine, No. 507 Zhengmin Road, Shanghai 200433, People's Republic of 
China. Electronic address: caicunzhoudr@163.com.

Acquired resistance of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase
inhibitor (TKI) has been developed as an important clinical problem though
EGFR-TKI such as gefitinib, erlotinib and afatinib [1,2] has achieved 8-14 months
of progression free survival in advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
patient with EGFR mutation. We report a case here that an advanced lung
adenocarcinoma with L858R mutation responded well to pemetrexed rechallenge after
acquired resistance of erlotinib.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2014.02.010 
PMID: 24636847  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


650. Respir Investig. 2014 Mar;52(2):82-91. doi: 10.1016/j.resinv.2013.07.007. Epub
2013 Aug 30.

Acquired resistance of non-small cell lung cancer to epidermal growth factor
receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors.

Nurwidya F(1), Takahashi F(2), Murakami A(3), Kobayashi I(4), Kato M(5), Shukuya 
T(6), Tajima K(7), Shimada N(8), Takahashi K(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Juntendo University Graduate School of
Medicine, 2-1-1 Hongo, Bunkyo, Tokyo 113-8421, Japan. Electronic address:
fariz@juntendo.ac.jp. (2)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Juntendo University 
Graduate School of Medicine, 2-1-1 Hongo, Bunkyo, Tokyo 113-8421, Japan.
Electronic address: fumiyuki@dol.hi-ho.ne.jp. (3)Department of Respiratory
Medicine, Juntendo University Graduate School of Medicine, 2-1-1 Hongo, Bunkyo,
Tokyo 113-8421, Japan. Electronic address: amuraka@juntendo.ac.jp. (4)Department 
of Respiratory Medicine, Juntendo University Graduate School of Medicine, 2-1-1
Hongo, Bunkyo, Tokyo 113-8421, Japan. Electronic address: isao-k@juntendo.ac.jp. 
(5)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Juntendo University Graduate School of
Medicine, 2-1-1 Hongo, Bunkyo, Tokyo 113-8421, Japan. Electronic address:
mtkatou@juntendo.ac.jp. (6)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Juntendo
University Graduate School of Medicine, 2-1-1 Hongo, Bunkyo, Tokyo 113-8421,
Japan. Electronic address: tshukuya@juntendo.ac.jp. (7)Department of Respiratory 
Medicine, Juntendo University Graduate School of Medicine, 2-1-1 Hongo, Bunkyo,
Tokyo 113-8421, Japan. Electronic address: tajiken@juntendo.ac.jp. (8)Department 
of Respiratory Medicine, Juntendo University Graduate School of Medicine, 2-1-1
Hongo, Bunkyo, Tokyo 113-8421, Japan. Electronic address: naokoh0421@hotmail.com.
(9)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Juntendo University Graduate School of
Medicine, 2-1-1 Hongo, Bunkyo, Tokyo 113-8421, Japan. Electronic address:
kztakaha@juntendo.ac.jp.

Activation of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) triggers anti-apoptotic
signaling, proliferation, angiogenesis, invasion, metastasis, and drug
resistance, which leads to development and progression of human epithelial
cancers, including non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Inhibition of EGFR by
tyrosine kinase inhibitors such as gefitinib and erlotinib has provided a new
hope for the cure of NSCLC patients. However, acquired resistance to gefitinib
and erlotinib via EGFR-mutant NSCLC has occurred through various molecular
mechanisms such as T790M secondary mutation, MET amplification, hepatocyte growth
factor (HGF) overexpression, PTEN downregulation, epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT), and other mechanisms. This review will discuss the biology of
receptor tyrosine kinase inhibition and focus on the molecular mechanisms of
acquired resistance to tyrosine kinase inhibitors of EGFR-mutant NSCLC.

Copyright © 2013 The Japanese Respiratory Society. Published by Elsevier B.V. All
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.resinv.2013.07.007 
PMID: 24636263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


651. Exp Cell Res. 2014 May 1;323(2):288-96. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2014.02.026. Epub
2014 Mar 12.

Effect of simvastatin on the resistance to EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors in a
non-small cell lung cancer with the T790M mutation of EGFR.

Hwang KE(1), Kwon SJ(1), Kim YS(1), Park DS(2), Kim BR(3), Yoon KH(4), Jeong
ET(1), Kim HR(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Institute of Wonkwang Medical Science,
Wonkwang University, School of Medicine, 344-2 shinyong-dong, Iksan, Jeonbuk
570-749, Republic of Korea. (2)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Wonkwang
University, School of Medicine, Iksan, Republic of Korea. (3)Department of
Obstetrics & Gynecology, Wonkwang University, School of Medicine, Iksan, Republic
of Korea. (4)Department of Radiology, Wonkwang University, School of Medicine,
Iksan, Republic of Korea. (5)Department of Internal Medicine, Institute of
Wonkwang Medical Science, Wonkwang University, School of Medicine, 344-2
shinyong-dong, Iksan, Jeonbuk 570-749, Republic of Korea. Electronic address:
kshryj@wonkwang.ac.kr.

Although non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) tumors with activating mutations in
the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) are highly responsive to EGFR
tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) including gefitinib and erlotinib, development 
of acquired resistance is almost inevitable. Statins show antitumor activity, but
it is unknown whether they can reverse EGFR-TKIs resistance in NSCLC with the
T790M mutation of EGFR. This study investigated overcoming resistance to EGFR-TKI
using simvastatin. We demonstrated that addition of simvastatin to gefitinib
enhanced caspase-dependent apoptosis in T790M mutant NSCLC cells. Simvastatin
also strongly inhibited AKT activation, leading to suppression of β-catenin
activity and the expression of its targets, survivin and cyclin D1. Both insulin 
treatment and AKT overexpression markedly increased p-β-catenin and survivin
levels, even in the presence of gefitinib and simvastatin. However, inhibition of
AKT by siRNA or LY294002 treatment decreased p-β-catenin and survivin levels. To 
determine the role of survivin in simvastatin-induced apoptosis of
gefitinib-resistant NSCLC, we showed that the proportion of apoptotic cells
following treatment with survivin siRNA and the gefitinib-simvastatin combination
was greater than the theoretical additive effects, whereas survivin up-regulation
could confer protection against gefitinib and simvastatin-induced apoptosis.
Similar results were obtained in erlotinib and simvastatin-treated HCC827/ER
cells. These findings suggest that survivin is a key molecule that renders T790M 
mutant NSCLC cells resistant to apoptosis induced by EGFR-TKIs and simvastatin.
Overall, these data indicate that simvastatin may overcome EGFR-TKI resistance in
T790M mutant NSCLCs via an AKT/β-catenin signaling-dependent down-regulation of
survivin and apoptosis induction.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2014.02.026 
PMID: 24631288  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


652. Drug Metab Lett. 2014 Jul;7(2):126-36.

Metabolite characterization of anti-cancer agent gefitinib in human hepatocytes.

Surve P, Ravindran S, Acharjee A, Rastogi H, Basu S, Honrao P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Bio- Analytical and Biotransformation, Drug Metabolism and
Pharmacokinetics Unit, Sai Life Sciences Limited, Building 1, Plot No 2,
Chrysalis Enclave, International Biotech Park, Pune 411057, Maharashtra, India.
selvan_ravindran@yahoo.com.

Intensive Biotransformation studies on Gefitinib could play a significant role in
designing and synthesizing new drugs around the core structure of Gefitinib.
These studies may be useful in developing an entirely new drug by blocking the
metabolic spots in Gefitinib. Gefitinib (Iressa) was the first oral epidermal
growth factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase inhibitor. Gefitinib shows toxicity
to cancer cells and has the capability to inhibit the growth of cancer cells.
Gefitinib is considered as one of the selective EGFR inhibitors to be available
in clinical practice. In 2003, FDA had approved Gefitinib for metastatic
non-small-cell lung cancer therapy (NSCLC). However, it was observed that NSCLC
Patients who responded to treatment developed resistance to Gefitinib. Hence, in 
the present study Gefitinib was incubated with hepatocytes to identify both
phase-I and Phase-II metabolites. Identified Phase -I metabolites were due to
oxidative defluorination, N-dealkylation and loss of morpholine ring. One of the 
phase-II metabolites identified i.e. the glutathione adduct suggests the need to 
modify the structure of the drug for higher potency and safety.


PMID: 24628403  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


653. BMJ Case Rep. 2014 Mar 13;2014. pii: bcr2013202705. doi: 10.1136/bcr-2013-202705.

Successful gefitinib treatment administration via gastrostomy tube in a patient
with non-small cell lung cancer with dysphagia.

Suzumura T(1), Yonesaka K, Tsukuda H, Fukuoka M.

Author information: 
(1)Izumi Municipal Hospital, Izumi-shi, Japan.

A 72-year-old woman with dysphagia was diagnosed with lung adenocarcinoma and
metastatic meningeal tumour that impaired the medulla. Owing to a bulky tumour
beside the medulla, radiosurgical control of the meningeal tumour was achieved
before systemic therapy. Genomic examination of the tumour revealed an existing
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) exon 19 deletion, for which an EGFR
tyrosine kinase inhibitor such as gefitinib was the standard therapy. However,
because of dysphagia, the patient was unable to orally ingest gefitinib.
Gefitinib was delivered via gastrostomy tube as a suspension after spontaneous
dissolution in hot water. One month later, the patient's symptoms, including
dysphagia, were drastically improved and she had recovered sufficiently to orally
ingest gefitinib. Gefitinib-associated toxicity comprises only mild liver
dysfunction and skin rash. CT scanning and MRI detected drastic shrinkage of the 
primary lung and meningeal tumours. The patient continued to take gefitinib and
has remained symptom-free for 9 months.

DOI: 10.1136/bcr-2013-202705 
PMCID: PMC3962901
PMID: 24626382  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


654. Cancer Biol Ther. 2014 Jun 1;15(6):653-4. doi: 10.4161/cbt.28504. Epub 2014 Mar
11.

Met in lung cancer.

Dent P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry; Massey Cancer Center; Virginia Commonwealth
University; Richmond, VA USA.

Comment on
    Cancer Biol Ther. 2014 Jun 1;15(6):721-34.

Receptor tyrosine kinases play important roles in the biology of many tumor cell 
types. In approximately 10% of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients
mutational activation of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) results in
tumor cells that are exquisitely addicted to signaling by this receptor. (1) Thus
expression of mutant active EGFR but in general not wild-type EGFR predisposes
NSCLC cells to inhibitors of EGFR/ErbB2. Use of EGFR inhibitory agents such as
gefitinib for this subset of NSCLC patients causes tumor regression and disease
stabilization for 12-18 mo, after which tumor cells become resistant to the drug.
(2) Initial studies identified a second mutation within the EGFR, which results
in the resistance of the tyrosine kinase to gefitinib, as a major cause of
reduced tumor control. (3) This has resulted in the development of newer EGFR
inhibitors, e.g., afatinib, which inhibited double mutant EGFR. (4) In a subset
of these patients, however, resistance to gefitinib was not associated with EGFR 
mutations. (5) Clearly, other mechanisms of gefitinib resistance must be at play.

DOI: 10.4161/cbt.28504 
PMCID: PMC4049779
PMID: 24618893  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


655. Cancer Lett. 2014 Jun 1;347(2):196-203. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2014.02.025. Epub
2014 Mar 7.

Synergistic anti-tumor effects of a novel phosphatidyl inositol-3
kinase/mammalian target of rapamycin dual inhibitor BGT226 and gefitinib in
non-small cell lung cancer cell lines.

Katanasaka Y(1), Kodera Y(2), Yunokawa M(2), Kitamura Y(2), Tamura T(3), Koizumi 
F(4).

Author information: 
(1)Shien-lab, National Cancer Center Hospital, 5-1-1 Tsukiji, Chuo-ku, Tokyo
104-0045, Japan; Division of Molecular Medicine, School of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, University of Shizuoka, 52-1 Yada, Suruga-ku, Shizuoka 422-8526, Japan.
(2)Shien-lab, National Cancer Center Hospital, 5-1-1 Tsukiji, Chuo-ku, Tokyo
104-0045, Japan. (3)Division of Internal Medicine, National Cancer Center
Hospital, 5-1-1 Tsukiji, Chuo-ku, Tokyo 104-0045, Japan. (4)Shien-lab, National
Cancer Center Hospital, 5-1-1 Tsukiji, Chuo-ku, Tokyo 104-0045, Japan; Genomic
Division, National Cancer Center Research Institute, 5-1-1 Tsukiji, Chuo-ku,
Tokyo 104-0045, Japan. Electronic address: fkoizumi@ncc.go.jp.

Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) and PI3K/mTOR pathway are drug targets
for non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Herein, we investigated anti-tumor
effects of the combination of BGT226, a novel PI3K/mTOR dual inhibitor, and
gefitinib on NSCLC cell lines which are high sensitive to gefitinib. The
combination of BGT226 and gefitinib exhibited supra-additive growth inhibitory
effects in PC-9 and HCC827 cells. Apoptotic induction and the inhibition of
PI3K/mTOR signaling were enhanced by the combination. Significant tumor growth
suppression was observed in xenograft model by the combination. These results
suggest that the combination is effective in EGFR inhibitor-sensitive NSCLC
therapy.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.canlet.2014.02.025 
PMID: 24614285  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


656. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2014 Mar 15;88(4):947-54. doi:
10.1016/j.ijrobp.2013.12.038.

Short-course treatment with gefitinib enhances curative potential of radiation
therapy in a mouse model of human non-small cell lung cancer.

Bokobza SM(1), Jiang Y(1), Weber AM(1), Devery AM(1), Ryan AJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Gray Institute for Radiation Oncology and Biology,
University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom. (2)Department of Oncology, Gray
Institute for Radiation Oncology and Biology, University of Oxford, Oxford,
United Kingdom. Electronic address: anderson.ryan@oncology.ox.ac.uk.

PURPOSE: To evaluate the combination of radiation and an epidermal growth factor 
receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) in preclinical models of human
non-small cell lung cancer.
METHODS AND MATERIALS: Sensitivity to an EGFR TKI (gefitinib) or radiation was
assessed using proliferation assays and clonogenic survival assays. Effects on
receptor signal transduction pathways (pEGFR, pAKT, pMAPK) and apoptosis
(percentage of cleaved PARP Poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP)) were assessed by
Western blotting. Radiation-induced DNA damage was assessed by γH2AX
immunofluorescence. Established (≥ 100 mm(3)) EGFR-mutated (HCC287) or EGFR
wild-type (A549) subcutaneous xenografts were treated with radiation (10 Gy, day 
1) or gefitinib (50 mg/kg, orally, on days 1-3) or both.
RESULTS: In non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cell lines with activating EGFR
mutations (PC9 or HCC827), gefitinib treatment markedly reduced pEGFR, pAKT, and 
pMAPK levels and was associated with an increase in cleaved PARP but not in γH2AX
foci. Radiation treatment increased the mean number of γH2AX foci per cell but
did not significantly affect EGFR signaling. In contrast, NSCLC cell lines with
EGFR T790M (H1975) or wild-type EGFR (A549) were insensitive to gefitinib
treatment. The combination of gefitinib and radiation treatment in cell culture
produced additive cell killing with no evidence of synergy. In xenograft models, 
a short course of gefitinib (3 days) did not significantly increase the activity 
of radiation treatment in wild-type EGFR (A549) tumors (P=.27), whereas this
combination markedly increased the activity of radiation (P<.001) or gefitinib
alone (P=.002) in EGFR-mutated HCC827 tumors, producing sustained tumor
regressions.
CONCLUSIONS: Gefitinib treatment increases clonogenic cell killing by radiation
but only in cell lines sensitive to gefitinib alone. Our data suggest additive
rather than synergistic interactions between gefitinib and radiation and that a
combination of short-course gefitinib and high-dose/-fraction radiation may have 
the greatest potential against the subsets of lung cancers harboring activating
mutations in the EGFR gene.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijrobp.2013.12.038 
PMID: 24606853  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


657. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2014;15(3):1391-6.

MiR-130a overcomes gefitinib resistance by targeting met in non-small cell lung
cancer cell lines.

Zhou YM(1), Liu J, Sun W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Geriatrics, Wuhan University, Renmin Hospital, Wuhan, China
E-mail : weisun02@163.com.

Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is the most common type of lung cancer and the
most common cause of lung cancer death. Currently, the epidermal growth factor
receptor inhibitor gefitinib is used for its treatment; however, drug resistance 
is a major obstacle. Expression of Met has been associated with both primary and 
acquired resistance to gefitinib, but the mechanisms regulating its expression
are not fully understood. Recently, miRNAs such as miR-130a have been shown to
play a role in gefitinib resistance, but importance in NSCLC and relationships
with Met have not been fully explored. Here we show that miR-130a is
over-expressed in gefitinib- sensitive NSCLC cell lines, but is low in
gefitinib-resistant NSCLC cell lines. Moreover, miR-130a expression was
negatively correlated with that of Met. Further analysis revealed that
over-expression of miR-130a increased cell apoptosis and inhibited proliferation 
of NSCLC cells treated with gefitinib, whereas lowering the expression of
miR-130a decreased cell apoptosis and promoted cell proliferation after treatment
with gefitinib in both gefitinib-sensitive and -resistant NSCLC cell lines,
suggesting that miR-130a overcomes gefitinib resistance. We also demonstrated
that miR-130a binds to the 3'-UTR of Met and significantly suppresses its
expression. Finally, our results showed that over-expressing Met could "rescue"
the functions of miR-130a regarding cell apoptosis and proliferation after cells 
are treated with gefitinib. These findings indicate that the miR-130a/Met axis
plays an important role in gefitinib resistance in NSCLC. Thus, the miR-130a/Met 
axis may be an effective therapeutic target in gefitinib-resistant lung cancer
patients.


PMID: 24606471  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


658. Expert Opin Pharmacother. 2014 Apr;15(5):717-28. doi:
10.1517/14656566.2014.890183. Epub 2014 Mar 4.

Icotinib: activity and clinical application in Chinese patients with lung cancer.

Guan YS(1), He Q, Li M.

Author information: 
(1)West China Hospital of Sichuan University, Department of Oncology , Chengdu
610041 , China yongsongguan@yahoo.com.

INTRODUCTION: Icotinib (BPI-2009H, Conmana) is a novel oral quinazoline compound 
that has proven survival benefit in Chinese patients with lung cancer, for which 
several therapies are currently available often with unsatisfactory results.
Icotinib is the first self-developed small molecular drug in China for targeted
therapy of lung cancer.
AREAS COVERED: The authors' experience in the clinical application of icotinib is
reviewed in combination with related publications in the literature. Antitumor
activities were observed in non-small-cell lung cancer and others in several
recent studies. On 7 June 2011, icotinib was approved by the State Food and Drug 
Administration of China for the treatment of local advanced or metastatic
non-small-cell lung cancer based on the results of a nationwide, of 27 centers,
randomized, double-blind, double-modulated, parallel-controlled, Phase III trial 
with single agent icotinib in lung cancer patients after failure of chemotherapy.
EXPERT OPINION: Icotinib is a generic drug. Compared to the other two
commercially available EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors, gefitinib and erlotinib, 
icotinib is similar to them in chemical structure, mechanism of activity and
therapeutic effects but less expensive. Better safety as well as a wider
therapeutic window has also been proven in several Chinese studies. Future
studies on cost effectiveness are warranted.

DOI: 10.1517/14656566.2014.890183 
PMID: 24588695  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


659. PLoS One. 2014 Feb 20;9(2):e88881. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0088881. eCollection
2014.

Economic outcomes of maintenance gefitinib for locally advanced/metastatic
non-small-cell lung cancer with unknown EGFR mutations: a semi-Markov model
analysis.

Zeng X(1), Li J(2), Peng L(3), Wang Y(1), Tan C(2), Chen G(4), Wan X(2), Lu Q(3),
Yi L(3).

Author information: 
(1)PET-CT Center, the Second Xiangya Hospital of Central South University,
Changsha, Hunan, People's Republic of China. (2)Department of Pharmacy, the
Second Xiangya Hospital of Central South University, Changsha, Hunan, People's
Republic of China ; School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Central South University, 
Changsha, Hunan, People's Republic of China. (3)Department of Pharmacy, the
Second Xiangya Hospital of Central South University, Changsha, Hunan, People's
Republic of China. (4)Department of Surgery, the Second Xiangya Hospital of
Central South University, Changsha, Hunan, People's Republic of China.

BACKGROUND: Maintenance gefitinib significantly prolonged progression-free
survival (PFS) compared with placebo in patients from eastern Asian with locally 
advanced/metastatic non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) after four
chemotherapeutic cycles (21 days per cycle) of first-line platinum-based
combination chemotherapy without disease progression. The objective of the
current study was to evaluate the cost-effectiveness of maintenance gefitinib
therapy after four chemotherapeutic cycle's stand first-line platinum-based
chemotherapy for patients with locally advanced or metastatic NSCLC with unknown 
EGFR mutations, from a Chinese health care system perspective.
METHODS AND FINDINGS: A semi-Markov model was designed to evaluate
cost-effectiveness of the maintenance gefitinib treatment. Two-parametric Weibull
and Log-logistic distribution were fitted to PFS and overall survival curves
independently. One-way and probabilistic sensitivity analyses were conducted to
assess the stability of the model designed. The model base-case analysis
suggested that maintenance gefitinib would increase benefits in a 1, 3, 6 or
10-year time horizon, with incremental $184,829, $19,214, $19,328, and $21,308
per quality-adjusted life-year (QALY) gained, respectively. The most sensitive
influential variable in the cost-effectiveness analysis was utility of PFS plus
rash, followed by utility of PFS plus diarrhoea, utility of progressed disease,
price of gefitinib, cost of follow-up treatment in progressed survival state, and
utility of PFS on oral therapy. The price of gefitinib is the most significant
parameter that could reduce the incremental cost per QALY. Probabilistic
sensitivity analysis indicated that the cost-effective probability of maintenance
gefitinib was zero under the willingness-to-pay (WTP) threshold of $16,349 (3 ×
per-capita gross domestic product of China). The sensitivity analyses all
suggested that the model was robust.
CONCLUSIONS: Maintenance gefitinib following first-line platinum-based
chemotherapy for patients with locally advanced/metastatic NSCLC with unknown
EGFR mutations is not cost-effective. Decreasing the price of gefitinib may be a 
preferential choice for meeting widely treatment demands in China.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0088881 
PMCID: PMC3930593
PMID: 24586426  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


660. Ann Surg Oncol. 2014 Jun;21(6):2091-6. doi: 10.1245/s10434-014-3586-9. Epub 2014 
Mar 1.

Pemetrexed-carboplatin adjuvant chemotherapy with or without gefitinib in
resected stage IIIA-N2 non-small cell lung cancer harbouring EGFR mutations: a
randomized, phase II study.

Li N(1), Ou W, Ye X, Sun HB, Zhang L, Fang Q, Zhang SL, Wang BX, Wang SY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center,
Guangzhou, China.

BACKGROUND: Epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors
(EGFR-TKIs) show great efficacy in patients with advanced non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC) with EGFR mutations. The efficacy and safety of gefitinib
following adjuvant chemotherapy in patients with EGFR mutation are unknown.
METHODS: In this open-label, phase II study, patients with resected stage IIIA-N2
NSCLC harbouring EGFR mutations (either exon 19 deletion or L858R point mutation)
were assigned randomly to receive pemetrexed (500 mg/m(2)) and carboplatin
(AUC = 5), administered every 21 days for 4 cycles, followed with or without
gefitinib (250 mg/day) for 6 months. The primary end point was disease-free
survival (DFS).
RESULTS: From August 2008 to September 2011, 60 patients were included in our
center. DFS was significantly longer among those who received pemetrexed and
carboplatin (PC)-gefitinib than among those who received PC alone [hazard ratio
(HR), 0.37; 95 % confidence interval (CI) 0.16-0.85; P = 0.014; median, 39.8 vs. 
27.0 months]. The rates of 2-year DFS were 78.9 % in the PC-gefitinib group and
54.2 % in the PC alone group. The rates of 2-year overall survival (OS) were
92.4 % in the PC-gefitinib group and 77.4 % in the PC alone group (HR, 0.37; 95 %
CI 0.12-1.11, P = 0.076). The most common adverse event was rash (43.3 %, 13/30) 
in the PC-gefitinib group and the administration of gefitinib following
chemotherapy was well tolerated.
CONCLUSIONS: The administration of gefitinib following PC adjuvant therapy shows 
significant improvement in DFS in patients with resected stage IIIA-N2 NSCLC
harbouring EGFR mutations.

DOI: 10.1245/s10434-014-3586-9 
PMID: 24585406  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


661. Biol Pharm Bull. 2014;37(3):355-60.

Monitoring of gefitinib sensitivity with radioiodinated PHY based on EGFR
expression.

Yoshimoto M(1), Hirata M, Kanai Y, Naka S, Nishii R, Kagawa S, Kawai K, Ohmomo Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Functional Imaging, National Cancer Center Hospital East.

Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is attractive target for tumor diagnosis 
and therapy, as it is specifically and abundantly expressed in tumor cells.
EGFR-tyrosine kinase (TK) inhibitors such as gefitinib and erlotinib are widely
used in the treatment of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). In this study, we
investigated whether radioiodinated 4-(3-iodo-phenoxy)-6,7-diethoxy-quinazoline
(PHY), which is a candidate EGFR-TK imaging agent for single photon emission
computed tomography (SPECT) is able to predict gefitinib sensitivity. We used
four NSCLC cell lines-A549 (wild-type EGFR), H1650 (mutant EGFR; del E746_A750), 
H1975 (mutant EGFR; L858R, T790M) and H3255 (mutant EGFR; L858R)-and one
epidermoid carcinoma cell line, A431 (wild-type EGFR). Cell proliferation assay
and Western blotting revealed that A431 and H3255 with high EGFR expression
showed high sensitivity to gefitinib. On the other hand, A549, H1650 and H1975
showed much lower sensitivity to gefitinib. The blocking study revealed that
gefitinib decreased tumor uptake in (125)I-PHY in A431-bearing mice. Moreover, in
vivo tumor uptake of (125)I-PHY was correlated with the IC50 of gefitinib for
cell proliferation. In the present study, tumor uptake of (125)I-PHY was
correlated with the gefitinib sensitivity and this uptake was based on expression
levels of EGFR, but not on mutation status. Although the mutation status is the
most important factor for predicting gefitinib sensitivity, the abundant
expression of EGFR is essential for therapy with EGFR-TK inhibitors. Therefore,
radioiodinated PHY is a potential imaging agent to predict gefitinib sensitivity 
based on EGFR expression levels though further modifications of the imaging agent
is needed to accurately estimate the mutation status.


PMID: 24583857  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


662. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2014 Mar 28;446(1):179-86. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2014.02.073. Epub 2014 Feb 28.

miR-138-5p reverses gefitinib resistance in non-small cell lung cancer cells via 
negatively regulating G protein-coupled receptor 124.

Gao Y(1), Fan X(1), Li W(2), Ping W(1), Deng Y(3), Fu X(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China. (2)Department of
Infectious Disease, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University 
of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China. (3)Research Institute of Thoracic
Surgery, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science 
and Technology, Wuhan, China. Electronic address: Leojokea@ailiyun.com.
(4)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China. Electronic address: 
fuxn2006@aliyun.com.

Epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors (EGFR TKIs) such as
gefitinib are clinically effective treatments for non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC) patients with EGFR activating mutations. However, therapeutic effect is
ultimately limited by the development of acquired TKI resistance. MicroRNAs
(miRNAs) represent a category of small non-coding RNAs commonly deregulated in
human malignancies. The aim of this study was to investigate the role of miRNAs
in gefitinib resistance. We established a gefitinib-resistant cell model (PC9GR) 
by continually exposing PC9 NSCLC cells to gefitinib for 6 months. MiRNA
microarray screening revealed miR-138-5p showed the greatest downregulation in
PC9GR cells. Re-expression of miR-138-5p was sufficient to sensitize PC9GR cells 
and another gefitinib-resistant NSCLC cell line, H1975, to gefitinib.
Bioinformatics analysis and luciferase reporter assay showed that G
protein-coupled receptor124 (GPR124) was a direct target of miR-138-5p.
Experimental validation demonstrated that expression of GPR124 was suppressed by 
miR-138-5p on protein and mRNA levels in NSCLC cells. Furthermore, we observed an
inverse correlation between the expression of miR-138-5p and GPR124 in lung
adenocarcinoma specimens. Knockdown of GPR124 mimicked the effects of miR-138-5p 
on the sensitivity to gefitinib. Collectively, our results suggest that
downregulation of miR-138-5p contributes to gefitinib resistance and that
restoration of miR-138-5p or inhibition GPR124 might serve as potential
therapeutic approach for overcoming NSCLC gefitinib resistance.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2014.02.073 
PMID: 24582749  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


663. Asia Pac J Clin Oncol. 2014 Dec;10(4):340-5. doi: 10.1111/ajco.12177. Epub 2014
Feb 27.

EGFR gene mutations in patients with adenosquamous lung carcinoma.

Powrózek T(1), Krawczyk P, Ramlau R, Sura S, Wojas-Krawczyk K, Kucharczyk T,
Walczyna B, Szumiło J, Szyszka-Barth K, Milecki P, Barinow-Wojewódzki A,
Milanowski J.

Author information: 
(1)Pneumonology, Oncology and Allergology Department, Medical University, Lublin,
Poland.

AIM: Adenosquamous (ADSQ) carcinoma accounts for 1-4% of non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC). The origin of ADSQ carcinoma and its genetic background is not
fully understood. Most studies concerning epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)
mutation status are performed in adenocarcinoma, while there is limited
information about the prevalence of this mutation in ADSQ-bearing Caucasian
patients and the efficacy of EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors.
METHODS: EGFR gene status has been examined in 1000 non-squamous NSCLC patients
of Polish origin. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) followed by DNA fragment length
analysis and allele-specific PCR as well as real-time PCR technique were used to 
estimate EGFR gene status. Complete clinical data were obtained for all examined 
patients.
RESULTS: In the group of 1000 non-squamous NSCLC patients, ADSQ was diagnosed in 
14 (1.4%) cases. Activating mutations of EGFR were observed in 28.6% (four out of
14) of ADSQ-bearing patients and included deletions of 15 base-pairs in exon 19
in three cases (one man and two women) and substitution of L861Q with coexistence
of G719X mutation in one non-smoking male patient. Deletions were diagnosed in
two non-smoking patients and one current-smoking female patient (50 pack-years). 
One non-smoking man with deletion in exon 19 of EGFR gene was successfully
treated with gefitinib in first-line therapy.
CONCLUSIONS: EGFR gene mutations in ADSQ carcinoma patients may be more common
than previously thought. EGFR mutation testing is appropriate in ADSQ-bearing
patients, in which response for molecular-based therapy is predictable.

© 2014 Wiley Publishing Asia Pty Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/ajco.12177 
PMID: 24575772  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


664. Thorac Cancer. 2014 Mar;5(2):149-54. doi: 10.1111/1759-7714.12074. Epub 2014 Mar 
3.

Phase II trial of paclitaxel-carboplatin with intercalated gefitinib for
untreated, epidermal growth factor receptor gene mutation status unknown
non-small cell lung cancer.

Yang J(1), Shi Y(1), Zhang X(1), Xu J(1), Wang B(1), Hao X(1), Li J(1), Yan W(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Cancer Institute/Hospital, Chinese Academy of 
Medical Sciences, Peking Union Medical CollegeBeijing, China; Beijing Key
Laboratory of Clinical Study on Anticancer Molecular Targeted DrugsBeijing,
China.

BACKGROUND: This study was conducted to evaluate the efficacy and safety of
paclitaxel-carboplatin combined with intercalated gefitinib in patients with
advanced, untreated, nonsquamous non-small cell lung cancer.
METHODS: A total of 29 patients were enrolled in the study. All patients were
Chinese, with a histology type of adenocarcinoma, without a smoking history, and 
as a result of the limited tissue sample, an epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR) mutation test could not be performed. All patients received chemotherapy
of paclitaxel-carboplatin every 21 days for four cycles, and gefitinib
(250 mg/day) was administered on days eight to 17 of the chemotherapy cycle. If
the patient responded to chemotherapy, maintenance therapy of 250mg of gefitinib 
could be administered daily.
RESULTS: All of the 29 patients received at least one cycle of chemotherapy and
gefitinib, and 25 patients received four cycles of therapy. Eighteen patients
selected maintenance therapy with gefitinib. The objective response rate was
74.1% (95% confidence interval, 53.7% to 88.9%). No complete response was
achieved. The median progression-free survival was 16 months, however, the median
overall survival was not available by the conclusion of the study. The major
adverse event was hematologic toxicity.
CONCLUSIONS: The regimen of paclitaxel-carboplatin combined with intercalated
gefitinib showed a high response rate and a favorable safety profile. Gefitinib
maintenance therapy was proven to be beneficial. This study proposes a good
pattern of chemotherapy combined with EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors.

DOI: 10.1111/1759-7714.12074 
PMCID: PMC4704326
PMID: 26766992  [PubMed]


665. J Carcinog. 2013 Dec 31;12:22. doi: 10.4103/1477-3163.123972. eCollection 2013.

Targeted therapies in development for non-small cell lung cancer.

Reungwetwattana T(1), Dy GK(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Medical Oncology, Ramathibodi
Hospital, Mahidol University, Bangkok 10400, Thailand ; Department of Medicine,
Roswell Park Cancer Institute, Buffalo, NY 14263, USA. (2)Department of Medicine,
Roswell Park Cancer Institute, Buffalo, NY 14263, USA.

The iterative discovery in various malignancies during the past decades that a
number of aberrant tumorigenic processes and signal transduction pathways are
mediated by "druggable" protein kinases has led to a revolutionary change in drug
development. In non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), the ErbB family of receptors 
(e.g., EGFR [epidermal growth factor receptor], HER2 [human epidermal growth
factor receptor 2]), RAS (rat sarcoma gene), BRAF (v-raf murine sarcoma viral
oncogene homolog B1), MAPK (mitogen-activated protein kinase) c-MET
(c-mesenchymal-epithelial transition), FGFR (fibroblast growth factor receptor), 
DDR2 (discoidin domain receptor 2), PIK3CA
(phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate3-kinase, catalytic subunit alpha)), PTEN
(phosphatase and tensin homolog), AKT (protein kinase B), ALK (anaplastic lym
phoma kinase), RET (rearranged during transfection), ROS1 (reactive oxygen
species 1) and EPH (erythropoietin-producing hepatoma) are key targets of various
agents currently in clinical development. These oncogenic targets exert their
selective growth advantage through various intercommunicating pathways, such as
through RAS/RAF/MEK, phosphoinositide 3-kinase/AKT/mammalian target of rapamycin 
and SRC-signal transduction and transcription signaling. The recent clinical
studies, EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors and crizotinib were considered as
strongly effective targeted therapies in metastatic NSCLC. Currently, five
molecular targeted agents were approved for treatment of advanced NSCLC:
Gefitinib, erlotinib and afatinib for positive EGFR mutation, crizotinib for
positive echinoderm microtubule-associated protein-like 4 (EML4)-ALK
translocation and bevacizumab. Moreover, oncogenic mutant proteins are subject to
regulation by protein trafficking pathways, specifically through the heat shock
protein 90 system. Drug combinations affecting various nodes in these signaling
and intracellular processes are predicted and demonstrated to be synergistic and 
advantageous in overcoming treatment resistance compared with monotherapy
approaches. Understanding the role of the tumor microenvironment in the
development and maintenance of the malignant phenotype provided additional
therapeutic approaches as well. More recently, improved knowledge on tumor
immunology has set the stage for promising immunotherapies in NSCLC. This review 
will focus on the rationale for the development of targeted therapies in NSCLC
and the various strategies employed in preventing or overcoming the inevitable
occurrence of treatment resistance.

DOI: 10.4103/1477-3163.123972 
PMCID: PMC3927069
PMID: 24574860  [PubMed]


666. Rev Pneumol Clin. 2014 Feb-Apr;70(1-2):38-46. doi: 10.1016/j.pneumo.2013.12.005. 
Epub 2014 Feb 22.

[Therapeutic impact of molecular diagnosis in metastatic non-small cell lung
cancer: targeted therapies in 2013].

[Article in French]

Pecuchet N(1), Bigot F(2), Henni M(2), Fabre E(3).

Author information: 
(1)Service d'oncologie médicale, hôpital européen Georges-Pompidou, 20-30, rue
Leblanc, 75908 Paris cedex 15, France; Unité Inserm U775 : bases moléculaires de 
la réponse aux xénobiotiques, centre universitaire des Saints-Pères, 45, rue des 
Saints-Pères, 75006 Paris, France. (2)Service d'oncologie médicale, hôpital
européen Georges-Pompidou, 20-30, rue Leblanc, 75908 Paris cedex 15, France.
(3)Service d'oncologie médicale, hôpital européen Georges-Pompidou, 20-30, rue
Leblanc, 75908 Paris cedex 15, France; Unité Inserm U775 : bases moléculaires de 
la réponse aux xénobiotiques, centre universitaire des Saints-Pères, 45, rue des 
Saints-Pères, 75006 Paris, France. Electronic address:
elizabeth.fabre@egp.aphp.fr.

Recent advances in the molecular characterization of metastatic unresectable lung
cancers have markedly improved the management of patients. Today, molecular tests
should be performed routinely in all patients with non-squamous non-small cell
lung cancer, and in case of squamous cell carcinoma occurring in a non-smoker. In
the presence of EGFR mutation or ALK rearrangement, specific inhibitors have
shown superior efficacy to chemotherapy in first-line treatment for anti-EGFR
(erlotinib and gefitinib) and in second-line treatment for anti-ALK (crizotinib).
We will report the most recent clinical trials that aimed to identify effective
therapeutic alternatives in case of acquired resistance to first-generation
inhibitors (erlotinib, gefitnib, crizotinib), which inevitably occur in a median 
of 11-13 months at the first line setting and 7 months at the second line
setting. Finally, we will describe more recently known molecular alterations such
as ROS1 or RET rearrangements and HER2, BRAF, PIK3CA, DDR2 mutations. Some of
these alterations are already elegible for dedicated targeted therapies within
clinical trials or temporary use authorization (ATU).

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pneumo.2013.12.005 
PMID: 24566025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


667. J Med Case Rep. 2014 Feb 20;8:64. doi: 10.1186/1752-1947-8-64.

Brain metastasis effectively treated with erlotinib following the acquisition of 
resistance to gefitinib: a case report.

Ohara S(1), Ushijima T, Gunji M, Tanai C, Tanaka Y, Noda H, Horiuchi H, Usui K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Respirology NTT Medical Center TOKYO, 5-9-22 Higashigotanda,
Shinagawa, Tokyo 141-8625, Japan. sayakaohara@gmail.com.

INTRODUCTION: Non-small-cell lung cancer harboring an activated epidermal growth 
factor receptor mutation exhibits a good response to epidermal growth factor
receptor-tyrosine kinase inhibitors; however, clinicians often experience
treatment failure following the development of resistance to epidermal growth
factor receptor-tyrosine kinase inhibitor.
CASE PRESENTATION: We here report a case of a 56-year-old Japanese woman with
non-small-cell lung carcinoma with a secondary T790M mutation associated with
resistance to epidermal growth factor receptor-tyrosine kinase inhibitor that
maintained sensitivity of brain metastases to epidermal growth factor
receptor-tyrosine kinase inhibitor. An autopsy showed that the primary focus had 
a T790M mutation; however, no mutations of T790M were found in the brain
metastases.
CONCLUSION: This case demonstrates the detection of T790M was associated with the
clinical responsiveness to epidermal growth factor receptor-tyrosine kinase
inhibitor.

DOI: 10.1186/1752-1947-8-64 
PMCID: PMC3943274
PMID: 24555578  [PubMed]


668. PLoS One. 2014 Feb 12;9(2):e85245. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0085245. eCollection
2014.

Network meta-analysis of erlotinib, gefitinib, afatinib and icotinib in patients 
with advanced non-small-cell lung cancer harboring EGFR mutations.

Liang W(1), Wu X(1), Fang W(1), Zhao Y(1), Yang Y(1), Hu Z(1), Xue C(1), Zhang
J(1), Zhang J(1), Ma Y(1), Zhou T(1), Yan Y(1), Hou X(1), Qin T(1), Dinglin X(1),
Tian Y(1), Huang P(1), Huang Y(1), Zhao H(1), Zhang L(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Collaborative Innovation
Center for Cancer Medicine, Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center, Guangzhou,
Guangdong, China.

BACKGROUND: Several EGFR-tyrosine kinase inhibitors (EGFR-TKIs) including
erlotinib, gefitinib, afatinib and icotinib are currently available as treatment 
for patients with advanced non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) who harbor EGFR
mutations. However, no head to head trials between these TKIs in mutated
populations have been reported, which provides room for indirect and integrated
comparisons.
METHODS: We searched electronic databases for eligible literatures. Pooled data
on objective response rate (ORR), progression free survival (PFS), overall
survival (OS) were calculated. Appropriate networks for different outcomes were
established to incorporate all evidences. Multiple-treatments comparisons (MTCs) 
based on Bayesian network integrated the efficacy and specific toxicities of all 
included treatments.
RESULTS: Twelve phase III RCTs that investigated EGFR-TKIs involving 1821
participants with EGFR mutation were included. For mutant patients, the weighted 
pooled ORR and 1-year PFS of EGFR-TKIs were significant superior to that of
standard chemotherapy (ORR: 66.6% vs. 30.9%, OR 5.46, 95%CI 3.59 to 8.30,
P<0.00001; 1-year PFS: 42.9% vs. 9.7%, OR 7.83, 95%CI 4.50 to 13.61; P<0.00001)
through direct meta-analysis. In the network meta-analyses, no statistically
significant differences in efficacy were found between these four TKIs with
respect to all outcome measures. Trend analyses of rank probabilities revealed
that the cumulative probabilities of being the most efficacious treatments were
(ORR, 1-year PFS, 1-year OS, 2-year OS): erlotinib (51%, 38%, 14%, 19%),
gefitinib (1%, 6%, 5%, 16%), afatinib (29%, 27%, 30%, 27%) and icotinib (19%,
29%, NA, NA), respectively. However, afatinib and erlotinib showed significant
severer rash and diarrhea compared with gefitinib and icotinib.
CONCLUSIONS: The current study indicated that erlotinib, gefitinib, afatinib and 
icotinib shared equivalent efficacy but presented different efficacy-toxicity
pattern for EGFR-mutated patients. Erlotinib and afatinib revealed potentially
better efficacy but significant higher toxicities compared with gefitinib and
icotinib.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0085245 
PMCID: PMC3922700
PMID: 24533047  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


669. Oncol Lett. 2014 Mar;7(3):878-880. Epub 2013 Dec 11.

Rechallenge with gefitinib following severe drug-induced hepatotoxicity in a
patient with advanced non-small cell lung cancer: A case report and literature
review.

Chen X(1), Pan Y(1), Zhang S(1), Chen D(1), Yang S(1), Li X(1), Ma S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Nanjing Medical University, Affiliated
Hangzhou Hospital (Hangzhou First People's Hospital), Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310006, 
P.R. China.

Gefitinib has come to be the most widely used epidermal growth factor
receptor-tyrosine kinase inhibitor in the treatment of advanced non-small cell
lung cancer (NSCLC) in Asian patients. Common side effects include mild to
moderate skin rash and diarrhea, however, drug-induced liver injury of varying
severity is overlooked in long-term gefitinib administration and rarely reported.
The current case report presents a female Chinese NSCLC patient who developed
severe gefitinib-induced hepatotoxicity and was rechallenged with gefitinib
following a 3-month break. The patient achieved partial clinical remission but
developed drug-induced grade 4 hepatotoxicity following gefitinib administration 
for 14 months. As an alternative, 4 cycles of chemotherapy were administered to
control tumor progression. Following restoration of the patient's liver function,
gefitinib was rechallenged together with active hepatoprotective therapy. The
patient presented good disease control and maintained normal liver function for
>6 months. Thus, sequential chemotherapy and gefitinib rechallenge with
hepatoprotective therapy may be a potential new treatment strategy for
gefitinib-induced hepatotoxicity.

DOI: 10.3892/ol.2013.1756 
PMCID: PMC3919904
PMID: 24527096  [PubMed]


670. Leuk Res. 2014 Apr;38(4):430-4. doi: 10.1016/j.leukres.2013.10.026. Epub 2013 Nov
5.

A phase II study of the EGFR inhibitor gefitinib in patients with acute myeloid
leukemia.

Deangelo DJ(1), Neuberg D(2), Amrein PC(3), Berchuck J(4), Wadleigh M(5),
Sirulnik LA(5), Galinsky I(5), Golub T(6), Stegmaier K(6), Stone RM(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA, USA.
Electronic address: daniel_deangelo@dfci.harvard.edu. (2)Department of
Biostatistics and Computational Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston,
MA, USA. (3)Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA. (4)Department of
Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, and the Division of
Hematology/Oncology, Children's Hospital Boston, Boston, MA, USA. (5)Department
of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA, USA. (6)Department
of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, and the Division of
Hematology/Oncology, Children's Hospital Boston, Boston, MA, USA; Broad Institute
of Harvard and Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA.

Novel therapies for the treatment of acute myeloid leukemia are required to
overcome disease resistance and to provide potentially less toxic therapies for
older adults. Prior clinical trials involving patients with non-small cell lung
cancer have demonstrated the safety and biologic activity of the administration
of EGFR inhibitors in carefully selected patients. The potential efficacy of this
approach in patients with acute myeloid leukemia is unknown. The effects of
gefitinib on differentiation induction and cell viability in AML cell lines and
primary patient AML cells were previously reported and cell viability was
inhibited in a clinically achievable range. To determine if EGFR inhibitors would
be therapeutically efficacious in advanced AML, we performed a phase II trial in 
which 18 patients with a median age of 72 (range, 57-84 years) were treated with 
gefitinib (750mg orally daily). While there were no unexpected toxicities, no
patients experienced an objective response, though one had stable disease lasting
16 months. We conclude that in spite of pre-clinical activity and anecdotal cases
of response to EGFR inhibitors, routine use of the EGFR inhibitor gefitinib as a 
single agent for advanced AML is not appropriate.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.leukres.2013.10.026 
PMCID: PMC4860003
PMID: 24522247  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


671. Clin Lung Cancer. 2014 May;15(3):182-7. doi: 10.1016/j.cllc.2014.01.001. Epub
2014 Jan 9.

Early pharmacodynamic assessment using ¹⁸F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron-emission
tomography on molecular targeted therapy and cytotoxic chemotherapy for clinical 
outcome prediction.

Kanazu M(1), Maruyama K(2), Ando M(3), Asami K(1), Ishii M(4), Uehira K(1),
Minomo S(1), Matsuda Y(1), Kawaguchi T(1), Atagi S(1), Ogawa Y(5), Kusunoki Y(5),
Takada M(6), Kubo A(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, National Hospital Organization Kinki-chuo
Chest Medical Center, Sakai, Osaka, Japan. (2)Nuclear Medicine and PET Center,
Hyogo College of Medicine, Nishinomiya, Hyogo, Japan. (3)Center for Advanced
Medicine and Clinical Research, Nagoya University Hospital, Nagoya, Aichi, Japan.
(4)Department of Medical Oncology, Yokohama Municipal Citizen's Hospital,
Yokohama, Kanagawa, Japan. (5)Health Examination Center, Hanwa Daini Senboku
Hospital, Sakai, Osaka, Japan. (6)Division of Respiratory Medicine, Koyo
Hospital, Wakayama, Wakayama, Japan. (7)Division of Respiratory Medicine and
Allergology, Aichi Medical University School of Medicine, Nagakute, Aichi, Japan.
Electronic address: kuboa@aichi-med-u.ac.jp.

Early prediction of therapeutic outcome is important in determining whether the
ongoing therapy is beneficial. In addition to anatomical response determined
using the Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors (RECIST) criteria, recent 
studies have indicated that change in tumor glucose use on or after treatment
correlates with histopathologic tumor regression and patient outcomes. This
Perspective discusses the use of (18)F-fluorodeoxyglucose-positron emission
tomography (FDG-PET) for pharmacodynamic evaluation in a very early phase of
treatment to predict clinical outcomes in patients with advanced non-small-cell
lung cancer. We conducted a study to assess whether early metabolic response
determined using FDG-PET correlated with clinical outcomes in patients treated
with gefitinib or those treated with carboplatin plus paclitaxel (CP). Early
metabolic response to gefitinib, but not CP, correlated with the late metabolic
response, anatomical response, progression-free survival, and even overall
survival. A rapid effect of molecular targeted agents might not be aptly
evaluated using the conventional criteria, eg, RECIST, in a very early phase of
treatment before volumetric shrinkage of the tumor. Based on the findings of
several studies, and on the findings from our study, use of FDG-PET might enable 
prediction of clinical outcomes at a very early stage of treatment, especially in
patients treated with molecular targeted agents with rapid clinical efficacy.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cllc.2014.01.001 
PMID: 24518101  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


672. PLoS One. 2014 Jan 31;9(1):e86667. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0086667. eCollection
2014.

Humoral immune responses to EGFR-derived peptides predict progression-free and
overall survival of non-small cell lung cancer patients receiving gefitinib.

Azuma K(1), Komatsu N(2), Hattori S(3), Matsueda S(2), Kawahara A(4), Sasada
T(2), Itoh K(2), Hoshino T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Respirology, Neurology, and Rheumatology, Department of Internal
Medicine, Kurume University School of Medicine, Kurume, Fukuoka, Japan.
(2)Department of Immunology, Kurume University School of Medicine, Kurume,
Fukuoka, Japan. (3)Biostatistics Center, Kurume University, Kurume, Fukuoka,
Japan. (4)Department of Diagnostic Pathology, Kurume University Hospital, Kurume,
Fukuoka, Japan.

Somatic mutations in the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) gene are
associated with clinical response to EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs), such
as gefitinib, in patients with non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). However,
humoral immune responses to EGFR in NSCLC patients have not been well studied. In
this study, we investigated the clinical significance of immunoglobulin G (IgG)
responses to EGFR-derived peptides in NSCLC patients receiving gefitinib. Plasma 
IgG titers to each of 60 different EGFR-derived 20-mer peptides were measured by 
the Luminex system in 42 NSCLC patients receiving gefitinib therapy. The
relationships between the peptide-specific IgG titers and presence of EGFR
mutations or patient survival were evaluated statistically. IgG titers against
the egfr_481-500, egfr_721-740, and egfr_741-760 peptides were significantly
higher in patients with exon 21 mutation than in those without it. On the other
hand, IgG titers against the egfr_841-860 and egfr_1001-1020 peptides were
significantly lower and higher, respectively, in patients with deletion in exon
19. Multivariate Cox regression analysis showed that IgG responses to egfr_41_
60, egfr_61_80 and egfr_481_500 were significantly prognostic for
progression-free survival independent of other clinicopathological
characteristics, whereas those to the egfr_41_60 and egfr_481_500 peptides were
significantly prognostic for overall survival. Detection of IgG responses to
EGFR-derived peptides may be a promising method for prognostication of NSCLC
patients receiving gefitinib. Our results may provide new insight for better
understanding of humoral responses to EGFR in NSCLC patients.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0086667 
PMCID: PMC3909003
PMID: 24497964  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


673. Life Sci. 2014 Mar 28;100(1):25-34. doi: 10.1016/j.lfs.2014.01.072. Epub 2014 Feb
2.

SR48692 inhibits non-small cell lung cancer proliferation in an EGF
receptor-dependent manner.

Moody TW(1), Chan DC(2), Mantey SA(3), Moreno P(3), Jensen RT(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health and Human Services, National Cancer Institute, Center for
Cancer Research, Office of the Director, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. Electronic
address: moodyt@mail.nih.gov. (2)University of Colorado School of Medicine,
Division of Medical Oncology, Aurora, CO 80045, USA. (3)National Institute of
Diabetes, Digestive and Kidney Disease, Digestive Diseases Branch, Bethesda, MD
20892, USA.

AIMS: The mechanism by which SR48692 inhibits non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) 
proliferation was investigated.
MAIN METHODS: The ability of SR48692 to inhibit the proliferation of NSCLC cell
lines NCI-H1299 and A549 was investigated in vitro in the presence or absence of 
neurotensin (NTS). The ability of NTS to cause epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR) transactivation was investigated by Western blot using NSCLC cells and
various inhibitors. The growth effects and Western blot results were determined
in cell lines treated with siRNA for NTSR1.
KEY FINDINGS: Treatment of A549 or NCI-H1299 cells with siRNA for NTSR1 reduced
significantly NTSR1 protein and the ability of SR48692 to inhibit the
proliferation of A549 or NCI-H1299 NSCLC cells. Treatment of A549 and NCI-H1299
cells with siRNA for NTSR1 reduced the ability of NTS to cause epidermal growth
factor receptor (EGFR) transactivation. SR48692 or gefitinib (EGFR tyrosine
kinase inhibitor) inhibited the ability of NTS to cause EGFR and ERK tyrosine
phosphorylation. NTS transactivation of the EGFR was inhibited by GM6001 (matrix 
metalloprotease inhibitor), Tiron (superoxide scavenger) or U73122 (phospholipase
C inhibitor) but not H89 (PKA inhibitor). NTS stimulates whereas SR48692 or
gefitinib inhibits the clonal growth of NSCLC cells.
SIGNIFICANCE: These results suggest that SR48692 may inhibit NSCLC proliferation 
in an EGFR-dependent mechanism.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lfs.2014.01.072 
PMCID: PMC3965624
PMID: 24496038  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


674. PLoS One. 2014 Jan 28;9(1):e86459. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0086459. eCollection
2014.

Hypoxia increases gefitinib-resistant lung cancer stem cells through the
activation of insulin-like growth factor 1 receptor.

Murakami A(1), Takahashi F(1), Nurwidya F(1), Kobayashi I(1), Minakata K(1),
Hashimoto M(2), Nara T(2), Kato M(1), Tajima K(1), Shimada N(1), Iwakami S(3),
Moriyama M(4), Moriyama H(4), Koizumi F(5), Takahashi K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Juntendo University, Graduate School of
Medicine, Tokyo, Japan ; Research Institute for Diseases of Old Ages, Juntendo
University, Graduate School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan. (2)Department of Molecular
and Cellular Parasitology, Juntendo University, Graduate School of Medicine,
Tokyo, Japan. (3)Juntendo University Shizuoka Hospital, Shizuoka, Japan.
(4)Pharmaceutical Research and technology institute, Kinki University, School of 
Medicine, Osaka, Japan. (5)Shien-Lab, National Cancer Center Hospital, Tokyo,
Japan.

Accumulating evidence indicates that a small population of cancer stem cells
(CSCs) is involved in intrinsic resistance to cancer treatment. The hypoxic
microenvironment is an important stem cell niche that promotes the persistence of
CSCs in tumors. Our aim here was to elucidate the role of hypoxia and CSCs in the
resistance to gefitinib in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) with activating
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutation. NSCLC cell lines, PC9 and
HCC827, which express the EGFR exon 19 deletion mutations, were exposed to high
concentration of gefitinib under normoxic or hypoxic conditions. Seven days after
gefitinib exposure, a small fraction of viable cells were detected, and these
were referred to as "gefitinib-resistant persisters" (GRPs). CD133, Oct4, Sox2,
Nanog, CXCR4, and ALDH1A1-all genes involved in stemness-were highly expressed in
GRPs in PC9 and HCC827 cells, and PC9 GRPs exhibited a high potential for
tumorigenicity in vivo. The expression of insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF1) was
also upregulated and IGF1 receptor (IGF1R) was activated on GRPs. Importantly,
hypoxic exposure significantly increased sphere formation, reflecting the
self-renewal capability, and the population of CD133- and Oct4-positive GRPs.
Additionally, hypoxia upregulated IGF1 expression through hypoxia-inducible
factor 1α (HIF1α), and markedly promoted the activation of IGF1R on GRPs.
Knockdown of IGF1 expression significantly reduced phosphorylated
IGF1R-expressing GRPs under hypoxic conditions. Finally, inhibition of HIF1α or
IGF1R by specific inhibitors significantly decreased the population of CD133- and
Oct4-positive GRPs, which were increased by hypoxia in PC9 and HCC827 cells.
Collectively, these findings suggest that hypoxia increased the population of
lung CSCs resistant to gefitinib in EGFR mutation-positive NSCLC by activating
IGF1R. Targeting the IGF1R pathway may be a promising strategy for overcoming
gefitinib resistance in EGFR mutation-positive NSCLC induced by lung CSCs and
microenvironment factors such as tumor hypoxia.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0086459 
PMCID: PMC3904884
PMID: 24489728  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


675. Clin Lung Cancer. 2014 May;15(3):173-81. doi: 10.1016/j.cllc.2013.12.002. Epub
2013 Dec 27.

Treatment of advanced non-small-cell lung cancer with epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR) mutation or ALK gene rearrangement: results of an international
expert panel meeting of the Italian Association of Thoracic Oncology.

Gridelli C(1), de Marinis F(2), Cappuzzo F(3), Di Maio M(4), Hirsch FR(5), Mok
T(6), Morgillo F(7), Rosell R(8), Spigel DR(9), Yang JC(10), Ciardiello F(7).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Oncology, San Giuseppe Moscati Hospital, Avellino, Italy. 
Electronic address: cgridelli@libero.it. (2)Division of Thoracic Oncology,
European Institute of Oncology, Milan, Italy. (3)Medical Oncology Department,
Civil Hospital of Livorno, Istituto Toscano Tumori, Livorno, Italy. (4)Clinical
Trials Unit, Istituto Nazionale per lo Studio e la Cura dei Tumori - Fondazione
G.Pascale IRCCS, Napoli, Italy. (5)University of Colorado Cancer Center, Aurora, 
CO. (6)Department of Clinical Oncology, Prince of Wales Hospital, Shatin, New
Territories, Hong Kong. (7)Dipartimento Medico-Chirurgico di Internistica Clinica
e Sperimentale "F. Magrassi e A. Lanzara," Seconda Università degli Studi di
Napoli, Napoli, Italy. (8)Medical Oncology Service, Catalan Institute of
Oncology, Hospital Germans Trias i Pujol, Badalona (Barcelona), Spain. (9)Sarah
Cannon Research Institute, Nashville, TN. (10)Graduate Institute of Oncology and 
Cancer Research Center, National Taiwan University and Department of Oncology,
National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei City, Taiwan.

The availability of targeted drugs has made the assessment of the EGFR mutation
and ALK rearrangement critical in choosing the optimal treatment for patients
with advanced non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC). In May 2013, the Italian
Association of Thoracic Oncology (AIOT) organized an International Experts Panel 
Meeting to review strengths and limitations of the available evidence for the
diagnosis and treatment of advanced NSCLC with EGFR or anaplastic lymphoma kinase
(ALK) alterations and to discuss implications for clinical practice and future
clinical research. All patients with advanced NSCLC, with the exclusion of pure
squamous cell carcinoma in former or current smokers, should be tested for EGFR
mutations and ALK rearrangements before decisions are made on first-line
treatment. First-line treatment of EGFR-mutated cases should be with an EGFR
tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI). Any available agent (gefitinib, erlotinib, or
afatinib) can be used, until further data from comparative studies may better
guide TKI selection. As general rule, and when clinically feasible, results of
EGFR mutational status should be awaited before starting first-line treatment.
Panelists agreed that the use of crizotinib is justified in any line of
treatment. Although solid evidence supporting the continuation of EGFR TKIs or
crizotinib beyond progression is lacking, in some cases (minimal, asymptomatic
progression, or oligoprogression manageable by local therapy), treatment
continuation beyond progression could be justified. Experimental strategies to
target tumor heterogeneity and to treat patients after failure of EGFR TKIs or
crizotinib are considered high-priority areas of research. A number of relevant
research priorities were identified to optimize available treatment options.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cllc.2013.12.002 
PMID: 24486058  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


676. Br J Pharmacol. 2014 Jun;171(11):2842-53. doi: 10.1111/bph.12610.

Luteolin is effective in the non-small cell lung cancer model with L858R/T790M
EGF receptor mutation and erlotinib resistance.

Hong Z(1), Cao X, Li N, Zhang Y, Lan L, Zhou Y, Pan X, Shen L, Yin Z, Luo L.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, School of Life Sciences,
Nanjing University, Nanjing, Jiangsu, China; Jiangsu Cancer Hospital, Nanjing,
Jiangsu, China.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is one of the most
commonly diagnosed malignancies in the world. Small-molecule inhibitors of the
EGF receptor's tyrosine kinase domain (TKIs), including gefitinib and erlotinib, 
have been widely used for treating NSCLC. Unfortunately, nearly all patients
after initially experiencing a marked improvement while on these drugs,
eventually progress to acquire resistance to TKIs. Because there is no effective 
therapeutic strategy to treat TKI-resistant NSCLC, we evaluated the effects of
luteolin, a naturally occurring flavanoid, on T790M mutant NSCLC cells.
EXPERIMENTAL APPROACH: The effect of luteolin on the viability of NSCLC and
normal cell lines was investigated using the Cell Counting Kit-8 (CCK-8) assay.
Luteolin-induced apoptosis was assessed by bivariate FITC-annexin V/PI assay, and
Western blots were used to measured apoptotic proteins. Co-immunoprecipitation
was used to determine the effect of luteolin on the interaction between Hsp90 and
mutant EGF receptors. The effect of luteolin on the Akt/mTOR pathway was studied 
using Western blotting analysis. Its anti-tumour efficacy in vivo was examined in
a mouse xenograft model.
KEY RESULTS: Luteolin exerted significant anti-tumourigenic effects on the EGF
receptor L858R/T790M mutation and erlotinib-resistant NSCLC both at the cellular 
and animal levels. Mechanistically, luteolin induced degradation of the EGF
receptor by inhibiting the association of Hsp90 with the mutant EGF receptor,
and, therefore, prevented PI3K/Akt/mTOR signalling, which resulted in NSCLC cell 
apoptosis.
CONCLUSION AND IMPLICATIONS: Luteolin may be a potential candidate for NSCLC
therapy, especially for treatment of patients with acquired erlotinib-resistant
NSCLC.

© 2014 The British Pharmacological Society.

DOI: 10.1111/bph.12610 
PMCID: PMC4243859
PMID: 24471765  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


677. Cancer Biomark. 2013;13(5):329-36. doi: 10.3233/CBM-130362.

Integrin beta 1 enhances the epithelial-mesenchymal transition in association
with gefitinib resistance of non-small cell lung cancer.

Ju L(1), Zhou C(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Shanghai Pulmonary Hospital,
Tongji University, Medical School, Shanghai, China. (2)Department of Oncology and
Cancer Institute, Shanghai Pulmonary Hospital, Tongji University, Medical School,
Shanghai, China.

We have previously shown that integrinβ1 associates with gefitinib resistance. As
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) also induces gefitinib resistance in
vitro, we wished to determine the relation of them in gefitinib resistance. In
this study, we show that integrinβ1 induced epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR) tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) resistance in xenograft tumors and
gefitinib-resistant NSCLC tumors acquired EMT phenotype. Furthermore, inhibition 
of integrinβ1 reverses EMT, meanwhile overexpression and activation of integrinβ1
aggravates EMT. Lastly, we further identified that integrinβ1 enhanced EMT via
FAK-AKT signaling pathway. These findings highlight a novel relation of
integrinβ1 and EMT in EGFR TKI resistant NSCLC.

DOI: 10.3233/CBM-130362 
PMID: 24440972  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


678. Exp Cell Res. 2014 Mar 10;322(1):168-77. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2014.01.007. Epub
2014 Jan 15.

Src mediates ERK reactivation in gefitinib resistance in non-small cell lung
cancer.

Ochi N(1), Takigawa N(2), Harada D(3), Yasugi M(3), Ichihara E(3), Hotta K(3),
Tabata M(3), Tanimoto M(3), Kiura K(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Oncology and Respiratory Medicine, Okayama
University Graduate School of Medicine, Dentistry and Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Okayama 700-8558, Japan; Department of General Internal Medicine 4, Kawasaki
Hospital, Kawasaki Medical School, Okayama 700-8505, Japan. (2)Department of
General Internal Medicine 4, Kawasaki Hospital, Kawasaki Medical School, Okayama 
700-8505, Japan. Electronic address: ntakigaw@med.kawasaki-m.ac.jp. (3)Department
of Hematology, Oncology and Respiratory Medicine, Okayama University Graduate
School of Medicine, Dentistry and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Okayama 700-8558,
Japan. (4)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Okayama University Hospital,
Okayama 700-8558, Japan.

To study epidermal growth factor receptor-tyrosine kinase inhibitor (EGFR-TKI)
resistance mechanisms, we established a novel gefitinib-resistant lung cancer
cell line derived from an EGFR-mutant non-small cell lung cancer cell line (PC-9)
pretreated with 4-(methylnitrosamino)-1-(3-pyridyl)-1-butanone (designated
PC9-GR). We found that gefitinib substantially suppressed the EGFR signaling
pathway, whereas ERK was reactivated after several hours in PC9-GR but not in
PC-9. The combination of gefitinib with ERK inhibition (by U0126) restored
gefitinib susceptibility in PC9-GR, but PI3K-Akt inhibition with LY294002 did
not. Although the levels of phosphorylated Src were up-regulated simultaneously
with ERK reactivation, neither ERK suppression using U0126 nor an ERK-specific
siRNA induced Src phosphorylation. Furthermore, dual inhibition of EGFR and Src
restored gefitinib sensitivity in PC9-GR in vitro and in vivo. In conclusion, our
results indicate that Src-mediated ERK reactivation may play a role in a novel
gefitinib resistance mechanism, and that the combined use of gefitinib with a Src
inhibitor may be a potent strategy to overcome this resistance.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2014.01.007 
PMID: 24440771  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


679. Int J Biol Markers. 2014 Jun 25;29(2):e112-9. doi: 10.5301/jbm.5000059.

The presence of EGFR mutations predicts the response in Chinese non-small cell
lung cancer patients treated with erlotinib.

Li RC(1), Zheng LJ, Fang MH, Yu SY.

Author information: 
(1)Comprehensive medical department, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei - China.

Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is a leading cause of death worldwide. The
upregulation of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) due to mutations has 
been observed in a number of cancers, and tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs), such
as gefitinib and erlotinib, which specifically target EGFR signaling, have been
used to treat NSCLC patients. The presence of EGFR mutations was previously shown
to confer sensitivity to TKIs. In this study, we evaluated the correlation
between EGFR mutations and response to erlotinib in Chinese NSCLC patients. We
recruited 36 patients with stage IIIB/IV NSCLC who had failed first-line
chemotherapy, and treated them with erlotinib. We used immunohistochemistry to
determine EGFR expression, and we screened for mutations using PCR analysis. We
used Cox regression analysis and Kaplan-Meier curves for survival analysis. We
found that 8 patients had exon 19 mutations, while 3 patients had exon 21
mutations. An Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) grade of 2 was a
significant negative predictor of overall survival (OS). Patients with EGFR
mutations showed a significantly better OS compared to those without EGFR
mutations. Additionally, multivariate analysis showed that erlotinib-treated
stage IV patients had a significantly longer progression-free survival (PFS)
compared to stage IIIB patients. Patients with EGFR mutations also had a
significantly better PFS compared to those without EGFR mutations. The overall
remission rate (22.2%) and disease control rate (75%) were significantly higher
compared to the rates after second-line chemotherapy (<10%). In conclusion, the
presence of EGFR mutations could be a marker to predict the therapeutic efficacy 
of erlotinib and the prognosis in Chinese NSCLC patients.

DOI: 10.5301/jbm.5000059 
PMID: 24425324  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


680. J Thorac Oncol. 2014 Feb;9(2):200-4. doi: 10.1097/JTO.0000000000000053.

Survival outcome assessed according to tumor response and shrinkage pattern in
patients with EGFR mutation-positive non-small-cell lung cancer treated with
gefitinib or erlotinib.

Takeda M(1), Okamoto I, Nakagawa K.

Author information: 
(1)*Department of Medical Oncology, Kinki University Faculty of Medicine, Osaka, 
Japan; †Department of Medical Oncology, Kishiwada City Hospital, Osaka, Japan;
and ‡Center for Clinical and Translational Research, Kyushu University Hospital, 
Fukuoka, Japan.

INTRODUCTION: Somatic mutations in the epidermal growth factor receptor gene
(EGFR) are associated with a marked therapeutic response to EGFR-tyrosine kinase 
inhibitors (TKIs) in patients with advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC).
Clinical indicators of the likely survival benefit of EGFR-TKI treatment in NSCLC
patients with EGFR mutations have not been identified, however. We therefore
evaluated progression-free survival (PFS) and overall survival (OS) according to 
tumor response and tumor shrinkage pattern in such patients.
METHODS: Among 145 EGFR mutation-positive NSCLC patients treated with EGFR-TKIs, 
68 individuals were selected for analysis.
RESULTS: Of the 68 selected patients, 6 achieved a complete response (CR), 42 a
partial response (PR), and 14 stable disease (SD). Both PFS and OS were
significantly longer in patients who achieved a CR or PR than in those who
experienced SD. Multivariate analysis showed that a response (CR or PR) to
EGFR-TKIs was significantly associated with both PFS and OS. Among the CR/PR
group, the median maximal tumor shrinkage relative to baseline was 56%, and the
median time to response (TTR) was 4.2 weeks. The subsets of these patients who
experienced rapid tumor regression (TTR of ≤4.2 weeks) or a high degree of tumor 
shrinkage (≥56%) did not show a more favorable PFS or OS compared with those who 
experienced slow tumor regression or a low degree of tumor shrinkage.
CONCLUSION: Response (CR or PR) may represent the optimal surrogate for efficacy 
among EGFR mutation-positive NSCLC patients treated with EGFR-TKIs.

DOI: 10.1097/JTO.0000000000000053 
PMCID: PMC4132038
PMID: 24419417  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


681. J Thorac Oncol. 2014 Feb;9(2):189-94. doi: 10.1097/JTO.0000000000000048.

Effectiveness of gefitinib against non-small-cell lung cancer with the uncommon
EGFR mutations G719X and L861Q.

Watanabe S(1), Minegishi Y, Yoshizawa H, Maemondo M, Inoue A, Sugawara S, Isobe
H, Harada M, Ishii Y, Gemma A, Hagiwara K, Kobayashi K.

Author information: 
(1)*Bioscience Medical Research Center, Niigata University Medical and Dental
Hospital, Niigata, Japan; †Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Pulmonary
Medicine, Infections Disease, and Oncology, Nippon Medical School, Tokyo, Japan; 
‡Department of Respiratory Medicine, Miyagi Cancer Center, Miyagi, Japan;
§Department of Respiratory Medicine, Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan;
‖Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Sendai Kousei Hospital, Sendai, Japan;
¶Department of Medical Oncology, KKR Sapporo Medical Center, Sapporo, Japan;
#Department of Respiratory Medicine, National Hospital Organization Hokkaido
Cancer Center, Sapporo, Japan; **Department of Pulmonary Medicine and Clinical
Immunology, Dokkyo Medical University School of Medicine, Mibu, Japan;
††Department of Respiratory Medicine, Saitama Medical University, Saitama, Japan;
and ‡‡Department of Respiratory Medicine, Saitama International Medical Center,
Saitama, Japan.

INTRODUCTION: In non-small-cell lung cancer, an exon 19 deletion and an L858R
point mutation in the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) are predictors of a
response to EGFR-tyrosine kinase inhibitors. However, it is uncertain whether
other uncommon EGFR mutations are associated with sensitivity to EGFR-tyrosine
kinase inhibitors.
METHODS: A post-hoc analysis to assess prognostic factors was performed with the 
use of patients with EGFR mutations (exon 19 deletion, L858R, G719X, and L861Q)
who were treated with gefitinib in the NEJ002 study, which compared gefitinib
with carboplatin-paclitaxel as the first-line therapy.
RESULTS: In the NEJ002 study, 225 patients with EGFR mutations received gefitinib
at any treatment line. The Cox proportional hazards model indicated that
performance status, response to chemotherapy, response to gefitinib, and mutation
types were significant prognostic factors. Overall survival (OS) was
significantly shorter among patients with uncommon EGFR mutations (G719X or
L861Q) compared with OS of those with common EGFR mutations (12 versus 28.4
months; p = 0.002). In the gefitinib group (n = 114), patients with uncommon EGFR
mutations had a significantly shorter OS (11.9 versus 29.3 months; p < 0.001). By
contrast, OS was similar between patients with uncommon mutations and those with 
common mutations in the carboplatin-paclitaxel group (n = 111; 22.8 versus 28
months; p = 0.358).
CONCLUSIONS: The post-hoc analyses clearly demonstrated shorter survival for
gefitinib-treated patients with uncommon EGFR mutations compared with the
survival of those with common mutations and suggest that the first-line
chemotherapy may be relatively effective for non-small-cell lung cancer with
uncommon EGFR mutations.

DOI: 10.1097/JTO.0000000000000048 
PMCID: PMC4132025
PMID: 24419415  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


682. Ther Drug Monit. 2014 Feb;36(1):24-9.

A limited sampling strategy for estimation of the area under the plasma
concentration-time curve of gefitinib.

Miura M, Sato K, Miura H, Niioka T, Kobayashi H, Narita C, Ito H.

PURPOSE: The aim of this study was to develop a limited sampling strategy (LSS)
to estimate the area under the concentration-time curve (AUC) of gefitinib using 
data from 18 patients with non-small-cell lung cancer.
METHODS: On day 14 after beginning daily therapy with 250 mg of gefitinib, plasma
samples were collected just before (C(0h), 24 hours after the 13th
administration) and 1, 2, 4, 6, 8, 12, and 24 hours (C(nh)) after gefitinib
administration and were analyzed by high-performance liquid chromatography.
RESULTS: The predicted AUC from 0 to 24 hours (AUC₀₋₂₄) from the single time
point of C(12h) showed the highest correlation with the measured AUC₀₋₂₄ of
gefitinib (AUC₀₋₂₄ = 20.0 · C(12h) + 1348.0; r² = 0.9623; P , 0.0001). The 95%
confidence intervals of the slopes and intercepts of the formulae obtained by
bootstrap analysis indicated acceptable accuracy and robustness in the prediction
of AUC₀₋₂₄ using C(0h), C(1h), C(12h), and C(1h) + C(12h). The median AUC₀₋₂₄ and
C(0h) of gefitinib in patients with diarrhea (n = 8) were higher than those
without diarrhea (n = 10) (15,043 versus 8918 ng·h·mL⁻¹, respectively, P = 0.0164
and 542 versus 261 ng/mL, respectively, P = 0.0263). The area under the receiver 
operator curve was 0.813, giving the best sensitivity (75%) and specificity (90%)
at a C(0h) threshold of 398 ng/mL.
CONCLUSIONS: Use of the C(12h) single time point is recommended for the gefitinib
AUC₀₋₂₄ predictive equation; however, total estimation of the AUC₀₋₂₄ of
gefitinib at the single point of C(0h) was also precise. C(0h) monitoring of
gefitinib might be beneficial during gefitinib therapy, because of a high
variability in gefitinib exposure among patients taking 250 mg. Further
examination of the correlation between clinical evaluation and the gefitinib
exposure is necessary.

DOI: 10.1097/FTD.0b013e31829dabbc 
PMID: 24413624  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


683. Cancer Med. 2014 Feb;3(1):61-9. doi: 10.1002/cam4.180. Epub 2014 Jan 10.

Factors associated with early progression of non-small-cell lung cancer treated
by epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine-kinase inhibitors.

Rozensztajn N(1), Ruppert AM, Lavole A, Leprieur EG, Duruisseaux M, Vieira T,
Rabbe N, Lacave R, Antoine M, Cadranel J, Wislez M.

Author information: 
(1)Service de Pneumologie, Hôpital Tenon, AP-HP, 4 rue de la Chine, Paris, 75970,
France.

Epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine-kinase inhibitors (EGFR-TKI) are a
therapeutic option as second-line therapy in non-small-cell lung carcinoma
(NSCLC), regardless of the EGFR gene status. Identifying patients with early
progression during EGFR-TKI treatment will help clinicians to choose the best
regimen, TKI or chemotherapy. From a prospective database, all patients treated
with gefitinib or erlotinib between 2001 and 2010 were retrospectively reviewed. 
Patients were classified into two groups according to their tumor response by
RECIST after 45 days of treatment, progressive disease (PD) or controlled disease
(CD). Two hundred and sixty-eight patients were treated with EGFR-TKI, among whom
239 were classified as PD (n = 75) and CD (n = 164). Median overall survival was 
77 days (95% CI 61-109) for PD and 385 days (95% CI 267-481) for CD. Patients
with PD were of younger age (P = 0.004) and more frequently current smokers (P = 
0.001) had more frequently a performance status ≥2 (P = 0.012), a weight loss
≥10% (P = 0.025), a shorter time since diagnosis (P < 0.0001), a pathological
classification as non-otherwise-specified NSCLC (P = 0.01), and the presence of
abdominal metastases (P = 0.008). In multivariate analysis, abdominal metastases 
were the only factor associated with early progression (odds ratio (OR) 2.17, 95%
CI [1.12-4.19]; P = 0.021). Wild-type EGFR versus mutated EGFR was associated
with early progression. The presence of abdominal metastasis was independently
associated with early progression in metastatic NSCLC receiving EGFR-TKI.

© 2014 The Authors. Cancer Medicine published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/cam4.180 
PMCID: PMC3930390
PMID: 24408092  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


684. Anticancer Res. 2014 Jan;34(1):319-22.

Complete metabolic remission with Gefitinib in a hemodialysis patient with bone
metastases from non-small cell lung cancer.

Del Conte A(1), Minatel E, Schinella D, Baresic T, Basso SM, Lumachi F.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Oncology, S. Maria degli Angeli Hospital, via Montereale 24, 33170
Pordenone, Italy. alessandro.delconte@aopn.fvg.it.

Gefitinib is highly active in patients with advanced or metastatic non-small cell
lung cancer (NSCLC) harboring activating mutation of the epidermal growth factor 
receptor (EGFR) gene. The feasibility and the degree of response to treatment
with gefitinib in patients with chronic renal failure (CRF) undergoing
hemodialysis has not yet been fully described in literature. We describe the case
of a 70-year-old man with CRF undergoing hemodialysis three times-a-week who
developed vertebral and rib bone metastasis three years after lobectomy. The bone
biopsy confirmed the pulmonary origin and pyrosequencing analysis revealed
deletion in E746-E750 of exon 19. We started daily administration of 250 mg
gefitinib with no changes in the hemodialysis schedule. Gefitinib was
well-tolerated without any adverse event. After three months, the
(18)F-fluoro-2-deoxy-d-glucose positron emission tomography/computed tomography
(FDG PET/CT) showed complete metabolic remission of bone lesions. The patient is 
still under treatment and maintains response (30 months to date). To our
knowledge, this is the first description of complete metabolic remission in this 
type of patient. In conclusion, gefitinib has been safely administered to a
patient with NSCLC with EGFR-activating mutation undergoing chronic hemodialysis 
and its use has achieved an excellent and prolonged response on bone metastases.


PMID: 24403481  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


685. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol. 2014 Mar;140(3):427-33. doi: 10.1007/s00432-014-1582-x. 
Epub 2014 Jan 9.

Different treatment orders achieved similar clinical results: a retrospective
study for retreatment of epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase
inhibitors in 120 patients with non-small-cell lung cancer.

Tang C(1), Gao H, Li X, Liu Y, Li J, Qin H, Wang W, Qu L, An J, Yang S, Liu X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Lung Cancer, Affiliated Hospital of Academy of Military Medical 
Sciences, No. 8 Dongdajie, Beijing, 100071, China.

BACKGROUND: It was reported the retreatment of epidermal growth factor receptor
tyrosine kinase inhibitors (EGFR-TKIs) may bring benefit to non-small-cell lung
cancer (NSCLC) patients who benefited previously. Nevertheless, the treatment
order in most of the prior literature was gefitinib (G) to erlotinib (E), and
little was known about whether other treatment order may also bring benefit to
the patients.
METHODS: One hundred and twenty NSCLC patients who received EGFR-TKIs treatment
twice were enrolled in this study. The safety and effectiveness of the second
EGFR-TKIs administration, as well as the influencing factors that contribute to
this process, were analyzed retrospectively.
RESULTS: Forty-nine (40.8%) patients were retreated with same kind of EGFR-TKIs: 
30 (25%) were G and 19 (15.8%) were E. Seventy-one (59.2%) patients switched to
another kind: 55 (45.8%) were G to E and 16 (13.4%) were the reverse. Notably, no
differences in clinical benefits were found among the four different treatment
orders. For the second administration, the adverse effects of all patients were
generally classified as grade I-II and the 1-year survival rate reached 32.5%.
The objective response rate, disease control rate, median progression-free
survival (PFS), and overall survival was 10.0% (12/120), 52.5% (63/120), 2.3 (95%
CI 1.5-3.0) months and 8.0 (95% CI 7.0-8.5) months, respectively. The univariate 
and multivariate analyses revealed that those patients who benefited from prior
EGFR-TKIs were easier to get benefit from the second administration, and the
strongest beneficial indicators of the retreatment were PFS of the initial
EGFR-TKIs (≥6 months, HR 0.611, 95% CI 0.354-0.901, P = 0.0076) and time interval
between the two EGFR-TKIs treatment (≥4 months, HR 0.529, 95% CI 0.328-0.852, P =
0.0088).
CONCLUSION: Those patients who benefited from prior EGFR-TKIs were easier to get 
benefit from the second administration. A time interval of ≥4 months may improve 
the retreatment, but differences in clinical benefit were not found among
different treatment orders. If the retrospective result could be validated
further in the future, it would be helpful for rational administration of
EGFR-TKIs.

DOI: 10.1007/s00432-014-1582-x 
PMID: 24401995  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


686. Mol Cancer Ther. 2014 Mar;13(3):617-29. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-13-0464. Epub 
2014 Jan 8.

TPCA-1 is a direct dual inhibitor of STAT3 and NF-κB and regresses mutant
EGFR-associated human non-small cell lung cancers.

Nan J(1), Du Y, Chen X, Bai Q, Wang Y, Zhang X, Zhu N, Zhang J, Hou J, Wang Q,
Yang J.

Author information: 
(1)Corresponding Author: Jinbo Yang, School of Life Science, Lanzhou University, 
Lanzhou, Gansu 730000, China. yangjb@lzu.edu.cn.

Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is a clinical therapeutic target to treat
a subset of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) harboring EGFR mutants. However,
some patients with a similar kind of EGFR mutation show intrinsic resistance to
tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKI). It indicates that other key molecules are
involved in the survival of these cancer cells. We showed here that
2-[(aminocarbonyl)amino]-5 -(4-fluorophenyl)-3- thiophenecarboxamide (TPCA-1), a 
previously reported inhibitor of IκB kinases (IKK), blocked STAT3 recruitment to 
upstream kinases by docking into SH2 domain of STAT3 and attenuated STAT3
activity induced by cytokines and cytoplasmic tyrosine kinases. TPCA-1 is an
effective inhibitor of STAT3 phosphorylation, DNA binding, and transactivation in
vivo. It selectively repressed proliferation of NSCLC cells with constitutive
STAT3 activation. In addition, using pharmacologic and genetic approaches, we
found that both NF-κB and STAT3 could regulate the transcripts of interleukin
(IL)-6 and COX-2 in NSCLC harboring EGFR mutations. Moreover, gefitinib treatment
only did not efficiently suppress NF-κB and STAT3 activity. In contrast, we found
that treatment with TKIs increased phosho-STAT3 level in target cells. Inhibiting
EGFR, STAT3, and NF-κB by combination of TKIs with TPCA-1 showed increased
sensitivity and enhanced apoptosis induced by gefitinib. Collectively, in this
work, we identified TPCA-1 as a direct dual inhibitor for both IKKs and STAT3,
whereas treatment targeting EGFR only could not sufficiently repress NF-κB and
STAT3 pathways for lung cancers harboring mutant EGFR. Therefore, synergistic
treatment of TPCA-1 with TKIs has potential to be a more effective strategy for
cancers.

©2014 AACR.

DOI: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-13-0464 
PMID: 24401319  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


687. Front Biosci (Landmark Ed). 2014 Jan 1;19:259-71.

The PI3k inhibitors: new hopes in the battle against advanced NSCLC.

Sacco PC(1), Maione P(1), Rossi A(1), Barecshino MA(1), Sgambato A(1), Casaluce
F(1), Napolitano A(2), Palazzolo G(3), Rossi E(1), Ferrara C(1), Gridelli C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, S.G.Moscati Hospital of Avellino, C.da Amoretta, 83100
Avellino, Italy. (2)Department of Pharmacy, S.G. Moscati Hospital of Avellino, C.
da Amoretta, 83100 Avellino, Italy. (3)USLL5, Cittadella (Padova), Italy.

In terms of both incidence and mortality, lung tumor is the most common cancer in
the world today. Among lung tumors, 80% are classified as non-small-cell lung
cancer (NSCLC) and are mostly diagnosed at an advanced stage (either locally
advanced or metastatic disease). Platinum-based doublet chemotherapy, the
standard treatment for advanced NSCLC, has reached a plateau of effectiveness and
achieves mostly partial responses in only 30%-40% of patients and a modest
survival increase. Thus, the search for new molecularly targeted therapies is
mandatory. The phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) pathway is frequently over
activated in human cancers playing a critical role both in the initiation and
progression of NSCLC. Activating mutations of this pathway play a role in the
development of resistance to chemotherapy and to the Epidermal Growth Factor
Receptor Tyrosine Kinase inhibitors (EGFR-TKIs) erlotinib and gefitinib. These
mutations are observed in 2-5 % of non-squamous NSCLC and 8-10 % of squamous
NSCLC. In this paper, we describe the available data and the possible future role
of PI3k inhibitors in the treatment of advanced NSCLC.


PMID: 24389182  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


688. Respir Med Case Rep. 2014 Oct 23;13:51-3. doi: 10.1016/j.rmcr.2014.09.003.
eCollection 2014.

Alkaline phosphatase flare phenomenon following epidermal growth factor
receptor-tyrosine kinase inhibitor treatment of non-small cell lung cancer:
Report of a case and case review.

Yasuda Y(1), Kawamura K(1), Ichikado K(1), Yoshioka M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Respiratory Medicine and Surgery, Saiseikai Kumamoto Hospital,
Japan.

Alkaline phosphatase (ALP) flare phenomenon documented as scintigraphic flare
phenomenon due to elevated serum ALP levels produced by osteoblasts reflects an
osteoblastic reaction in response to the effective therapy of non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC). Here, we report a case of ALP flare following gefitinib treatment
for NSCLC. We also retrospectively analyzed the prevalence of ALP flare in lung
cancer patients treated via epidermal growth factor receptor-tyrosine kinase
inhibitor in our hospital. Recognition of this phenomenon is important for
physicians treating NSCLC patients to avoid discontinuation of a potentially
beneficial treatment because of misdiagnosis for refractory multiple bone
metastasis or adverse effect.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmcr.2014.09.003 
PMCID: PMC4246355
PMID: 26029561  [PubMed]


689. Ann Palliat Med. 2014 Jan;3(1):19-21. doi: 10.3978/j.issn.2224-5820.2013.12.03.

Patient reported outcomes from LUX-Lung 3: first-line afatinib is superior to
chemotherapy-would patients agree?

Popat S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department Medicine, Royal Marsden Hospital, London, SW3 6JJ, UK.
sanjay.popat@rmh.nhs.uk.

The LUX-Lung 3 trial was an important randomized phase 3 trial in patients with
EGFR mutant advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Here, patients were
randomized to either afatinib or cisplatin-pemetrexed and the primary endpoint of
progression-free survival (PFS) was easily met (HR=0.58, P=0.001). This was the
first large-scale trial of this type using a modern chemotherapy comparator,
including Asian and non-Asian patients, central radiology review, and utilizing
comprehensive patient-reported outcomes. Whilst efficacy for afatinib was
markedly superior to chemotherapy, do the patient-reported outcomes reflect this 
superiority? The symptom control and quality of life (QoL) data from this trial
has now been published. Analysis of these demonstrate clear superiority of
afatinib over chemotherapy for delay in cough deterioration, and dyspnoea.
Notably, given the toxicity profile of afatinib, these improvements translated
into significant improvements in global health status, physical, role, and
cognitive functioning. The clinical benefits for afatinib over
cisplatin-pemetrexed chemotherapy for EGFR mutation-positive advanced non-small
cell lung patients seem overwhelming, and are clinically meaningful. These
results are also consistent with QoL data from other trials of
gefitinib/erlotinib, but much more robust, given the larger patient numbers.
Would patients agree that afatinib is superior to chemotherapy? On the basis of
data presented, the answer is probably "Yes". However, the key unanswered
question remaining is "Which is the best EGFR-tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) to 
use up front?" and we will have to wait until ongoing trial data can help answer 
this.

DOI: 10.3978/j.issn.2224-5820.2013.12.03 
PMID: 25841484  [PubMed]


690. Crit Rev Oncol Hematol. 2014 Feb;89(2):284-99. doi:
10.1016/j.critrevonc.2013.11.006. Epub 2013 Dec 1.

Targeting the MET gene for the treatment of non-small-cell lung cancer.

Gelsomino F(1), Facchinetti F(2), Haspinger ER(3), Garassino MC(4), Trusolino
L(5), De Braud F(6), Tiseo M(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Medical Oncology Unit 1, Fondazione IRCCS,
Istituto Nazionale Tumori, Milan, Italy. Electronic address:
francesco.gelsomino@istitutotumori.mi.it. (2)Medical Oncology Unit, University
Hospital of Parma, Italy. Electronic address:
Francesco.facchinetti@studenti.unipr.it. (3)Department of Medical Oncology,
Medical Oncology Unit 1, Fondazione IRCCS, Istituto Nazionale Tumori, Milan,
Italy. Electronic address: eva.haspinger@istitutotumori.mi.it. (4)Department of
Medical Oncology, Medical Oncology Unit 1, Fondazione IRCCS, Istituto Nazionale
Tumori, Milan, Italy. Electronic address: marina.garassino@istitutotumori.mi.it. 
(5)Laboratory of Molecular Pharmacology, Institute for Cancer Research and
Treatment, and Department of Oncological Sciences, University of Torino School of
Medicine, Candiolo (Torino), Italy. Electronic address: livio.trusolino@ircc.it. 
(6)Department of Medical Oncology, Medical Oncology Unit 1, Fondazione IRCCS,
Istituto Nazionale Tumori, Milan, Italy. Electronic address:
filippo.debraud@istitutotumori.mi.it. (7)Medical Oncology Unit, University
Hospital of Parma, Italy. Electronic address: mtiseo@ao.pr.it.

Recently, a better understanding of the specific mechanisms of oncogene addiction
has led to the development of antitumor strategies aimed at blocking these
abnormalities in different malignancies, including lung cancer. These
abnormalities trigger constitutive activation of tyrosine kinase receptors (RTKs)
involved in fundamental cell mechanisms such as proliferation, survival,
differentiation and migration, and consequently the aberrant signaling of RTKs
leads to cancer growth and survival. The inhibition of aberrant RTKs and
downstream signaling pathways has opened the door to the targeted therapy era. In
non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC), molecular research has allowed the
discrimination of different aberrant RTKs in lung cancer tumorigenesis and
progression, and thus the identification of several targetable oncogenic drivers.
Following the development of small molecules (gefitinib/erlotinib and crizotinib)
able to reversibly inhibit the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) and
signaling pathways mediated by anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK), respectively,
the MET signaling pathway has also been recognized as a potential target.
Moreover, according to current knowledge, MET could be considered both as a
secondary oncogenic mechanism and as a prognostic factor. Several therapeutic
strategies for inhibiting activated hepatocyte growth factor receptor (HGFR) and 
the subsequent downstream signaling transduction have been improved in order to
block tumor growth. This review will focus on the MET pathway and its role in
resistance to EGFR TK (tyrosine kinase) inhibitors, the different strategies of
its inhibition, and the potential approaches to overcoming acquired resistance.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.critrevonc.2013.11.006 
PMID: 24355409  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


691. Sci Transl Med. 2013 Dec 18;5(216):216ra177. doi: 10.1126/scitranslmed.3007205.

Structural, biochemical, and clinical characterization of epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR) exon 20 insertion mutations in lung cancer.

Yasuda H(1), Park E, Yun CH, Sng NJ, Lucena-Araujo AR, Yeo WL, Huberman MS, Cohen
DW, Nakayama S, Ishioka K, Yamaguchi N, Hanna M, Oxnard GR, Lathan CS, Moran T,
Sequist LV, Chaft JE, Riely GJ, Arcila ME, Soo RA, Meyerson M, Eck MJ, Kobayashi 
SS, Costa DB.

Author information: 
(1)Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA
02215, USA.

Erratum in
    Sci Transl Med. 2014 Feb 26;6(225):225er1.

Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) gene mutations (G719X, exon 19
deletions/insertions, L858R, and L861Q) predict favorable responses to EGFR
tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) in advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC).
However, EGFR exon 20 insertion mutations (~10% of all EGFR mutations) are
generally associated with insensitivity to available TKIs (gefitinib, erlotinib, 
and afatinib). The basis of this primary resistance is poorly understood. We
studied a broad subset of exon 20 insertion mutations, comparing in vitro TKI
sensitivity with responses to gefitinib and erlotinib in NSCLC patients, and
found that most are resistant to EGFR TKIs. The crystal structure of a
representative TKI-insensitive mutant (D770_N771insNPG) reveals an unaltered
adenosine triphosphate-binding pocket, and the inserted residues form a wedge at 
the end of the C helix that promotes the active kinase conformation. Unlike
EGFR-L858R, D770_N771insNPG activates EGFR without increasing its affinity for
EGFR TKIs. Unexpectedly, we find that EGFR-A763_Y764insFQEA is highly sensitive
to EGFR TKIs in vitro, and patients whose NSCLCs harbor this mutation respond to 
erlotinib. Analysis of the A763_Y764insFQEA mutant indicates that the inserted
residues shift the register of the C helix in the N-terminal direction, altering 
the structure in the region that is also affected by the TKI-sensitive
EGFR-L858R. Our studies reveal intricate differences between EGFR mutations,
their biology, and their response to EGFR TKIs.

DOI: 10.1126/scitranslmed.3007205 
PMCID: PMC3954775
PMID: 24353160  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


692. Zhongguo Fei Ai Za Zhi. 2013 Dec;16(12):632-8. doi:
10.3779/j.issn.1009-3419.2013.12.03.

[Relationship between BIM gene polymorphism and therapeutic efficacy in the
retreatment of advanced non-small cell lung cancer with tyrosine kinase
inhibitor].

[Article in Chinese; Abstract available in Chinese from the publisher]

Zheng L(1), Lin B, Song Z, Xie F, Hong W, Feng J, Shao L, Zhang Y.

Author information: 
(1)The Second Clinical Medical College, Zhejiang Chinese Medical University,
Hangzhou 310053, China.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: BIM gene is a member of the BCL-2 family, is involved
in cell death. The aim of this study is to explore the relationship between BIM
gene polymorphism and therapeutic efficacy in the retreatment advanced non-small 
cell lung cancer (NSCLC) with tyrosine kinase inhibitor (EGFR-TKI).
METHODS: In the study, there were 123 patients who were diagnosed with advanced
NSCLC in Zhejiang Province Cancer Hospital between January 2009 to October 2012, 
all of who were received gefitinib and erlotinib therapy after failure to
chemotherapy. We detected the genotype of peripheral blood leukocytes of patients
with BIM gene polymorphism though polymerase chain reaction (PCR). Statistical
analysis was performed by SPSS version 13.0.
RESULTS: On the disease control rates, BIM gene with no polymorphism type was
slightly better trend than polymorphism types in disease control rate DCR (75.5% 
vs 57.1%, χ²=2.931, P=0.087). Univariate analysis the median PFS, women were
longer than men (6.9 months vs 4.5 months, χ² =7.077, P=0.008). Non-smokers were 
longer than smokers (8.0 months vs 2.5 months, χ² =15.277, P<0.001).
Adenocarcinoma were longer than others pathological type (7.0 months vs 2.0
months, χ² =14.978, P<0.001). The median PFS in BIM gene with no polymorphism
type were longer than with polymorphism type (6.0 months vs 3.5 months, χ²=7.035,
P=0.008). Multi-factor analysis showed that smoking, pathological type, the BIM
gene polymorphism were the independent prognostic factors for PFS.
CONCLUSIONS: The patients with the BIM gene no polymorphism have longer the
median progression-free time than the polymorphism types in retreatment advanced 
non-small cell lung cancer patients with tyrosine kinase inhibitor.

Publisher: 背景与目的 BIM基因是BCL-2家族成员之一，是参与细胞死亡的重要介质。在非小细胞肺癌（non-small cell lung
cancer,
NSCLC）中，BCL-2家族成员蛋白介导的EGFR基因突变癌细胞能够激活PI3K/AKT/mTORC和MER/ERT信号通道，决定着细胞的存活或者凋亡。BIM基
因的BH3域缺失，则容易引起凋亡受阻。本研究通过检测BIM基因多态性，探讨其与复治晚期NSCLC表皮生长因子受体酪氨酸激酶抑制剂（epidermal growth
factor receptor-tyrosine kinase inhibitor, EGFR-TKI）治疗疗效的关系。方法
入选2009年1月1日-2012年10月1日就诊于浙江省肿瘤医院的123例复治晚期NSCLC患者，所有患者既往均接受过化疗，失败后接受吉非替尼或厄洛替尼靶向治疗。
采用多聚酶链反应方法检测患者外周血白细胞中BIM基因多态性。采用SPSS 13.0统计软件分析。结果 在疾病控制率上，
BIM基因无多态性的患者较BIM基因有多态性的患者呈略好趋势（DCR 75.5% vs 57.1%, χ2=2.931,
P=0.087）。单因素分析中位PFS，女性长于男性（6.9个月 vs 4.5个月，χ2=7.077，P=0.008)；不吸烟者长于有吸烟史者（8.0个月 vs 
2.5个月，χ2=15.277，P<0.001)；病理类型为腺癌的长于其它类型（7.0个月 vs 2.0个月，χ2 =14.978，P<0.001)；
BIM基因无多态性的患者中位PFS长于BIM基因有多态性的患者（6.0个月 vs 3.5个月，χ2
=7.035，P=0.008)。多因素分析结果显示吸烟、病理类型、BIM基因多态性为影响PFS的预后因素。BIM基因型与不良反应差异无统计学意义（P>0.05）。
结论 BIM基因多态性的有无对复治晚期NSCLC EGFR-TKI治疗患者的中位无进展时间有统计学差异，检测患者BIM基因多态性对复治晚期NSCLC
EGFR-TKI治疗患者的评估预后有重要意义。
DOI: 10.3779/j.issn.1009-3419.2013.12.03 
PMID: 24345487  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


693. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2014 Jan 1;24(1):224-7. doi: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2013.11.034.
Epub 2013 Nov 22.

Discovery of hybrid Hsp90 inhibitors and their anti-neoplastic effects against
gefitinib-resistant non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC).

Jeong CH(1), Park HB(2), Jang WJ(3), Jung SH(2), Seo YH(4).

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmacy, Keimyung University, Daegu 704-701, South Korea;
Institute for New Drug Development, Keimyung University, Daegu 704-701, South
Korea. (2)Institute for New Drug Development, Keimyung University, Daegu 704-701,
South Korea. (3)College of Pharmacy, Keimyung University, Daegu 704-701, South
Korea. (4)College of Pharmacy, Keimyung University, Daegu 704-701, South Korea;
Institute for New Drug Development, Keimyung University, Daegu 704-701, South
Korea. Electronic address: seoyho@kmu.ac.kr.

Heat shock protein 90 (Hsp90) represents an attractive cancer therapeutic target 
due to its role in the stabilization and maturation of many oncogenic proteins.
We have designed a series of hybrid Hsp90 inhibitors by connecting the resorcinol
ring of VER-49009 (2) and the trimethoxyphenyl ring of PU3 (3) using
structure-based approach. Subsequent testing established that compound 1f
inhibited gefitinib-resistant H1975 cell proliferation, brought about the
degradation of Hsp90 client proteins including EGFR, Met, Her2 and Akt and
induced the expression of Hsp70. The design, synthesis, and evaluation of 1f are 
described herein.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2013.11.034 
PMID: 24345447  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


694. Lung Cancer. 2014 Feb;83(2):231-9. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2013.11.016. Epub 2013 
Nov 27.

Risk of interstitial lung disease with gefitinib and erlotinib in advanced
non-small cell lung cancer: a systematic review and meta-analysis of clinical
trials.

Shi L(1), Tang J(1), Tong L(1), Liu Z(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Beijing Tuberculosis and Thoracic Tumor Research
Institute, Beijing Chest Hospital, Capital Medical University, Beijing, 101149 P.
R. China. (2)Department of Oncology, Beijing Tuberculosis and Thoracic Tumor
Research Institute, Beijing Chest Hospital, Capital Medical University, Beijing, 
101149 P. R. China. Electronic address: lza@vip.163.com.

OBJECTIVES: Gefitinib and erlotinib are oral epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR) tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) widely used in advanced non-small cell
lung cancer (NSCLC). Interstitial lung disease (ILD) events have been described
with these agents, although the overall risk remains unclear. We performed a
systematic review and meta-analysis to determine the incidence and the relative
risk (RR) associated with the use of gefitinib and erlotinib.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: PubMed databases were searched for articles published from
January 2000 to October 2012, and abstracts presented at the American Society of 
Clinical Oncology and the European Society of Medical Oncology meetings held
between 2000 and 2012 were searched for relevant studies. Eligible studies
included randomized controlled trials with gefitinib and erlotinib in advanced
NSCLC patients. Summary incidence rates, relative risks, and 95% CIs were
calculated using fixed-effects or random-effects models, depending on the
heterogeneity of the included studies.
RESULTS: 15,618 patients from 29 randomized controlled trials were selected for
this meta-analysis. The overall incidence for all-grade ILD events was 1.2% (95% 
CI, 0.9-1.6%) among patients receiving gefitinib and erlotinib, with a mortality 
of 22.8% (95% CI, 14.6-31.0%). Compared with controls, the RR of all-grade ILD
events associated with gefitinib and erlotinib was 1.53 (95% CI, 1.13-2.08;
P=0.006) using a fixed-effects model. The RR of fatal ILD events associated with 
EGFR TKIs treatment was 1.96 (95% CI, 1.03-3.72, P=0.041) compared with control
patients. The analysis was also stratified for drug type, study location,
treatment arm, and treatment line, but no significant differences in RRs were
observed.
CONCLUSION: Treatment with EGFR TKIs gefitinib and erlotinib is associated with a
significant increase in the risk of developing both all-grade and fatal ILD
events in advanced NSCLC.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2013.11.016 
PMID: 24332320  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


695. Lung Cancer. 2014 Feb;83(2):252-8. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2013.11.008. Epub 2013 
Nov 20.

Clinical characteristics of non-small cell lung cancer patients who experienced
acquired resistance during gefitinib treatment.

Kim HR(1), Lee JC(2), Kim YC(3), Kim KS(3), Oh IJ(3), Lee SY(4), Jang TW(5), Lee 
MK(6), Shin KC(7), Lee GH(7), Ryu JS(8), Jang SH(9), Son JW(10), Lee JE(11), Kim 
SY(11), Kim HJ(12), Lee KY(13).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Korea Cancer Center Hospital, 215-4,
Gongneung-dong, Nowon-gu, Seoul 139-706, Republic of Korea. (2)Department of
Oncology, Asan Medical Center, Ulsan University College of Medicine, Seoul,
Republic of Korea. (3)Department of Internal Medicine, Chonnam National
University College of Medicine, Hwasun Hospital, Hwasun, Republic of Korea.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine, Guro Hospital, Korea University College of
Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea. (5)Department of Internal Medicine, Kosin
University College of Medicine, Pusan, Republic of Korea. (6)Department of
Internal Medicine, Pusan National University College of Medicine, Pusan, Republic
of Korea. (7)Department of Internal Medicine, Yeungnam University College of
Medicine, Daegu, Republic of Korea. (8)Department of Internal Medicine, Inha
University College of Medicine, Incheon, Republic of Korea. (9)Department of
Internal Medicine, Hallym University College of Medicine, Anyang, Republic of
Korea. (10)Department of Internal Medicine, Konyang University College of
Medicine, Daejeon, Republic of Korea. (11)Department of Internal Medicine,
Chungnam National University College of Medicine, Deajeon, Republic of Korea.
(12)Department of Internal Medicine, Konkuk University College of Medicine,
Seoul, Republic of Korea. (13)Department of Internal Medicine, Konkuk University 
College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea. Electronic address:
kyleemd@kuh.ac.kr.

BACKGROUND: The NSCLC patients who experienced good clinical responses to an
EGFR-TKI will inevitably develop acquired resistance. A great deal of research is
being carried out to discover the molecular mechanisms underlying this
resistance. In comparison, few studies have been conducted to find out about the 
clinical characteristics of acquired resistance in the patients who had responded
to an EGFR-TKI. Herein we investigated clinical characteristics of NSCLC patients
who experienced acquired resistance during gefitinib therapy.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We reviewed NSCLC patients who showed a clinical benefit
from initial gefitinib therapy. All clinical data were obtained from 11 centers
of Korean Molecular Lung Cancer Group (KMLCG). The clinical manifestations of
acquired resistance, time to progression (TTP), and post-progression survival
(PPS) after gefitinib failure were analyzed retrospectively.
RESULTS: A total of 417 patients were recruited. Median TTP was 10.2 months (95% 
CI, 9.5-10.9). TTP showed a significant longer duration in female, non-smoker,
and patients with adenocarcinoma. At the time of acquired resistance, 63.3% of
the patients showed symptomatic deterioration. Sites of disease progression were 
as follows: primary lung lesion in 58.4%, previous metastasis in 38.3%, and new
metastasis in 54.2%. Patients with EGFR wild type showed a tendency of higher
frequency in symptomatic deterioration and newly development of CNS metastasis
compared with patients with EGFR mutation. There was a significant difference in 
newly development of lung metastasis between patients with exon 19 deletion and
those with L858R mutation (41.4% vs. 6.3%, p=0.02). PPS was 8.9 months (95% CI,
7.4-10.4). Smoking history, PS, new CNS lesion and subsequent chemotherapy were
independent factors for PPS.
CONCLUSION: This study suggests that clinical manifestations of acquired
resistance may be different according to EGFR mutation status and EGFR mutation
genotype. In addition, subsequent chemotherapy confers clinical benefit in terms 
of PPS in NSCLC patients who experienced acquired resistance after gefitinib
therapy.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2013.11.008 
PMID: 24309368  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


696. Transl Lung Cancer Res. 2013 Dec;2(6):452-6. doi:
10.3978/j.issn.2218-6751.2013.10.16.

Personalized maintenance therapy in advanced non-small cell lung cancer.

Asami K(1), Okishio K(1), Kawaguchi T(1), Atagi S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Oncology, National Hospital Organization Kinki-chuo
Chest Medical Center, Sakai, Japan.

Maintenance therapy is a treatment strategy that can prolong survival in patients
with advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). The increased survival achieved
with maintenance therapy has led to new treatment options that should be chosen
in accordance with the preferences of patients and physicians. Personalized
maintenance therapy involves identification of histological subtypes and
molecular features of tumors, thereby improving treatment outcomes. Many clinical
trials have been conducted to establish new treatment strategies for patients
with advanced NSCLC with non-squamous cell histology. The discovery of epidermal 
growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutations was the most significant innovation for
personalized therapy in NSCLC patients. First generation EGFR-tyrosine kinase
inhibitors (TKIs) such as gefitinib and erlotinib have significantly contributed 
to greatly increased survival in specific patients harboring activating EGFR
mutations such as exon 19 deletion and L858R point mutation. Based on clinical
trials of different maintenance therapy strategies, we identified the regimen is 
the most promising and highlighted for patients whom should be given specific
kinds of therapy now and in future studies.

DOI: 10.3978/j.issn.2218-6751.2013.10.16 
PMCID: PMC4367627
PMID: 25806269  [PubMed]


697. Transl Lung Cancer Res. 2013 Dec;2(6):435-8. doi:
10.3978/j.issn.2218-6751.2013.10.01.

Gefitinib in non-small-cell lung cancer-an old lesson new re-visited.

Dempke WC(1).

Author information: 
(1)University of Munich, University Hospital of Grosshadern (Hematology and
Oncology), D-81377 Munich, Germany ; ; Medical Oncology Department,
Industriestrasse E2, D-01612 Glaubitz, Germany.

Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) accounts for approximately 80-85% of all cases
of lung cancer, and it is the most common cause of death in men and second only
to breast cancer in women. Combination chemotherapy, usually platinum-based, is
currently the first-line therapy of choice, however, the prognosis for patients
with advanced NSCLC remains poor with a median survival time of 8-11 months and a
1-year survival rate of 30%. Maintenance therapy is a treatment strategy that has
been investigated extensively in NSCLC and has been the subject of considerable
recent debate. The outstanding results of the JMEN study proved that maintenance 
of pemetrexed significantly improved the overall survival (OS) in advanced NSCLC 
patients was a proof of principle. Subsequently, the results of the SATURN study 
also showed a significant prolongation of progression-free survival (PFS) and OS 
with maintenance erlotinib compared with placebo. Despite considerable
controversy, it has become an acceptable treatment paradigm and both drugs are
approved for maintenance therapy of advanced NSCLC patients in Europe and the
USA. In addition, several large phase III clinical trials (e.g., INFORM trial)
provided evidence that maintenance therapy with gefitinib also significantly
improved PFS in NSCLC patients, with greatest PFS benefit in patients harboring
EGF-R mutations. However, OS was unchanged. The question still remains whether
the benefit of maintenance therapy for NSCLC is best defined by PFS. Truely, PFS 
is the best predictor for improved OS (and is independent of subsequent
treatment), but OS is acknowledged as the key clinical outcome in the treatment
of advanced NSCLC. The approval of pemetrexed and erlotinib by the FDA and the
EMEA and the promising data with gefitinib have certainly shifted the pendulum
towards maintenance therapy, however, the precise role for the treatment strategy
of NSCLC in terms of a maintenance approach is far from being clear and
additional studies are warranted to further clarify this option.

DOI: 10.3978/j.issn.2218-6751.2013.10.01 
PMCID: PMC4367626
PMID: 25806264  [PubMed]


698. Chin Med J (Engl). 2013 Dec;126(23):4435-9.

miR-30b and miR-30c expression predicted response to tyrosine kinase inhibitors
as first line treatment in non-small cell lung cancer.

Gu YF(1), Zhang H, Su D, Mo ML, Song P, Zhang F, Zhang SC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Beijing Tuberculosis and Thoracic Tumor Research
Institute/Beijing Chest Hospital, Capital Medical University, Beijing 101149,
China.

BACKGROUND: Aberrantly expressed microRNAs are a hallmark of cancer, and microRNA
expression profiling is associated with tumor progression and response to
chemotherapy, suggesting their potential application as prognostic and predictive
biomarkers. The role of microRNAs in lung cancer remains elusive. It has been
recently reported that epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) and hepatocyte
growth factor receptor (MET) tyrosine kinase can regulate expression of specific 
microRNAs including miR-30b, miR-30c, miR-221, miR-222, miR-103 and miR-203, and 
induce tumorigenesis and gefitinib resistance in lung cancers. We intend to study
the role of miR-30b and miR-30c expression in predicting response to tyrosine
kinase inhibitors (TKIs) in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC).
METHODS: We have therefore retrospectively examined expression of miR-30b miR-30c
in 41 formalin fixed paraffin embedded tissue samples from NSCLC patients when
TKIs were used as first line therapy.
RESULTS: We found a significant correlation between expression of miR-30b and
miR-30c. Furthermore, miR-30b and miR-30c expression correlated with short-term
response. Kaplan-Meier analysis further revealed that the expression of miR-30b
and miR-30c predicted progression free survival and the overall survival rate in 
the examined cohort.
CONCLUSION: Our study identified miR-30b and miR-30c as useful prognostic
predictors in NSCLC patients who underwent first line treatment with TKIs.


PMID: 24286402  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


699. Hong Kong Med J. 2014 Jun;20(3):178-86. doi: 10.12809/hkmj133986. Epub 2013 Nov
22.

Effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of erlotinib versus gefitinib in first-line 
treatment of epidermal growth factor receptor-activating mutation-positive
non-small-cell lung cancer patients in Hong Kong.

Lee VW(1), Schwander B(2), Lee VH(3).

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmacy, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, Hong Kong.
(2)AHEAD-Agency for Health Economic Assessment and Dissemination GmbH, Lörrach,
Germany. (3)Department of Clinical Oncology, Queen Mary Hospital, The University 
of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong.

Comment in
    Hong Kong Med J. 2014 Oct;20(5):465.
    Hong Kong Med J. 2014 Jun;20(3):176-7.

OBJECTIVE: To compare the effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of erlotinib
versus gefitinib as first-line treatment of epidermal growth factor
receptor-activating mutation-positive non-small-cell lung cancer patients.
DESIGN. Indirect treatment comparison and a cost-effectiveness assessment.
SETTING: Hong Kong.
PATIENTS: Those having epidermal growth factor receptor-activating
mutation-positive non-small-cell lung cancer.
INTERVENTIONS: Erlotinib versus gefitinib use was compared on the basis of four
relevant Asian phase-III randomised controlled trials: one for erlotinib
(OPTIMAL) and three for gefitinib (IPASS; NEJGSG; WJTOG). The cost-effectiveness 
assessment model simulates the transition between the health states:
progression-free survival, progression, and death over a lifetime horizon. The
World Health Organization criterion (incremental cost-effectiveness ratio <3
times of gross domestic product/capita: <US$102 582; approximately <HK$798 078)
was used to rate cost-effectiveness.
RESULTS: The best fit of study characteristics and prognostic patient
characteristics were found between the OPTIMAL and IPASS trials. Comparing
progression-free survival hazard ratios of erlotinib versus gefitinib using only 
these randomised controlled trials in an indirect treatment comparison resulted
in a statistically significant progression-free survival difference in favour of 
erlotinib (indirect treatment comparison hazard ratio=0.33; 95% confidence
interval, 0.19-0.58; P=0.0001). The cost-effectiveness assessment model showed
that the cost per progression-free life year gained and per quality-adjusted life
year gained was at acceptable values of US$39 431 (approximately HK$306 773) and 
US$62 419 (approximately HK$485 619) for erlotinib versus gefitinib,
respectively.
CONCLUSION: The indirect treatment comparison of OPTIMAL versus IPASS shows that 
erlotinib is significantly more efficacious than gefitinib. Furthermore, the
cost-effectiveness assessment indicates that the incremental cost-effectiveness
ratios are well within an acceptable range in relation to the survival benefits
obtained. In conclusion, erlotinib is cost-effective compared to gefitinib for
first-line epidermal growth factor receptor-activating mutation-positive
non-small-cell lung cancer patients.

DOI: 10.12809/hkmj133986 
PMID: 24281768  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


700. Pharmacol Res. 2014 Jan;79:34-74. doi: 10.1016/j.phrs.2013.11.002. Epub 2013 Nov 
20.

The ErbB/HER family of protein-tyrosine kinases and cancer.

Roskoski R Jr(1).

Author information: 
(1)Blue Ridge Institute for Medical Research, 3754 Brevard Road, Suite 116, Box
19, Horse Shoe, NC 28742, USA. Electronic address: rrj@brimr.org.

The human epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) family consists of four members
that belong to the ErbB lineage of proteins (ErbB1-4). These receptors consist of
a glycosylated extracellular domain, a single hydrophobic transmembrane segment, 
and an intracellular portion with a juxtamembrane segment, a protein kinase
domain, and a carboxyterminal tail. Seven ligands bind to EGFR including
epidermal growth factor and transforming growth factor α, none bind to ErbB2, two
bind to ErbB3, and seven ligands bind to ErbB4. The ErbB proteins function as
homo and heterodimers. The heterodimer consisting of ErbB2, which lacks a ligand,
and ErbB3, which is kinase impaired, is surprisingly the most robust signaling
complex of the ErbB family. Growth factor binding to EGFR induces a large
conformational change in the extracellular domain, which leads to the exposure of
a dimerization arm in domain II of the extracellular segment. Two ligand-EGFR
complexes unite to form a back-to-back dimer in which the ligands are on opposite
sides of the aggregate. Following ligand binding, EGFR intracellular kinase
domains form an asymmetric homodimer that resembles the heterodimer formed by
cyclin and cyclin-dependent kinase. The carboxyterminal lobe of the activator
kinase of the dimer interacts with the amino-terminal lobe of the receiver kinase
thereby leading to its allosteric stimulation. Downstream ErbB signaling modules 
include the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/Akt (PKB) pathway, the
Ras/Raf/MEK/ERK1/2 pathway, and the phospholipase C (PLCγ) pathway. Several
malignancies are associated with the mutation or increased expression of members 
of the ErbB family including lung, breast, stomach, colorectal, head and neck,
and pancreatic carcinomas and glioblastoma (a brain tumor). Gefitinib, erlotinib,
and afatinib are orally effective protein-kinase targeted quinazoline derivatives
that are used in the treatment of ERBB1-mutant lung cancer. Lapatinib is an
orally effective quinazoline derivative used in the treatment of
ErbB2-overexpressing breast cancer. Trastuzumab, pertuzumab, and ado-trastuzumab 
emtansine, which are given intravenously, are monoclonal antibodies that target
the extracellular domain and are used for the treatment of ErbB2-positive breast 
cancer; ado-trastuzumab emtansine is an antibody-drug conjugate that delivers a
cytotoxic drug to cells overexpressing ErbB2. Cetuximab and panitumumab are
monoclonal antibodies that target ErbB1 and are used in the treatment of
colorectal cancer. Cancers treated with these targeted drugs eventually become
resistant to them. The role of combinations of targeted drugs or targeted drugs
with cytotoxic therapies is being explored in an effort to prevent or delay drug 
resistance in the treatment of these malignancies.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.phrs.2013.11.002 
PMID: 24269963  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


701. Biomed Pharmacother. 2014 Apr;68(3):307-13. doi: 10.1016/j.biopha.2013.10.007.
Epub 2013 Nov 7.

Fulvestrant increases gefitinib sensitivity in non-small cell lung cancer cells
by upregulating let-7c expression.

Shen H(1), Liu J(2), Wang R(1), Qian X(3), Xu R(1), Xu T(1), Li Q(3), Wang L(3), 
Shi Z(3), Zheng J(3), Chen Q(3), Shu Y(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical
University, Nanjing, China. (2)Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, First
Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, China. (3)Department 
of Pathology, Cancer Center, Nanjing Medical University, 210029 Nanjing, China.
(4)Department of Oncology, First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical
University, Nanjing, China. Electronic address: shuyongqian@csco.org.cn.

Patients with non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) who have activating epidermal
growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutations benefit from treatment with EGFR-tyrosine
kinase inhibitors (EGFR-TKIs), namely, gefitinib and erlotinib. However, these
patients eventually develop resistance to EGFR-TKIs. About 50% of this acquired
resistance may be the result of a secondary mutation in the EGFR gene, such as
the one corresponding to T790M. In our previous study, we found that combined
treatment with fulvestrant and gefitinib decreases the proliferation of H1975
NSCLC cells, compared to treatment with either fulvestrant or gefitinib alone;
however, the molecular mechanism for the improved effects of the combination
treatment are still unknown. In this study, we confirmed that fulvestrant
increases the gefitinib sensitivity of H1975 cells and found that let-7c was most
upregulated in the fulvestrant-treated cells. Our data revealed that let-7c
increases gefitinib sensitivity by repressing RAS and inactivating the
phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K)/AKT and mitogen-activated extracellular
signal-regulated kinase (MEK)/extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK)
signaling pathways. Taken together, our findings suggest that let-7c plays an
important role in fulvestrant-induced upregulation of gefitinib sensitivity in
H1975 cells.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biopha.2013.10.007 
PMID: 24268810  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


702. J Korean Med Sci. 2013 Nov;28(11):1595-602. doi: 10.3346/jkms.2013.28.11.1595.
Epub 2013 Oct 31.

Post-progression survival in patients with non-small cell lung cancer with
clinically acquired resistance to gefitinib.

Kim H(1), Yun T, Lee YJ, Han JY, Kim HT, Lee GK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hemato-oncology, Pusan National University Hospital, Busan,
Korea.

Most patients with tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI)-sensitive non-small cell lung 
cancer (NSCLC) eventually develop acquired resistance to TKIs. Factors that
affect TKI-sensitive patient survival after progression during TKI treatment
remain unknown. We attempted to identify factors that affected post-progression
survival. We retrospectively reviewed 81 advanced NSCLC patients with disease
progression following tumor response and durable (≥ 6 months) disease
stabilization with first-line or second-line gefitinib. Post-progression survival
(PPS) and characteristics were investigated and compared in patients who did (n =
16) and did not (n = 65) resume TKIs. Most patients were female never-smokers
with adenocarcinoma. Median overall PPS was 10.3 months (95% confidence interval 
[CI], 7.458-13.142). Age, gender, smoking history, histology, Eastern Cooperative
Oncology Group performance status at gefitinib initiation, initial stage, and
platinum-based chemotherapy after gefitinib were not significant predictors of
PPS. Pemetrexed use after gefitinib significantly improved PPS (18.5 vs 8.6
months; hazard ratio [HR], 0.45; P = 0.008). Gefitinib reuse tended to lengthen
PPS but was insignificant in multivariate analysis (27.4 vs 8.8 months; HR, 0.53;
P = 0.095). NSCLC patients assumed to have clinically acquired resistance to TKIs
had relatively long PPS. TKIs reuse or pemetrexed use after progression with
gefitinib may improve PPS.

DOI: 10.3346/jkms.2013.28.11.1595 
PMCID: PMC3835500
PMID: 24265521  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


703. Br J Cancer. 2014 Jan 7;110(1):55-62. doi: 10.1038/bjc.2013.721. Epub 2013 Nov
21.

First-line gefitinib in Caucasian EGFR mutation-positive NSCLC patients: a
phase-IV, open-label, single-arm study.

Douillard JY(1), Ostoros G(2), Cobo M(3), Ciuleanu T(4), McCormack R(5), Webster 
A(5), Milenkova T(5).

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Cancérologie de l'Ouest, Centre René Gauducheau, Bd J. Monod,
44805 St-Herblain, Nantes, France. (2)National Koranyi Institute of Pulmonology, 
Piheno ut 1, Budapest H-1121, Hungary. (3)Hospital Regional Universitario Carlos 
Haya, Málaga, Andalucia 29010, Spain. (4)Institutul Oncologic Ion Chiricuta and
UMF Iuliu Hatieganu, Cluj-Napoca 400015, Romania. (5)AstraZeneca, Alderley Park, 
Macclesfield, Cheshire SK10 4TG, UK.

BACKGROUND: Phase-IV, open-label, single-arm study (NCT01203917) to assess
efficacy and safety/tolerability of first-line gefitinib in Caucasian patients
with stage IIIA/B/IV, epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutation-positive
non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC).
METHODS:
TREATMENT: gefitinib 250 mg day(-1) until progression. Primary endpoint:
objective response rate (ORR). Secondary endpoints: disease control rate (DCR),
progression-free survival (PFS), overall survival (OS) and safety/tolerability.
Pre-planned exploratory objective: EGFR mutation analysis in matched tumour and
plasma samples.
RESULTS: Of 1060 screened patients with NSCLC (859 known mutation status; 118
positive, mutation frequency 14%), 106 with EGFR sensitising mutations were
enrolled (female 70.8%; adenocarcinoma 97.2%; never-smoker 64.2%). At data
cutoff: ORR 69.8% (95% confidence interval (CI) 60.5-77.7), DCR 90.6% (95% CI
83.5-94.8), median PFS 9.7 months (95% CI 8.5-11.0), median OS 19.2 months (95%
CI 17.0-NC; 27% maturity). Most common adverse events (AEs; any grade): rash
(44.9%), diarrhoea (30.8%); CTC (Common Toxicity Criteria) grade 3/4 AEs: 15%;
SAEs: 19%. Baseline plasma 1 samples were available in 803 patients (784 known
mutation status; 82 positive; mutation frequency 10%). Plasma 1 EGFR mutation
test sensitivity: 65.7% (95% CI 55.8-74.7).
CONCLUSION: First-line gefitinib was effective and well tolerated in Caucasian
patients with EGFR mutation-positive NSCLC. Plasma samples could be considered
for mutation analysis if tumour tissue is unavailable.

DOI: 10.1038/bjc.2013.721 
PMCID: PMC3887309
PMID: 24263064  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


704. Mol Cancer Ther. 2014 Feb;13(2):444-53. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-13-0448. Epub 
2013 Nov 20.

MiR-134/487b/655 cluster regulates TGF-β-induced epithelial-mesenchymal
transition and drug resistance to gefitinib by targeting MAGI2 in lung
adenocarcinoma cells.

Kitamura K(1), Seike M, Okano T, Matsuda K, Miyanaga A, Mizutani H, Noro R,
Minegishi Y, Kubota K, Gemma A.

Author information: 
(1)Corresponding Author: Masahiro Seike, Nippon Medical School, 1-1-5, Sendagi,
Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8603, Japan. mseike@nms.ac.jp.

Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) has recently been recognized as a key
element of cell invasion, migration, metastasis, and drug resistance in several
types of cancer, including non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Our aim was to
clarify microRNA (miRNA)-related mechanisms underlying EMT followed by acquired
resistance to epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor
(EGFR-TKI) in NSCLC. miRNA expression profiles were examined before and after
transforming growth factor β1 (TGF-β1) exposure in four human adenocarcinoma cell
lines with or without EMT. Correlation between expressions of EMT-related miRNAs 
and resistance to EGFR-TKI gefitinib was evaluated. miRNA array and real-time
quantitative reverse transcription PCR (qRT-PCR) revealed that TGF-β1
significantly induced overexpression of miR-134, miR-487b, and miR-655, which
belong to the same cluster located on chromosome 14q32, in lung adenocarcinoma
cells with EMT. MAGI2 (membrane-associated guanylate kinase, WW, and PDZ
domain-containing protein 2), a predicted target of these miRNAs and a scaffold
protein required for PTEN, was diminished in A549 cells with EMT after the TGF-β1
stimulation. Overexpression of miR-134 and miR-487b promoted the EMT phenomenon
and affected the drug resistance to gefitinib, whereas knockdown of these miRNAs 
inhibited the EMT process and reversed TGF-β1-induced resistance to gefitinib.
Our study demonstrated that the miR-134/487b/655 cluster contributed to the
TGF-β1-induced EMT phenomenon and affected the resistance to gefitinib by
directly targeting MAGI2, in which suppression subsequently caused loss of PTEN
stability in lung cancer cells. The miR-134/miR-487b/miR-655 cluster may be a new
therapeutic target in patients with advanced lung adenocarcinoma, depending on
the EMT phenomenon.

DOI: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-13-0448 
PMID: 24258346  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


705. J Clin Neurosci. 2014 Apr;21(4):591-5. doi: 10.1016/j.jocn.2013.05.022. Epub 2013
Aug 11.

Gefitinib and erlotinib for non-small cell lung cancer patients who fail to
respond to radiotherapy for brain metastases.

Song Z(1), Zhang Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemotherapy, Zhejiang Cancer Hospital, 38 Guangji Road,
Hangzhou 310022, China; Key Laboratory, Diagnosis and Treatment Technology on
Thoracic Oncology, Zhejiang Province, Hangzhou, China. (2)Department of
Chemotherapy, Zhejiang Cancer Hospital, 38 Guangji Road, Hangzhou 310022, China; 
Key Laboratory, Diagnosis and Treatment Technology on Thoracic Oncology, Zhejiang
Province, Hangzhou, China. Electronic address: yipingzhang@yahoo.cn.

Survival and treatment options are limited for patients with brain metastases
arising from non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). We evaluated erlotinib and
gefitinib as salvage treatments for NSCLC patients with brain metastases that
failed to respond to radiotherapy in a retrospective study. Survival was
estimated using Kaplan-Meier analysis and log-rank tests. Multivariable
predictors were assessed using the Cox proportional hazards model. Epidermal
growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutations were assessed in part using sequencing
methods. The 103 NSCLC patients who were treated with gefitinib or erlotinib for 
salvage treatment for brain metastases between January 2005 and December 2011 had
overall objective response rates (ORR) of 11.7%, disease control rates (DCR) of
53.4%, 3.6 months of median progression-free survival (PFS), and 7.5 months of
median survival. Intracranial disease had an ORR of 11.7% and a DCR of 70.9%.
Extracranial disease had an ORR of 8.7% and a DCR of 66.0%. Nine patients (of 22 
tested) were documented with EGFR mutations (five with deletion in exon 19 and
four with L858R in exon 21). The median PFS for EGFR mutation patients was 9.0
months, versus 3.1 months for wild-type patients (p=0.001). The recursive
partitioning analysis class was the only factor predictive of PFS using
univariate analyses and was associated with survival in the multivariate
analysis. Our retrospective data suggest a potential role for gefitinib and
erlotinib in advanced NSCLC patients with brain metastases which have failed to
respond to radiotherapy. Patients with EGFR mutations benefited most from
treatment.

Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jocn.2013.05.022 
PMID: 24256883  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


706. Zhonghua Bing Li Xue Za Zhi. 2013 Jul;42(7):455-9. doi:
10.3760/cma.j.issn.0529-5807.2013.07.006.

[Effect of Wnt signaling suppression on gefitinib in non small cell lung cancer
cell lines].

[Article in Chinese]

Fang X(1), Gu P, Zhou CC, Ren SX, Luo BF, Zeng Y, Wu YJ, Zhao YM, Zhu XY, Yi XH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Shanghai Tongji Hospital, Tongji University School of
Medicine, Shanghai 200065, China.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the effect of Wnt signaling suppression on proliferation of
non small cell lung cancer to gefitinib, and its related mechanisms.
METHODS: PC9 and PC9/AB2 cells of both gefitinib sensitive and resistant were
treated with different concentrations of gefitinib, and the proliferation index
was measured using CCK8 kit. The members of Wnt signaling pathway were detected
by Western blot. Dual luciferase reportor gene assay (TOP Flash) was used to
document the transcriptional level of β-catenin. β-catenin siRNA was transfected 
into PC9/AB2 cells to suppress the Wnt signaling transcription, followed by
treatment with different concentrations of gefitinib. Western blot was then used 
to detect the expression of EGFR and its downstream signaling after inhibit the
expression of β-catenin.
RESULTS: Treating with different concentrations of gefitinib, the resistance of
PC9/AB2 cells to gefitinib was significantly increased (P < 0.05). The members of
Wnt signaling expressed at higher level in PC9/AB2 cells than in PC9 cells (t =
24.590, P = 0.000). TOP Flash examination showed that the endogenous
transcriptional activity of Wnt signaling was higher in PC9/AB2 cell than that in
PC9 cell (t = 4.983, P = 0.008). Compared with the negative control group,
apoptotic rate and sensitivity to gefitinib significantly increased in interfered
group (P < 0.05). The expression of p-ERK1/2 significantly decreased after Wnt
signaling suppression, although other proteins showed no significant alterations.
CONCLUSION: Suppressing the activity of Wnt signaling can partly reverse the
celluar resistance to gefitinib in non small cell lung cancer.


PMID: 24246864  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


707. Anticancer Res. 2013 Nov;33(11):5083-9.

Clinical significance of erlotinib monotherapy for gefitinib-resistant non-small 
cell lung cancer with EGFR mutations.

Koyama N(1), Uchida Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary Medicine, Clinical Department of Internal Medicine,
Jichi Medical University Saitama Medical Center, 1-847 Amanuma-cho, Omiya-ku,
Saitama-shi, Saitama, 330-8503, Japan. nkoyama@jichi.ac.jp.

BACKGROUND: The efficacy of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine 
kinase inhibitor (TKI) erlotinib is difficult to be accurately assessed in
patients with non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) because it is commonly employed 
after failure of another EGFR-TKI, gefitinib.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Medical records from 104 patients with NSCLC treated with
erlotinib were retrospectively reviewed.
RESULTS: There were no significant differences in erlotinib efficacy between
EGFR-mutated NSCLC with gefitinib resistance and NSCLC with wild-type EGFR. A
therapeutic response of disease control (DC) and the onset of skin rash prolonged
the progression-free survival (PFS), whereas the onset of interstitial lung
disease shortened both PFS and overall survival (OS). The DC group also
experienced prolonged OS.
CONCLUSION: Erlotinib may be a therapeutic option for EGFR-mutated NSCLC with
gefitinib resistance, as well as for NSCLC with wild-type EGFR. Therapeutic
response of DC and the onset of the described adverse events may be practical
predictors of survival in erlotinib treatment.


PMID: 24222153  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


708. Anticancer Res. 2013 Nov;33(11):5057-64.

Clinical outcomes after first-line EGFR inhibitor treatment for patients with
NSCLC, EGFR mutation, and poor performance status.

Okuma Y(1), Hosomi Y, Nagamata M, Yamada Y, Sekihara K, Kato K, Hishima T,
Okamura T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Oncology and Respiratory Medicine, Tokyo Metropolitan
Cancer and Infectious diseases Center Komagome Hospital, 3-18-22 Honkomagome,
Bunkyo, Tokyo 113-8677, Japan. y-okuma@cick.jp.

BACKGROUND: The phase II NEJ001 trial suggested that gefitinib was active against
advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) even in patients with poor
performance status (PS). Clinical response among the patients harboring epidermal
growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutation with poor PS is fair; however, gefitinib
does not have as much continued efficacy as in patients with good PS. This study 
has retrospectively investigated the clinical outcomes of gefitinib treated
patients with advanced NSCLC, EGFR mutations, and poor PS.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: A total of 208 patients with advanced NSCLC and poor PS
treated with gefitinib from 2004 to 2013 were retrospectively evaluated. Outcomes
were studied after stratification for gender, smoking status, histological
subtype, and EGFR mutation status.
RESULTS: Fifty-two patients (25.0%) with advanced NSCLC, EGFR mutation, and poor 
PS were treated with gefitinib. The overall response rate was 65.4%. The median
progression-free survival, median survival time, and one-year survival rate was
6.6 months, 19.6 months, and 62.9%, respectively. Death due to interstitial lung 
disease occurred in 11.5% of the patient population. In multivariate analysis, a 
PS of 4 was independently associated with poor outcomes (hazard ratio=10.5; 95%
Confidence interval=1.92-50.19; p=0.0091).
CONCLUSION: Patients with advanced NSCLC, EGFR mutation, and poor PS have poor
outcomes in response to gefitinib. However, the indication of gefitinib for such 
patients will not be changed in clinical practice and oncologists should treat
these patients with more careful follow-up since for those with poor PS, therapy 
may be more toxic than for patients with good PS.


PMID: 24222150  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


709. Med Oncol. 2013 Dec;30(4):750. doi: 10.1007/s12032-013-0750-1. Epub 2013 Nov 6.

microRNA expression profiles associated with survival, disease progression, and
response to gefitinib in completely resected non-small-cell lung cancer with EGFR
mutation.

Shen Y(1), Tang D, Yao R, Wang M, Wang Y, Yao Y, Li X, Zhang H.

Author information: 
(1)Medical College, Thoracic Surgery of the Affiliated Hospital of Qingdao
University, 16 Jiangsu Road, Qingdao, 266003, China.

microRNAs have been implicated in regulating diverse cellular pathways. Although 
there is emerging evidence that some microRNAs can function as oncogenes or tumor
suppressors, the role of microRNAs in mediating cancer progression remains
unexplored. And whether expression levels of a panel of biologically relevant
microRNAs can be used as prognostic or predictive biomarkers in radically
resected non-small-cell lung carcinoma (NSCLC) patients still needs to be further
validated. Our analyses involved two separated, retrospective cohorts. Firstly,
microRNA expression profile was performed in a cohort consisted of 128 radically 
resected NSCLC patients [60 were positive to epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR) mutation and 68 were negative] and 32 healthy providers to identify EGFR
mutation-related microRNAs and to determine their association with survival. In
addition, to validate our findings, we used quantitative reverse transcriptase
polymerase chain reaction assays to measure microRNAs and assess their
association with disease progression, survival, and response to gefitinib in an
independent cohort of 201 patients with EGRF mutation. In radically resected
NSCLC patients, the expression levels of miR-21, 10b in patients with EGFR
mutation were much higher than those without mutation. We used Cox
proportional-hazards regression to evaluate the effect of treatment on survival. 
In both univariate and multivariate analyses, gefitinib was associated with a
significant improvement in overall survival in patients with reduced miR-21
expression. Thus, miR-21 expression emerged as an independent predictor of the
response to gefitinib. Additionally, miR-10b is highly expressed in progressive
disease compared with complete remission or stable disease (P < 0.001). However, 
miR-21 expression has no significant prognosis for disease progression
(P = 0.720). Meanwhile, when overall survival was considered as the end point,
miR-10b did not have a significant difference between different subgroups
(P = 0.634). The expression patterns of microRNAs differ significantly between
patients with positive and negative EGFR mutation. And the expression status of
miR-21 and 10b in such patients is associated with disease progression, survival,
and response to adjuvant therapy with gefitinib.

DOI: 10.1007/s12032-013-0750-1 
PMID: 24198203  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


710. Lung Cancer. 2014 Jan;83(1):73-7. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2013.10.007. Epub 2013
Oct 19.

A population-based review of the feasibility of platinum-based combination
chemotherapy after tyrosine kinase inhibition in EGFR mutation positive non-small
cell lung cancer patients with advanced disease.

Mariano C(1), Bosdet I(2), Karsan A(2), Ionescu D(2), Murray N(3), Laskin JJ(3), 
Zhai Y(4), Melosky B(3), Sun S(3), Ho C(3).

Author information: 
(1)British Columbia Cancer Agency, Department of Medical Oncology, 600 West 10th 
Avenue, Vancouver, BC, Canada V5Z 4E6. Electronic address:
cmariano@bccancer.bc.ca. (2)British Columbia Cancer Agency, Department of
Pathology, 600 West 10th Avenue, Vancouver, BC, Canada V5Z 4E6. (3)British
Columbia Cancer Agency, Department of Medical Oncology, 600 West 10th Avenue,
Vancouver, BC, Canada V5Z 4E6. (4)Department of Statistics, University of British
Columbia, Canada.

INTRODUCTION: The IPASS trial demonstrated superior progression free survival for
Asian, light/never smoking, advanced, pulmonary adenocarcinoma patients treated
with first-line gefitinib compared to carboplatin/paclitaxel, of which 59% of
those tested were epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutation positive. In
IPASS 39% of gefitinib treated patients went on to receive platin based
polychemotherapy. We hypothesized that in a population-based setting fewer
patients receive second-line platin based chemotherapy than those enrolled in a
clinical trial.
METHODS: The Iressa Alliance program provided standardized EGFR mutation testing 
and appropriate access to gefitinib to all patients in British Columbia with
advanced, non squamous non small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). We retrospectively
analyzed clinical, pathologic data and outcomes for all patients tested in this
program between March 2010 and June 2011.
RESULTS: A total of 548 patients were referred for testing and 22% of patients
were mutation positive. Baseline characteristics of mutation negative and
mutation positive; median age 67/65, male 41%/31%, Asian 15%/51%, never smoker
21%/58%, stage IV 80%/91%. Median overall survival was 12 months in mutation
negative patients and not yet reached in mutation positive (p<0.0001). In
mutation positive patients 5% of patients had a complete response, 46% partial
response, 34% stable disease, 6% progressive disease. Twenty percent of patients 
continued on gefitinib after radiographic progression and clinical stability.
Sixty-one gefitinib treated patients progressed at the time of analysis; 10% of
patients received further gefitinib only, 38% platinum based doublet, 8% other
chemotherapy and 44% no further treatment. Performance status most strongly
predicted for delivery of second line chemotherapy.
CONCLUSIONS: This North American population based study shows similar efficacy of
gefitinib in mutation positive patients compared to the IPASS trial. Contrary to 
our hypothesis, delivery of second line chemotherapy was feasible in a
significant proportion of gefitinib treated patients.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2013.10.007 
PMID: 24192511  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


711. Curr Pharm Des. 2014;20(24):3901-13.

Combining anti-Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor (EGFR) and anti-angiogenic
strategies in advanced NSCLC: we should have known better….

Di Maio M, Morabito A, Piccirillo MC, Daniele G, Giordano P, Costanzo R,
Sandomenico C, Montanino A, Rocco G, Perrone F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Trials Unit, National Cancer Institute - "G. Pascale" Foundation, Via
Mariano Semmola, 80131 Napoli, Italy. dimaiomax@libero.it.

Drugs directed against Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor (EGFR), namely tyrosine
kinase inhibitors erlotinib and gefitinib, and anti-angiogenic agents, namely the
anti-Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor (VEGF) antibody bevacizumab, have
independently demonstrated clinical benefit in the treatment of patients with
advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), and are currently approved for use
in clinical practice. Pre-clinical studies have shown promising results with the 
combination of anti-EGFR and anti-angiogenesis drugs in different tumor models,
including NSCLC. Several clinical trials have been conducted to verify if the
combination of the two therapeutic strategies could improve the outcome in the
setting of advanced NSCLC. The largest body of evidence has been produced testing
the combination of erlotinib plus bevacizumab, or erlotinib plus a multi-targeted
receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor, namely sunitinib or sorafenib. Furthermore,
several dual inhibitors, targeting both EGFR and VEGFR, have been tested in
advanced NSCLC, with the greatest body of evidence produced with vandetanib.
However, despite an intriguing pre-clinical background, the combination strategy 
has not yet produced clinically relevant results. Several phase III trials showed
an improvement in progression-free survival, underlining some activity of
targeting both pathways concurrently, but no trial has demonstrated an impact on 
overall survival to date. Unfortunately, the vast majority of trials conducted in
this setting have been performed without any selection criteria based on
molecular characteristics, compromising the chance of detecting a potentially
relevant benefit in selected subgroup of patients. In recent years, the important
interaction between the efficacy of EGFR inhibitors and the presence of EGFR
activating mutations in tumor cells has been repeatedly demonstrated. On the
other hand, we still have no clear idea about predictive factors of efficacy for 
bevacizumab and other anti-angiogenic drugs. This is probably the real challenge 
to optimize the use of these drugs and to fully evaluate the real clinical
potential of a combination strategy.


PMID: 24191956  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


712. PLoS One. 2013 Oct 22;8(10):e78656. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0078656.
eCollection 2013.

Gefitinib inhibits invasive phenotype and epithelial-mesenchymal transition in
drug-resistant NSCLC cells with MET amplification.

La Monica S(1), Caffarra C, Saccani F, Galvani E, Galetti M, Fumarola C, Bonelli 
M, Cavazzoni A, Cretella D, Sirangelo R, Gatti R, Tiseo M, Ardizzoni A,
Giovannetti E, Petronini PG, Alfieri RR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of Parma, Parma, 
Italy.

Despite the initial response, all patients with epidermal growth factor receptor 
(EGFR)-mutant non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) eventually develop acquired
resistance to EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs). The EGFR-T790M secondary
mutation is responsible for half of acquired resistance cases, while MET
amplification has been associated with acquired resistance in about 5-15% of
NSCLCs. Clinical findings indicate the retained addiction of resistant tumors on 
EGFR signaling. Therefore, we evaluated the molecular mechanisms supporting the
therapeutic potential of gefitinib maintenance in the HCC827 GR5 NSCLC cell line 
harbouring MET amplification as acquired resistance mechanism. We demonstrated
that resistant cells can proliferate and survive regardless of the presence of
gefitinib, whereas the absence of the drug significantly enhanced cell migration 
and invasion. Moreover, the continuous exposure to gefitinib prevented the
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) with increased E-cadherin expression and 
down-regulation of vimentin and N-cadherin. Importantly, the inhibition of
cellular migration was correlated with the suppression of EGFR-dependent Src,
STAT5 and p38 signaling as assessed by a specific kinase array, western blot
analysis and silencing functional studies. On the contrary, the lack of effect of
gefitinib on EGFR phosphorylation in the H1975 cells (EGFR-T790M) correlated with
the absence of effects on cell migration and invasion. In conclusion, our
findings suggest that certain EGFR-mutated patients may still benefit from a
second-line therapy including gefitinib based on the specific mechanism
underlying tumor cell resistance.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0078656 
PMCID: PMC3805532
PMID: 24167634  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


713. Cancer Res. 2014 Jan 1;74(1):253-62. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-1103. Epub
2013 Oct 28.

MET and AXL inhibitor NPS-1034 exerts efficacy against lung cancer cells
resistant to EGFR kinase inhibitors because of MET or AXL activation.

Rho JK(1), Choi YJ, Kim SY, Kim TW, Choi EK, Yoon SJ, Park BM, Park E, Bae JH,
Choi CM, Lee JC.

Author information: 
(1)Authors' Affiliations: Department of Pulmonology and Critical Care Medicine;
Asan Institute for Life Sciences; Departments of Oncology and Radiation Oncology,
Asan Medical Center, College of Medicine, University of Ulsan, Songpa-gu, Seoul; 
and Department of New Drug Discovery, Neopharm, Daejeon, South Korea.

In non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) with epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR) mutations, acquired resistance to EGFR-tyrosine kinase inhibitors
(EGFR-TKI) can occur through a generation of bypass signals such as MET or AXL
activation. In this study, we investigated the antitumor activity of NPS-1034, a 
newly developed drug that targets both MET and AXL, in NSCLC cells with acquired 
resistance to gefitinib or erlotinib (HCC827/GR and HCC827/ER, respectively).
Characterization of H820 cells and evaluation of NPS-1034 efficacy in these cells
were also performed. The resistance of HCC827/GR was mediated by MET activation, 
whereas AXL activation led to resistance in HCC827/ER. The combination of
gefitinib or erlotinib with NPS-1034 synergistically inhibited cell proliferation
and induced cell death in both resistant cell lines. Accordingly, suppression of 
Akt was noted only in the presence of treatment with both drugs. NPS-1034 was
also effective in xenograft mouse models of HCC827/GR. Although the H820 cell
line was reported previously to have T790M and MET amplification, we discovered
that AXL was also activated in this cell line. There were no antitumor effects of
siRNA or inhibitors specific for EGFR or MET, whereas combined treatment with AXL
siRNA or NPS-1034 and EGFR-TKIs controlled H820 cells, suggesting that AXL is the
main signal responsible for resistance. In addition, NPS-1034 inhibited cell
proliferation as well as ROS1 activity in HCC78 cells with ROS1 rearrangement.
Our results establish the efficacy of NPS-1034 in NSCLC cells rendered resistant 
to EGFR-TKIs because of MET or AXL activation or ROS1 rearrangement.

DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-1103 
PMID: 24165158  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


714. J Cancer Res Ther. 2013 Sep;9 Suppl 2:S110-3. doi: 10.4103/0973-1482.119123.

A severe dermatologic adverse effect related with gefitinib: case report and
review of the literature.

Li YQ(1), Sun H, Xue D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Integration of TCM and Western Medicine, Key Laboratory of
Carcinogenesis and Translational Research (Ministry of Education), Peking
University Cancer Hospital and Institute, Beijing, China.

Gefitinib, a selective inhibitor of the epidermal growth factor receptor-tyrosine
kinase, it's one of the most frequent drug-related adverse effects (AEs) reported
in literature is dermatologic AEs. We report, a case of severe cutaneous adverse 
reactions induced by gefitinib as second-line treatment in a male patient with
advanced non-small cell lung cancer after 1 month of treatment. Although tumor
shrunk and patient got benefit from the treatment, gefitinib had to be stopped
right away. We managed the symptoms of rash with a variety of treatments,
including topical ethacridine lactate, antihistamine and so on. After the rash
improved, we found his tumor were progress. Then he took gefitinib again without 
severe skin toxicity or disease progression. We think the development of
gefitinib-induced rash may be a sign of effective and administrating it again
maybe relieves the degree of rash.

DOI: 10.4103/0973-1482.119123 
PMID: 24135241  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


715. J Ethnopharmacol. 2014;151(1):210-7. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2013.10.021. Epub 2013
Oct 21.

Marsdenia tenacissima extract inhibits gefitinib metabolism in vitro by
interfering with human hepatic CYP3A4 and CYP2D6 enzymes.

Han SY(1), Zhao HY(2), Zhou N(1), Zhou F(1), Li PP(3).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Translational Research (Ministry of
Education), Department of Integration of Chinese and Western Medicine, Peking
University Cancer Hospital & Institute, Beijing 100142, PR China. (2)Institute of
Chinese Materia Medica, China Academy of Chinese Medical Sciences, Beijing 10070,
PR China. (3)Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Translational Research
(Ministry of Education), Department of Integration of Chinese and Western
Medicine, Peking University Cancer Hospital & Institute, Beijing 100142, PR
China. Electronic address: lppma123@sina.com.

ETHNOPHARMACOLOGICAL RELEVANCE: The stem of Marsdenia tenacissima (Roxb.) Wight
et Arn. is mainly produced in Yunnan China and has long been used as a medicine
to treat cancer in China. Xiao-Ai-Ping injection, the water-soluble part of the
stem of Marsdenia tenacissima, is administrated as an anti-cancer agent in
clinics for decades. Our previous study showed that Marsdenia tenacissima extract
(MTE) restored gefitinib sensitivity in gefitinib-resistant non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC) cells, but the mechanism involved is unknown. Gefitinib undergoes 
hepatic metabolism predominantly through human cytochrome P450 (CYP) 3A4 and
CYP2D6 enzymes. This study aims to evaluate whether MTE interferes with gefitinib
metabolism via human hepatic P450 enzymes.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: A cocktail-substrate assay was used to test the effect of
MTE on major CYP enzyme activities by incubation of pooled human liver microsomes
with specific substrate probes of CYP1A2, CYP2C9, CYP2C19, CYP2D6, and CYP3A4 in 
the absence and presence of MTE. Recombinant human CYP450 enzymes were used to
predict in vitro gefitinib metabolic clearance in the absence and presence of
MTE. The metabolites of the substrate probes and gefitinib were detected by
high-performance liquid chromatographic tandem mass spectrometry (HPLC-MS/MS).
Human hepatoma HepG2 cells were used to investigate the effect of gefitinib alone
or in combination with MTE on CYP3A4 and CYP2D6 mRNA and protein expression.
RESULTS: The cocktail-substrate assay showed that MTE inhibited CYP450 activities
in human liver microsomes with the inhibition rate of 3A4>2C9>2C19>1A2>2D6. The
co-administration of MTE with gefitinib significantly decreased the in vitro
intrinsic clearance (Clint) of gefitinib by 2.6 and 4.0-fold for CYP2D6 and
CYP3A4, respectively, but did not affect other CYP450s. CYP2D6 and CYP3A4 mRNA
and protein expression in human hepatoma HepG2 cells were greatly reduced in the 
combined gefitinib and MTE treatment.
CONCLUSION: We demonstrate that MTE inhibits gefitinib metabolism by interfering 
with CYP3A4 and CYP2D6. Meanwhile, MTE combined with gefitinib down-regulates the
mRNA and protein expression of CYP3A4 and CYP2D6 in the HepG2 cells. Thus, these 
data suggest that MTE is a promising herbal medicine to enhance gefitinib
efficacy through improving its metabolic stability.

© 2013 Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jep.2013.10.021 
PMID: 24157377  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


716. Cancer Res Treat. 2013 Sep;45(3):178-85. doi: 10.4143/crt.2013.45.3.178. Epub
2013 Sep 30.

How Molecular Understanding Affects to Prescribing Patterns and Clinical Outcome 
of Gefitinib in Non-small Cell Lung Cancer? 10 Year Experience of Single
Institution.

Keam B(1), Kim DW, Park JH, Lee JO, Kim TM, Lee SH, Chung DH, Heo DS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul
National University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea. ; Cancer Research
Institute, Seoul National University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

PURPOSE: Gefitinib was introduced in 2002 for treatment of non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC); however, it is not clear whether its use in daily practice has
changed the outcome of patients. The purpose of this study is to evaluate the
question of how molecular understanding regarding gefitinib and epidermal growth 
factor receptor (EGFR) mutation affect the prescribing patterns and clinical
outcomes of treatment with gefitinib in NSCLC, in a real practical field.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We conducted a retrospective analysis of the consecutive
database of NSCLC patients who were treated with gefitinib at Seoul National
University Hospital between January 2002 and December 2011. Prescribing patterns 
and clinical outcomes were analyzed by year.
RESULTS: A total of 1,115 NSCLC patients, who received gefitinib at recurred or
metastatic setting, were included in this study. Proportion of patients receiving
gefitinib, for the first line, showed a gradual increase, from 5.2% in 2002-2003 
to 30.6% in 2010-2011. Proportion of patients who underwent EGFR mutation testing
showed a rapid increase, from 0.6% in 2004-2005 to 73.5% in 2010-2011. The
response rate also showed a gradual increase, from 17.2% in 2002-2003 to 57.1% in
2010-2011 (p<0.001). The median progression-free survival of gefitinib was
increased with statistical significance from 2.8 months in 2002-2003 to 9.1
months in 2010-2011 (p<0.001).
CONCLUSION: We demonstrated that molecular understanding and practical use of
EGFR mutation testing have resulted in a change in the prescription patterns of
gefitinib. Use of an enrichment strategy can lead to improvement in the efficacy 
of gefitinib in real practice.

DOI: 10.4143/crt.2013.45.3.178 
PMCID: PMC3804729
PMID: 24155676  [PubMed]


717. Dermatol Online J. 2013 Oct 16;19(10):20020.

Gefitinib-associated vitiligo: report in a man with parotid squamous cell
carcinoma and review of drug-induced hypopigmentation.

Jalalat SZ(1), Cohen PR.

Author information: 
(1)University of Texas Medical Branch. szjalala@utmb.edu.

Gefitinib is a tyrosine kinase inhibitor that targets and inhibits epidermal
growth factor receptors. It was initially used to treat non-small cell lung
cancer but has increasingly been used for other solid tumors such as those in the
breast, colorectal sites, and head and neck, as in our patient. Vitiligo is an
autoimmune disorder that results in the destruction of melanocytes and subsequent
skin depigmentation and hypopigmentation. Previously described mucocutanous side 
effects of gefitinib at 250-500 mg/day include alopecia, asteatotic dermatitis,
desquamation, hyperpigmentation, papulopustular acneiform eruption, pruritus,
seborrheic dermatitis, and skin fragility. A 54-year-old man with metastatic
squamous cell carcinoma to the parotid gland developed vitiligo within 1 month of
starting gefitinib therapy. We retrospectively reviewed the medical literature
using PubMed, searching: (1) gefitinib side effects, (2) drugs and (3) vitiligo. 
The patient with gefitinib-induced vitiligo continued to receive treatment with
the drug during which time areas of skin hypopigmentation persisted and
progressed. Etiology of drug-induced vitiligo includes alopecia areata therapies,
anticonvulsants, antimalarials, antineoplastics, anti-Parkinson medications, and 
other miscellaneous drugs. No other individuals have been described with
gefitinib-induced vitiligo. Albeit rare, gefitinib may be associated with the
development of vitiligo.


PMID: 24139363  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


718. Lung Cancer. 2013 Dec;82(3):397-406. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2013.09.011. Epub
2013 Sep 25.

Inhibition of p38 MAPK-dependent MutS homologue-2 (MSH2) expression by metformin 
enhances gefitinib-induced cytotoxicity in human squamous lung cancer cells.

Ko JC(1), Chiu HC, Wo TY, Huang YJ, Tseng SC, Huang YC, Chen HJ, Syu JJ, Chen CY,
Jian YT, Jian YJ, Lin YW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, National Taiwan University Hospital, Hsin-Chu
Branch, Taiwan; Department of Nursing, Yuanpei University, Hsinchu, Taiwan;
Institute of Technology Law, National Chiao Tung University, Hsinchu, Taiwan.

OBJECTIVES: Gefitinib, a quinazoline-derived tyrosine kinase inhibitor, has
anti-tumor activity in vivo and in vitro. Human MutS homologue-2 (MSH2) plays a
central role in promoting genetic stability by correcting DNA replication errors.
The present study investigated the effects of p38 mitogen-activated protein
kinase (MAPK) signal on gefitinib-induced MSH2 expression in two human non-small 
cell lung squamous cancer cell lines.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: After the gefitinib treatment, the expressions of MSH2
mRNA were determined by real-time PCR and RT-PCR analysis. Protein levels of
MSH2, phospho-MKK3/6, phospho-p38 MAPK were determined by Western blot analysis. 
We used specific MSH2, and p38 MAPK small interfering RNA to examine the role of 
p38 MAPK-MSH2 signal in regulating the chemosensitivity of gefitinib. Cell
viability was assessed by MTS assay, trypan blue exclusion, and colony-forming
ability assay.
RESULTS: Exposure of gefitinib increased MSH2 protein and mRNA levels, which was 
accompanied by MKK3/6-p38 MAPK activation in H520 and H1703 cells. Moreover,
blocking p38 MAPK activation by SB202190 significantly decreased
gefitinib-induced MSH2 expression by increasing mRNA and protein instability. In 
contrast, enhancing p38 activation using constitutively active MKK6 (MKK6E)
increased MSH2 protein and mRNA levels. Specific inhibition of MSH2 expression by
siRNA enhanced gefitinib-induced cytotoxicity. Metformin, an anti-diabetic drug, 
might reduce cancer risk. In human lung squamous cancer cells, metformin
decreased gefitinib-induced MSH2 expression and augmented the cytotoxic effect
and growth inhibition by gefitinib. Transient expression of MKK6E or HA-p38 MAPK 
vector could abrogate metformin and gefitinib-induced synergistic cytotoxic
effect in H520 and H1703 cells.
CONCLUSION: Together, down-regulation of MSH2 expression can be a possible
strategy to enhance the sensitivity of gefitinib to human lung squamous cancer
cells.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2013.09.011 
PMID: 24138903  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


719. Curr Pharm Des. 2014;20(24):3894-900.

Irreversible EGFR inhibitors in the treatment of advanced NSCLC.

Maione P, Rossi A, Bareschino M, Sacco PC, Schettino C, Casaluce F, Sgambato A,
Gridelli C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Oncology, "S.G. Moscati" Hospital, Contrada Amoretta -
83100 Avellino Italy. pmaione@libero.it.

The epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is among the most important targets
in the treatment of advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Erlotinib and
gefitinib, two small molecules, are reversible EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors
(TKIs). Non-small cell lung cancers with EGFR mutations, are characterized by
excellent responses when treated with the EGFR-TKIs gefitinib and erlotinib.
However, all the patients with tumors harbouring EGFR mutations experience
disease progression after a median of 10 to 14 months of treatment with gefitinib
or erlotinib. A group of new generation EGFR-TKIs irreversibly inhibit EGFR-TK
and represent one of the strategies that may potentially overcome the acquired
resistance to gefitinib and erlotinib or achieve better outcomes than reversible 
inhibitors in the first-line treatment of EGFR mutant lung cancers. Afatinib
(BIBW 2992) and PF299804 are the irreversible EGFR-TKIs with the most relevant
data in the treatment of advanced NSCLC, as primary EGFR-targeted therapy and
after resistance to reversible EGFR-TKIs. However, to date, the role of
irreversible EGFR inhibitors remains to be defined.


PMID: 24138713  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


720. Clin Respir J. 2014 Apr;8(2):206-12. doi: 10.1111/crj.12059. Epub 2013 Dec 11.

The evaluation of efficacy and safety of sunitinib on EGFR-TKI pretreated
advanced non-small cell lung cancer patients in China.

Liu YR(1), Zhu W, Zhang JL, Huang JQ, Zhao YZ, Zhang W, Han BH, Yao YH, Jiang LY,
Li SQ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonary, Shanghai Chest Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, Shanghai, China.

BACKGROUND: Sunitinib is an oral multitargeted tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI)
exhibiting antiagiogenic and antitumor effects.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the efficacy and potential toxicity of sunitinib therapy
in advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients in China.
METHODS: From January 2009 to August 2011, 30 patients with stage IV NSCLC, who
were pretreated with the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)-TKIs and then
received sunitinib, were retrospectively reviewed. Univariate and multivariate
Cox proportional hazard regression analysis was performed to determine the
potential prognostic risk factors influencing NSCLC survival.
RESULTS: The median progression-free survival (PFS) and median overall survival
(OS) of all 30 treated patients was 1.25 months [95% confidence interval (CI):
0.90-1.9 months] and 3.40 months (95% CI: 3.00-6.80 months), respectively. Cox
regression analysis suggested that Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG)
performance status (PS) is predictive of both PFS (P=0.001) and OS (P<0.001).
Common adverse events (AEs) included hand-foot syndrome (53.3%), mucositis
(40.0%), rash (36.7%) and diarrhea (33.3%).
CONCLUSION: No sign of overall clinical benefits of sunitinib was detected in
patients with pretreated EGFR-TKIs. Most patients suffered AEs from mild to
moderate severity. ECOG PS is highly associated with PFS and OS rate. Further
studies in NSCLC are required to determine whether sunitinib is beneficial nor
not.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/crj.12059 
PMID: 24118906  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


721. Zhongguo Fei Ai Za Zhi. 2013 Oct 20;16(10):535-40. doi:
10.3779/j.issn.1009-3419.2013.10.07.

[Research progress of the resistance mechanism of non-small cell lung cancer to
EGFR-TKIs].

[Article in Chinese; Abstract available in Chinese from the publisher]

Liu H(1), Wang M, Hu K, Xu Y, Ma M, Zhong W, Zhao J, Li L, Wang H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Peking Union Medical College Hospital,
Beijing 100730, China.

Nowadays, lung cancer is the malignant tumor of the highest morbidity and
mortality over the world, and non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) makes up about
80%. There is a great many NSCLC patients have been in advanced stage when
diagnosed. As a result, people pay more attention to curing advanced NSCLC. The
standard treatment to advanced NSCLC is platinum-based combined chemotherapy.
However, chemotherapy drugs usually have limited effects on improving the
survival of the patients. Then exploring new therapies is extremely urgent to us.
Now, molecular targeted therapy has been the most promising research area for the
treatment of NSCLC with researches going deep into pathogenesis and biological
behavior of lung cancer. Epidermal growth factor receptor-tyrosine kinase
inhibitors (EGFR-TKIs) have achieved a great success in the treatment of advanced
NSCLC. Their representatives are erlotinib and gefitinib. The two drugs have been
widely used to treat advanced NSCLCs worldwide, especially for the patients with 
EGFR activating mutations. However, after a period of treatment (median time is 6
to 12 months), most patients will develop drug resistance to EGFR-TKIs. Intense
research in these NSCLCs has identified two major mechanisms of resistance to
TKIs: primary and acquired resistances. The research about resistance mechanism
of NSCLC to EGFR-TKIs is a hot one because of their excellent effects on
improving overall and progression-free survival. The aim of this article was to
summarize the development of the resistance mechanisms.

Publisher: 目前，肺癌是全世界范围内发病率和死亡率最高的恶性肿瘤，其中非小细胞肺癌（non-small cell lung cancer,
NSCLC）占全部肺癌的80%左右，而NSCLC患者中有很大一部分在确诊时已经处于晚期。因此，对于晚期NSCLC的治疗也越来越受到人们的重视。虽然晚期NSCLC的
标准治疗为含铂双药联合化疗，但是化疗药物对改善晚期NSCLC患者的生存期方面作用十分有限，因此寻求新的治疗方式迫在眉睫。随着对肺癌发病机制及其生物学行为的深入研究
，分子靶向治疗已成为治疗晚期NSCLC最具前景的研究领域。其中表皮生长因子受体-酪氨酸激酶抑制剂（epidermal growth factor receptor
tyrosine kinase inhibitors,
EGFR-TKIs）在晚期NSCLC治疗方面取得了突破性进展，其代表药物为吉非替尼和厄洛替尼，这两种EGFR-TKIs已在全世界范围内得到认可并被广泛用于晚期NS
CLC的治疗，尤其是对于EGFR敏感突变者。然而，经过一段时间（中位时间为6个月-12个月）的治疗后，大部分患者会对EGFR-TKIs产生耐药，其耐药机制主要包括
原发性和获得性耐药。由于EGFR-TKIs在改善晚期NSCLC患者总生存期和无进展生存期方面的突出作用，对于EGFR-TKIs耐药机制的探索已成为国内外研究的热点
。该文章就EGFR-TKI耐药机制的研究进展进行了综述。
DOI: 10.3779/j.issn.1009-3419.2013.10.07 
PMID: 24113007  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


722. Zhongguo Fei Ai Za Zhi. 2013 Oct 20;16(10):510-3. doi:
10.3779/j.issn.1009-3419.2013.10.02.

[Progressive patterns of gifitinib treating advanced non-small cell lung cancer
after obtained resistance].

[Article in Chinese; Abstract available in Chinese from the publisher]

Wang B(1), Zhang X, Lin L, Hao X, Zhang X, Li J, Shi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Cancer Institute/Hospital, Chinese Academy of 
Medical Sciences & Peking Union Medical College; Beijing Key Laboratory of
Clinical Study on Anticancer Molecular Targeted Drugs, Beijing 100021, China.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Clinical observation was conducted on the resistance to
epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor (EGFR-TKI) gefitinib
(Iressa) therapy for advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients.
METHODS: Ninety-three NSCLC patients in our hospital, showing effective or stable
condition after 6-month previous gefitinib therapy, were included in this
investigation. Among the patients, 94.6% of them were suffering from
adenocarcinoma. The percentage of female is 79.6%; the percentage of non-smoking 
is 80.6%. During the therapy period, follow-up was preformed every 2 months.
RESULTS: Among the 93 patients, median therapy time was 16 months (range: 8 to 70
months), and 21.5% (20/93) of them had received therapy for more than 2 years,
while 8.6% (8/93) had received that for more than 3 years. The progression
included 80% (72/90) for intrapleural progression, 38.9% (35/90) for primary
tumor plus recurrence after sugary especially, 51.1% (46/90) for intrapulmonary
metastasis, 25.6% (23/90) for pleural metastasis, 30% (30/90) for intracranial
progression and 15.6% (14/90) for intraperitoneal progression.
CONCLUSION: Resistance to EGFR-TKI shows diversification in clinical observation,
therefore, close clinical follow-up is necessary for early attention and timely
treatment.

Publisher: 背景与目的 观察表皮生长因子受体酪氨酸激酶抑制剂吉非替尼（Iressa）治疗晚期非小细胞肺癌（non-small cell lung
cancer, NSCLC）获益后出现耐药的临床表现和进程。方法
回顾性分析了我院内科接受吉非替尼治疗的93例晚期NSCLC患者，有效或稳定超过6个月，腺癌94.6%，女性79.6%，不吸烟者80.6%。每2个月评估疗效，观察耐
药出现的临床表现。结果
本组93例，中位服药时间16个月（8个月-70个月），用药时间超过2年占21.5%（20/93），超过3年8.6%（8/93）。耐药出现时的临床表现主要为胸腔内进
展，占80%（72/90），其中原发病灶及术后断端复发进展占38.9%（35/90），肺内转移占51.1%（46/90），胸膜转移占25.6%（23/90）；颅内
进展30%（30/90）；腹腔内进展15.6%（14/90）。结论
EGFRTKI治疗耐药后的进展在临床上表现为多样化，治疗后的预后不同，因此，需要密切的临床随访以期早期发现、及时处理。
DOI: 10.3779/j.issn.1009-3419.2013.10.02 
PMID: 24113002  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


723. Case Rep Ophthalmol Med. 2013;2013:213124. doi: 10.1155/2013/213124. Epub 2013
Sep 12.

Choroidal metastasis of non-small cell lung cancer that responded to gefitinib.

Shimomura I(1), Tada Y, Miura G, Suzuki T, Matsumura T, Tsushima K, Terada J,
Kurimoto R, Sakaida E, Sekine I, Takiguchi Y, Yamamoto S, Tatsumi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respirology, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba University,
1-8-1 Inohana Chuo-ku, Chiba 260-8677, Japan.

A 52-year-old Japanese woman presented with optical symptoms, including
left-sided myodesopsia, blurred vision, narrowed visual field, and diminished
visual acuity. Ocular evaluation revealed a metastatic tumor in the choroid.
Further examinations identified pulmonary adenocarcinoma as the primary tumor.
Because an epidermal growth factor receptor gene (EGFR) mutation was detected in 
a biopsy specimen, gefitinib treatment was initiated. Dramatic responses were
obtained in the primary tumor and metastatic foci. Optical symptoms improved and 
remained stable for 5 months during the treatment, until relapse. This report
demonstrates that gefitinib is effective for choroidal metastasis of pulmonary
adenocarcinoma harboring an EGFR mutation.

DOI: 10.1155/2013/213124 
PMCID: PMC3787632
PMID: 24109538  [PubMed]


724. Cancer Res. 2014 Jan 1;74(1):309-19. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-4721. Epub
2013 Oct 9.

ERK1/2 blockade prevents epithelial-mesenchymal transition in lung cancer cells
and promotes their sensitivity to EGFR inhibition.

Buonato JM(1), Lazzara MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Authors' Affiliations: Departments of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering,
and Bioengineering, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.

Overcoming cellular mechanisms of de novo and acquired resistance to drug therapy
remains a central challenge in the clinical management of many cancers, including
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Although much work has linked the
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in cancer cells to the emergence of drug 
resistance, it is less clear where tractable routes may exist to reverse or
inhibit EMT as a strategy for drug sensitization. Here, we demonstrate that
extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) 1/2 (mitogen-activated protein kinase
3/1, MAPK3/1) signaling plays a key role in directing the mesenchymal character
of NSCLC cells and that blocking ERK signaling is sufficient to heighten
therapeutic responses to EGF receptor (EGFR) inhibitors. MEK1/2 (MAPKK1/2)
inhibition promoted an epithelial phenotype in NSCLC cells, preventing induction 
of EMT by exogenous TGF-β. Moreover, in cells exhibiting de novo or acquired
resistance to the EGFR inhibitor gefitinib, MEK inhibition enhanced the
sensitivity to gefitinib and slowed cell migration. These effects only occurred, 
however, if MEK was inhibited for a period sufficient to trigger changes in EMT
marker expression. Consistent with these findings, changes in EMT phenotypes and 
markers were also induced by the expression of mutant KRAS in a MEK-dependent
manner. Our results suggest that prolonged exposure to MEK or ERK inhibitors may 
not only restrain EMT but also overcome naïve or acquired resistance of NSCLC to 
EGFR-targeted therapy in the clinic.

DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-4721 
PMCID: PMC3964587
PMID: 24108744  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


725. Med J Aust. 2013 Oct 7;199(7):471-3.

The economic evaluation of personalised oncology medicines: ethical challenges.

Lewis JR(1), Lipworth WL, Kerridge IH, Day RO.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Values, Ethics and Law in Medicine, University of Sydney, Sydney,
NSW, Australia. jlewis@med.usyd.edu.au.

Insights into the molecular drivers of cancer are providing opportunities for the
development of new targeted treatments and more personalised approaches to cancer
management. Drugs targeting mutant epidermal growth factor receptors, such as
erlotinib and gefitinib, may provide more effective, safer and better tolerated
treatment options compared with chemotherapy among appropriately selected
patients with advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). First-line access to
these newer treatments remains unfunded after several considerations by the
Pharmaceutical Benefits Advisory Committee and their assessment that these are
not cost-effective treatments. We suggest that there may be evidentiary and
ethical challenges associated with the assessment of the cost-effectiveness of
personalised oncology medicines in Australia, and that a new approach is needed
to determine the value and cost-effectiveness of personalised medicine.


PMID: 24099207  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


726. Drugs Today (Barc). 2013 Sep;49(9):523-35. doi: 10.1358/dot.2013.49.9.2016610.

Afatinib for the treatment of patients with EGFR-positive non-small cell lung
cancer.

Bowles DW(1), Weickhardt A, Jimeno A.

Author information: 
(1)University of Colorado School of Medicine, Division of Medical Oncology, and
Denver Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Denver, Colorado, USA.
antonio.jimeno@ucdenver.edu.

Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) are
valuable treatments for EGFR-mutated non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC).
Anti-EGFR antibodies are widely used in the treatment of head and neck squamous
cell carcinomas (HNSCC) and in KRAS wild-type colorectal cancer. The
first-generation, reversible EGFR inhibitors erlotinib and gefitinib in the
first-line setting provide superior progression-free survival and quality of life
compared to conventional chemotherapy in NSCLC harboring activating EGFR
mutations. However, these therapies eventually fail and new options are needed.
Afatinib is a novel irreversible inhibitor of the ErbB family members EGFR,
tyrosine kinase-type cell surface receptors HER2 and HER4. It shows preclinical
efficacy in NSCLC with common EGFR-activating mutations and the T790M mutation
typically associated with EGFR TKI resistance. Preclinical activity is seen in
other tumor types as well, including HNSCC. Clinically, afatinib has been
evaluated in the broad-reaching LUX Lung trial program, with significant activity
seen in the first and later-line settings. It is also under investigation in
multiple other tumor types. This review will stress on afatinib's preclinical
pharmacology, pharmacokinetics and clinical activity with a focus on NSCLC.

Copyright 2013 Prous Science, S.A.U. or its licensors. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1358/dot.2013.49.9.2016610 
PMID: 24086949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


727. Asia Ocean J Nucl Med Biol. 2013 Fall;1(2):47-52.

Assessment of epidermal growth factor receptor status in glioblastomas.

Zhu HJ(1), Ogawa M(2), Magata Y(2), Hirata M(3), Ohmomo Y(3), Namba H(4),
Sakahara H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiology, Hamamatsu University School of Medicine, Japan.
(2)Medical Photonics Research Center, Hamamatsu University School of Medicine,
Japan. (3)Osaka University of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Japan. (4)Department of
Neurosurgery, Hamamatsu University School of Medicine, Japan.

OBJECTIVES: Our previous study showed that a newly designed tracer radioiodinated
6-(3-morpholinopropoxy)-7-ethoxy-4-(3'-iodophenoxy)quinazoline ([(125)I]PYK) is
promising for the evaluation of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)
status and prediction of gefitinib treatment of non-small cell lung cancer. EGFR 
is over-expressed and mutated also in glioblastoma. In the present study, the
expressions and mutation of EGFR were tested with [(125)I] PYK in glioblastoma in
vitro and in vivo to determine whether this could be used to predict the
sensitivity of glioblastoma to gefitinib treatment.
METHODS: Glioblastoma cell lines with different expression of EGFR were tested.
Growth inhibition of cell lines by gefitinib was assessed by the 3-(4,
5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2, 5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) colorimetric
assay. Uptake levels of [(125)I]PYK were evaluated in cell lines in vitro. Tumor 
targeting of [(125)I]PYK was examined by a biodistribution study and imaging by
single photon emission computed tomography (SPECT).
RESULTS: High concentrations of gefitinib were needed to suppress EGFR-mediated
proliferation. The uptake of [(125)I] PYK in cell lines in vitro was low, and
showed no correlation with EGFR expression or mutation status. Biodistribution
study and SPECT imaging with [(125)I]PYK for xenografts showed no [(125)I]PYK
uptake.
CONCLUSION: The results showed prediction of gefitinib effectiveness was
difficult in glioblastoma by [(125)I]PYK, which might be due to the complicated
expression of EGFR status in glioblastoma. Thus, new tracers for sites downstream
of the mutant EGFR should be investigated in further studies.


PMCID: PMC4927051
PMID: 27408849  [PubMed]


728. Cell Death Dis. 2013 Sep 26;4:e814. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2013.312.

Atorvastatin overcomes gefitinib resistance in KRAS mutant human non-small cell
lung carcinoma cells.

Chen J(1), Bi H, Hou J, Zhang X, Zhang C, Yue L, Wen X, Liu D, Shi H, Yuan J, Liu
J, Liu B.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, Cancer Institute and Hospital,
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing
100191, China.

The exact influence of statins on gefitinib resistance in human non-small cell
lung cancer (NSCLC) cells with KRAS mutation alone or KRAS/PIK3CA and KRAS/PTEN
comutations remains unclear. This work found that transfection of mutant KRAS
plasmids significantly suppressed the gefitinib cytotoxicity in Calu3 cells
(wild-type KRAS). Gefitinib disrupted the Kras/PI3K and Kras/Raf complexes in
Calu3 cells, whereas not in Calu3 KRAS mutant cells. These trends were
corresponding to the expression of pAKT and pERK in gefitinib treatment.
Atorvastatin (1 μM) plus gefitinib treatment inhibited proliferation, promoted
cell apoptosis, and reduced the AKT activity in KRAS mutant NSCLC cells compared 
with gefitinib alone. Atorvastatin (5 μM) further enhanced the gefitinib
cytotoxicity through concomitant inhibition of AKT and ERK activity. Atorvastatin
could interrupt Kras/PI3K and Kras/Raf complexes, leading to suppression of AKT
and ERK activity. Similar results were also obtained in comutant KRAS/PTEN or
KRAS/PIK3CA NSCLC cells. Furthermore, mevalonate administration reversed the
effects of atorvastatin on the Kras/Raf and Kras/PI3K complexes, as well as AKT
and ERK activity in both A549 and Calu1 cells. The in vivo results were similar
to those obtained in vitro. Therefore, mutant KRAS-mediated gefitinib
insensitivity is mainly derived from failure to disrupt the Kras/Raf and
Kras/PI3K complexes in KRAS mutant NSCLC cells. Atorvastatin overcomes gefitinib 
resistance in KRAS mutant NSCLC cells irrespective of PIK3CA and PTEN statuses
through inhibition of HMG-CoA reductase-dependent disruption of the Kras/Raf and 
Kras/PI3K complexes.

DOI: 10.1038/cddis.2013.312 
PMCID: PMC3789171
PMID: 24071646  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


729. J Geriatr Oncol. 2013 Jul;4(3):282-90. doi: 10.1016/j.jgo.2013.04.005. Epub 2013 
May 7.

Medical treatment of advanced non-small cell lung cancer in elderly patients: a
review of the role of chemotherapy and targeted agents.

Meoni G(1), Cecere FL, Lucherini E, Di Costanzo F.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Oncology 1, Azienda Ospedaliero Universitaria Careggi, Florence,
Italy. Electronic address: giulia.meoni@gmail.com.

Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer related mortality worldwide. Non-small
cell lung cancer (NSCLC) accounts for 85% of all cases. Half of the patients at
diagnosis of NSCLC are over seventy years old; therefore, the elderly represent a
large subgroup of patients affected by advanced NSCLC in our clinical practice.
Nevertheless, the elderly are under-represented in clinical trials. Given the
fact that old age is frequently associated with several comorbidities, poor
general conditions and physiologic reduction in organ function, clinicians must
carefully choose the best treatment option for elderly patients with advanced
NSCLC, always taking into account the expected risks and benefits. In this paper 
we perform a review of literature evidence regarding the medical treatment of
elderly patients affected by advanced NSCLC, encompassing single-agent
chemotherapy, doublet chemotherapy and targeted agents. We conclude that
single-agent chemotherapy with a third generation agent (vinorelbine, taxanes,
gemcitabine) represents a valid treatment option for elderly patients who are not
eligible for a combination chemotherapy due to clinical features such as
comorbidities, poor performance status and inadequate organ function.
Platinum-based doublet chemotherapy shows similar efficacy in elderly patients as
compared to their younger counterpart, despite greater treatment related toxicity
and it is indicated in elderly patients with ECOG PS: 0-2, adequate organ
function and no major comorbidities. Elderly patients affected by epidermal
growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutated NSCLC benefit mostly from a tyrosine kinase
inhibitor of EGFR (erlotinib, gefitinib) which is associated with a good toxicity
profile. Currently there are no available data to strongly support the use of
bevacizumab in combination with first line chemotherapy in the treatment of older
adults. Elderly patients affected by NSCLC harboring the EML4-ALK translocation
could benefit mostly from a treatment with an oral inhibitor of such a
rearrangement (crizotinib).

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jgo.2013.04.005 
PMID: 24070465  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


730. Invest New Drugs. 2013 Dec;31(6):1458-65. doi: 10.1007/s10637-013-0030-0. Epub
2013 Sep 26.

Dual inhibition of MEK1/2 and EGFR synergistically induces caspase-3-dependent
apoptosis in EGFR inhibitor-resistant lung cancer cells via BIM upregulation.

Song JY(1), Kim CS, Lee JH, Jang SJ, Lee SW, Hwang JJ, Lim C, Lee G, Seo J, Cho
SY, Choi J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Asan Medical Center, University of Ulsan College of
Medicine, 388-1 Pungnap-2 dong, Songpa-gu, Seoul, 138-736, South Korea.

Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) gene mutations activate the
KRAS-RAF-MEK-ERK pathway in lung cancer cells. EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors
(TKIs) such as gefitinib induce apoptosis of cancer cells, but prolonged
treatment is often associated with acquired resistance. Here, we identified a
novel MEK1/2 inhibitor, CZ0775, and compared its cytotoxic effects to those of
AZD6244 (selumetinib) in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cell lines harboring 
EGFR mutations. The lapatinib-sensitive HCC827 and PC9 and lapatinib-resistant
H1650 and H1975 cell lines showed poor responses to CZ0775 and AZD6244
monotherapy with an IC50 > 10 μM. By contrast, combination treatment with
lapatinib and CZ0775 inhibited cell proliferation and produced a 2-fold higher
number of annexin V-labeled cells than lapatinib alone in H1975 cells.
Furthermore, combination treatment decreased phosphorylated extracellular signal 
related kinase (p-ERK) and survivin levels and upregulated the expression of the 
pro-apoptotic protein BIM. siRNA-mediated BIM depletion reduced caspase-3
activity (~40%) in lapatinib and CZ0775 treated H1975 cells. An in vitro ERK
activity assay showed that p-ERK levels were approximately a 3-fold lower in
H1975 cells treated with CZ0775 and lapatinib combination than in cells treated
with lapatinib alone. CZ0775 was more cytotoxic than AZD6244 when used in
combination with lapatinib. Our results suggest that combination treatment with
CZ0774 and EGFR inhibitors is a promising therapeutic approach for the treatment 
of EGFR-TKI-resistant lung cancers and its effect is mediated by the inhibition
of ERK and the induction of BIM.

DOI: 10.1007/s10637-013-0030-0 
PMID: 24068620  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


731. J Chin Med Assoc. 2013 Dec;76(12):682-5. doi: 10.1016/j.jcma.2013.08.006. Epub
2013 Sep 21.

The epidermal growth factor receptor-tyrosine kinase inhibitor era has changed
the causes of death of patients with advanced non-small-cell lung cancer.

Wu WS(1), Chen YM, Tsai CM, Shih JF, Lee YC, Perng RP, Whang-Peng J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chest Medicine, Taipei Veterans General Hospital, National
Yang-Ming University School of Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan, ROC.

BACKGROUND: Epidermal growth factor receptor-tyrosine kinase inhibitors
(EGFR-TKIs) are effective against tumor EGFR-mutated non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC). Patients with the tumor EGFR-activating mutation (EGFRmu) had superior
survival, compared to patients with EGFR wild-type tumors (EGFRwt). Many patients
with the EGFRmu have had disease progression with EGFR-TKI treatment because of
central nervous system (CNS) metastases. The objective of this retrospective
study was to compare the causes of death in patients with a known tumor EGFR
mutation status who had been treated with EGFR-TKIs.
METHODS: We retrospectively reviewed the chart records of our patients with
advanced NSCLC who had received diagnosis, treatment, and supportive and hospice 
care in our hospital between July 2005 and June 2010. The tumor EGFR mutation
status was analyzed by using a DNA sequence method. All enrolled patients had a
documented cause of death.
RESULTS: Ninety-four patients had documented tumor EGFR data, had received
EGFR-TKI treatment (either erlotinib or gefitinib), and were with or without
previous or salvage systemic chemotherapy. Of the 94 patients, 36 patients had
EGFRwt and 58 patients had EGFRmu. The overall patient survival after starting
EGFR-TKI treatment was significantly longer in the EGFRmu patients (median 17.2
months) than in the EGFRwt patients (median 11.6 months; p = 0.0058). Twenty-nine
patients died of CNS metastases and 65 died of organ failure (other than the
CNS). Patients who died of CNS metastases had undergone EGFR-TKI treatment
significantly longer than patients who died of other organ failure (median, 8
months vs. 1.9 months; p = 0.0003) with a hazard ratio of 2.308 [95% confidence
interval (C.I.), 1.452-3.668; p = 0.0004]. A significantly higher proportion of
EGFRmu patients (26 of 58 patients; 44.8%) than EGFRwt patients (3 of 36
patients; 8.3%) (p < 0.001) died of CNS metastases.
CONCLUSION: The EGFRmu NSCLC patients survived longer and had a significantly
higher probability of mortality due to CNS metastases, compared to the EGFRwt
patients. This change in the causes of death was noted after the era of EGFR-TKI 
treatment, and will have an important impact on the strategies and management of 
supportive and hospice care for patients.

Copyright © 2013. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jcma.2013.08.006 
PMID: 24064329  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


732. Lung Cancer. 2013 Nov;82(2):305-12. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2013.08.028. Epub 2013
Sep 8.

Combined epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)-tyrosine kinase inhibitor and
chemotherapy in non-small-cell lung cancer: chemo-refractoriness of cells
harboring sensitizing-EGFR mutations in the presence of gefitinib.

Tsai CM(1), Chen JT, Chiu CH, Lai CL, Hsiao SY, Chang KT.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Thoracic Oncology, Department of Chest Medicine, Taipei Veterans
General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan; Department of Medicine, School of Medicine,
National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan. Electronic address:
doc3006a@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Combined epidermal growth factor receptor-tyrosine kinase inhibitor
(EGFR-TKI) with chemotherapy is believed to be more effective in treating
non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) with sensitizing-EGFR mutation (SEM). This
hypothesis failed to be realized clinically and needs to be examined in vitro.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Using the tetrazolium colorimetric assay and classical
isobole method, we investigated the combination effects of 6
gefitinib-chemotherapeutic doublets (gefitinib/cisplatin, gemcitabine,
pemetrexed, paclitaxel, docetaxel, or vinorelbine) in a panel of 15 NSCLC cell
lines.
RESULTS: Upon treatment with the 6 gefitinib-chemotherapeutic doublets, the 12
cell lines that did not harbor SEM displayed a broad spectrum of group results,
from obvious synergism to robust antagonism. The values of group mean combination
index (mCIs) ranged from 0.769 to 1.201. In contrast, the 3 cell lines with SEM
showed a tendency toward consistent antagonism to the tested doublets,
impressively, with a narrow range of higher group mCIs (0.993-1.141). In the
presence of gefitinib, the SEM or gefitinib-sensitive group was more
chemo-refractory than the non-SEM (index of chemo-refractoriness (RI): 69.33
versus 42.67; P = 0.036) or gefitinib-resistant group (68.25 versus 40.64, P =
0.0108), respectively. The results of using the gefitinib/drug combinations with 
the gefitinib-sensitive non-SEM cell line H322 and the gefitinib-resistant EGFR
mutant H820 shared patterns similar to those with the SEM and non-SEM cell lines,
respectively.
CONCLUSION: Gefitinib-treated EGFR-TKI-sensitive NSCLC cells showed a wide
spectrum of chemo-refractoriness, suggesting that concomitantly combined
EGFR-TKI-chemotherapy might not be a good treatment strategy for NSCLC harboring 
SEM.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2013.08.028 
PMID: 24055492  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


733. Onkologie. 2013;36(9):510-8. doi: 10.1159/000354627. Epub 2013 Aug 19.

Afatinib, erlotinib and gefitinib in the first-line therapy of EGFR
mutation-positive lung adenocarcinoma: a review.

Köhler J(1), Schuler M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, West German Cancer Center, University Hospital
Essen, Germany.

Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) consists of several histomorphologically
defined phenotypes that display an enormous genetic variability. In recent years,
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutation-positive lung adenocarcinoma has
emerged as a unique subset of NSCLC in terms of etiopathogenesis and tumor
biology. Since the introduction of the reversible EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors
(TKIs) erlotinib and gefitinib, patients with metastatic EGFR mutation-positive
lung cancer can be offered a therapeutic alternative that has proven its
superiority over standard platinum-based chemotherapy. However, primary or
acquired resistance limits the therapeutic success of these targeted agents.
Irreversible inhibitors targeting all ErbB family receptor tyrosine kinases, such
as afatinib and dacomitinib, have been developed to confer sustained disease
control in ErbB-dependent cancers. The large LUX-Lung 3 phase III trial recently 
reported afatinib to be clearly superior over the most effective platinum doublet
in patients with EGFR mutation-positive lung cancer. To fully exploit the
clinical activity of afatinib, proactive management of its gastrointestinal and
dermatologic toxicities is advised.

© 2013 S. Karger GmbH, Freiburg.

DOI: 10.1159/000354627 
PMID: 24051929  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


734. Crit Rev Oncol Hematol. 2014 Feb;89(2):300-13. doi:
10.1016/j.critrevonc.2013.08.003. Epub 2013 Aug 28.

Are erlotinib and gefitinib interchangeable, opposite or complementary for
non-small cell lung cancer treatment? Biological, pharmacological and clinical
aspects.

Bronte G(1), Rolfo C(2), Giovannetti E(3), Cicero G(1), Pauwels P(4), Passiglia
F(1), Castiglia M(1), Rizzo S(1), Vullo FL(1), Fiorentino E(5), Van Meerbeeck
J(6), Russo A(7).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Oncology, Department of Surgical and Oncology Sciences, University of 
Palermo, Palermo, Italy. (2)Phase I-Early Clinical Trials Unit, Oncology
Department and Multidisciplinary Oncology Center Antwerp (MOCA) Antwerp
University Hospital, Edegem, Belgium. (3)Department Medical Oncology, VU
University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. (4)Molecular Pathology
Unit, Pathology Department and Multidisciplinary Oncology Center Antwerp (MOCA)
Antwerp University Hospital, Edegem, Belgium. (5)Surgical Oncology, Department of
Surgical and Oncology Sciences, University of Palermo, Palermo, Italy.
(6)Thoracic Oncology, Multidisciplinary Oncology Center Antwerp (MOCA) Antwerp
University Hospital, Edegem, Belgium. (7)Medical Oncology, Department of Surgical
and Oncology Sciences, University of Palermo, Palermo, Italy. Electronic address:
antonio.russo@usa.net.

Gefitinib and erlotinib are the two anti-epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) 
tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) approved for treatment of advanced NSCLC
patients. These drugs target one of the most important pathways in lung
carcinogenesis and are able to exploit the phenomenon of 'oncogene addiction',
with different efficacy according to EGFR gene mutational status in tumor
samples. Gefitinib has been approved only for EGFR mutation bearing patients
regardless the line of treatment, while erlotinib is also indicated in patients
without EGFR mutation who undergo second- or third-line treatment. Some studies
evaluated the main differences between these drugs both for direct comparison and
to improve their sequential use. In particular, toxicity profile resulted
partially different, and these observations may be explained by several molecular
and pharmacokinetic features. Therefore, this review integrates preclinical data 
with clinical evidences of TKIs to guide the optimization of currently available 
treatments in advanced NSCLC patients.

Copyright © 2013. Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.critrevonc.2013.08.003 
PMID: 24041630  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


735. Zhongguo Fei Ai Za Zhi. 2013 Sep;16(9):464-9. doi:
10.3779/j.issn.1009-3419.2013.09.05.

[c-Met signaling pathway participating in the gefitinib resistance of different
gene types of non-small cell lung cancer cells induced by HGF in vitro].

[Article in Chinese; Abstract available in Chinese from the publisher]

Xuan X(1), An C, Zhou C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Disease, Yanbian University Hospital, Yanji 133000, 
China.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: It has been known that hepatocyte growth factor (HGF)
induces gefitinib resistance in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cells. The
possible mechanism may be related to the activation of the HGF receptor c-Met.
The aim of this study is to investigate the involvement of c-Met and its
downstream signaling pathway in the HGF-induced gefitinib resistance of NSCLC
cells with different epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) gene types.
METHODS: NSCLC cell lines with different EGFR genes (PC-9, PC9/R, H292, and A549)
were selected and induced by HGF. Cell survival was determined by MTT assay and
the expression of Met and downstream signaling proteins were examined by Western 
blot.
RESULTS: Gefitinib inhibited the cell growth of PC9, H292, and A549 cell lines in
a dose-dependent manner. The concentration-survival curve notably shifted to the 
right when induced by HGF. The apoptotic rate was lower when the cells were
treated with HGF and gefitinib than when these cells were treated with gefitinib 
alone (P<0.05), particularly in PC9, H292, and A549 cells, but not in PC9/R. HGF 
stimulated the phosphorylation of Met and downstream signaling proteins in PC9,
H292, PC9/R, and A549 cell lines. p-Met, p-Akt, p-Stat3, and p-Erk1/2 expressions
were higher when the cells were treated with HGF and gefitinib than when these
cells were treated with gefitinib alone, particularly in PC9, H292, and A549
cells, but not in PC9/R.
CONCLUSIONS: c-Met and its downstream signaling pathway possibly participated in 
the HGF-induced gefitinib resistance in NSCLC cells with different EGFR gene
types.

Publisher: 背景与目的 肝细胞生长因子（hepatocyte growth factor, HGF）诱导非小细胞肺癌（non-small cell
lung cancer,
NSCLC）对吉非替尼耐药，可能与其受体c-Met激活有关。本研究旨在探讨c-Met及其下游信号通道是否参与HGF诱导不同基因型NSCLC细胞株对吉非替尼耐药。方
法 选择人NSCLC细胞株表皮生长因子受体(epidermal growth factor receptor,
EGFR)突变型PC-9、PC9/R和EGFR野生型H292、A549，用HGF诱导细胞，通过MTT法检测细胞增殖，Annexin
V-FITC法检测细胞凋亡，应用免疫印迹技术检测细胞中c-Met及下游通道的变化。结果
吉非替尼对PC9、H292、A549的生长抑制作用呈浓度依赖性，HGF诱导后吉非替尼抑制细胞的生长曲线明显往右移
。在PC9、H292、A549细胞中，吉非替尼和HGF处理组的细胞凋亡率比吉非替尼处理组均减少（P<0.05），在PC9/R细胞中无明显减少（P>0.05）。HG
F能激活PC9、H292、PC9/R、A549细胞中c-Met及其下游通道蛋白。在PC9、H292、A549细胞中，吉非替尼和HGF处理组的p-Met、p-Akt
、p-Stat3、p-Erk1/2蛋白表达比吉非替尼处理组均增高，在PC9/R细胞中无明显增高。结论
在体外HGF诱导不同基因型NSCLC细胞株对吉非替尼耐药，c-Met及其下游信号通道参与HGF诱导不同基因型NSCLC细胞株对吉非替尼耐药。
DOI: 10.3779/j.issn.1009-3419.2013.09.05 
PMID: 24034993  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


736. Chin Med J (Engl). 2013;126(17):3348-55.

Chemotherapy with or without gefitinib in patients with advanced non-small-cell
lung cancer: a meta-analysis of 6,844 patients.

Zhou H(1), Zeng C, Wang LY, Xie H, Zhou J, Diao P, Yao WX, Zhao X, Wei Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemotherapy, Sichuan Cancer Hospital, Chengdu, Sichuan 610041, 
China.

BACKGROUND: Gefitinib is widely used in patients with advanced non-small-cell
lung cancer (NSCLC), in whom chemotherapy had failed. Previous trials reported
inconsistent findings regarding the efficacy of gefitinib on overall survival
(OS) and progression free survival (PFS). This study was to evaluate the effects 
of chemotherapy plus gefitinib versus chemotherapy alone on survival of patients 
with NSCLC.
METHODS: We systematically searched Medline, EmBase, the Cochrane Central
Register of Controlled Trials, reference lists of articles, and proceedings of
major meetings for relevant literature. Randomized controlled trials (RCTs)
comparing chemotherapy with and without gefitinib in the treatment of patients
with advanced NSCLC were included in our analysis. The primary endpoints were OS 
and PFS.
RESULTS: Of 182 relevant studies, 12 were included in the final analysis, which
consisted of 6844 patients with NSCLC. Overall, we noted that gefitinib therapy
had an 8% improvement in the OS as compared to the gefitinib-free therapy, but
this difference was not statistically significant (HR, 0.92; 95% CI: 0.85-1.00;
P=0.051). Furthermore, gefitinib therapy had significantly longer PFS compared to
gefitinib-free therapy (HR, 0.72; 95% CI 0.60-0.87, P=0.001). Patients receiving 
gefitinib therapy also had a more frequent objective response rate (ORR) than the
control arm (OR, 2.51; 95% CI, 1.67-3.78, P < 0.001). Rashes, diarrhea, dry skin,
pruritus, paronychia, and abnormal hepatic function were more frequent in the
gefitinib therapy group.
CONCLUSIONS: Treatment with gefitinib had a clear effect on PFS and ORR, and it
might contribute considerably to the OS. Furthermore, there was some evidence of 
benefit for gefitinib therapy among patients with adenocarcinoma.


PMID: 24033963  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


737. Lung Cancer. 2013 Nov;82(2):313-8. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2013.08.013. Epub 2013 
Aug 19.

Pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic study of Gefitinib in a mouse model of
non-small-cell lung carcinoma with brain metastasis.

Chen Y(1), Wang M, Zhong W, Zhao J.

Author information: 
(1)The Respiratory Department of Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Chinese
Academy of Medical Sciences & Peking Union Medical College, Peking 100730, China.

INTRODUCTION: Some studies showed that epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)
tyrosine kinase inhibitor gefitinib could improve the outcome of non-small-cell
lung cancer (NSCLC) patients with brain metastasis (BM), while the concentration 
of gefitinib in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) was low. Therefore, we designed the
present study to investigate whether gefitinib could actively penetrate blood
brain barrier (BBB) in a mouse model of lung cancer brain metastasis (BM).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: In vitro MDCK-MDR1 assay was used to determine
permeability and efflux ratio (RE) of gefitinib. In vivo pharmacokinetic and
pharmacodynamic evaluation was performed in both normal nude mice and a BM model 
established by intra-carotid artery (ICA) injection of PC-9 cells.
RESULTS: The result showed that RE of gefitinib at the concentrations of 1 μM and
10 μM was 4.12 and 4.05, respectively, but significantly decreased to 1 and 1.35 
after adding a P-glycoprotein (P-gp) inhibitor, cyclosporine A. In both normal
mice and BM model, dose dependent increase of gefitinib was detected in the
blood, brain and CSF at the doses of 50, 100 and 200 mg/kg. In BM model,
AUC(totalbrain)/AUC(totalblood) in 50 mg/kg and 200 mg/kg groups were 0.4 and
0.7, respectively, while AUC(CSF)/AUC(freeblood) were 0.21 and 0.18,
respectively. Positive correlation between concentration of gefitinib in CSF and 
pEGFR modulation in the brain tumor was identified.
CONCLUSION: Gefitinib is a P-gp substrate and has limited active BBB penetration.
Increased doses of gefitinib potentially accelerated passive permeability.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2013.08.013 
PMID: 24011632  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


738. Oncol Rep. 2013 Nov;30(5):2311-5. doi: 10.3892/or.2013.2709. Epub 2013 Aug 29.

Direct sequencing and amplification refractory mutation system for epidermal
growth factor receptor mutations in patients with non-small cell lung cancer.

Chu H(1), Zhong C, Xue G, Liang X, Wang J, Liu Y, Zhao S, Zhou Q, Bi J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, General Hospital, Jinan Command of the People's
Liberation Army, Jinan, Shandong 250031, P.R. China.

Treatment with epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine inhibitors
(EGFR-TKIs) provides encouraging outcomes for advanced non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC) patients with EGFR mutations. Pleural effusion is a common complication
of NSCLC. We compared direct DNA sequencing and ADx Amplification Refractory
Mutation System (ADx-ARMS) to detect EGFR mutations in malignant pleural effusion
samples. We obtained 24 samples from pleural effusion fluid of NSCLC patients.
Three common types of EGFR mutations were examined by direct sequencing and
ADx-ARMS analysis. The sensitivity of the methods was compared and the
relationship between EGFR mutations and response rates of the patients
determined. In 14/24 patients, we detected EGFR mutations (58.3%) by ADx-ARMS,
and in 10 samples (41.7%) by direct sequencing. In 6 samples, EGFR mutations were
on exon 19, and in 8 samples, mutations were on exon 21 by ADx-ARMS. By contrast,
we found EGFR mutations in 4 samples on exon 19, and in 6 samples on exon 21 by
direct sequencing. Neither method showed mutations on exon 20. Among the 24
patients, there was 83.3% concordance for the methods. In 18/24 patients,
gefitinib treatment was administered, including 10 patients with mutations who
showed improved response compared to 8 of the wild-type patients (P<0.05). In
conclusion, EGFR mutation analysis by ADx-ARMS was the most sensitive compared to
direct sequencing, and provided more reliable EGFR mutation assessments. ADx-ARMS
could be introduced into the clinical practice to identify NSCLC patients likely 
to benefit from TKI treatment, especially those with malignant pleural effusion.

DOI: 10.3892/or.2013.2709 
PMID: 24002698  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


739. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2013;14(7):4205-8.

Serum CEA level change and its significance before and after Gefitinib therapy on
patients with advanced non-small cell lung cancer.

Qin HF(1), Qu LL, Liu H, Wang SS, Gao HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonary Neoplasms Internal Medicine, The Affiliated Hospital
of Academy of Military Medical Science, Beijing, China.

OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to explore change and significance of serum 
carcino-embryonic antigen (CEA) before and after gefitinib therapy in patients
with advanced non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC).
METHODS: Forty patients with advanced NSCLCs in III~IV stages were selected as
study objects given gefitinib therapy combined with routine local radiotherapy
until tumor progression or intolerable toxicity. After treatment, all patients
were divided into control and non-control groups according to the results of
evaluation based on RECIST 1.1 (Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors in
2009). Peripheral fasting blood from all patients was collected in the early
morning and serum CEA was assessed by electro-chemiluminescence immunoassay
(ECLIA) before and after treatment. Before treatment, patients were divided into 
high CEA group (CEA level > 50 ng/mL) and low CEA group (CEA level ≤ 50 ng/mL).
Adverse reactions were noted and progression-free survival (PFS) in both groups
was recorded after long-term follow-up that ended in December, 2012.
RESULTS: There was no difference between control and non-control groups in CEA
level before treatment (P>0.05), whereas serum CEA decreased more markedly lower 
in the control group after treatment (P<0.01). All patients were divided into
high CEA group (26) and low CEA group (14) according to serum CEA level. There
was no statistically significant difference between two groups in adverse
reactions (P>0.05) but the rate in former group was lower. Additionally, survival
rates at 9 and 12 months in high CEA group were clearly higher than in the low
CEA group (P<0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: Serum CEA level can serve as a biochemical index to evaluate the
prognosis with gefitinib treatment for NSCLC.


PMID: 23991977  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


740. J Thorac Dis. 2013 Aug;5(4):400-5. doi: 10.3978/j.issn.2072-1439.2013.07.28.

Re-administration after the failure of gefitinib or erlotinib in patients with
advanced non-small cell lung cancer.

Song Z(1), Yu X, He C, Zhang B, Zhang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemotherapy, Zhejiang Cancer Hospital, Hangzhou 310022, China; 
; Key Laboratory Diagnosis and Treatment Technology on Thoracic Oncology,
Hangzhou 310022, China.

OBJECTIVE: Few treatment options are available for advanced non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC) patients who have failed of gefitinib or erlotinib treatment in
second/third-line treatment. The aim of this study was to investigate the
efficacy of re-administration of the same TKI after failure of gefitinib or
erlotinib.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: The clinical data of 33 patients with advanced NSCLC were
retrospectively analyzed. All of the patients were given the same TKI treatment
after the failure of gefitinib or erlotinib. Survival analysis was evaluated by
Kaplan-Meier method.
RESULTS: Twenty patients (60.6%) were re-administration with gefitinib as the
2(nd) EGFR-TKI, and thirteen patients (39.4%) received erlotinib. One patient
(3.0%) showed partial response (PR), 14 (42.4%) achieved stable disease (SD), and
18 (54.5%) had progressive disease (PD). The disease control rate was 45.5% and
the median progression-free survival was 1.5 months (95% CI: 0.6-2.3 months). The
PFS in patients who got disease control in the prior TKI was 2.2 and 1.2 months
in the progression disease cases (P=0.29), the DCR was 54.5% and 27.3% in two
group, respectively (P=0.26).
CONCLUSIONS: Re-administration of TKI seems to be a potential therapeutic option 
for treatment of selected advanced NSCLC patients after failure of geﬁtinib or
erlotinib, especially for the patients with NSCLC who once responded from the
prior TKI treatment.

DOI: 10.3978/j.issn.2072-1439.2013.07.28 
PMCID: PMC3755689
PMID: 23991294  [PubMed]


741. J Clin Oncol. 2013 Sep 20;31(27):3320-6. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2013.51.1816. Epub 2013
Aug 26.

Gefitinib versus placebo in completely resected non-small-cell lung cancer:
results of the NCIC CTG BR19 study.

Goss GD(1), O'Callaghan C, Lorimer I, Tsao MS, Masters GA, Jett J, Edelman MJ,
Lilenbaum R, Choy H, Khuri F, Pisters K, Gandara D, Kernstine K, Butts C, Noble
J, Hensing TA, Rowland K, Schiller J, Ding K, Shepherd FA.

Author information: 
(1)Glenwood D. Goss and Ian Lorimer, Ottawa Hospital Cancer Center, University of
Ottawa, Ottawa; Chris O'Callaghan and Keyue Ding, NCIC CTG, Queens University,
Kingston; Ming-Sound Tsao and Frances A. Shepherd, University Health Network,
Princess Margaret Hospital, University of Toronto, Toronto; Jonathan Noble,
Northeast Cancer Center, Sudbury, Ontario; Charles Butts, Cross Cancer Institute,
University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada; Gregory A. Masters, Christiana 
Care's Helen F. Graham Cancer Center, Newark, DE; James Jett, National Jewish
Health, Division of Oncology, Denver, CO; Martin J. Edelman, Greenebaum Cancer
Center, University of Maryland, Baltimore, MD; Rogerio Lilenbaum, Smilow Cancer
Hospital, Yale Cancer Center, New Haven, CT; Hak Choy, Kemp Kernstine, and Joan
Schiller, The University of Texas, Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas; Katherine
Pisters, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX; Fadlo
Khuri, Winship Cancer Institute, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta,
GA; David Gandara, University of California, Davis Cancer Center, Sacramento, CA;
Thomas A. Hensing, NorthShore University Health System, The University of
Chicago, Chicago; and Kendrith Rowland, Carle Cancer Center, Urbana, IL.

PURPOSE: Survival of patients with completely resected non-small-cell lung cancer
(NSCLC) is unsatisfactory, and in 2002, the benefit of adjuvant chemotherapy was 
not established. This phase III study assessed the impact of postoperative
adjuvant gefitinib on overall survival (OS).
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Patients with completely resected (stage IB, II, or IIIA)
NSCLC stratified by stage, histology, sex, postoperative radiotherapy, and
chemotherapy were randomly assigned (1:1) to receive gefitinib 250 mg per day or 
placebo for 2 years. Study end points were OS, disease-free survival (DFS), and
toxicity.
RESULTS: As a result of early closure, 503 of 1,242 planned patients were
randomly assigned (251 to gefitinib and 252 to placebo). Baseline factors were
balanced between the arms. With a median of 4.7 years of follow-up (range, 0.1 to
6.3 years), there was no difference in OS (hazard ratio [HR], 1.24; 95% CI, 0.94 
to 1.64; P = .14) or DFS (HR, 1.22; 95% CI, 0.93 to 1.61; P = .15) between the
arms. Exploratory analyses demonstrated no DFS (HR, 1.28; 95% CI, 0.92 to 1.76; P
= .14) or OS benefit (HR, 1.24; 95% CI, 0.90 to 1.71; P = .18) from gefitinib for
344 patients with epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) wild-type tumors.
Similarly, there was no DFS (HR, 1.84; 95% CI, 0.44 to 7.73; P = .395) or OS
benefit (HR, 3.16; 95% CI, 0.61 to 16.45; P = .15) from gefitinib for the 15
patients with EGFR mutation-positive tumors. Adverse events were those expected
with an EGFR inhibitor. Serious adverse events occurred in ≤ 5% of patients,
except infection, fatigue, and pain. One patient in each arm had fatal
pneumonitis.
CONCLUSION: Although the trial closed prematurely and definitive statements
regarding the efficacy of adjuvant gefitinib cannot be made, these results
indicate that it is unlikely to be of benefit.

DOI: 10.1200/JCO.2013.51.1816 
PMCID: PMC3770864
PMID: 23980091  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


742. Anticancer Drugs. 2013 Nov;24(10):1039-46. doi: 10.1097/CAD.0000000000000011.

Crizotinib overcomes hepatocyte growth factor-mediated resistance to gefitinib in
EGFR-mutant non-small-cell lung cancer cells.

Chen X(1), Zhou JY, Zhao J, Chen JJ, Ma SN, Zhou JY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Diseases, Thoracic Disease Diagnosis and Treatment
Center, The First Affiliated Hospital, School of Medicine, Zhejiang University,
Hangzhou, China.

Acquired resistance develops ultimately in most non-small-cell lung cancer
patients with epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutations who initially
respond to EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors. Overexpression of hepatocyte growth
factor (HGF) contributes to a considerable part of acquired resistance.
Therefore, novel approaches are required for better management to overcome the
resistance. Here, we tested whether crizotinib (PF02341066), a MET kinase
inhibitor, can overcome two different HGF-triggered mechanisms of resistance to
gefitinib in human EGFR mutant lung cancer cell lines HCC827 and PC-9. Compared
with the monotherapy, the combined treatment of crizotinib and gefitinib induced 
apoptosis and significantly inhibited the growth of cells in the presence of HGF 
by blocking the MET/PI3K/Akt pathway. Further, we demonstrated that crizotinib
plus gefitinib successfully prevented the emergence of gefitinib-resistant HCC827
cells induced by transient exposure to HGF. In vivo, the combination therapy with
crizotinib and gefitinib also markedly suppressed the growth of
gefitinib-resistant mouse xenografts established by injecting HCC827 cells mixed 
with HGF-producing fibroblasts (MRC-5 cells) subcutaneously into severe combined 
immunodeficient mice. In conclusion, these findings provided preclinical evidence
that crizotinib can be used in the treatment of HGF-induced resistance to
gefitinib in EGFR mutant lung cancer.

DOI: 10.1097/CAD.0000000000000011 
PMID: 23962905  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


743. Lancet Oncol. 2013 Sep;14(10):953-61. doi: 10.1016/S1470-2045(13)70355-3. Epub
2013 Aug 13.

Icotinib versus gefitinib in previously treated advanced non-small-cell lung
cancer (ICOGEN): a randomised, double-blind phase 3 non-inferiority trial.

Shi Y(1), Zhang L, Liu X, Zhou C, Zhang L, Zhang S, Wang D, Li Q, Qin S, Hu C,
Zhang Y, Chen J, Cheng Y, Feng J, Zhang H, Song Y, Wu YL, Xu N, Zhou J, Luo R,
Bai C, Jin Y, Liu W, Wei Z, Tan F, Wang Y, Ding L, Dai H, Jiao S, Wang J, Liang
L, Zhang W, Sun Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Cancer Institute and Hospital, Chinese Academy
of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, China.

Comment in
    Lancet Oncol. 2013 Sep;14(10):913-4.

BACKGROUND: Icotinib, an oral EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor, had shown
antitumour activity and favourable toxicity in early-phase clinical trials. We
aimed to investigate whether icotinib is non-inferior to gefitinib in patients
with non-small-cell lung cancer.
METHODS: In this randomised, double-blind, phase 3 non-inferiority trial we
enrolled patients with advanced non-small-cell lung cancer from 27 sites in
China. Eligible patients were those aged 18-75 years who had not responded to one
or more platinum-based chemotherapy regimen. Patients were randomly assigned
(1:1), using minimisation methods, to receive icotinib (125 mg, three times per
day) or gefitinib (250 mg, once per day) until disease progression or
unacceptable toxicity. The primary endpoint was progression-free survival,
analysed in the full analysis set. We analysed EGFR status if tissue samples were
available. All investigators, clinicians, and participants were masked to patient
distribution. The non-inferiority margin was 1·14; non-inferiority would be
established if the upper limit of the 95% CI for the hazard ratio (HR) of
gefitinib versus icotinib was less than this margin. This study is registered
with ClinicalTrials.gov, number NCT01040780, and the Chinese Clinical Trial
Registry, number ChiCTR-TRC-09000506.
FINDINGS: 400 eligible patients were enrolled between Feb 26, 2009, and Nov 13,
2009; one patient was enrolled by mistake and removed from the study, 200 were
assigned to icotinib and 199 to gefitinib. 395 patients were included in the full
analysis set (icotinib, n=199; gefitinib, n=196). Icotinib was non-inferior to
gefitinib in terms of progression-free survival (HR 0·84, 95% CI 0·67-1·05;
median progression-free survival 4·6 months [95% CI 3·5-6·3] vs 3·4 months
[2·3-3·8]; p=0·13). The most common adverse events were rash (81 [41%] of 200
patients in the icotinib group vs 98 [49%] of 199 patients in the gefitinib
group) and diarrhoea (43 [22%] vs 58 [29%]). Patients given icotinib had less
drug-related adverse events than did those given gefitinib (121 [61%] vs 140
[70%]; p=0·046), especially drug-related diarrhoea (37 [19%] vs 55 [28%];
p=0·033).
INTERPRETATION: Icotinib could be a new treatment option for pretreated patients 
with advanced non-small-cell lung cancer.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S1470-2045(13)70355-3 
PMID: 23948351  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


744. Zhongguo Fei Ai Za Zhi. 2013 Aug 20;16(8):405-10. doi:
10.3779/j.issn.1009-3419.2013.08.03.

[A randomized clinical study of Gefitinib and pemetrexed as second line therapy
for advanced non-squamous non-small cell lung cancer].

[Article in Chinese; Abstract available in Chinese from the publisher]

Dai H(1), Xu L, Xia C, Chen W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Nanjing Chest Hospital, Nanjing 210029,
China.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Gefitinib and Pemetrexed are drugs used as second-line 
therapy for advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), although studies
comparing the two drugs are limited. The aim of this study is to explore the
effects, safety, and quality of life (QoL) of Gefitinib and Pemetrexed on
patients with advanced non-squamous NSCLC.
METHODS: Forty-six advanced non-squamous NSCLC patients who failed to first-line 
therapy were randomly divided into two groups with 23 patients each, one using
oral Gefitinib (Gefitinib group) and the other using intravenous injection
Pemetrexed (Pemetrexed group). The effects, safety, and QoL were determined and
analyzed.
RESULTS: For the Pemetrexed group, objective response rate (ORR) was 13.0%
(3/23), disease control rate (DCR) was 30.4% (7/23), and median progression-free 
survival (mPFS) was 3.1 months. In the Gefitinib group, ORR was 17.3% (4/23), DCR
was 39.1% (9/23), and mPFS was 4.4 months. Compared with the Pemetrexed group,
the ORR, DCR, and mPFS in the Gefitinib group exhibited no statistical
significance (P>0.05). Furthermore, the most common toxicities in the Pemetrexed 
group were neutropenia (n=9, 39.13%) and fatigue (n=8, 34.78%), whereas those in 
the in Gefitinib group were skin rash (n=8, 34.78%) and diarrhea (n=4, 17.39%).
Compared with baseline, the QoL improved in both groups but to different degrees.
Likewise, emotional, functional well-being, and QoL aspects specifically related 
to lung cancer were better improved in the Gefitinib group than in the Pemetrexed
group (P<0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: The effects of Pemetrexed and Gefitinib as second line therapy were 
similar, although with different AEs. Both drugs could improve the QoL, but
Gefitinib showed better overall results than Pemetrexed.

Publisher: 背景与目的 吉非替尼和培美曲塞均是晚期非小细胞肺癌（non-small cell lung cancer,
NSCLC）二线治疗的药物，但直接对比两者二线治疗的研究数据有限。本研究旨在比较吉非替尼和培美曲塞二线治疗晚期非鳞型NSCLC的疗效、安全性及对生活质量的影响。方
法
将46例一线含铂双药化疗方案（不含培美曲塞）治疗失败的晚期非鳞型NSCLC患者随机分为两组，每组23例，分别给予吉非替尼口服（吉非替尼组），或静脉滴注培美曲塞（培
美曲塞组），比较两组的疗效和安全性及治疗对生活质量的影响。结果 培美曲塞组的客观缓解率（objective response rate, ORR）为
13.0%（3/23），疾病控制率（disease control rate, DCR）为30.4% （7/23），中位无进展生存时间（median
progression-free survival, mPFS）为3.1个月；吉非替尼组的ORR 17.3%（4/23），DCR 39.1%（9/23），mPFS
4.4个月；两组的ORR、DCR和mPFS均未见统计学差异（P>0.05）。培美曲塞最常见的不良反应为中性粒细胞减少（n=9, 39.13%）和乏力（n=8,
34.78%）；吉非替尼最常见的不良反应为皮疹（n=8, 34.78%）和腹泻（n=4,
17.39%）。和治疗前基线相比，培美曲塞组和吉非替尼组治疗后生活质量评分均有不同程度的改善，吉非替尼组在情绪，活动能力及肺癌附加关注的其它因素方面较培美曲塞组改
善更明显（P<0.05）。结论 吉非替尼和培美曲塞二线治疗晚期非鳞型NSCLC的疗效相似，不良反应各异；两者均能改善患者的生活质量，但是吉非替尼改善更明显。
DOI: 10.3779/j.issn.1009-3419.2013.08.03 
PMID: 23945243  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


745. J Transl Med. 2013 Aug 12;11:186. doi: 10.1186/1479-5876-11-186.

Enhanced interaction between natural killer cells and lung cancer cells:
involvement in gefitinib-mediated immunoregulation.

He S(1), Yin T, Li D, Gao X, Wan Y, Ma X, Ye T, Guo F, Sun J, Lin Z, Wang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Oncology, Cancer Center, State Key Laboratory of
Biotherapy, West China Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu 610041, PR China.
wangys75@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Natural killer (NK) cells can kill tumor cells in a
non-MHC-restricted manner. However, cancer cells frequently escape from the
attack of NK cells by multiple ways. In this study, we investigated the effect of
gefitinib on the interaction between NK cells and lung cancer cells.
METHODS: ⁵¹Cr release assay, CD107a assay, and IFN-γ secretion assay were
performed to detect the sensitivity of lung cancer cell lines A549 and H1975 to
NK cells cytotoxicity in the presence of gefitinib. Human NK cells were
co-cultured with A549 and H1975 cell lines in the presence of gefitinib. NKG2D
ligands, ULBP1, ULBP2, MICA, and MHC-I on tumor cells, and NKG2D, NKp44 and NKp46
on NK cells were evaluated with flow cytometry. 51Cr release assay was performed 
when NKG2D antibody were added into the co-culture system. Expressions of stat3
and LC3 I/II on tumor cells were determined with western blot after co-cultured
with NK cells. After treated with gefitinib, mannose-6-phosphate receptor (MPR)
on H1975 cells was evaluated by flow cytometry. ⁵¹Cr release assay were performed
when MPR antagonist were used.
RESULTS: Gefitinib increased cytotoxicity of NK cells to human lung cancer H1975 
cells with EGFR L858R + T790M mutations, while not in A549 cells with wild type
EGFR. Gefitinib could block the immune escape by up-regulating the expression of 
NKG2D ligands ULBP1, ULBP2 or MICA on tumor cells and NKG2D on NK cells in the
co-culture system. Gefitinib and NK cells up-regulated MHC-I expression in A549
while not in H1975 cells. NKG2D antibody blocked the enhanced NK cytotoxicity by 
gefitinib. The combination of NK cells and gefitinib could significantly
down-regulate stat3 expression. Furthermore, NK cells-mediated tumor cell
autophagy was observed in A549 cells while not in H1975 cells. Notably, gefitinib
increased autophagy and MPR expression in H1975 cells, which improved the
sensitivity to NK cell-based immunotherapy.
CONCLUSIONS: Gefitinib greatly enhanced NK cell cytotoxicity to lung cancer cells
with EGFR L858R + T790M resistance mutation. Combination of EGFR tyrokinase
inhibitors and NK cells adoptive immunotherapy may represent a potentially
effective strategy for patients with non-small cell lung cancer.

DOI: 10.1186/1479-5876-11-186 
PMCID: PMC3766712
PMID: 23937717  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


746. J Exp Clin Cancer Res. 2013 Aug 9;32(1):50. doi: 10.1186/1756-9966-32-50.

Detection of EGFR mutations in circulating free DNA by PNA-mediated PCR clamping.

Kim HR, Lee SY, Hyun DS, Lee MK, Lee HK, Choi CM, Yang SH, Kim YC, Lee YC, Kim
SY, Jang SH, Lee JC, Lee KY.

BACKGROUND: Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)-activating mutations are
major determinants in predicting the tumor response to EGFR tyrosine kinase
inhibitors in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Noninvasive test for the
detection of EGFR mutations is required, especially in NSCLC patients from whom
tissue is not available. In this study, we assessed the feasibility of detection 
of EGFR mutations in free DNA circulating in plasma.
METHODS: Plasma samples of 60 patients with partial response to gefitinib were
analyzed to detect EGFR-activating mutations in exons 19 and 21. Forty (66.7%) of
patients had tumor EGFR mutation results. EGFR mutations in plasma were detected 
using the peptide nucleic acid (PNA)-mediated polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
clamping method. All clinical data and plasma samples were obtained from 11
centers of the Korean Molecular Lung Cancer Group (KMLCG).
RESULTS: Of the 60 patients, 39 were female and the median age was 62.5 years.
Forty-three patients never smoked, 53 had adenocarcinomas, and seven had other
histologic types. EGFR-activating mutation was detected in plasma of 10 cases
(exon 19 deletion in seven and exon 21 L858R point mutation in three). It could
not be found in plasma after treatment for 2 months. When only patients with
confirmed EGFR mutation in tumor were analyzed, 17% (6 of 35) of them showed
positive plasma EGFR mutation and the mutation type was completely matched with
that in tumor. There was no statistically significant difference in clinical
parameters between patients with EGFR mutations in plasma and those without EGFR 
mutations.
CONCLUSIONS: The detection rate of EGFR mutations from plasma was not so high
despite highly sensitive EGFR mutation test suggesting that more advances in
detection methods and further exploration of characteristics of circulating free 
DNA are required.

DOI: 10.1186/1756-9966-32-50 
PMCID: PMC3751150
PMID: 23927790  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


747. Cancer. 2013 Nov 1;119(21):3761-8. doi: 10.1002/cncr.28290. Epub 2013 Aug 6.

Volumetric tumor growth in advanced non-small cell lung cancer patients with EGFR
mutations during EGFR-tyrosine kinase inhibitor therapy: developing criteria to
continue therapy beyond RECIST progression.

Nishino M(1), Dahlberg SE, Cardarella S, Jackman DM, Rabin MS, Ramaiya NH, Hatabu
H, Jänne PA, Johnson BE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Brigham and Women's 
Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts.

BACKGROUND: The objective of this study was to define the volumetric tumor growth
rate in patients who had advanced nonsmall cell lung cancer (NSCLC) with
sensitizing epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutations and had initially
received treatment with EGFR-tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) therapy beyond
progression.
METHODS: The study included 58 patients with advanced NSCLC who had sensitizing
EGFR mutations treated with first-line gefitinib or erlotinib, had baseline
computed tomography (CT) scans available that revealed a measurable lung lesion, 
had at least 2 follow-up CT scans during TKI therapy, and had experienced
volumetric tumor growth. The tumor volume (in mm3) of the dominant lung lesion
was measured on baseline and follow-up CT scans during therapy. In total, 405
volume measurements were analyzed in a linear mixed-effects model, fitting time
as a random effect, to define the growth rate of the logarithm of tumor volume
(log(e)V).
RESULTS: A linear mixed-effects model was fitted to predict the growth of
log(e)V, adjusting for time in months from baseline. Log(e)V was estimated as a
function of time in months among patients whose tumors started growing after the 
nadir: log(e)V = 0.12*time  + 7.68. In this formula, the regression coefficient
for time, 0.12/month, represents the growth rate of log(e)V (standard error,
0.015/month; P < .001). When adjusted for baseline volume, log(e)V0, the growth
rate was also 0.12/month (standard error, 0.015/month; P < .001; log(e)V =
0.12*months + 0.72 log(e)V0 + 0.61).
CONCLUSIONS: Tumor volume models defined volumetric tumor growth after the nadir 
in patients with EGFR-mutant, advanced NSCLC who were receiving TKI, providing a 
reference value for the tumor growth rate in patients who progress after the
nadir on TKI therapy. The results can be studied further in additional cohorts to
develop practical criteria to help identify patients who are slowly progressing
and can safely remain on EGFR-TKIs.

© 2013 American Cancer Society.

DOI: 10.1002/cncr.28290 
PMCID: PMC3817609
PMID: 23922022  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


748. Oncologist. 2013;18(8):947-53. doi: 10.1634/theoncologist.2013-0096. Epub 2013
Aug 5.

Second-Line Therapy for Advanced NSCLC.

Weiss JM(1), Stinchcombe TE.

Author information: 
(1)Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center at the University of North Carolina at 
Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina 27599-7305, USA. Jared_Weiss@med.unc.edu

Most patients with lung cancer have non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) subtype
and have advanced disease at the time of diagnosis. Improvements in both
first-line and subsequent therapies are allowing longer survival and enhanced
quality of life for these patients. The median overall survival observed in many 
second-line trials is approximately 9 months, and many patients receive further
therapy after second-line therapy. The cytotoxic agents pemetrexed and docetaxel 
and the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs)
erlotinib and gefitinib are standard second-line therapies. For patients with
EGFR mutation, a TKI is the favored second-line therapy if not already used in
first-line therapy. For patients without the EGFR mutation, TKIs are an option,
but many oncologists favor cytotoxic therapy. The inhibitor of the EML4/ALK
fusion protein, crizotinib, has recently become a standard second-line treatment 
for patients with the gene rearrangement and has promise for patients with the
ROS1 rearrangement.

DOI: 10.1634/theoncologist.2013-0096 
PMCID: PMC3755933
PMID: 23918070  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


749. Eur J Cancer. 2013 Nov;49(16):3559-72. doi: 10.1016/j.ejca.2013.07.007. Epub 2013
Aug 2.

Notch-1 contributes to epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor
acquired resistance in non-small cell lung cancer in vitro and in vivo.

Xie M(1), He CS, Wei SH, Zhang L.

Author information: 
(1)China State Key Laboratory of Respiratory Disease and Guangzhou Institute of
Respiratory Disease, The First Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou Medical
University, 151 Yan Jiang Road, Guangzhou 510120, China. Electronic address:
mianxie@gird.cn.

Acquired resistance to epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase
inhibitors (EGFR-TKIs) occurs in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients who 
initially respond to TKI treatment but whose cancer then progresses. Recent
studies have shown that Notch signal is associated with drug resistance. However,
the exact mechanism of Notch during acquisition of resistance to EGFR-TKI in
human lung cancer remains unclear. In the present study, we showed that the
expression of Notch-1 was highly upregulated in EGFR-TKI acquired resistant lung 
cancer cells. More importantly, Notch-1 contributed to the acquisition of the
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) phenotype, which was critically
associated with acquired resistance to EGFR-TKI. Silencing of Notch-1 using siRNA
resulted in mesenchymal-epithelial transition (MET), which was associated with
impaired invasion and anchorage-independent growth of lung cancer and
resensitisation to gefitinib in acquired resistant NSCLC cells. Finally,
gefitinib treatment of Balb/c nu/nu with acquired resistant lung cancer
xenografts in combination with Notch inhibitor
N-[N-(3,5-difluorophenacetyl)-L-alanyl]-(S)-phenylglycine t-butyl ester (DAPT)
resulted in effective tumour growth retardation, with decreased proliferative
activity and increased apoptotic activity. Collectively, these data suggest that 
Notch-1 might play a novel role in acquired resistance to gefitinib, which could 
be reversed by inhibiting Notch-1.

Crown Copyright © 2013. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejca.2013.07.007 
PMID: 23916913  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


750. Int J Clin Oncol. 2014 Aug;19(4):594-600. doi: 10.1007/s10147-013-0602-1. Epub
2013 Aug 6.

Rare and complex mutations of epidermal growth factor receptor, and efficacy of
tyrosine kinase inhibitor in patients with non-small cell lung cancer.

Keam B(1), Kim DW, Park JH, Lee JO, Kim TM, Lee SH, Chung DH, Heo DS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul National University Hospital, 101
Daehak-ro, Jongno-gu, Seoul, 110-744, Korea.

BACKGROUND: There are many complex and rare mutations in the epidermal growth
factor receptor (EGFR) gene in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) other than the 
two classical mutations of L858R and exon 19 deletional mutation. The purpose of 
this study was to investigate the clinical significance of rare and complex
mutations, and the efficacy of EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs).
METHODS: We analyzed 1,431 NSCLC patients who were treated with either gefitinib 
or erlotinib. Exons 18 to 21 of EGFR were analyzed by PCR and subjected to direct
sequencing methods.
RESULTS: Of 306 patients who had EGFR mutation, 24 patients (7.3 %) had complex
mutations. The frequency of rare mutations was 10.3 %. Four groups were
categorized [group A (N = 269): classical mutation alone; group B (N = 16):
complex mutation with classical mutation; group C (N = 16): rare mutation alone
or complex mutation with rare mutation; group D (N = 5); classical mutation with 
T790M]; the response rate (RR) to TKI was significantly different between each
group (RR = 74.8 % in group A vs. 68.8 % in group B vs. 25.0 % in group C vs.
80.0 % in group D, P < 0.001). Progression-free survival (PFS) was also poorer in
rare mutations (median PFS: 11.9 vs. 8.1 vs. 1.4 vs. 8.0 months, respectively, P 
< 0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: NSCLC patients harboring rare mutations did not show consistent and 
favorable responses to EGFR TKI compared with those harboring classical
mutations. However, complex mutations with classical mutations showed similar
treatment efficacy toward EGFR TKI to that with classical mutations alone.

DOI: 10.1007/s10147-013-0602-1 
PMID: 23912954  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


751. Crit Rev Oncol Hematol. 2013 Dec;88(3):477-93. doi:
10.1016/j.critrevonc.2013.06.009. Epub 2013 Jul 31.

Therapeutic strategy for advanced EGFR mutant non-small-cell lung carcinoma.

Cadranel J(1), Ruppert AM, Beau-Faller M, Wislez M.

Author information: 
(1)Service de Pneumologie, Hôpital Tenon, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, 
France; Equipe de Recherche 2 et GRC-UPMC 04 Theranoscan, Université Pierre et
Marie Curie, Paris VI, France. Electronic address: jacques.cadranel@tnn.aphp.fr.

Activating mutation in exons 19 or 21 of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) 
in non-small-cell lung cancers (NSCLC) are associated with increased sensitivity 
to EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors (EGFR-TKIs), such as gefitinib and erlotinib. 
Cancer patients harboring activating EGFR mutations benefit from first-line TKI
therapy. Yet 10% of patients present a primary TKI resistance, while 50% of the
others develop a secondary resistance within 9-12 months after starting TKI. The 
RECIST's definition of progression appears flawed when applied to EGFR-mutated
NSCLC patients. Most often, tumor volume shrinking widely exceeds 30% during TKI 
response and kinetics of growth is low during relapse. At present, secondary
resistance mechanisms associated with progression are better known: clonal
selection of EGFR resistance mutation (T790M mutation in exon 20), amplification 
of transmembrane receptors for other growth factors (c-met, HER family, IGF1R, or
AXL), downstream molecular alterations in EGFR signaling pathway (PI3K or PTEN), 
and epithelial-mesenchymal transition or transdifferentiation to small-cell
cancer. The best strategy for secondary resistance is not well-defined:
maintaining TKI therapy, switching to chemotherapy, combining both treatments, or
using new therapies targeting other signaling pathways.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.critrevonc.2013.06.009 
PMID: 23911281  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


752. Curr Treat Options Oncol. 2013 Dec;14(4):514-27. doi: 10.1007/s11864-013-0248-2.

Molecular subtyping of brain metastases and implications for therapy.

Renfrow JJ(1), Lesser GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Wake Forest Baptist Medical Center, Medical Center
Boulevard, Winston-Salem, NC, 7157-1082, USA.

OPINION STATEMENT: Molecular subtyping of tumors and treatment with specifically 
targeted therapy is a rapidly developing trend in oncology. Genetic and protein
biomarkers impact biological behavior, patient prognosis, and inform treatment
options. Select examples include EGFR mutations in primary non-small cell lung
cancers, Her2 overexpression in breast cancer, and BRAF mutations in melanoma.
Systemic benefit is emphasized in targeted therapies; yet lung cancer, breast
cancer, and melanoma comprise the most common diagnoses in patients with brain
metastases making the effectiveness of targeted therapies in the treatment and/or
prevention of brain metastases relevant.Emerging evidence suggests efficacy for
targeted therapy in the setting of brain metastases. Randomized, phase III
clinical trials indicate targeted HER2 treatment with lapatinib and capecitabine 
in brain metastases from breast cancer increases the time to progression and
decreases the frequency of CNS involvement at progression. Phase II trials and
retrospective reviews for gefitinib and erlotinib demonstrate these agents may
have a role in both the chemoprevention of brain metastases and, in combination
with WBRT, treatment for non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) brain metastases.
Dabrafenib and other BRAF inhibitors have demonstrated improved survival in
patients with brain metastases from melanoma in a recent phase II clinical trial.
Further data that support the use of these agents are the subject of several
active clinical trials. Challenges and future directions for targeted therapies
in brain metastases include both better characterization and drug design with
respect to central nervous system distribution. Limited published data
demonstrate suboptimal CNS distribution of currently available targeted
chemotherapeutic agents. Increasing systemic dosing, alternate delivery methods, 
and new compounds with improved CNS distribution are being pursued. Additionally,
eventual resistance to targeted therapies poses a challenge; however, research is
showing resistance mutations are conserved and relatively predictable creating
opportunities for second-line therapies with additional targeted drugs. Newer
targeted therapies represent an additional chemotherapeutic option for the
treatment and/or prevention of brain metastases in patients with an appropriate
molecular profile.

DOI: 10.1007/s11864-013-0248-2 
PMID: 23907440  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


753. Anticancer Res. 2013 Aug;33(8):3279-84.

Comparison of the time-to-response between radiotherapy and epidermal growth
factor receptor--tyrosine kinase inhibitors for advanced non-small cell lung
cancer with EGFR mutation.

Imai H(1), Shukuya T, Takahashi T, Fujiwara S, Mori K, Ono A, Akamatsu H, Taira
T, Kenmotsu H, Naito T, Kaira K, Murakami H, Harada H, Endo M, Nakajima T,
Yamamoto N.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Thoracic Oncology, Shizuoka Cancer Center, 1007 Shimonagakubo,
Nagaizumi-chou, Suntou-gun, Shizuoka 411-8777, Japan. m06701014@gunma-u.ac.jp

BACKGROUND: Patients harboring sensitive epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) 
mutations show a dramatic response to treatment with EGFR tyrosine kinase
inhibitors (TKIs). However, there have been no clinical reports in lung cancer
patients that compare the time-to-response between radiotherapy and EGFR-TKIs.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We reviewed 17 and 32 consecutive patients with inoperable 
stage III/IV NSCLC who harbored sensitive EGFR mutations and who were treated
with thoracic radiotherapy with or without chemotherapy and EGFR-TKIs,
respectively.
RESULTS: There were statistically significant differences in time-to-partial
response (PR) with regard to the treatment modalities (radiotherapy vs.
EGFR-TKIs, median 57 days vs. 22 days, log-rank test, p=0.008).
CONCLUSION: EGFR-TKIs elicit tumor shrinkage earlier than does radiotherapy in
patients with a sensitive EGFR mutation, suggesting that EGFR-TKIs may be useful 
for early symptom improvement in these patients.


PMID: 23898092  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


754. Oncotarget. 2013 Aug;4(8):1253-65.

Combination therapy with anti-ErbB3 monoclonal antibodies and EGFR TKIs potently 
inhibits non-small cell lung cancer.

Noto A(1), De Vitis C, Roscilli G, Fattore L, Malpicci D, Marra E, Luberto L,
D'Andrilli A, Coluccia P, Giovagnoli MR, Normanno N, Ruco L, Aurisicchio L,
Mancini R, Ciliberto G.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Medicina Clinica e Molecolare, Sapienza Universita' di Roma,
Italy.

Personalized therapy of advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) has been
improved by the introduction of EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs), gefitinib
and erlotinib. EGFR TKIs induce dramatic objective responses and increase
survival in patients bearing sensitizing mutations in the EGFR intracytoplasmic
tyrosine kinase domain. However, virtually all patients develop resistance, and
this is responsible for disease relapse. Hence several efforts are being
undertaken to understand the mechanisms of resistance in order to develop
combination treatments capable to sensitize resistant cells to EGFR TKIs. Recent 
studies have suggested that upregulation of another member of the EGFR receptor
family, namely ErbB3 is involved in drug resistance, through increased
phosphorylation of its intracytoplasmic domain and activation of PI3K/AKT
signaling. In this paper we first show, by using a set of malignant pleural
effusion derived cell cultures (MPEDCC) from patients with lung adenocarcinoma,
that surface ErbB3 expression correlates with increased AKT phosphorylation.
Antibodies against ErbB3, namely A3, which we previously demonstrated to induce
receptor internalization and degradation, inhibit growth and induce apoptosis
only in cells overexpressing surface ErbB3. Furthermore, combination of
anti-ErbB3 antibodies with EGFR TKIs synergistically affect cell proliferation in
vitro, cause cell cycle arrest, up-regulate p21 expression and inhibit tumor
growth in mouse xenografts. Importantly, potentiation of gefitinib by anti-ErbB3 
antibodies occurs both in de novo and in ab initio resistant cells. Anti-ErbB3
mAbs strongly synergize also with the dual EGFR and HER2 inhibitor lapatinib. Our
results suggest that combination treatment with EGFR TKI and antibodies against
ErbB3 should be a promising approach to pursue in the clinic.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.1141 
PMCID: PMC3787155
PMID: 23896512  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


755. J Thorac Oncol. 2013 Sep;8(9):1136-41. doi: 10.1097/JTO.0b013e31829f6a43.

Challenges to implementation of an epidermal growth factor receptor testing
strategy for non-small-cell lung cancer in a publicly funded health care system.

Ellis PM(1), Verma S, Sehdev S, Younus J, Leighl NB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, McMaster University, Juravinski Cancer Centre,
Hamilton, Ontario, Canada. peter.ellis@jcc.hhsc.ca

BACKGROUND: Data from seven recent randomized clinical trials have demonstrated
that epidermal growth factor (EGFR) mutation status is predictive of improved
progression-free survival and quality of life from first-line EGFR tyrosine
kinase inhibitor therapy compared with platinum-based chemotherapy. We examined
barriers to the initial implementation of a national EGFR testing policy in
Canada.
METHODS: Five laboratories across Canada underwent a validation and
quality-control exercise for EGFR mutation testing using reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction with financial support from the
pharmaceutical industry for the initial 12 months. Oncologists registered
patients with nonquamous histology for EGFR mutation testing using a Web-based
platform. Basic demographics were collected including age, histology, sex,
smoking status, and ethnicity. The decision to prescribe gefitinib was
subsequently registered on the system.
RESULTS: Between March and December 2010, 2104 requests were received for EGFR
mutation testing. Demographic details are as follows: adenocarcinoma (91.6%);
Asian ethnicity (13.9%); female (58%); light/never smoker (41.3%); stage IV
disease (87.1%). The number of tests requested each month ranged from 200 to 250.
Mutation testing was conducted in 1771 of 2104 requests (84%). The median
turnaround time for EGFR testing was 18 days (standard deviation 9.7). Gefitinib 
was prescribed in 302 patients (17.1%). The number of test requests dropped to 50
to 100 per month at the end of the initial 12 months.
CONCLUSION: There was rapid uptake of EGFR mutation testing into routine clinical
practice in Canada. Uptake of EGFR mutation testing dropped substantially once
funding from pharmaceutical industry was discontinued. There is a need for a
national strategy to ensure resources are in place to implement molecular testing
for new molecularly targeted agents.

DOI: 10.1097/JTO.0b013e31829f6a43 
PMID: 23887170  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


756. Clin Chim Acta. 2013 Oct 21;425:119-24. doi: 10.1016/j.cca.2013.07.012. Epub 2013
Jul 23.

Highly sensitive and noninvasive detection of epidermal growth factor receptor
T790M mutation in non-small cell lung cancer.

He C(1), Zheng L, Xu Y, Liu M, Li Y, Xu J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory, the Affiliated Shenzhen Bao'an Hospital of Southern
Medical University, Shenzhen, Guangdong, 518101, China. Electronic address:
hecheen@163.com.

BACKGROUND: Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) T790M mutation is associated 
with EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors resistance in non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC). However, the tissue availability and technical feasibility limits the
genotyping of EGFR T790M mutation in the clinical setting. The current study is, 
therefore, designed to develop a blood-based approach to detect the EGFR T790M
mutation in advanced NSCLC patients.
METHODS: The detection of EGFR T790M mutation is based on the principle of
mutant-enriched PCR. We assessed the basic performance efficiency of this method,
and confirmed its clinical applicability. EGFR T790M mutation in the plasma
samples obtained from 33 patients with gefitinib-resistant NSCLC was analyzed by 
the both mutant-enriched PCR and direct sequencing.
RESULTS: The sensitivity of this method for the detection of EGFR T790M mutation 
was as low as 0.1%. In the 33 subjects whose samples were analyzed, the
mutant-enriched PCR indentified more EGFR T790M mutation than direct sequencing
(36.4% vs. 6.1%, P=0.005), and the EGFR T790M mutation was more frequent in
patients with EGFR activating mutations than those without EGFR activating
mutations (62.5% vs. 11.8%, P=0.004). Patients with EGFR T790M mutation have a
better prior efficacy of gefitinib compared to those without EGFR T790M mutation 
due to the occurrence of the EGFR activating mutations.
CONCLUSION: The blood-based mutant-enriched PCR is an ideal noninvasive
monitoring system for detecting EGFR T790M mutation for clinical application.

© 2013.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cca.2013.07.012 
PMID: 23886554  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


757. Health Technol Assess. 2013 Jul;17(31):1-278. doi: 10.3310/hta17310.

Clinical effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of first-line chemotherapy for
adult patients with locally advanced or metastatic non-small cell lung cancer: a 
systematic review and economic evaluation.

Brown T(1), Pilkington G, Bagust A, Boland A, Oyee J, Tudur-Smith C, Blundell M, 
Lai M, Martin Saborido C, Greenhalgh J, Dundar Y, Dickson R.

Author information: 
(1)Liverpool Reviews and Implementation Group (LRiG), Institute of Psychology,
Health and Society, Department of Health Services Research, University of
Liverpool, Liverpool, UK.

Erratum in
    Health Technol Assess. 2015 May;17(31):281-2.

BACKGROUND: The National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) has
issued multiple guidance for the first-line management of patients with lung
cancer and recommends different combinations of chemotherapy treatments. This
review provides a synthesis of clinical effectiveness and cost-effectiveness
evidence supporting current guidance.
OBJECTIVES: To evaluate the clinical effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of
first-line chemotherapy currently licensed in Europe and recommended by NICE, for
adult patients with locally advanced or metastatic non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC).
DATA SOURCES: Three electronic databases (MEDLINE, EMBASE and The Cochrane
Library) were searched from 2001 to August 2010.
REVIEW METHODS: Trials that compared first-line chemotherapy currently licensed
in Europe and recommended by NICE in chemotherapy-naive adult patients with
locally advanced or metastatic NSCLC were included. Data on key outcomes
including, but not limited to, overall survival (OS), progression-free survival
(PFS) and adverse events (AEs) were extracted. For the assessment of
cost-effectiveness, outcomes included incremental cost per quality-adjusted
life-year (QALY) gained. Analyses were performed for three NSCLC subpopulations: 
patients with predominantly squamous disease, patients with predominantly
non-squamous disease and patients with epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)
mutation-positive (M+) status. Meta-analysis and mixed-treatment comparison
methodology were conducted where appropriate.
RESULTS: Twenty-three trials involving > 11,000 patients in total met the
inclusion criteria. The quality of the trials was poor. In the case of patients
with squamous disease, there were no statistically significant differences in OS 
between treatment regimes. The mixed-treatment comparison demonstrated that, in
patients with non-squamous disease, pemetrexed (Alimta®, Eli Lilly and Company;
PEM) + platinum (PLAT) increases OS statistically significantly compared with
gemcitabine (Gemzar®, Eli Lilly and Company; GEM) + PLAT [hazard ratio (HR) =
0.85; 95% confidence interval (CI) 0.74 to 0.98] and that paclitaxel (Abraxane®, 
Celgene Corporation; PAX) + PLAT increases OS statistically significantly
compared with docetaxel (Taxotere®, Sanofi-aventis; DOC) + PLAT (HR = 0.79, 95%
CI 0.66 to 0.93). None of the comparisons found any statistically significant
differences in OS among patients with EGFR M+ status. Direct meta-analysis showed
a statistically significant improvement in PFS with gefitinib (Iressa®,
AstraZeneca; GEF) compared with DOC + PLAT and PAX + PLAT (HR = 0.49; 95% CI 0.33
to 0.73; and HR = 0.38; 95% CI 0.24 to 0.60, respectively). No papers related to 
UK decision-making were identified. A de novo economic model was developed. Using
list prices (British National Formulary), cisplatin (CIS) doublets are preferable
to carboplatin doublets, but this is reversed if electronic market information
tool prices are used, in which case drug administration costs then become more
important than drug acquisition costs. For patients with both squamous and
non-squamous disease, moving from low to moderate willingness-to-pay thresholds, 
the preferred drugs are PAX → GEM → DOC. However, in patients with non-squamous
disease, PEM + CIS resulted in increased OS and would be considered
cost-effective up to £35,000 per QALY gained. For patients with EGFR M+, use of
GEF compared with PAX or DOC yields very high incremental cost-effectiveness
ratios. Vinorelbine (Navelbine®, Pierre Fabre Pharmaceutical Inc.) was not shown 
to be cost-effective in any comparison.
LIMITATIONS: Poor trial quality and a lack of evidence for all drug comparisons
complicated and limited the data analysis. Outcomes and adverse effects are not
consistently combined across the trials. Few trials reported quality-of-life data
despite their relevance to patients and clinicians.
CONCLUSIONS: The results of this comprehensive review are unique to NSCLC and
will assist clinicians to make decisions regarding the treatment of patients with
advanced NSCLC. The design of future lung cancer trials needs to reflect the
influence of factors such as histology, genetics and the new prognostic
biomarkers that are currently being identified. In addition, trials will need to 
be adequately powered so as to be able to test for statistically significant
clinical effectiveness differences within patient populations. New initiatives
are in place to record detailed information on the precise chemotherapy (and
targeted chemotherapy) regimens being used, together with data on age, cell type,
stage of disease and performance status, allowing for very detailed observational
audits of management and outcomes at a population level. It would be useful if
these initiatives could be expanded to include the collection of health economics
data.
FUNDING: The National Institute for Health Research Health Technology Assessment.

DOI: 10.3310/hta17310 
PMCID: PMC4781689
PMID: 23886301  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


758. Cell Prolif. 2013 Aug;46(4):382-95. doi: 10.1111/cpr.12040.

5-aminolaevulinic acid/photo-dynamic therapy and gefitinib in non-small cell lung
cancer cell lines: a potential strategy to improve gefitinib therapeutic
efficacy.

Postiglione I(1), Chiaviello A, Aloj SM, Palumbo G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine and Health Biotechnology, University Federico
II, Naples, 80131, Italy.

OBJECTIVES: Often, non-small cell lung cancers (NSCLC) respond only poorly to the
tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) gefitinib, which targets the epidermal growth
factor receptor (EGFR), these poor responders EGFRs lacking activating mutations.
In this study, we have attempted to improve TKI response of NSCLC cell lines
(A549 and H1299) devoid of EGFR mutations, by combination of gefitinib and
5-ALA/photodynamic therapy (PDT).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Cells of the two lines were incubated with gefitinib (from
0.5 to 50 mm, for 48 h) then irradiated at doses ranging from 4 to 20 J/cm(2) ;
5-ALA concentration and incubation time were kept constant (1 mm for 3 h). We
analysed cell viability, colony-forming efficiency, cell cycle parameters,
proteasome and NF-κB activity and expression patterns of specific proteins, after
individual or combined treatments.
RESULTS: Effects (antagonistic, additive or synergistic) of combination treatment
were evaluated using a predictive model (combination index) for expected
interactive effects and results are consistent with mutual potentiation exceeding
simple additivity. Investigation of molecular mechanisms underlying cytotoxic
effects indicated that combination treatment impaired proteasome function,
inhibited NF-κB transcriptional activity and hampered AKT pro-survival
signalling.
CONCLUSIONS: The results of this study show that poor response of cells devoid of
EGFR activating mutations to TKIs, can be overcome by combining gefitinib with
5-ALA/photodynamic therapy (PDT).

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cpr.12040 
PMID: 23869760  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


759. Zhongguo Fei Ai Za Zhi. 2013 Jul;16(7):345-52. doi:
10.3779/j.issn.1009-3419.2013.07.03.

[How to make the choice in the retreatment of EGFR-TKI for advanced NSCLC
patients who benefited from prior gefitinib therapy: the original drug or
switching to a second EGFR-TKI?].

[Article in Chinese; Abstract available in Chinese from the publisher]

Tang C(1), Li X, Guo W, Li J, Qin H, Wang W, Qu L, An J, Gao H, Liu X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Lung Cancer, Affiliated Hospital of Academy of Military Medical 
Sciences, Beijing 100071, China.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: For advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
patients who benefited from prior epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine
kinase inhibitor (EGFR-TKI) therapy, the choice of a second TKI therapy has
gradually become a new strategy for the treatment. Some investigators recommend
that the second therapy should be continued with the original TKI; however, other
investigators recommend the administration of another TKI. The aim of this study 
is to explore which choice is more reasonable.
METHODS: In retrospect, patients with advanced NSCLC or with postoperative
relapse of advanced NSCLC achieved complete response (CR), partial response (PR) 
or stable disease (SD) in prior Gefitinib therapy, progression free survival
(PFS) ≥3 months. They received repeated Gefitinib or Erlotinib at an interval of 
at least one month. The analysis was carried out with respect to efficacy and
optimal population of the two groups.
RESULTS: A total of 61 patients were enrolled into the study, 30 in Gefitinib
group and 31 in Erlotinib group. Baseline characteristics of the two groups were 
comparable. In the comparison between patients treated with Gefitinib and with
Erlotinib, no statistical differences were seen for response rate (10% vs 22.6%, 
P=0.300,6), disease control rate (60% vs 74.2%, P=0.237,8), median PFS (3.0 vs
3.5 months, P=0.494,5), or median OS (8.3 vs 8.5 months, P=0.140,8). Multivariate
analysis showed that in the initial dose of Gefitinib, PFS≥6 months (HR=0.317,
95%CI: 0.102-0.984, P=0.046,9). With an interval ≥3 months (HR=0.224, 95%CI:
0.071-0.713, P=0.011,3) between two doses of TKI, the risk of disease progression
was reduced; but if with an interval ≥3 months (HR=0.262, 95%CI: 0.097-0.705,
P=0.008,0), the risk of death was reduced.
CONCLUSIONS: Advanced NSCLC patients who benefited from prior Gefitinib therapy
can benefit again either with the original drug Gefitinib or the alternative drug
Erlotinib when a second TKI therapy is resumed. Such benefit is related to PFS of
initial TKI therapy and time interval between two doses of TKI.

Publisher: 背景与目的 既往表皮生长因子受体酪氨酸激酶抑制剂（epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine
kinase inhibitor, EGFR-TKI）治疗获益的晚期非小细胞肺癌（non-small cell lung cancer,
NSCLC）患者，再次给予TKI治疗，已逐渐成为一种新的治疗策略。本研究旨在探讨二次TKI治疗时，原药或换药，哪一种选择更为合理。方法
回顾晚期或术后复发的NSCLC患者，既往吉非替尼治疗疗效达到完全缓解（complete response, CR）、部分缓解（partial response, 
PR）或稳定（stable disease, SD），无进展生存期（progression free survival,
PFS）≥3个月，病情进展后，间隔时间至少1个月，分别接受吉非替尼或厄洛替尼治疗。就两组患者的疗效、优势人群等进行分析。结果
共有61例患者入组，其中吉非替尼组30例，厄洛替尼组31例，两组患者基线特征基本平衡。吉非替尼组与厄洛替尼组疗效比较，有效率（response rate,
RR）（10% vs 22.6%, P=0.300,6）、疾病控制率（disease contral rate, DCR）（60% vs 74.2%,
P=0.237,8）、中位PFS（3.0个月 vs 3.5个月，P=0.494,5）、中位总生存期（overall survival, OS）（8.3个月 vs 
8.5个月，P=0.140,8）均未见统计学差异。多因素分析示：首次吉非替尼PFS≥6个月（HR=0.317, 95%CI: 0.102-0.984,
P=0.046,9），两次TKI间隔时间≥3个月（HR=0.224, 95%CI: 0.071-0.713,
P=0.011,3）的患者疾病进展风险降低。而两次TKI间隔时间≥3个月（HR=0.262, 95%CI: 0.097-0.705,
P=0.008,0）的患者死亡风险降低。结论
既往吉非替尼治疗获益的晚期NSCLC患者再次TKI治疗，无论选择吉非替尼还是换用厄洛替尼均可获益，这种获益与首次TKI的PFS、以及两次TKI的间隔时间相关。
DOI: 10.3779/j.issn.1009-3419.2013.07.03 
PMID: 23866664  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


760. J Transl Med. 2013 Jul 10;11:168. doi: 10.1186/1479-5876-11-168.

Establishment of patient-derived non-small cell lung cancer xenograft models with
genetic aberrations within EGFR, KRAS and FGFR1: useful tools for preclinical
studies of targeted therapies.

Zhang XC(1), Zhang J, Li M, Huang XS, Yang XN, Zhong WZ, Xie L, Zhang L, Zhou M, 
Gavine P, Su X, Zheng L, Zhu G, Zhan P, Ji Q, Wu YL.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Center of Guangdong General Hospital & Guangdong Academy of
Medical Sciences, Guangdong Lung Cancer Institute Guangzhou 510080, PR China.

BACKGROUND: Patient-derived tumor xenograft models have been established and
increasingly used for preclinical studies of targeted therapies in recent years. 
However, patient-derived non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) xenograft mouse
models are relatively few in number and are limited in their degree of genetic
characterization and validation. In this study, we aimed to establish a variety
of patient-derived NSCLC models and characterize these for common genetic
aberrations to provide more informative models for preclinical drug efficacy
testing.
METHODS: NSCLC tissues from thirty-one patients were collected and implanted into
immunodeficient mice. Established xenograft models were characterized for common 
genetic aberrations, including detection of gene mutations within EGFR and KRAS, 
and genetic amplification of FGFR1 and cMET. Finally, gefitinib anti-tumor
efficacy was tested in these patient-derived NSCLC xenograft models.
RESULTS: Ten passable patient-derived NSCLC xenograft models were established by 
implantation of NSCLC specimens of thirty-one patients into immunodeficient mice.
Genetic aberrations were detected in six of the models, including one model with 
an EGFR activating mutation (Exon19 Del), one model with KRAS mutation, one model
with both KRAS mutation and cMET gene amplification, and three models with FGFR1 
amplification. Anti-tumor efficacy studies using gefitinib demonstrated that the 
EGFR activating mutation model had superior sensitivity and that the KRAS
mutation models were resistant to gefitinib. The range of gefitinib responses in 
the patient-derived NSCLC xenograft models were consistent with the results
reported from clinical trials. Furthermore, we observed that patient-derived
NSCLC models with FGFR1 gene amplification were insensitive to gefitinib
treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: Ten patient-derived NSCLC xenograft models were established
containing a variety of genetic aberrations including EGFR activating mutation,
KRAS mutation, and FGFR1 and cMET amplification. Gefitinib anti-tumor efficacy in
these patient-derived NSCLC xenografts containing EGFR and KRAS mutation was
consistent with the reported results from previous clinical trials. Thus, data
from our panel of patient-derived NSCLC xenograft models confirms the utility of 
these models in furthering our understanding of this disease and aiding the
development of personalized therapies for NSCLC patients.

DOI: 10.1186/1479-5876-11-168 
PMCID: PMC3716998
PMID: 23842453  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


761. J Neurooncol. 2013 Oct;115(1):95-101. doi: 10.1007/s11060-013-1199-y. Epub 2013
Jul 6.

Impact of EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors versus chemotherapy on the development 
of leptomeningeal metastasis in never smokers with advanced adenocarcinoma of the
lung.

Lee Y(1), Han JY, Kim HT, Yun T, Lee GK, Kim HY, Lee JS.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Lung Cancer, National Cancer Center, Ilsanro 323, Ilsandong-gu,
Goyang, Gyeonggi, 410-769, Republic of Korea.

This study investigated whether epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase 
inhibitors (EGFR-TKI) increase the development of leptomeningeal metastasis (LM) 
compared with standard chemotherapy in EGFR mutation-enriched non- small cell
lung cancer. The incidence of LM was longitudinally assessed in never smokers
with advanced adenocarcinoma of the lung enrolled in a phase III randomized
controlled study that compared gefitinib with gemcitabine plus cisplatin (GP) as 
first-line therapy (The First-SIGNAL study). Among 203 patients who were enrolled
at the National Cancer Center Hospital (Goyang, Republic of Korea), LM occurred
in 32 (15.8 %) with a minimum follow-up time of 55.1 months. The 1-, 2-, and
3-year actuarial incidence rates of LM were 5.3, 10.6, and 24.6 %, respectively. 
During first-line treatment, LM occurred in 2 patients (2.0 %) treated with
gefitinib and in 3 patients (3.2 %) treated with GP. There was no difference in
the incidence of LM during first-line treatment between the two groups
(P = 0.934). The incidence of LM was significantly increased during second-line
EGFR-TKI treatment compared with first-line EGFR-TKI treatment (P = 0.041).
During the disease course, the cumulative incidence of LM was not significantly
different between the two treatment groups (P = 0.514). The median time to LM was
21.4 and 24.0 months in the gefitinib and GP groups, respectively (P = 0.895).
Similar trends were observed in the subset analysis with 23 EGFR-mutant patients.
In conclusion, LM predominantly occurred in the late phase of disease in this
population. EGFR-TKIs did not affect the incidence or timing of LM development.

DOI: 10.1007/s11060-013-1199-y 
PMID: 23832498  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


762. Radiother Oncol. 2013 Sep;108(3):370-7. doi: 10.1016/j.radonc.2013.06.010. Epub
2013 Jul 3.

Nuclear EGFR as a molecular target in cancer.

Brand TM(1), Iida M, Luthar N, Starr MM, Huppert EJ, Wheeler DL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Oncology, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and
Public Health, Wisconsin Institute for Medical Research, Madison, USA.

The epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) has been one of the most targeted
receptors in the field of oncology. While anti-EGFR inhibitors have demonstrated 
clinical success in specific cancers, most patients demonstrate either intrinsic 
or acquired resistance within one year of treatment. Many mechanisms of
resistance to EGFR inhibitors have been identified, one of these being attributed
to alternatively localized EGFR from the cell membrane into the cell's nucleus.
Inside the nucleus, EGFR functions as a co-transcription factor for several genes
involved in cell proliferation and angiogenesis, and as a tyrosine kinase to
activate and stabilize proliferating cell nuclear antigen and DNA dependent
protein kinase. Nuclear localized EGFR is highly associated with disease
progression, worse overall survival in numerous cancers, and enhanced resistance 
to radiation, chemotherapy, and the anti-EGFR therapies gefitinib and cetuximab. 
In this review the current knowledge of how nuclear EGFR enhances resistance to
cancer therapeutics is discussed, in addition to highlighting ways to target
nuclear EGFR as an anti-cancer strategy in the future.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.radonc.2013.06.010 
PMCID: PMC3818450
PMID: 23830194  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


763. J Clin Oncol. 2013 Sep 20;31(27):3335-41. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2012.45.0981. Epub
2013 Jul 1.

LUX-Lung 4: a phase II trial of afatinib in patients with advanced non-small-cell
lung cancer who progressed during prior treatment with erlotinib, gefitinib, or
both.

Katakami N(1), Atagi S, Goto K, Hida T, Horai T, Inoue A, Ichinose Y, Koboyashi
K, Takeda K, Kiura K, Nishio K, Seki Y, Ebisawa R, Shahidi M, Yamamoto N.

Author information: 
(1)Nobuyuki Katakami, Kobe City Medical Center General Hospital, Kobe; Shinji
Atagi, National Hospital Organization Kinki-Chuo Chest Medical Center; Koji
Takeda, Osaka City General Hospital; Kazuto Nishio, Kinki University, Osaka;
Koichi Goto, National Cancer Center Hospital East, Chiba; Toyoaki Hida, Aichi
Cancer Center Hospital, Nagoya; Takeshi Horai, The Cancer Institute Hospital of
Japanese Foundation for Cancer Research, Tokyo; Akira Inoue, Tohoku University
Hospital, Sendai; Yukito Ichinose, National Kyushu Cancer Center, Fukuoka;
Kunihiko Koboyashi, Saitama International Medical Center, Saitama; Katsuyuki
Kiura, Okayama University, Okayama; Yoko Seki and Ryuichi Ebisawa, Nippon
Boehringer Ingelheim; Nobuyuki Yamamoto, Shizuoka Cancer Center, Shizuoka, Japan;
and Mehdi Shahidi, Boehringer Ingelheim, Bracknell, United Kingdom.

Comment in
    J Clin Oncol. 2013 Sep 20;31(27):3303-6.

PURPOSE: New molecular targeted agents are needed for patients with
non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) who progress while receiving erlotinib,
gefitinib, or both. Afatinib, an oral irreversible ErbB family blocker, has
preclinical activity in epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR [ErbB1]) mutant
models with EGFR-activating mutations, including T790M.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: This was a Japanese single-arm phase II trial conducted in 
patients with stage IIIB to IV pulmonary adenocarcinoma who progressed after ≥ 12
weeks of prior erlotinib and/or gefitinib. Patients received afatinib 50 mg per
day. The primary end point was objective response rate (complete response or
partial response) by independent review. Secondary end points included
progression-free survival (PFS), overall survival (OS), and safety.
RESULTS: Of 62 treated patients, 45 (72.6%) were EGFR mutation positive in their 
primary tumor according to local and/or central laboratory analyses. Fifty-one
patients (82.3%) fulfilled the criteria of acquired resistance to erlotinib
and/or gefitinib. Of 61 evaluable patients, five (8.2%; 95% CI, 2.7% to 18.1%)
had a confirmed objective response rate (partial response). Median PFS was 4.4
months (95% CI, 2.8 to 4.6 months), and median OS was 19.0 months (95% CI, 14.9
months to not achieved). Two patients had acquired T790M mutations: L858R +
T790M, and deletion in exon 19 + T790M; they had stable disease for 9 months and 
1 month, respectively. The most common afatinib-related adverse events (AEs) were
diarrhea (100%) and rash/acne (91.9%). Treatment-related AEs leading to afatinib 
discontinuation were experienced by 18 patients (29%), of whom four also had
progressive disease.
CONCLUSION: Afatinib demonstrated modest but noteworthy efficacy in patients with
NSCLC who had received third- or fourth-line treatment and who progressed while
receiving erlotinib and/or gefitinib, including those with acquired resistance to
erlotinib, gefitinib, or both.

DOI: 10.1200/JCO.2012.45.0981 
PMID: 23816963  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


764. Lung Cancer. 2013 Sep;81(3):328-36. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2013.05.020. Epub 2013
Jun 25.

Mechanisms of resistance to EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors gefitinib/erlotinib
and to ALK inhibitor crizotinib.

Tartarone A(1), Lazzari C, Lerose R, Conteduca V, Improta G, Zupa A, Bulotta A,
Aieta M, Gregorc V.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Oncology, Centro di Riferimento Oncologico di Basilicata, 
I.R.C.C.S., Rionero in Vulture, PZ, Italy. tarta1@virgilio.it

The discovery of several molecular alterations that underlie non-small cell lung 
cancer (NSCLC) pathogenesis has led to the development of targeted therapies. In 
particular, gefitinib and erlotinib have become the standard of care in patients 
harboring epidermal growth factor receptor mutations, while crizotinib showed an 
impressive efficacy in patients with ALK-positive NSCLC. Nevertheless, the
occurrence of clinical resistance limits the long term results of these novel
agents. The identification of the molecular mechanisms responsible for acquired
resistance to targeted therapy is crucial in order to pursue the creation of
rational strategies to overcome resistance. In the current review, we will focus 
on the acquired resistance mechanisms to EGFR-TKIs and crizotinib and the
therapeutic strategies currently under study to overcome resistance.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2013.05.020 
PMID: 23809060  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


765. Lung Cancer. 2013 Sep;81(3):435-9. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2013.05.021. Epub 2013 
Jul 1.

Impact of physical size on gefitinib efficacy in patients with non-small cell
lung cancer harboring EGFR mutations.

Ichihara E(1), Hotta K, Takigawa N, Kudo K, Kato Y, Honda Y, Hayakawa H, Minami
D, Sato A, Tabata M, Tanimoto M, Kiura K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Oncology, and Respiratory Medicine, Okayama
University Graduate School of Medicine, Dentistry, and Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Japan. ichiha-e@md.okayama-u.ac.jp

Gefitinib is an essential drug for the treatment of non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC) with epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) gene mutations. The approved
dosage is 250 mg/body/day without adjustment for physical size such as body
surface area (BSA), and the impact of physical size on the efficacy of gefitinib 
has not been evaluated. Here, we sought to clarify this issue using a
retrospective cohort. We reviewed the medical records of patients with
consecutive advanced NSCLC harboring EGFR mutations who underwent gefitinib
monotherapy at Okayama University Hospital. In total, 101 patients were included 
in this study, and the median BSA in this cohort was 1.5 m(2). The median
progression-free survival (PFS) of the patients with higher BSA (≥1.5 m(2)) was
significantly worse than that of those with lower BSA (< 1.5 m(2)) (10.4 vs. 18.0
months; p = 0.019, log-rank test). Multivariate analysis also showed a
significant impact of BSA on PFS (hazards ratio, 2.34; 95% confidence interval,
1.78-2.89; p = 0.002). By contrast, no significant association between BSA and
PFS was observed in those undergoing cytotoxic chemotherapy (4.0 vs. 5.1 months; 
p = 0.989, log-rank test), suggesting that BSA is a predictive, rather than a
prognostic, marker for gefitinib therapy in EGFR-mutated NSCLC. In conclusion,
BSA affected PFS in patients with EGFR-mutated NSCLC who underwent gefitinib
monotherapy, suggesting the need for appraisal of BSA-based dose adjustment, even
for this molecular target-based therapy.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2013.05.021 
PMID: 23809059  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


766. PLoS One. 2013 Jun 21;8(6):e67782. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0067782. Print 2013.

DISSECT Method Using PNA-LNA Clamp Improves Detection of EGFR T790m Mutation.

Guha M(1), Castellanos-Rizaldos E, Makrigiorgos GM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of DNA Repair and Genome Stability, Department of Radiation Oncology,
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts,
United States of America.

Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients treated with small molecule EGFR
inhibitors, such as gefitinib, frequently develop drug resistance due to the
presence of secondary mutations like the T790M mutation on EGFR exon 20. These
mutations may originate from small subclonal populations in the primary tumor
that become dominant later on during treatment. In order to detect these
low-level DNA variations in the primary tumor or to monitor their progress in
plasma, it is important to apply reliable and sensitive mutation detection
methods. Here, we combine two recently developed methodologies, Differential
Strand Separation at Critical Temperature (DISSECT), with peptide nucleic
acid-locked nucleic acid (PNA-LNA) polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for the
detection of T790M EGFR mutation. DISSECT pre-enriches low-abundance T790M EGFR
mutations from target DNA prior to implementing PNA-LNA PCR, a method that can
detect 1 mutant allele in a background of 100-1000 wild type alleles. The
combination of DISSECT and PNA-LNA PCR enables the detection of 1 mutant allele
in a background of 10,000 wild type alleles. The combined DISSECT-PNA-LNA PCR
methodology is amenable to adaptation for the sensitive detection of additional
emerging resistance mutations in cancer.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0067782 
PMCID: PMC3689726
PMID: 23805327  [PubMed]


767. J Thorac Oncol. 2013 Aug;8(8):1069-74. doi: 10.1097/JTO.0b013e318294c8e8.

Erlotinib versus gefitinib for control of leptomeningeal carcinomatosis in
non-small-cell lung cancer.

Lee E(1), Keam B, Kim DW, Kim TM, Lee SH, Chung DH, Heo DS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul,
Korea.

INTRODUCTION: Leptomeningeal carcinomatosis (LMC) from non-small-cell lung cancer
(NSCLC) is a clinically important neurological complication in the era of
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs). The
purpose of this study was to compare the efficacy of gefitinib and erlotinib for 
control of LMC in NSCLC.
METHODS: We retrospectively reviewed medical records of 25 EGFR TKI-treated NSCLC
patients with LMC between 2004 and 2012 at Seoul National University Hospital.
Cytologic negative conversion was defined as absence of malignant cells in the
cerebrospinal fluid three times in succession. Cytologic conversion rates were
compared between the gefitinib arm and the erlotinib arm.
RESULTS: Nine patients had exon 21 point mutations and eight patients had exon 19
deletional mutations. Nine of 25 patients had already used EGFR TKIs and switched
to another EGFR TKI after LMC occurrence. The other 16 patients received EGFR
TKIs after LMC diagnoses. All the patients received intrathecal chemotherapy,
including methotrexate, and six of them were treated with combined whole-brain
radiotherapy. Gefitinib and erlotinib were administered to 11 and 14 patients,
respectively. Ten patients had LMC controlled with cytologic negative conversion,
whereas in 15 patients, cytological clearance of the cerebrospinal fluid could
not be achieved. Patients treated with erlotinib showed better cytologic
conversion rate of LMC than those with gefitinib (64.3% [9 of 14] in the
erlotinib arm versus 9.1% [1 of 11] in the gefitinib arm; p = 0.012).
CONCLUSION: This study suggested that erlotinib had better control rate for LMC
in NSCLC than gefitinib. Further prospective study is warranted.

DOI: 10.1097/JTO.0b013e318294c8e8 
PMID: 23804027  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


768. J Thorac Oncol. 2013 Aug;8(8):1059-68. doi: 10.1097/JTO.0b013e318294c909.

Tumor volume decrease at 8 weeks is associated with longer survival in
EGFR-mutant advanced non-small-cell lung cancer patients treated with EGFR TKI.

Nishino M(1), Dahlberg SE, Cardarella S, Jackman DM, Rabin MS, Hatabu H, Jänne
PA, Johnson BE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Imaging, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts
02215, USA. Mizuki_Nishino@dfci.harvard.edu

BACKGROUND: The study investigated whether tumor volume changes at 8 weeks of
therapy is associated with outcomes in advanced non-small-cell lung cancer
(NSCLC) patients harboring sensitizing epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)
mutations treated with EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs).
METHODS: In 56 advanced NSCLC patients with sensitizing EGFR mutations treated
with first-line erlotinib or gefitinib, tumor volumes of dominant lung lesions
were measured on baseline and follow-up computed tomography, and were analyzed
for association with survival.
RESULTS: Among 56 eligible patients, the median tumor volume was 17.8 cm (range, 
1.3-172.7 cm) on the baseline scans. Forty-nine patients had follow-up computed
tomography at approximately 8 weeks; the median tumor volume at 8 weeks was 7.1
cm (range, 0.4-62.3 cm), with the median proportional volume change of -59%
(range, -90% to +91%) from baseline. The proportional volume change at 8 weeks
was associated with survival (p = 0.02). Using the cutoff value of 38% volume
decrease (75th percentile) at 8 weeks, patients with volume decrease more than
38% (n = 37) had a median overall survival of 43.5 months compared with 16.3
months among those with volume decrease of 38% or less (n = 12; p = 0.01). The
median progression-free survival for patients with more than 38% volume decrease 
was 12.6 months, compared with 5.5 months for those with 38% or lesser volume
decrease (p = 0.2).
CONCLUSION: The proportional volume change at 8 weeks is associated with overall 
survival in EGFR-mutant advanced NSCLC patients treated with first-line
EGFR-TKIs. The observation of the study, if confirmed in larger study cohorts,
indicates that tumor volume analysis at 8 weeks may provide an early marker for
survival, and contribute to therapeutic decision making by identifying patients
who may benefit from additional anticancer therapy after 8 weeks of EGFR-TKI
therapy.

DOI: 10.1097/JTO.0b013e318294c909 
PMCID: PMC3714311
PMID: 23787800  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


769. Chin Med J (Engl). 2013 Jun;126(12):2235-41.

Recurrence patterns of advanced non-small cell lung cancer treated with
gefitinib.

Chen MJ(1), Zhong W, Zhang L, Zhao J, Li LY, Wang MZ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Peking Union Medical College Hospital,
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences & Peking Union Medical College, Beijing
100730, China.

BACKGROUND: Geftinib is widely used in the treatment of advanced non-small cell
lung cancer (NSCLC). However, only a small number of reports have described
initial failure sites in patients treated with gefitinib. The aim of this study
was to investigate survival, recurrence sites, and treatment after recurrence in 
these patients.
METHODS: A retrospective review was conducted of all patients with stage III/IV
NSCLC treated with gefitinib in Peking Union Medical College Hospital from
October 2002 to September 2011. Patient characteristics, initial failure sites,
associated clinical factors, and subsequent therapy were included in the analysis
of prognostic factors.
RESULTS: A total of 316 patients were identified The median progress free
survival (PFS) and overall survival (OS) times were 238 days and 468 days,
respectively. The median survival time after progression was 145 days. The sites 
of initial failure were lung (62.34%), bone (17.72%), central nerve system (CNS, 
16.14%), liver (9.49%), and others (7.19%). Patients with single-site progression
or multi-site progression were 81.01% and 18.99%, respectively. Progression-free 
survival time was associated with lung and bone failure. Additionally, the median
survival time after progression was lower in patients with multi-site progression
and liver progression. Other initial failure sites displayed no relationship with
survival, including CNS failure. Subsequent therapy may affect survival after
progression. In patients receiving continuous epidermal growth factor receptor
tyrosine kinase inhibitor (EGFR-TKI) therapy, chemotherapy, radiotherapy, and re-
treatment with EGFR-TKIs, survival time after progression was prolonged compared 
with the best supportive care.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest that patients receiving gefitinib should be closely
monitored regarding lung metastasis during follow-up. Liver metastases and
multi-site progression were poor prognostic factors. After failure with
gefitinib, patients may benefit from radiotherapy, chemotherapy, continuous
EGFR-TKI therapy and re-treatment with EGFR-TKIs.


PMID: 23786931  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


770. Cancer Manag Res. 2013 Jun 7;5:91-101. doi: 10.2147/CMAR.S32973. Print 2013.

Molecularly targeted approaches herald a new era of non-small-cell lung cancer
treatment.

Kaneda H(1), Yoshida T, Okamoto I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Kinki University, Osakasayama, Japan.

The discovery of activating mutations in the epidermal growth-factor receptor
(EGFR) gene in 2004 opened a new era of personalized treatment for non-small-cell
lung cancer (NSCLC). EGFR mutations are associated with a high sensitivity to
EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors, such as gefitinib and erlotinib. Treatment with 
these agents in EGFR-mutant NSCLC patients results in dramatically high response 
rates and prolonged progression-free survival compared with conventional standard
chemotherapy. Subsequently, echinoderm microtubule-associated protein-like 4
(EML4)-anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK), a novel driver oncogene, has been found 
in 2007. Crizotinib, the first clinically available ALK tyrosine kinase
inhibitor, appeared more effective compared with standard chemotherapy in NSCLC
patients harboring EML4-ALK. The identification of EGFR mutations and ALK
rearrangement in NSCLC has further accelerated the shift to personalized
treatment based on the appropriate patient selection according to detailed
molecular genetic characterization. This review summarizes these genetic
biomarker-based approaches to NSCLC, which allow the instigation of
individualized therapy to provide the desired clinical outcome.

DOI: 10.2147/CMAR.S32973 
PMCID: PMC3682814
PMID: 23785245  [PubMed]


771. J Thorac Oncol. 2013 Jul;8(7):e59-60. doi: 10.1097/JTO.0b013e318286cc26.

Activity of gefitinib in a non-small-cell lung cancer patient with both
activating and resistance EGFR mutations.

Morabito A(1), Costanzo R, Rachiglio AM, Pasquale R, Sandomenico C, Franco R,
Montanino A, De Lutio E, Rocco G, Normanno N.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Oncology Unit, Thoraco-Pulmonary Department, National Cancer
Institute, Napoli, Italy. alessandromorabito1@virgilio.it

DOI: 10.1097/JTO.0b013e318286cc26 
PMID: 23774386  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


772. Cancer Treat Rev. 2013 Dec;39(8):839-50. doi: 10.1016/j.ctrv.2013.05.001. Epub
2013 Jun 12.

Epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors as initial therapy
for non-small cell lung cancer: focus on epidermal growth factor receptor
mutation testing and mutation-positive patients.

Roengvoraphoj M(1), Tsongalis GJ, Dragnev KH, Rigas JR.

Author information: 
(1)Comprehensive Thoracic Oncology Program, Norris Cotton Cancer Center,
Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical Center, One Medical Center Drive, Lebanon, NH
03756-0001, USA; The Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth, One Rope Ferry Road,
Hanover, NH 03755-1404, USA. Electronic address:
monic.roengvoraphoj@hitchcock.org.

Activation of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) pathway has been
implicated in tumorigenesis in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), the most
common type of lung cancer. As a result, EGFR has become a key focus for the
development of personalized therapy, with several molecular biomarkers having
been investigated as potential predictors of response with EGFR tyrosine kinase
inhibitors (TKIs) in NSCLC (e.g., EGFR expression, EGFR gene copy gain, and EGFR 
mutations). Of these, activating mutations in EGFR have thus far given the most
consistent results based on the available evidence from preclinical studies and
clinical trials. In an attempt to identify patients who are most likely to
benefit from treatment with EGFR TKIs, EGFR mutation testing is being
increasingly utilized in clinical practice. Currently in the United States, no
EGFR TKI or accompanying mutational test is approved for the identification and
first-line treatment of patients with advanced NSCLC. However, the
first-generation EGFR TKIs, erlotinib and gefitinib, as well as investigational
ErbB family TKIs and EGFR mutation testing methods are being evaluated in this
setting. This review will discuss EGFR mutation testing as a biomarker of
response to EGFR TKIs and the evolution of EGFR mutational analysis in NSCLC.
Completed and ongoing clinical trials evaluating currently available or
investigational EGFR TKIs as first-line therapy in molecularly and clinically
selected patients with NSCLC, with a focus on trials in patients whose tumors
have EGFR mutations, will also be reviewed.

Copyright © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ctrv.2013.05.001 
PMID: 23768755  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


773. Indian J Palliat Care. 2013 Jan;19(1):48-53. doi: 10.4103/0973-1075.110237.

The Role of Gefitinib in Patients with Non-small-cell Lung Cancer in India.

Mehta AA(1), Jose WM, Pavithran K, Triavadi GS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Cancer Institute and Institute of Molecular 
Medicine, Amrita Institute of Medical Sciences, AIMS Ponekkara P.O. Kochi,
Kerala, India.

BACKGROUND: Gefitinib, an epidermal growth factor receptor-tyrosine kinase
inhibitor, represents a new treatment option for patients with advanced
non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC). We analyzed the data of patients who received
Gefitinib for NSCLC in a tertiary care center in South India.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Sixty-three patients with advanced NSCLC who had received 
Gefitinib either after failure of conventional chemotherapy or were previously
not treated as they were unfit or unwilling for conventional treatment were
included in the analysis.
RESULTS: The median follow-up for the cohort was 311 days (range 11-1544 days).
Median time to progression was 161 (range 9-883) days. Complete and partial
remission was seen in 1 (2%) and 6 (9%) patients, respectively, with overall
response rate of 11%. Twenty-four (38%) patients had stable disease. Gefitinib
was well tolerated with no significant side effects.
CONCLUSION: Gefitinib shows anti-tumor activity in pretreated or previously
untreated patients with advanced NSCLC. It has a favorable toxicity profile and
is well tolerated. Gefitinib should be considered as a viable therapy in patients
with NSCLC.

DOI: 10.4103/0973-1075.110237 
PMCID: PMC3680839
PMID: 23766595  [PubMed]


774. Oncol Lett. 2013 May;5(5):1599-1600. Epub 2013 Feb 27.

Gefitinib in combination with prednisolone to avoid interstitial lung disease
during non-small cell lung cancer treatment: A case report.

Xue X(1), Xue Q, Liu Y, Pan L, Wang K, Zhang L, Wang N, Yang B, Wang J.

Author information: 
(1)Cadres Respiratory Diseases Department of Beijing Shijitan Hospital, Beijing
100038;

Gefitinib-induced interstitial lung disease (ILD) is a rare but lethal drug
adverse event, which usually leads to the withdrawal of gefitinib and causes
complications with anticancer treatment. In this study, gefitinib administration 
combined with prednisolone in a female with stage IIIb non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC) produced a good outcome without inducing ILD. The results suggested that 
combined administration of gefitinib with glucocorticoids may be an efficient
method to treat NSCLC while avoiding complications with ILD.

DOI: 10.3892/ol.2013.1212 
PMCID: PMC3678659
PMID: 23761825  [PubMed]


775. Lung. 2013 Oct;191(5):491-9. doi: 10.1007/s00408-013-9482-4. Epub 2013 Jun 9.

Routine EGFR molecular analysis in non-small-cell lung cancer patients is
feasible: exons 18-21 sequencing results of 753 patients and subsequent clinical 
outcomes.

Locatelli-Sanchez M(1), Couraud S, Arpin D, Riou R, Bringuier PP, Souquet PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Service de pneumologie et oncologie thoracique, CH Lyon Sud, Hospices Civils
de Lyon, Lyon, France.

BACKGROUND: Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)-targeting therapies
dramatically modified the prognosis of stage 4 non-small-cell lung cancer.
Sensitizing EGFR mutations are the best efficacy factor of these treatments. In
2006, the French National Cancer Institute launched a network of 28 centers for
EGFR molecular analysis in routine practice. The aim of this retrospective study 
was to describe the results of routine EGFR analysis in one of these centers
(Lyon University Hospital) and to assess outcomes in patients with the mutation.
METHODS: EGFR mutations were analyzed for exons 18-21 by direct sequencing. The
characteristics of each sample were retrospectively collected from the lab
archives. Subsequent outcomes for patients harboring at least one mutation were
retrospectively collected from each referring physician.
RESULTS: During 1 year, 792 samples were analyzed, corresponding to 753 patients.
A total of 133 mutations were diagnosed in 124 samples (15.7 %), corresponding to
121 patients. Most of them (77.4 %) were sensitizing mutations and were located
in exons 19 and 21. Others were resistance mutations (8.3 %) or rare mutations
(14.3 %) for which effects on tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) sensitivity are
unknown. The rate of indeterminate results (i.e., no sequencing of the entire
exon 19 or 21) was 6.3 % (n = 50 samples). The only factor statistically
associated with a risk of failure was sample from bone tissue: 13.7 % gave
incomplete results (i.e., no whole sequencing of exons 18-21).
CONCLUSIONS: Eighty-five of the 121 patients with EGFR mutations were treated
with TKI. There were no differences in progression free survival (PFS) according 
to the type of molecule (erlotinib or gefitinib) or to the line of prescription
of TKI. By contrast, exon 18 sensitizing mutations showed a worse PFS than exon
19 or 21 mutations. Finally, dose reduction was significantly more frequent in
the erlotinib group than in the gefitinib group.

DOI: 10.1007/s00408-013-9482-4 
PMID: 23749122  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


776. Clin Cancer Res. 2013 Jul 15;19(14):3894-904. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-12-3696.
Epub 2013 Jun 7.

USP8 is a novel target for overcoming gefitinib resistance in lung cancer.

Byun S(1), Lee SY, Lee J, Jeong CH, Farrand L, Lim S, Reddy K, Kim JY, Lee MH,
Lee HJ, Bode AM, Won Lee K, Dong Z.

Author information: 
(1)The Hormel Institute, University of Minnesota, Austin, Minnesota 55912, USA.

PURPOSE: Common treatment modalities for non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
involve the EGF receptor-tyrosine kinase inhibitors (EGFR-TKIs) like gefitinib
and erlotinib. However, the vast majority of treated patients acquire resistance 
to EGFR-TKIs, due, in large part, to secondary mutations in EGFR or amplification
of the MET gene. Our purpose was to test ubiquitin-specific peptidase 8 (USP8) as
a potential therapeutic target for gefitinib-resistant and -sensitive non-small
cell lung cancer (NSCLC).
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Testing the effect of knockdown of USP8 and use of a
synthetic USP8 inhibitor to selectively kill gefitinib-resistant (or -sensitive) 
NSCLCs with little effect on normal cells in cell culture and a xenograft mouse
model.
RESULTS: Knockdown of ubiquitin-specific peptidase 8 (USP8) selectively kills
gefitinib-resistant NSCLCs while having little toxicity toward normal cells.
Genetic silencing of USP8 led to the downregulation of several receptor tyrosine 
kinases (RTK) including EGFR, ERBB2, ERBB3, and MET. We also determined that a
synthetic USP8 inhibitor markedly decreased the viability of gefitinib-resistant 
and -sensitive NSCLC cells by decreasing RTK expression while having no effect on
normal cells. Moreover, treatment with a USP8 inhibitor led to significant
reductions in tumor size in a mouse xenograft model using gefitinib-resistant and
-sensitive NSCLC cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results show for the first time that the inhibition of USP8
activity or reduction in USP8 expression can selectively kill NSCLC cells. We
propose USP8 as a potential therapeutic target for gefitinib-resistant and
-sensitive NSCLC cells.

DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-12-3696 
PMCID: PMC3891300
PMID: 23748694  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


777. Biomed Pap Med Fac Univ Palacky Olomouc Czech Repub. 2013 Jun;157(2):125-36. doi:
10.5507/bp.2013.034. Epub 2013 May 29.

Non-small cell lung cancer--genetic predictors.

Koudelakova V(1), Kneblova M, Trojanec R, Drabek J, Hajduch M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Experimental Medicine, Institute of Molecular and Translational 
Medicine, Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry, Palacky University Olomouc and
University Hospital Olomouc, Czech Republic. koudelakovav@gmail.com

BACKGROUND: Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) accounts for approximately 85% of 
all lung cancer that is the leading cause of cancer-related mortality worldwide. 
Several predictive markers have been found in NSCLC patients to date but only a
few are currently used for tailored therapy.
METHODS AND RESULTS: PubMed and Web of Science online databases were used to
search review and original articles on the most important predictive markers in
NSCLC.
CONCLUSION: EGFR activating mutations (exons 18 to 21) and EML4-ALK rearrangement
are clinically important markers able to select NSCLC patients which benefit from
EGFR or ALK tyrosine kinase inhibitors (gefitinib, erlotinib, crizotinib). Other 
markers, such as KRAS mutation, EGFR T790M mutation and C-MET amplification, are 
responsible for resistance to these inhibitors. Overcoming of this resistance as 
well as discovery of new potential markers and inhibitors is the main goal of
ongoing research and clinical trials in NSCLC.

DOI: 10.5507/bp.2013.034 
PMID: 23733083  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


778. Onco Targets Ther. 2013 May 21;6:563-76. doi: 10.2147/OTT.S28155. Print 2013.

Novel small molecule EGFR inhibitors as candidate drugs in non-small cell lung
cancer.

Berardi R(1), Santoni M, Morgese F, Ballatore Z, Savini A, Onofri A, Mazzanti P, 
Pistelli M, Pierantoni C, De Lisa M, Caramanti M, Pagliaretta S, Pellei C,
Cascinu S.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Oncology Unit, Universita Politecnica delle Marche, Azienda
Ospedaliero-Universitaria Ospedali Riuniti Umberto I - GM Lancisi - G Salesi,
Ancona, Italy.

In the last decade, better understanding of the role of epidermal growth factor
receptor in the pathogenesis and progression of non-small cell lung cancer has
led to a revolution in the work-up of these neoplasms. Tyrosine kinase
inhibitors, such as erlotinib and gefitinib, have been approved for the treatment
of non-small cell lung cancer, demonstrating an improvement in progression-free
and overall survival, particularly in patients harboring activating EGFR
mutations. Nevertheless, despite initial responses and long-lasting remissions,
resistance to tyrosine kinase inhibitors invariably develops, most commonly due
to the emergence of secondary T790M mutations or to the amplification of
mesenchymal-epithelial transition factor (c-Met), which inevitably leads to
treatment failure. Several clinical studies are ongoing
(http://www.clinicaltrials.gov), aimed to evaluate the efficacy and toxicity of
combined approaches and to develop novel irreversible or multitargeted tyrosine
kinase inhibitors and mutant-selective inhibitors to overcome such resistance.
This review is an overview of ongoing Phase I, II, and III trials of novel small 
molecule epidermal growth factor receptor inhibitors and combinations in
non-small cell lung cancer patients.

DOI: 10.2147/OTT.S28155 
PMCID: PMC3665567
PMID: 23723712  [PubMed]


779. Cancer Sci. 2013 Sep;104(9):1198-204. doi: 10.1111/cas.12211. Epub 2013 Jul 1.

Detection of epidermal growth factor receptor T790M mutation in plasma DNA from
patients refractory to epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase
inhibitor.

Sakai K(1), Horiike A, Irwin DL, Kudo K, Fujita Y, Tanimoto A, Sakatani T, Saito 
R, Kaburaki K, Yanagitani N, Ohyanagi F, Nishio M, Nishio K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genome Biology, Kinki University Faculty of Medicine, Osaka,
Japan.

A secondary epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutation, the substitution of
threonine 790 with methionine (T790M), leads to acquired resistance to reversible
EGFR-tyrosine kinase inhibitors (EGFR-TKIs). A non-invasive method for detecting 
T790M mutation would be desirable to direct patient treatment strategy. Plasma
DNA samples were obtained after discontinuation of gefitinib or erlotinib in 75
patients with non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). T790M mutation was amplified
using the SABER (single allele base extension reaction) technique and analyzed
using the Sequenom MassARRAY platform. We examined the T790M mutation status in
plasma samples obtained after treatment with an EGFR-TKI. The SABER assay
sensitivity using mixed oligonucleotides was determined to be 0.3%. The T790M
mutation was detected in 21 of the 75 plasma samples (28%). The presence of the
T790M mutation was confirmed by subcloning into sequencing vectors and sequencing
in 14 of the 21 samples (66.6%). In this cohort of 75 patients, the median
progression-free survival (PFS) of the patients with the T790M mutation (n = 21) 
was not statistically different from that of the patients without the mutation (n
= 54, P = 0.94). When patients under 65 years of age who had a partial response
were grouped according to their plasma T790M mutation status, the PFS of the
T790M-positive patients (n = 11) was significantly shorter than that of the
T790M-negative patients (n = 29, P = 0.03). The SABER method is a feasible means 
of determining the plasma T790M mutation status and could potentially be used to 
monitor EGFR-TKI therapy.

© 2013 Japanese Cancer Association.

DOI: 10.1111/cas.12211 
PMID: 23721103  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


780. Pulm Pharmacol Ther. 2014 Jun;28(1):41-8. doi: 10.1016/j.pupt.2013.05.005. Epub
2013 May 23.

β-Catenin overexpression is associated with gefitinib resistance in non-small
cell lung cancer cells.

Fang X(1), Gu P(2), Zhou C(3), Liang A(4), Ren S(5), Liu F(6), Zeng Y(7), Wu
Y(8), Zhao Y(9), Huang B(10), Zhang Z(11), Yi X(12).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Tongji Hospital, Tongji University School of
Medicine, Shanghai 200065, China. Electronic address: dilay_123@yahoo.cn.
(2)Department of Pathology, Tongji Hospital, Tongji University School of
Medicine, Shanghai 200065, China. Electronic address: gupanjiayou@sina.com.
(3)Department of Oncology, Shanghai Pulmonary Hospital, Tongji University School 
of Medicine, Shanghai 200433, China. Electronic address: cczhou2000@126.com.
(4)Department of Haematology, Tongji Hospital, Tongji University School of
Medicine, Shanghai 200065, China. Electronic address: lab410817@126.com.
(5)Department of Oncology, Shanghai Pulmonary Hospital, Tongji University School 
of Medicine, Shanghai 200433, China. Electronic address: Hillary_ren@126.com.
(6)Department of Pathology, Tongji Hospital, Tongji University School of
Medicine, Shanghai 200065, China. Electronic address: GYLIUFANG@HOTMAIL.COM.
(7)Department of Pathology, Tongji Hospital, Tongji University School of
Medicine, Shanghai 200065, China. Electronic address: yuzeng77@hotmail.com.
(8)Department of Pathology, Tongji Hospital, Tongji University School of
Medicine, Shanghai 200065, China. Electronic address: yunjinwuhope@126.com.
(9)Department of Oncology, Shanghai Pulmonary Hospital, Tongji University School 
of Medicine, Shanghai 200433, China. Electronic address: zhaoyingmin80@126.com.
(10)Department of Haematology, Tongji Hospital, Tongji University School of
Medicine, Shanghai 200065, China. Electronic address: binbin2004_20@hotmail.com. 
(11)Department of Pathology, Tongji Hospital, Tongji University School of
Medicine, Shanghai 200065, China. Electronic address: zongzong1986@126.com.
(12)Department of Pathology, Tongji Hospital, Tongji University School of
Medicine, Shanghai 200065, China. Electronic address: yixhxf@yahoo.com.cn.

BACKGROUND: Acquired resistance to epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine
kinase inhibitors (EGFR-TKIs) presents great challenges in the treatment of
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients, while the mechanisms are still not
well understood. The β-catenin signaling pathway has been found to be associated 
with chemoresistance and can activate the EGFR and its downstream pathways. This 
study aimed to investigate the role of β-catenin in acquired resistance to
EGFR-TKIs in NSCLC cell lines.
METHODS: The expression and transcriptional activity of β-catenin were measured
in both the NSCLC cell line PC9 and its sub-line PC9/AB(2) which has acquired
resistance to gefitinib. Knockdown and overexpression of β-catenin in the
PC9/AB(2) and PC9 cells were performed. The cell survival rate and the activation
of the EGFR and its downstream pathways were detected in the two cell lines after
transfection.
RESULTS: Nuclear translocation of β-catenin was increased in the PC9/AB(2) cells 
and the baseline expression of members of the β-catenin signaling pathway was
also higher in the PC9/AB(2) cells. Knocking down the expression of β-catenin
increased the sensitivity of the PC9/AB(2) cells to gefitinib by blocking the
activation of the EGFR downstream pathways, while β-catenin overexpression
improved PC9 cells resistance to gefitinib by enhancing the activation of the
EGFR and its downstream signaling.
CONCLUSION: β-catenin plays an important role in acquired resistance to EGFR-TKIs
in NSCLC cell lines and may be a potential therapeutic target for NSCLC patients 
who have failed to respond to targeted therapy.

Crown Copyright © 2013. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pupt.2013.05.005 
PMID: 23707949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


781. Clin Cancer Res. 2013 Jul 1;19(13):3508-19. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-12-2777.
Epub 2013 May 21.

Synergistic effects of metformin treatment in combination with gefitinib, a
selective EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor, in LKB1 wild-type NSCLC cell lines.

Morgillo F(1), Sasso FC, Della Corte CM, Vitagliano D, D'Aiuto E, Troiani T,
Martinelli E, De Vita F, Orditura M, De Palma R, Ciardiello F.

Author information: 
(1)Oncologia Medica, Dipartimento Medico-Chirurgico di Internistica Clinica e
Sperimentale F. Magrassi e A. Lanzara, Seconda Università degli Studi di Napoli, 
Naples, Italy. florianamorgillo@yahoo.com

PURPOSE: EGF receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKI) have been found to 
be effective against lung cancer, but clinical resistance to these agents has
developed as their usage has increased. Metformin is a widely used antidiabetic
drug and also displays significant growth-inhibitory and proapoptotic effects in 
several cancer models, alone or in combination with chemotherapeutic drugs.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: The effects of gefitinib, a selective EGFR-TKI, and
metformin on a panel of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cell lines were
assessed by using MTT, bromide assay, flow cytometry, anchorage-independent
growth, coimmunoprecipitation, and Western blot analysis.
RESULTS: The combination of metformin with gefitinib induced a strong
antiproliferative and proapoptotic effect in NSCLC cell lines that harbored
wild-type LKB1 gene. Treatment with metformin as single agent, however, induced
an activation and phosphorylation of mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK)
through an increased C-RAF/B-RAF heterodimerization. The inhibition of EGFR
phosphorylation and of downstream signaling by adding gefitinib to metformin
treatment abrogated this phenomenon and induced a strong apoptotic effect in
vitro and in vivo.
CONCLUSIONS: Metformin and gefitinib are synergistic in LKB1 wild-type NSCLC
cells. However, further studies are required to investigate better the effect of 
metformin action on the RAS/RAF/MAPK pathway and the best context in which to use
metformin in combination with molecular targeted agents.

©2013 AACR.

DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-12-2777 
PMID: 23695170  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


782. Lung Cancer. 2013 Aug;81(2):294-6. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2013.04.009. Epub 2013 
May 14.

Coexistence of EGFR mutation and ALK translocation in NSCLC: literature review
and case report of response to gefitinib.

Santelmo C(1), Ravaioli A, Barzotti E, Papi M, Poggi B, Drudi F, Mangianti M,
Salvi M, Crinò L.

Author information: 
(1)U.O. Oncologia, Ospedale Infermi Rimini, 2 Settembrini Street, Rimini, Italy. 
carlotta.santelmo@alice.it

The coexistence of EGFR and ALK-EML4 gene mutations represents a rare event
(about 1%) in patients with non small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and the few cases 
described in the literature have all been treated by different methods. We
present the case of a 52-year-old woman with adenocarcinoma of the lung whose
tumor had this double genetic aberration. The patient was immediately treated
with gefitinib because the tumor was judged inoperable, but after two months she 
obtained an important clinical remission and was submitted to radical surgery.
She is currently undergoing adjuvant treatment with gefitinib. A review of the
literature on this double genetic aberration highlighted that further research is
needed to define the best therapeutic approach.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2013.04.009 
PMID: 23683537  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


783. J Chin Med Assoc. 2013 May;76(5):249-57. doi: 10.1016/j.jcma.2013.01.010. Epub
2013 Mar 22.

Update of epidermal growth factor receptor-tyrosine kinase inhibitors in
non-small-cell lung cancer.

Chen YM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chest Medicine, Taipei Veterans General Hospital, National
Yang-Ming University School of Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan, ROC.
ymchen@vghtpe.gov.tw

Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer-related death in the world. Prior to
the era of targeted therapy, platinum-based doublet chemotherapy was the
first-line therapy of choice for patients with metastatic non-small-cell lung
cancer (NSCLC). The availability of agents that target epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR)-tyrosine kinase, as well as inhibitors against anaplastic
lymphoma kinase (ALK) gene rearrangement or ROS-1 gene rearrangement product, has
provided promising clinical benefits in specific subpopulations of NSCLC. At
present, only first-generation EGFR-tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) (erlotinib 
and gefitinib) are available for clinical use. Second-generation irreversible
EGFR-TKIs, such as afatinib, are still in clinical trials. In current clinical
practice, EGFR-TKI is the first-line treatment of choice for metastatic NSCLC
patients with tumor EGFR mutation or as salvage therapy in NSCLC patients who
received systemic chemotherapy previously. Platinum-based doublet chemotherapy
continues to be the standard of care for those treatment-naïve patients with EGFR
wild -type tumor or unknown EGFR status. Even though all investigators agree with
the use of EGFR-TKI as the first-line treatment in tumor EGFR-mutated patients,
only 10-30% of NSCLC patients have mutated EGFR, and there was no obvious
survival difference when EGFR-TKIs were used in a second-line setting versus a
first-line treatment in EGFR-mutated patients. Thus, the molecular complexity of 
lung cancer emphasizes the need for optimizing treatment by seeking a more
personalized approach to care, including searching for driver oncogenes, managing
the emergence of resistance and overcoming that resistance, and optimizing the
sequence of treatment. Numerous other novel targeted agents are now in clinical
development, including new agents targeting novel pathways and those that may
have the potential to overcome the limitations or resistance associated with
currently available EGFR-TKIs. In this report, we review the clinical data of
EGFR-TKIs as molecular-targeted therapies in NSCLC.

Copyright © 2013. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jcma.2013.01.010 
PMID: 23683257  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


784. Clin Lung Cancer. 2013 Sep;14(5):502-7. doi: 10.1016/j.cllc.2013.03.003. Epub
2013 May 9.

Polymorphisms of CYP2D6 gene and gefitinib-induced hepatotoxicity.

Takimoto T(1), Kijima T, Otani Y, Nonen S, Namba Y, Mori M, Yokota S, Minami S,
Komuta K, Uchida J, Imamura F, Furukawa M, Tsuruta N, Fujio Y, Azuma J, Tachibana
I, Kumanogoh A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Toyonaka Municipal Hospital, Osaka, Japan.
tkijima@imed3.med.osaka-u.ac.jp

INTRODUCTION: Gefitinib induces severe hepatotoxicity in approximately a quarter 
of Japanese patients with epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)
mutation-positive non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Gefitinib is metabolized by
cytochrome P450 (CYP) enzymes--including CYP3A4/5, CYP1A1, and CYP2D6--in the
liver. We hypothesized that polymorphisms of the CYP2D6 gene may account for
gefitinib-induced hepatotoxicity.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Polymorphisms of the CYP2D6 gene were analyzed in 55
patients with NSCLC who experienced grade ≥ 2 transaminase elevation from
gefitinib. The distribution of the CYP2D6 genotype was compared with that of the 
healthy Japanese population. The correlations between the nonfunctional allele *5
or the reduced-function allele *10 and hepatotoxicity-related clinical factors
were also examined.
RESULTS: The distribution of the CYP2D6 genotype in the study participants was
not different from that of the general Japanese population, reported previously. 
Existence of allele *5 or *10 did not correlate with clinical factors such as
onset of hepatotoxicity within 2 months, grade ≥ 3 serum transaminase elevation, 
and tolerability to dose reduction or rechallenge of gefitinib. However, in 7
patients taking CYP3A4-inhibitory drugs, rechallenge of gefitinib again caused
hepatotoxicity in 4 patients with allele *5 or *10 but not in 3 patients with
normal alleles (P = .029). Moreover, switching to erlotinib did not cause
hepatotoxicity in any of 17 patients with allele *5 or *10 but did in 3 of 8
patients without these alleles (P = .024).
CONCLUSION: Reduced function of CYP2D6 may partly account for gefitinib-induced
hepatotoxicity when CYP3A4 is inhibited. Erlotinib could be safely used in
patients with decreased CYP2D6 activity even after they experienced
gefitinib-induced hepatotoxicity.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cllc.2013.03.003 
PMID: 23664723  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


785. Lung Cancer. 2013 Aug;81(2):155-61. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2013.02.021. Epub 2013
May 10.

Clinical perspective of afatinib in non-small cell lung cancer.

Chen X(1), Zhu Q, Zhu L, Pei D, Liu Y, Yin Y, Schuler M, Shu Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, the First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical
University, Nanjing, 210029, China.

Reversible ATP-competitive inhibitors targeting the epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR) have been established as the most effective treatment of patients
with advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) harboring "activating" mutations
in exons 19 and 21 of the EGFR gene. However, clinical activity is limited by
acquired resistance which on average develops within 10 months of continued
treatment. The mechanisms for acquired resistance include selection of the EGFR
T790M mutation in approximately 50% of cases, and MET gene amplification, PIK3CA 
gene mutation, transdifferentiation into small-cell lung cancer and additional
rare or unkown mechanisms. Afatinib is a small molecule covalently binding and
inhibiting the EGFR, HER2 and HER4 receptor tyrosine kinases. In preclinical
studies, afatinib not only inhibited the growth of models with common activating 
EGFR mutations, but was also active in lung cancer models harboring wild-type
EGFR or the EGFR L858R/T790M double mutant. Clinical efficacy of afatinib has
been extensively studied in the LUX-Lung study program. These trials showed
promising efficacy in patients with EGFR-mutant NSCLC or enriched for clinical
benefit from EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors gefitinib or erlotinib. Here we
review the current status of clinical application of afatinib in NSCLC. We also
discuss clinical aspects of resistance to afatinib and strategies for its
circumvention.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2013.02.021 
PMID: 23664448  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


786. Clin Chem. 2013 Oct;59(10):1447-56. doi: 10.1373/clinchem.2012.200477. Epub 2013 
May 8.

Companion biomarkers: paving the pathway to personalized treatment for cancer.

Duffy MJ(1), Crown J.

Author information: 
(1)UCD School of Medicine and Medical Science, Conway Institute, University
College Dublin, Ireland;

BACKGROUND: Companion biomarkers are biomarkers that are used in combination with
specific therapies and that prospectively help predict likely response or severe 
toxicity. In this article we review the role of companion biomarkers in guiding
treatment in patients with cancer.
CONTENT: In addition to the established companion biomarkers such as estrogen
receptors and HER2 (human epidermal growth factor receptor 2) in breast cancer,
several new companion biomarkers have become available in recent years. These
include v-Ki-ras2 Kirsten rat sarcoma viral oncogene homolog (KRAS) mutations for
the selection of patients with advanced colorectal cancer who are unlikely to
benefit from anti-epidermal growth factor receptor antibodies (cetuximab or
panitumumab), epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutations for selecting
patients with advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) for treatment with
tyrosine kinase inhibitors (gefitinib or erlotinib), v-raf murine sarcoma viral
oncogene homolog B1 (BRAF) mutations for selecting patients with advanced
melanoma for treatment with anti-BRAF agents (vemurafenib and dabrafenib), and
anaplastic lymphoma receptor tyrosine kinase (ALK) translocations for identifying
patients with NSCLC likely to benefit from crizotinib.
SUMMARY: The availability of companion biomarkers should improve drug efficacy,
decrease toxicity, and lead to a more individualized approach to cancer
treatment.

DOI: 10.1373/clinchem.2012.200477 
PMID: 23656699  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


787. Clinicoecon Outcomes Res. 2013 Apr 10;5:137-41. doi: 10.2147/CEOR.S30670. Print
2013.

Update on the treatment of non-small-cell lung cancer: focus on the
cost-effectiveness of new agents.

Vergnenègre A(1), Borget I, Chouaid C.

Author information: 
(1)Service de Pathologie Respiratoire et d'Allergologie, CHU Dupuytren, Limoges, 
France ; Inserm, U707, Paris, France.

BACKGROUND: The incidence of lung cancer and the cost of drug treatment have
increased dramatically in the last decade. This article examines the costs of new
target agents, such as tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) and anti-angiogenic
drugs.
METHODS: This study uses PubMed research to focus on the topics of lung cancer,
economics, and new targeted therapies.
RESULTS: The published papers only addressed TKIs and anti-angiogenic antibodies.
For gefitinib, the results favored a clinical-based selection, despite the low
number of studies. Erlotinib was studied in second line and as a maintenance
treatment (with the studies reaching opposite conclusions in terms of
cost-effectiveness). Economic analyses were not in favor of bevacizumab, but the 
studies on this topic were very heterogeneous.
CONCLUSION: The economic impact of a drug depends on the health care system
organization. Future clinical trials must include economic analyses, particularly
with TKIs in the first line.

DOI: 10.2147/CEOR.S30670 
PMCID: PMC3626258
PMID: 23630426  [PubMed]


788. Case Rep Oncol. 2013 Mar 29;6(1):189-96. doi: 10.1159/000350680. Print 2013 Jan.

Long-Term Treatment with Erlotinib for EGFR Wild-Type Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer:
A Case Report.

Polychronidou G(1), Papakotoulas P.

Author information: 
(1)Theagenio Cancer Hospital, Thessaloniki, Greece.

The epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs)
gefitinib and erlotinib are known to have greater efficacy in EGFR
mutation-positive non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), although erlotinib also has
activity in wild-type disease. We report the successful long-term maintenance
treatment of a patient with EGFR wild-type NSCLC with gefitinib and later
erlotinib. The patient (male; 44 years old; smoker) was diagnosed with EGFR
wild-type NSCLC after computer tomography had revealed a mediastinal mass, and
histology and mutation testing had identified the tumor as an EGFR wild-type
grade 3 adenocarcinoma. The patient received multiple rounds of chemotherapy,
followed by gefitinib maintenance (3 years). Later on, he received erlotinib
maintenance and developed a persistent rash (grade 1/2) that lasted throughout
the treatment. The patient's condition has remained stable on erlotinib for more 
than 5 years, with no evidence of progression. We describe the patient's disease 
course and treatment in the context of EGFR TKI therapy and the prognostic
factors for long-term clinical outcomes of NSCLC, including the development of
erlotinib-induced rash.

DOI: 10.1159/000350680 
PMCID: PMC3636957
PMID: 23626560  [PubMed]


789. Cell Oncol (Dordr). 2013 Jul;36(4):277-88. doi: 10.1007/s13402-013-0133-9. Epub
2013 Apr 26.

Insulin-like growth factor-1 receptor (IGF-1R) as a biomarker for resistance to
the tyrosine kinase inhibitor gefitinib in non-small cell lung cancer.

Peled N(1), Wynes MW, Ikeda N, Ohira T, Yoshida K, Qian J, Ilouze M, Brenner R,
Kato Y, Mascaux C, Hirsch FR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine/Medical Oncology, University of Colorado Cancer Center,
UC Denver, 12801 E 17th Ave, Mail Stop 8177, Aurora, CO 80045, USA.
nirp@post.tau.ac.il

BACKGROUND: The insulin-like growth factor-1 receptor (IGF-1R) pathway is known
to play a role in the acquisition of resistance to epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR)-specific tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) in non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC). However, its exact role in TKI resistance has so far remained
unclear. Here, we interrogated the hypothesis that the IGF-1R may serve as a
biomarker for, and may play a role in, intrinsic resistance to the EGFR-specific 
TKI gefitinib in NSCLC.
METHODS: Total-IGF-1R and phosphorylated (p)-IGF-1R expression levels were
related to gefitinib sensitivity in 23 NSCLC cell lines. This sensitivity was
re-evaluated after knocking down IGF-1R expression and after IGF-1R up-regulation
through exogenous IGF-1 expression. The utility of IGF-1R expression as a
predictive biomarker was also evaluated by immunohistochemistry (IHC) in 98
primary NSCLC samples from patients treated with gefitinib.
RESULTS: Seventeen of the cell lines tested were resistant to gefitinib, whereas 
3 cell lines were sensitive. The three remaining cell lines showed intermediate
values. Thirteen resistant cell lines were found to be positive for total-IGF-1R 
expression, while all the sensitive cell lines were negative, resulting in a
positive predictive value (PPV) of 81% for total-IGF-1R to predict resistance.
Seven resistant cell lines exhibited high p-IGF-1R levels, whereas all 3
sensitive cell lines were negative for p-IGF-1R, resulting in a PPV of 100% for
p-IGF-1R to predict resistance. Neither a knock-down of IGF-1R expression nor an 
activation of the IGF1-R pathway through exogenous IGF-1 expression affected
gefitinib sensitivity. In primary NSCLC tissues, IGF-1R expression was found to
be significantly higher in patients with progressive disease, i.e., showing
gefitinib resistance, as compared to those with a complete or partial response.
CONCLUSIONS: IGF-1R acts as a predictor for resistance to gefitinib in NSCLC cell
lines and NSCLC patients, but does not seem to play a role in the intrinsic
resistance to this drug. High total-IGF-1R and p-IGR-1R levels may predict such a
resistance. Since the underlying mechanism does not appear to be related to
proliferation induction, alternative pathways should be explored.

DOI: 10.1007/s13402-013-0133-9 
PMCID: PMC4186686
PMID: 23619944  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


790. Expert Rev Anticancer Ther. 2013 May;13(5):523-33. doi: 10.1586/era.13.23.

Erlotinib in the first-line treatment of non-small-cell lung cancer.

D'Arcangelo M(1), Cappuzzo F.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto Toscano Tumori, Ospedale Civile, Viale Alfieri 36, 57100, Livorno,
Italy.

Non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is the leading cause of cancer-related deaths.
In the last decade the EGF receptor (EGFR) signaling pathway has emerged as one
of the most important molecular aberrations in NSCLC. Drugs interfering with the 
tyrosine kinase domain of the EGFR (EGFR-TKI), such as erlotinib or gefitinib,
demonstrated efficacy in patients with advanced NSCLC irrespective of therapy
line and particularly in patients harboring activating mutations of the EGFR
gene. Results of large Phase III randomized trials clearly demonstrated that an
EGFR-TKI is the best front-line option for patients with classical EGFR
mutations, while in the EGFR wild-type or EGFR unknown population platinum-based 
chemotherapy remains the gold standard. In pretreated patients, EGFR-TKIs are
considered more effective than standard chemotherapy in the EGFR-mutated
population, with no difference in EGFR wild-type NSCLC. Although EGFR-TKIs are
certainly particularly effective in patients with EGFR mutations, at present no
biomarker, including KRAS mutations, can be recommended in clinical practice for 
precluding the therapy to any pretreated patient. In this article, the authors
analyzed data of erlotinib in NSCLC, focusing on its role in front-line therapy.

DOI: 10.1586/era.13.23 
PMID: 23617344  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


791. Zhongguo Fei Ai Za Zhi. 2013 Apr;16(4):203-10. doi:
10.3779/j.issn.1009-3419.2013.04.06.

[The cost-effectiveness analysis of gefitinib or erlotinib in the treatment of
advanced EGFR mutant non-small cell lung cancer patients].

[Article in Chinese; Abstract available in Chinese from the publisher]

Ma Y(1), Huang Y, Zhao H, Liu J, Chen L, Wu H, Zhou N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center,
Guangzhou 510060, China.

BACKGROUND: Targeted therapy in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) had become a
research hotspot. Both of gefitinib and erlotinib had already been recommended as
first line treatment in epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutant advanced
NSCLC patients. The study aimed to compare the effectiveness and prognosis of
advanced NSCLC with gefitinib or erlotinib, as well as the cost-effectiveness
ratio of the two drugs.
METHODS: Data of 66 EGFR mutant NSCLC patients who were included in Guangzhou
medical insurance were analyzed. The efficacy and adverse reactions were
evaluated. All the patients were followed-up regularly and the cost of the
treatment was recorded.
RESULTS: The median progression free survival (PFS) of all patients was 15.0
months. 49 patients received gefintib and 17 patients had erlotinib. The PFS for 
the two groups of patients was 17.5 month and 13 months, respectively (P=0.459). 
31 (62.3%) patients had rash in gefitinib group, 16 (94.1%) in erlotinib group.
Cost-effectiveness ratio (CER) in gefitinib group was 3,027 RMB per month, while 
6,800 RMB in erlotinib group. The incremental cost-effectiveness ratio (ICEA) of 
erlotinib was 2.25 times of gefitinib.
CONCLUSIONS: For EGFR mutant advanced NSCLC patients, equal efficacy and survival
benefit were observed in patients with gefitinib and erlotinib. The adverse
reaction was milder in gefitinib group than that of erlotinib group. And with
Guangzhou medical insurance, gefitinib had a superior cost-effectiveness ratio.

Publisher: 背景与目的 非小细胞肺癌（non-small cell lung cancer,
NSCLC）靶向治疗越来越受到关注，吉非替尼和厄洛替尼均被推荐用于存在表皮生长因子受体酪氨酸激酶（epidermal growth factor
receptor, EGFR）基因突变的晚期NSCLC的一线治疗。本研究旨在分析比较吉非替尼和厄洛替尼在晚期NSCLC的疗效和生存获益，以及治疗成本效益。 方法 
回顾性分析广州医保内的66例EGFR突变型的NSCLC患者。观察疗效和记录不良反应，定期随访生存预后，并追踪治疗费用。结果
总共66例可评估患者，中位无进展生存期（progression-free survival, PFS）为15.0个月。其中吉非替尼49例，厄洛替尼17例，
PFS分别为17.5个月和13.0个月（P=0.459）。皮疹发生率吉非替尼组为62.3%
（31/49），厄洛替尼组为94.1%（16/17）。成本-效益比率（cost-effectiveness ratio,
CER）吉非替尼组为3,027元/月，厄洛替尼组为6,800元/月，增量成本-效益比率（incremental cost-effectiveness ratio,
ICEA）厄洛替尼为吉非替尼的2.25倍。结论
EGFR突变的晚期NSCLC患者治疗，吉非替尼和厄洛替尼有相似的疗效和生存获益，前者不良反应可能较为轻微。广州医保下，吉非替尼成本-效益比率稍优。
DOI: 10.3779/j.issn.1009-3419.2013.04.06 
PMID: 23601301  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


792. Jpn J Clin Oncol. 2013 Jun;43(6):629-35. doi: 10.1093/jjco/hyt056. Epub 2013 Apr 
18.

Phase II trial of erlotinib for Japanese patients with previously treated
non-small-cell lung cancer harboring EGFR mutations: results of Lung Oncology
Group in Kyushu (LOGiK0803).

Yamada K(1), Takayama K, Kawakami S, Saruwatari K, Morinaga R, Harada T, Aragane 
N, Nagata S, Kishimoto J, Nakanishi Y, Ichinose Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Respirology, Neurology, and Rheumatology, Department of Internal
Medicine, Kurume University School of Medicine, 67 Asahi-machi, Kurume City,
Fukuoka 830-0011, Japan. kayamada@med.kurume-u.ac.jp

OBJECTIVE: Erlotinib has been reported to be useful for treatment of
non-small-cell lung cancer harboring mutation of the epidermal growth factor
receptor gene EGFR-mt. However, no prospective trial has yet assessed the utility
of erlotinib in Japanese patients.
METHODS: Patients with EGFR-mt (exon 19/21) non-small-cell lung cancer who had
previously received one to two chemotherapy regimens were enrolled in this trial.
Erlotinib was initially administered at a dose of 150 mg/day orally until disease
progression or unacceptable toxicities occurred. The primary endpoint was the
objective response rate.
RESULTS: Twenty-six patients were enrolled between February 2009 and January
2011. Objective response was observed in 14 patients (53.8%, 95% confidence
interval: 33.4-73.4%), and the disease control rate reached 80.8% (95% confidence
interval: 60.7-93.5%). After a median follow-up time of 17.3 months (range:
5.8-29.5 months), the median progression-free survival was 9.3 months (95%
confidence interval: 7.6-11.6 months). The median survival time is yet to be
determined. Major toxicities were skin disorder and liver dysfunction; most
episodes were grade 2 or less, and all were tolerable. Only one patient with
grade 3 skin rash discontinued the study. No patients developed interstitial lung
disease, and there were no treatment-related deaths.
CONCLUSIONS: This prospective study is the first to have investigated the
usefulness of erlotinib in Japanese patients with previously treated EGFR-mt
non-small-cell lung cancer. Although this trial could not meet the primary
endpoint, erlotinib was well tolerated and showed clinical benefit such as
promising disease control rate or progression-free survival in this population,
similar to gefitinib.

DOI: 10.1093/jjco/hyt056 
PMID: 23599349  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


793. J Cell Biochem. 2013 Jun;114(6):1248-56. doi: 10.1002/jcb.24465.

mTOR inhibitors radiosensitize PTEN-deficient non-small-cell lung cancer cells
harboring an EGFR activating mutation by inducing autophagy.

Kim EJ(1), Jeong JH, Bae S, Kang S, Kim CH, Lim YB.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Radiation Effects, Korea Institute of Radiological and Medical
Sciences, Seoul 139-706, Republic of Korea.

Clinical resistance to gefitinib, an epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)
tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI), in patients with lung cancer has been linked to 
acquisition of the T790M resistance mutation in activated EGFR or amplification
of MET. Phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN) loss has been recently reported as 
a gefitinib resistance mechanism in lung cancer. The aim of this study was to
evaluate the efficacy of radiotherapy in non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) with 
acquired gefitinib resistance caused by PTEN deficiency to suggest radiotherapy
as an alternative to EGFR TKIs. PTEN deficient-mediated gefitinib resistance was 
generated in HCC827 cells, an EGFR TKI sensitive NSCLC cell line, by PTEN
knockdown with a lentiviral vector expressing short hairpin RNA-targeting PTEN.
The impact of PTEN knockdown on sensitivity to radiation in the presence or
absence of PTEN downstream signaling inhibitors was investigated. PTEN knockdown 
conferred acquired resistance not only to gefitinib but also to radiation on
HCC827 cells. mTOR inhibitors alone failed to reduce HCC827 cell viability,
regardless of PTEN expression, but ameliorated PTEN knockdown-induced
radioresistance. PTEN knockdown-mediated radioresistance was accompanied by
repression of radiation-induced cytotoxic autophagy, and treatment with mTOR
inhibitors released the repression of cytotoxic autophagy to overcome PTEN
knockdown-induced radioresistance in HCC827 cells. These results suggest that
inhibiting mTOR signaling could be an effective strategy to radiosensitize NSCLC 
harboring the EGFR activating mutation that acquires resistance to both TKIs and 
radiotherapy due to PTEN loss or inactivation mutations.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jcb.24465 
PMID: 23592446  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


794. J Thorac Oncol. 2013 Jul;8(7):892-8. doi: 10.1097/JTO.0b013e31828c3929.

Cytokeratin 19 fragment predicts the efficacy of epidermal growth factor
receptor-tyrosine kinase inhibitor in non-small-cell lung cancer harboring EGFR
mutation.

Tanaka K(1), Hata A, Kaji R, Fujita S, Otoshi T, Fujimoto D, Kawamura T, Tamai K,
Takeshita J, Matsumoto T, Monden K, Nagata K, Otsuka K, Nakagawa A, Tachikawa R, 
Otsuka K, Tomii K, Katakami N.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Integrated Oncology, Institute of Biomedical Research and
Innovation, Minatojima-Minamimachi, Chuo-Ku, Kobe, Japan.

BACKGROUND: EGFR gene mutation is independently associated with a favorable
response in non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients receiving epidermal
growth factor receptor -tyrosine kinase inhibitors (EGFR-TKIs), regardless of sex
or smoking history. Squamous cell carcinoma patients harboring EGFR mutations
show a significantly worse response to EGFR-TKIs compared with adenocarcinoma
patients. We hypothesized that the serum cytokeratin 19 fragment (CYFRA 21-1) is 
associated with the efficacy of EGFR-TKIs in EGFR-mutated NSCLC patients.
METHODS: We retrospectively screened 160 NSCLC patients harboring EGFR mutations,
who had received either gefitinib, or erlotinib between 1992 and 2011. Patients
were screened for clinical characteristics, the efficacy of EGFR-TKI, and tumor
markers (carcinoembryonic antigen [CEA]/CYFRA 21-1) at the initial diagnosis.
RESULTS: Of 160 eligible patients treated with EGFR-TKIs, 77 patients with high
CYFRA 21-1 level (>2 ng/ml) showed significantly shorter progression-free
survival (PFS) than the 83 patients with normal CYFRA 21-1 level (median PFS, 7.5
versus 13.3 months; p < 0.001). No significant difference in PFS was observed
between the high-CEA group (>5 ng/ml) and the normal-CEA group (median PFS, 8.6
versus 11.2 months; p = 0.242). A multivariate analysis revealed that high CYFRA 
21-1 level is independently associated with PFS (hazard ratio, 1.27; p = 0.002). 
No significant difference in overall survival was observed between the high- and 
the normal-CYFRA 21-1 groups (median overall survival, 24.8 versus 39.1 months; p
= 0.104).
CONCLUSIONS: Patients with a high CYFRA 21-1 level have significantly shorter
PFS. CYFRA 21-1 is not a prognostic but a predictive marker of EGFR-TKI treatment
in EGFR-mutated NSCLC patients.

DOI: 10.1097/JTO.0b013e31828c3929 
PMID: 23591159  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


795. Int J Oncol. 2013 Jun;42(6):2094-102. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2013.1895. Epub 2013 Apr
12.

Knockdown of the Bcl-2 gene increases sensitivity to EGFR tyrosine kinase
inhibitors in the H1975 lung cancer cell line harboring T790M mutation.

Zou M(1), Xia S, Zhuang L, Han N, Chu Q, Chao T, Peng P, Chen Y, Gui Q, Yu S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430030, P.R. China.

Epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors (EGFR-TKIs) are being
widely used as targeted therapy in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), but most
cases acquire drug-resistance in 9 months. However, the mechanisms of resistance 
are still not fully understood. Since it has been demonstrated that
EGFR-TKI-mediated repression of downstream signaling cascades and apoptosis
induction is a key mechanism through which EGFR-TKIs exert their cytotoxic
effects, we reasoned that activation of downstream signaling pathways and changes
in the expression of apoptosis-related proteins contribute to the acquired
resistance to EGFR-TKIs. We analyzed the protein levels of p-Akt, Bcl-2, Bax
between gefitinib-sensitive and gefitinib-resistant lung cancer cell lines and
evaluated whether targeting the anti-apoptotic protein Bcl-2 induces cell
apoptosis and further sensitizes resistant H1975 cells to gefitinib. The data
showed that p-Akt was activated and accompanied by substantial Bcl-2 in the H1975
lung cancer cell line, whereas no evidence was observed in HCC827 cells. Using
small interfering RNA (siRNA) to silence Bcl-2 in H1975 cells led to significant 
downregulation of Bcl-2 protein expression, decreased cell viability in vitro and
induced intrinsic apoptosis confirmed by flow cytometry and PARP cleavage. In
Bcl-2 siRNA-transfected cells, adding gefitinib further reduced the number of
viable cells, induced apoptosis to a greater extent compared to either treatment 
alone. These preclinical data suggested that downregulation of Bcl-2 by RNAi in
the gefitinib-resistant H1975 lung cancer cell line with T790M mutation enhanced 
the effects of gefitinib and may offer a novel therapeutic strategy for the
treatment of NSCLC.

DOI: 10.3892/ijo.2013.1895 
PMID: 23588221  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


796. Jpn J Clin Oncol. 2013 Jun;43(6):664-8. doi: 10.1093/jjco/hyt049. Epub 2013 Apr
12.

Interstitial lung disease associated with gefitinib in Japanese patients with
EGFR-mutated non-small-cell lung cancer: combined analysis of two Phase III
trials (NEJ 002 and WJTOG 3405).

Akamatsu H(1), Inoue A, Mitsudomi T, Kobayashi K, Nakagawa K, Mori K, Nukiwa T,
Nakanishi Y, Yamamoto N.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Thoracic Oncology, Shizuoka Cancer Center, 1007 Shimonagakubo,
Nagaizumi-cho Sunto-gun, Shizuoka 411-8777, Japan. h.akamatsu@scchr.jp

OBJECTIVE: Interstitial lung disease associated with gefitinib is a critical
adverse reaction. When geftinib was administered to EGFR-unknown patients, the
interstitial lung disease incidence rate was approximately 3-4% in Japan, and
usually occurs during the first 4 weeks of treatment. However, it has not been
fully investigated in EGFR-mutated patients.
METHODS: We collected clinical records of participants of two Phase III trials
(WJTOG 3405 and NEJ 002), which compared gefitinib with platinum doublet
chemotherapy. All patients were EGFR mutated, chemo-naïve and had good
performance status.
RESULTS: A total of 402 patients were enrolled in this study. In the gefitinib
arm, 10 (5.0%) of 201 patients developed interstitial lung disease, of whom five 
(2.5%) were Grade 3 or greater, with two deaths (1.0%). In contrast, only one
patient developed interstitial lung disease (Grade 1) in the chemotherapy arm.
With regard to gefitinib, smoking history was significantly associated with
developing interstitial lung disease (odds ratio 0.18; 95% confidence interval:
0.05-0.74; P = 0.01). The cumulative incidence rate of interstitial lung disease 
was similar in the 0-4, 5-8 and 9-12 week time periods. However, between smokers 
and never-smokers, cumulative incidence rates in the first 4 weeks were
significantly different (4.7% versus 0%, P = 0.03). Three of 10 patients
developed interstitial lung disease after 8 weeks of gefitinib administration
(days 135, 171 and 190, respectively).
CONCLUSIONS: Among EGFR-mutated patients, the incidence of interstitial lung
disease associated with gefitinib was not different from that in previous
reports. Smoking history was associated with developing interstitial lung
disease, and smokers had a higher incidence rate of interstitial lung disease in 
the first 4 weeks.

DOI: 10.1093/jjco/hyt049 
PMID: 23585689  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


797. Clin Lung Cancer. 2013 Jul;14(4):311-21. doi: 10.1016/j.cllc.2013.01.001. Epub
2013 Apr 11.

The importance of molecular profiling in predicting response to epidermal growth 
factor receptor family inhibitors in non-small-cell lung cancer: focus on
clinical trial results.

Tsao AS(1), Papadimitrakopoulou V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic/Head and Neck Medical Oncology, University of Texas MD 
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA. astsao@mdanderson.org

In recent years, the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) family has become a 
key focus of non-small-cell lung cancer biology and targeted therapies, such as
the reversible EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors erlotinib and gefitinib.
Initially, response to these agents was associated with certain demographic and
clinical characteristics; subsequently, it was discovered that these subgroups
were more likely to harbor specific mutations in the EGFR gene that enhanced
tumor response. However, the presence of these mutations does not equate to
therapeutic success. Other aspects of EGFR family signaling, including other
types of EGFR mutations, EGFR protein expression, EGFR gene amplification,
mediators of downstream signaling, and other receptors with similar downstream
pathways may all play a role in response or resistance to treatment. The
identification of these and other molecular determinants is driving the
development of novel therapies designed to achieve improved clinical outcomes in 
patients.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cllc.2013.01.001 
PMID: 23582282  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


798. Tumour Biol. 2013 Jun;34(3):1275-84. doi: 10.1007/s13277-013-0759-2. Epub 2013
Apr 9.

The war on cancer: are we winning?

Duffy MJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)UCD Clinical Research Centre, St Vincent's University Hospital, Dublin,
Ireland. michael.j.duffy@ucd.ie

Of all the diseases affecting humankind, cancer is one of the most difficult to
treat and cure. One of the main reasons for this difficulty relates to the fact
that cancer is not a single disease but consists of hundreds of different types. 
Furthermore, cancers exhibit considerable genetic complexity with more than 400
different genes implicated in their development. In addition, cancers display
major inter- and intratumor heterogeneity. Despite these complexities, several
successes have been achieved in recent years. Most of these successes relate to
the specific targeting of driver genes involved in cancer development. These
successes include imatinib for the treatment of chronic myeloid leukemia,
anti-HER2 therapies (trastuzumab, pertuzumab, and lapatinib) to treat breast
cancer, anti-EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors (gefitinib and erlotinib) to treat
non-small cell lung cancer, and anti-BRAF agents (vemurafenib and dabrafenib) to 
treat melanoma. Although the war on cancer has not yet been won, neither has it
been lost. With continued basic and clinical research, cancer is being
transformed into a chronic disease in which patients have increased survival
rates and better quality of life.

DOI: 10.1007/s13277-013-0759-2 
PMID: 23568704  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


799. BMC Res Notes. 2013 Apr 8;6:139. doi: 10.1186/1756-0500-6-139.

Plasma RANTES, IL-10, and IL-8 levels in non-small-cell lung cancer patients
treated with EGFR-TKIs.

Umekawa K(1), Kimura T, Kudoh S, Suzumura T, Oka T, Nagata M, Mitsuoka S,
Matsuura K, Nakai T, Yoshimura N, Kira Y, Hirata K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka City
University, 1-4-3 Asahi-machi, Abeno-ku, Osaka 545-8585, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase inhibitors
(TKIs), routinely used to treat advanced non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
patients with activated EGFR mutations, are associated with excellent response
and improved performance status. Recently, pro-inflammatory cytokines, such as
regulated upon activation normal T cell expressed and secreted (RANTES),
interleukin (IL)-10 and IL-8 have been proposed as mediators of cancer
development. EGFR-TKIs have been found to affect this network of pro-inflammatory
cytokines.
METHODS: EGFR-TKIs (erlotinib, 150 mg/day; and gefitinib, 250 mg/day) were
administered once per day. Treatment was continued until disease progressed or
the patient developed intolerable symptoms of toxicity, or withdrew his/her
consent for study participation. The treatment was a part of standard care. We
investigated the correlation between plasma pro-inflammatory cytokines (including
plasma RANTES, IL-10, and IL-8) levels and clinical outcomes following EGFR-TKI
treatment in lung cancer patients. Pro-inflammatory cytokine levels were
evaluated at diagnosis and on treatment day 30 after the first administration of 
EGFR-TKIs.
RESULTS: Overall, 33 patients were enrolled. Plasma pro-inflammatory cytokine
levels were determined for all patients at diagnosis. Plasma samples from 26
patients were obtained on treatment day 30. High level of RANTES at diagnosis was
associated with severe general fatigue (P = .026). Low level of RANTES at
diagnosis was significantly associated with long-term survival (P = .0032).
Percent decrease change of IL-10 was associated with severity of rash (P = .037).
The plasma IL-8 level on treatment day 30 (median, 5.48 pg/mL; range, 0.49-26.13 
pg/mL) was significantly lower than the level at diagnosis (median 10.45 pg/mL;
3.04-54.86 pg/mL; P = .021).
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that EGFR-TKIs may suppress systemic
inflammation and promote tumor shrinkage. The network of pro-inflammatory
cytokines was affected by EGFR-TKI treatment for NSCLC. In addition, the clinical
outcomes of EGFR-TKI treatment were influenced by the status of the plasma
pro-inflammatory cytokines at diagnosis.

DOI: 10.1186/1756-0500-6-139 
PMCID: PMC3637543
PMID: 23566546  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


800. Cancer Sci. 2013 Jul;104(7):904-11. doi: 10.1111/cas.12171. Epub 2013 May 15.

Cisplatin influences acquisition of resistance to molecular-targeted agents
through epithelial-mesenchymal transition-like changes.

Kurokawa M(1), Ise N, Omi K, Goishi K, Higashiyama S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, Ehime University Graduate
School of Medicine, Ehime, Japan.

Chemotherapy with platinum agents is the standard of care for non-small-cell lung
cancer (NSCLC); however, novel molecular-targeted agents like gefitinib have been
approved for advanced NSCLCs, including recurrent cases previously treated with
platinum-based chemotherapy. Although these agents show antitumor activity
through distinct mechanisms and elicit positive initial responses, tumors
invariably develop resistance. Recent studies have revealed mechanisms by which
both types of agents induce acquired resistance. However, little is known about
whether first-line treatment with either type of agent affects cancer cell
susceptibility and development of resistance against subsequent treatment with
the other. Using in vitro drug-resistant NSCLC cell models, we provide evidence
that acquired cisplatin resistance may reduce the sensitivity of cancer cells to 
subsequent treatment with a molecular-targeted agent. In addition, first-line
cisplatin treatment influenced the mechanism by which cancer cells developed
resistance to subsequent treatment with a molecular-targeted agent. The influence
of cisplatin on acquisition of resistance to a molecular-targeted agent was
associated with epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT)-like alterations such as 
increased expression of mesenchymal markers, morphological change, and AXL
tyrosine kinase-mediated increased cell motility. Our findings indicate that the 
influence of platinum-based chemotherapy on molecular-targeted therapies and the 
involvement of EMT and EMT-related effectors should be considered when developing
therapeutic strategies using antitumor agents, especially in the context of
sequential therapy.

© 2013 Japanese Cancer Association.

DOI: 10.1111/cas.12171 
PMID: 23566288  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


801. Ann Oncol. 2013 Aug;24(8):2080-7. doi: 10.1093/annonc/mdt127. Epub 2013 Apr 4.

Primary resistance to epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase
inhibitors (TKIs) in patients with non-small-cell lung cancer harboring
TKI-sensitive EGFR mutations: an exploratory study.

Lee JK(1), Shin JY, Kim S, Lee S, Park C, Kim JY, Koh Y, Keam B, Min HS, Kim TM, 
Jeon YK, Kim DW, Chung DH, Heo DS, Lee SH, Kim JI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul,
Korea.

BACKGROUND: The mechanism of primary resistance to epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) in EGFR-mutant non-small-cell
lung cancer (NSCLC) has not been clearly understood.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Eleven patients exhibiting primary resistance (disease
progression <3 months) were identified among 197 consecutive NSCLC patients with 
TKI-sensitive EGFR mutations who received EGFR TKIs at Seoul National University 
Hospital. Treatment-naïve tumors were examined for concurrent genetic alterations
using fluorescence in situ hybridization and targeted deep sequencing of
cancer-related genes. Deletion polymorphism of Bcl-2-interacting mediator of cell
death (BIM) gene was examined to validate its predictive role for TKI outcome.
RESULTS: The median progression-free survival (PFS) for patients receiving EGFR
TKIs was 11.9 months, and the response rate 78.8%. Among the 11 patients
exhibiting primary resistance, a de novo T790M mutation was identified in one
patient, and two exhibited mesenchymal-epithelial transition amplification and
anaplastic lymphoma kinase fusion. Targeted deep sequencing identified no
recurrent, coexistent drivers of NSCLC. Survival analysis revealed that patients 
with recurrent disease after surgery had a longer PFS than those with initial
stage IV disease. However, BIM deletion polymorphism, line of treatment, EGFR
genotype, and smoking were not predictive of PFS for EGFR TKIs.
CONCLUSIONS: We identified coexistent genetic alterations of cancer-related genes
that could explain primary resistance in a small proportion of patients. Our
result suggests that the mechanism of primary resistance might be heterogeneous.

DOI: 10.1093/annonc/mdt127 
PMID: 23559152  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


802. PLoS One. 2013;8(3):e60317. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0060317. Epub 2013 Mar 26.

miR-146a inhibits cell growth, cell migration and induces apoptosis in non-small 
cell lung cancer cells.

Chen G(1), Umelo IA, Lv S, Teugels E, Fostier K, Kronenberger P, Dewaele A,
Sadones J, Geers C, De Grève J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, First Affiliated Hospital, Guangxi Medical
University, Nanning, Guangxi, People's Republic of China.

Aberrant expression of microRNA-146a (miR-146a) has been reported to be involved 
in the development and progression of various types of cancers. However, its role
in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) has not been elucidated. The aim of this
study was to investigate the contribution of miR-146a to various aspects of the
malignant phenotype of human NSCLCs. In functional experiments, miR-146a
suppressed cell growth, induced cellular apoptosis and inhibited EGFR downstream 
signaling in five NSCLC cell lines (H358, H1650, H1975, HCC827 and H292).
miR-146a also inhibited the migratory capacity of these NSCLC cells. On the other
hand, miR-146a enhanced the inhibition of cell proliferation by drugs targeting
EGFR, including both TKIs (gefitinib, erlotinib, and afatinib) and a monoclonal
antibody (cetuximab). These effects were independent of the EGFR mutation status 
(wild type, sensitizing mutation or resistance mutation), but were less potent
compared to the effects of siRNA targeting of EGFR. Our results suggest that
these effects of miR-146a are due to its targeting of EGFR and NF-κB signaling.
We also found, in clinical formalin fixed paraffin embedded (FFPE) lung cancer
samples, that low expression of miR-146a was correlated with advanced clinical
TNM stages and distant metastasis in NSCLC (P<0.05). The patients with high
miR-146a expression in their tumors showed longer progression-free survival (25.6
weeks in miR-146a high patients vs. 4.8 weeks in miR-146a low patients, P<0.05). 
miR-146a is therefore a strong candidate prognostic biomarker in NSCLC. Thus
inducing miR-146a might be a therapeutic strategy for NSCLC.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0060317 
PMCID: PMC3608584
PMID: 23555954  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


803. PLoS One. 2013;8(3):e59314. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0059314. Epub 2013 Mar 21.

Gefitinib or erlotinib as maintenance therapy in patients with advanced stage
non-small cell lung cancer: a systematic review.

Chen X(1), Liu Y, Røe OD, Qian Y, Guo R, Zhu L, Yin Y, Shu Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, the First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical
University, Nanjing, China.

BACKGROUND: Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase inhibitors
(TKI), gefitinib and erlotinib have been tested as maintenance therapy in
patients with advanced non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC). The studies are quite 
heterogenous regarding study size and populations, and a synopsis of these data
could give some more insight in the role of maintenance therapy with TKI.
METHODS: In September 2012 we performed a search in the pubmed, EMBASE and
Cochrane library databases for randomized phase III trials exploring the role of 
gefitinib or erlotinib in advanced non-small cell lung cancer. Through a rigorous
selection process with specific criteria, five trials (n = 2436 patients) were
included for analysis. Standard statistical methods for meta-analysis were
applied.
RESULTS: TKIs (gefitinib and erlotinib) significantly increased progression-free 
survival (PFS) [hazard ratio (HR) 0.63, 95% confidence interval (CI) 0.50-0.76,
I(2) = 78.1%] and overall survival (HR 0.84, 95% CI 0.76-0.93, I(2) = 0.0%)
compared with placebo or observation. The PFS benefit was consistent in all
subgroups including stage, sex, ethnicity, performance status, smoking status,
histology, EGFR mutation status, and previous response to chemotherapy. Patients 
with clinical features such as female, never smoker, adenocarcinoma, Asian
ethnicity and EGFR mutation positive had more pronounced PFS benefit. Overall
survival benefit was observed in patients with clinical features such as female, 
non-smoker, smoker, adenocarcinoma, and previous stable to induction
chemotherapy. Severe adverse events were not frequent. Main limitations of this
analysis are that it is not based on individual patient data, and not all studies
provided detailed subgroups analysis.
CONCLUSIONS: The results show that maintenance therapy with erlotinib or
gefitinib produces a significant PFS and OS benefit for unselected patients with 
advanced NSCLC compared with placebo or observation. Given the less toxicity of
TKIs than chemotherapy and simple oral administration, this treatment strategy
seems to be of important clinical value.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0059314 
PMCID: PMC3605444
PMID: 23555654  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


804. Oncogenesis. 2013 Mar 25;2:e39. doi: 10.1038/oncsis.2013.4.

A mechanism of resistance to gefitinib mediated by cellular reprogramming and the
acquisition of an FGF2-FGFR1 autocrine growth loop.

Ware KE(1), Hinz TK, Kleczko E, Singleton KR, Marek LA, Helfrich BA, Cummings CT,
Graham DK, Astling D, Tan AC, Heasley LE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Craniofacial Biology, School of Dental Medicine, University of
Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, CO, USA.

Despite initial and often dramatic responses of epidermal growth factor receptor 
(EGFR)-addicted lung tumors to the EGFR-specific tyrosine kinase inhibitors
(TKIs), gefitinib and erlotinib, nearly all develop resistance and relapse. To
explore novel mechanisms mediating acquired resistance, we employed
non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cell lines bearing activating mutations in
EGFR and rendered them resistant to EGFR-specific TKIs through chronic adaptation
in tissue culture. In addition to previously observed resistance mechanisms
including EGFR-T790M 'gate-keeper' mutations and MET amplification, a subset of
the seven chronically adapted NSCLC cell lines including HCC4006, HCC2279 and
H1650 cells exhibited marked induction of fibroblast growth factor (FGF) 2 and
FGF receptor 1 (FGFR1) mRNA and protein. Also, adaptation to EGFR-specific TKIs
was accompanied by an epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) as assessed by
changes in CDH1, VIM, ZEB1 and ZEB2 expression and altered growth properties in
Matrigel. In adapted cell lines exhibiting increased FGF2 and FGFR1 expression,
measures of growth and signaling, but not EMT, were blocked by FGFR-specific
TKIs, an FGF-ligand trap and FGFR1 silencing with RNAi. In parental HCC4006
cells, cell growth was strongly inhibited by gefitinib, although drug-resistant
clones progress within 10 days. Combined treatment with gefitinib and AZD4547, an
FGFR-specific TKI, prevented the outgrowth of drug-resistant clones. Thus,
induction of FGF2 and FGFR1 following chronic adaptation to EGFR-specific TKIs
provides a novel autocrine receptor tyrosine kinase-driven bypass pathway in a
subset of lung cancer cell lines that are initially sensitive to EGFR-specific
TKIs. The findings support FGFR-specific TKIs as potentially valuable additions
to existing targeted therapeutic strategies with EGFR-specific TKIs to prevent or
delay acquired resistance in EGFR-driven NSCLC.

DOI: 10.1038/oncsis.2013.4 
PMCID: PMC3641357
PMID: 23552882  [PubMed]


805. Anticancer Drugs. 2013 Aug;24(7):731-5. doi: 10.1097/CAD.0b013e32836100d7.

Phase I and pharmacokinetic study of bexarotene in combination with gefitinib in 
the third-line treatment of non-small-cell lung cancer: brief report.

Padda SK(1), Chhatwani L, Zhou L, Jacobs CD, Lopez-Anaya A, Wakelee HA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Oncology, Stanford Cancer Institute,
Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305-5826, USA.

Gefitinib (an epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor) and
bexarotene (a rexinoid) affect similar oncogenic pathways and are both
metabolized through cytochrome P450 CYP3A4. We studied the combination of
bexarotene and gefitinib in the third-line treatment of advanced non-small-cell
lung cancer to examine pharmacokinetic interactions and establish the maximum
tolerated dose. This was a single-institution, nonrandomized, open-label, phase I
clinical trial with a standard 3+3 dose escalation. Three patients were enrolled 
at each dose level on the basis of pharmacokinetic analysis with dose level 1
including gefitinib (Iressa) 250 mg oral daily and bexarotene (Targretin) 400
mg/m oral daily and dose level +1 including gefitinib 500 mg oral daily and
bexarotene 400 mg/m oral daily. Patients received gefitinib alone for 2 weeks to 
allow for steady state and thereafter, bexarotene was added. In dose level 1, two
of three patients had undetectable gefitinib levels at day 15 for unknown
reasons. However, the peak levels on day 29 for all three patients receiving 250 
mg of gefitinib with bexarotene are lower than published peak levels. Among the
three patients in dose level +1, ∼40% lower gefitinib plasma concentrations were 
noted on day 29 compared with day 15 along with a mean 44% reduction in area
under the plasma concentration-time curve from 0 to 24 h (AUC0-24). Bexarotene
appears to lower the C max and AUC0-24 of gefitinib through cytochrome P450
CYP3A4. Our results have pharmacokinetic implications for ongoing trials that
combine bexarotene with other small molecules in the era of personalized cancer
therapy.

DOI: 10.1097/CAD.0b013e32836100d7 
PMID: 23552470  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


806. Tumori. 2013 Jan-Feb;99(1):3e-5e. doi: 10.1700/1248.13802.

Gefitinib in non-small cell lung carcinoma: a case report of an unusual side
effect and complete response in advanced disease.

Laterza MM(1), Chiurazzi B, Brangi M, Riccardi F, Cartenì G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology Studies, Second University of Naples, Napels,
Italy. marilena_laterza@yahoo.it

Gefitinib is a tyrosine kinase inhibitor, indicated in advanced non-small cell
lung cancer in all lines of treatment for patients harboring EGFR mutations. It
has a favorable toxicity profile but may induce unexpected adverse effects, such 
as an infiammatory reaction in the bladder. We report a rare case of hemorrhagic 
cystitis, an unusual side effect, in a patient with non-small cell lung cancer
treated with gefitinib, which did not compromise the clinical response.

DOI: 10.1700/1248.13802 
PMID: 23549019  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


807. Lung Cancer. 2013 Aug;81(2):280-7. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2013.03.004. Epub 2013 
Mar 26.

Tumor response and health-related quality of life in clinically selected patients
from Asia with advanced non-small-cell lung cancer treated with first-line
gefitinib: post hoc analyses from the IPASS study.

Wu YL(1), Fukuoka M, Mok TS, Saijo N, Thongprasert S, Yang JC, Chu DT, Yang JJ,
Rukazenkov Y.

Author information: 
(1)Guangdong Lung Cancer Institute, Guangdong General Hospital & Guangdong
Academy of Medical Sciences, Guangzhou, China. syylwu@live.cn

BACKGROUND: In IPASS (NCT00322452), progression-free survival (PFS, primary
endpoint) was significantly longer with first-line gefitinib versus
carboplatin/paclitaxel in never/light ex-smokers with advanced pulmonary
adenocarcinoma in Asia, both in the overall intent-to-treat (ITT) population and 
in the EGFR mutation-positive subgroup. To further characterize the clinical
relevance of these data, we investigated objective response rate (ORR) and
health-related quality of life (HRQoL) in patients treated with gefitinib.
METHODS: Objective response was assessed (RECIST) 6-weekly (previously reported).
Post hoc assessments included median time to response, median duration of
response and change in tumor size. The analysis of response population included
those patients treated with gefitinib who responded (n = 262 from ITT; n = 94
from EGFR mutation-positive subgroup). The percentage of patients with
deterioration in HRQoL (Functional Assessment of Cancer Therapy-Lung [FACT-L],
Trial Outcome Index [TOI]) and symptoms (Lung Cancer Subscale [LCS]) at 4 months 
post-randomization was analyzed according to progression status (EFQ population
grouped by progressors/non-progressors in both treatment arms). The ORR (ITT) and
incidence of skin rash/acne (evaluable-for-safety) were summarized.
RESULTS: In patients whose tumors responded to gefitinib, median time to response
was 6.1 weeks in the ITT population (n = 262) and 6.0 weeks in the EGFR
mutation-positive subgroup (n = 94); median duration of response was 9.7 and 8.7 
months in these groups, respectively. There was significant tumor shrinkage with 
gefitinib. A greater percentage of patients in the EFQ population whose tumors
progressed experienced deterioration in HRQoL and symptoms at 4 months versus
patients whose tumors did not progress (FACT-L 33.7% vs 16.3%; TOI 33.7% vs
13.2%; LCS 31.7% vs 15.5%). In the gefitinib arm of the EFS population, incidence
of rash was 75.8% and 68.1% in EGFR mutation-positive and -negative subgroups,
respectively (with ORR for the gefitinib arm of the ITT 71.2% vs 1.1%,
respectively).
CONCLUSIONS: Patients whose tumors responded to first-line gefitinib experienced 
significant tumor shrinkage and a rapid, durable response. Deterioration in HRQoL
and lung cancer symptoms at 4 months post-randomization was found to be
associated with tumor progression, highlighting the role of patient-reported
outcomes in the evaluation of advanced NSCLC disease. Rash was not supported as a
predictive marker of response to gefitinib.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2013.03.004 
PMID: 23540718  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


808. Transl Lung Cancer Res. 2013 Apr;2(2):122-7. doi:
10.3978/j.issn.2218-6751.2013.02.02.

HER2 driven non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC): potential therapeutic approaches.

Garrido-Castro AC(1), Felip E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Oncology Department, Vall d'Hebron University Hospital, Barcelona,
Spain.

Oncogenic driver mutations identified in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) have 
triggered the development of drugs capable of interfering in intracellular
signaling pathways involved in tumorigenesis. Tyrosine kinase inhibitors, such as
erlotinib or gefitinib, have demonstrated promising results in patients with
advanced NSCLC that harbor EGFR mutations. Human epidermal growth factor 2
(HER2/ERBB2/neu) is a member of the ERBB family of tyrosine kinase receptors, and
is activated by homodimerization or heterodimerization with other ERBB receptors.
Deregulation of HER2 gene, by overexpression and/or gene amplification has been
proved important in breast and gastric cancer, in which overexpression of HER2
confers greater response to specific anti-HER2 treatment, including trastuzumab. 
In lung carcinogenesis, HER2 mutations are thought to be more clinically relevant
than overexpression or gene amplification. HER2 mutations in NSCLC, described
exclusively in adenocarcinoma histology, are present in approximately 4% of this 
subset of lung cancer patients, suggesting that thousands of patients per year
may possibly benefit from targeted therapy. Therefore, we conclude that
systematic genotypic testing in this subgroup of NSCLC patients should include
detection of HER2 mutations. In addition, clinical trials with standard antiHER2 
agents and new investigational therapies are ongoing, with promising preliminary 
results, as illustrated in this review, although further research is warranted in
this field.

DOI: 10.3978/j.issn.2218-6751.2013.02.02 
PMCID: PMC4369854
PMID: 25806223  [PubMed]


809. Mol Cancer Res. 2013 Jul;11(7):759-67. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-12-0652. Epub
2013 Mar 27.

Activation of the FGF2-FGFR1 autocrine pathway: a novel mechanism of acquired
resistance to gefitinib in NSCLC.

Terai H(1), Soejima K, Yasuda H, Nakayama S, Hamamoto J, Arai D, Ishioka K,
Ohgino K, Ikemura S, Sato T, Yoda S, Satomi R, Naoki K, Betsuyaku T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, School of Medicine, Keio University, 35
Shinanomachi, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 160-8582, Japan.

Patients with non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) that harbors epidermal growth
factor receptor (EGFR) mutations initially respond to EGFR-tyrosine kinase
inhibitors (TKI) but eventually experience relapse. Acquired resistance to
EGFR-TKIs is strongly associated with patient mortality. Thus, elucidation of the
mechanism of acquired resistance to EGFR-TKIs is of great importance. In this
study, gefitinib-resistant cell line models were established by long-term
exposure to gefitinib using the gefitinib-sensitive lung cancer cell lines, PC9
and HCC827. Expression analyses indicated that both FGFR1 and FGF2 were increased
in PC9 gefitinib-resistant (PC9 GR) cells as compared with PC9 naïve (PC9 na)
cells. Importantly, proliferation of gefitinib-resistant cells was dependent on
the FGF2 -FGFR1 pathway. Mechanistically, inhibition of either FGF2 or FGFR1 by
siRNA or FGFR inhibitor (PD173074) restored gefitinib sensitivity in PC9 GR
cells. These data suggest that FGF2 -FGFR1 activation through an autocrine loop
is a novel mechanism of acquired resistance to EGFR-TKIs.

©2013 AACR

DOI: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-12-0652 
PMID: 23536707  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


810. PLoS One. 2013;8(3):e59708. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0059708. Epub 2013 Mar 18.

Synergistic effect of afatinib with su11274 in non-small cell lung cancer cells
resistant to gefitinib or erlotinib.

Chen G(1), Noor A, Kronenberger P, Teugels E, Umelo IA, De Grève J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, First Affiliated Hospital, Guangxi Medical
University, Nanning Guangxi, People's Republic of China.

Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) and c-MET receptors are expressed on many
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cells. Current single agent therapeutic
targeting of a mutant EGFR has a high efficacy in the clinic, but is not
curative. Here, we investigated the combination of targeting EGFR and c-MET
pathways in NSCLC cells resistant to receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs), 
using RNA interference and inhibition by TKIs. Different NSCLC cell lines with
various genomic characteristics (H358, H1650 and H1975) were transfected with
EGFR-specific-siRNA, T790M-specific-siRNA, c-MET siRNA or the combination.
Subsequently EGFR TKIs (gefitinib, erlotinib or afatinib) or monoclonal antibody 
cetuximab were combined respectively with the c-MET-specific TKI su11274 in NSCLC
cell lines. The cell proliferation, viability, caspase-3/7 activity and apoptotic
morphology were monitored by spectrophotometry, fluorimetry and fluorescence
microscopy. The combined effect of EGFR TKIs, or cetuximab and su11274, was
evaluated using a combination index. The results showed that the cell lines that 
were relatively resistant to EGFR TKIs, especially the H1975 cell line containing
the resistance T790M mutation, were found to be more sensitive to
EGFR-specific-siRNA. The combination of EGFR siRNA plus c-MET siRNA enhanced cell
growth inhibition, apoptosis induction and inhibition of downstream signaling in 
EGFR TKI resistant H358, H1650 and H1975 cells, despite the absence of activity
of the c-MET siRNA alone. EGFR TKIs or cetuximab plus su11274 were also
consistently superior to either agent alone. The strongest biological effect was 
observed when afatinib, an irreversible pan-HER blocker was combined with
su11274, which achieved a synergistic effect in the T790M mutant H1975 cells. In 
a conclusion, our findings offer preclinical proof of principle for combined
inhibition as a promising treatment strategy for NSCLC, especially for patients
in whom current EGFR-targeted treatments fail due to the presence of the
T790M-EGFR-mutation or high c-MET expression.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0059708 
PMCID: PMC3601073
PMID: 23527257  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


811. Oncol Rep. 2013 Jun;29(6):2486-92. doi: 10.3892/or.2013.2357. Epub 2013 Mar 22.

Combined inhibition of the EGFR and mTOR pathways in EGFR wild-type non-small
cell lung cancer cell lines with different genetic backgrounds.

Huang Y(1), Chen Y, Mei Q, Chen Y, Yu S, Xia S.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Center of Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University 
of science and technology, Wuhan, Hubei 430030, PR China.

The epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) signaling pathway is widely activated
in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). However, only a subset of patients with
NSCLC is sensitive to EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs), particularly those 
with activating EGFR mutations. The mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) is
another key intracellular kinase that plays an important role in the onset and
progression of many types of human cancers and has been proven to be linked with 
primary resistance to EGFR inhibitors. We performed this study to investigate the
combined inhibitory effect of the mTOR inhibitor RAD001 and the EGFR-TKI
gefitinib in three EGFR wild-type NSCLC cell lines: A549 (PIK3CA wild‑type),
NCI-H460 (PIK3CA mutant) and NCI-H661 (PIK3CA wild-type). All cell lines
demonstrate a poor response to gefitinib, but have a different genetic status for
PIK3CA. We used MTT assays to measure cell proliferation. Flow cytometry was used
to assess the effects on apoptosis and cell cycle arrest. Immunoblot analysis was
used to evaluate the expression of downstream proteins. Treatment of RAD001 alone
showed dose-dependent growth inhibition in all three cell lines. The combination 
of gefitinib and RAD001 resulted in synergistic growth inhibition in NCI-H460
cells, but only an additive inhibitory effect on A549 and NCI-H661 cells.
Exposure to the combination of RAD001 and gefitinib led to a significant
reduction in phosphorylated AKT levels in NCI-H460 cells; however, this was not
noted in the other two cell lines. In conclusion, our data indicate that the dual
inhibition of the EGFR/mTOR pathways may be a promising approach to treat EGFR
wild-type NSCLC; however, this may be dependent on the PIK3CA mutation status.

DOI: 10.3892/or.2013.2357 
PMID: 23525575  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


812. J Indian Med Assoc. 2012 Jul;110(7):474-6, 493.

Skin rash as a surrogate marker of clinical response of targeted therapy using
gefitinib in advanced or metastatic non-small-cell lung cancer--a retrospective
study.

Acharyya S(1), Sau S, Dasgupta P, Chakraborty A, Gangopadhyay S.

Author information: 
(1)Bankura Sammilani Medical College, Bankura 722102.

This retrospective review of a single institution case series study was conducted
to correlate the objective response and skin rash of gefitinib in patients with
advanced or metastatic non-small-cell lung cancer(NSCLC). One hundred and
forty-nine patients with advanced or metastatic NSCLC were treated with gefitinib
(250 mg/day) as second line systemic therapy. Baseline patient characteristics
were: More than 75% patients were above 50 years of age, males 64%;
adenocarcinoma 52%. Sixty-one patients were excluded from the analysis due to
varying reasons; only 88 remaining in the analysis. Partial response was observed
in 15 patients (17%), and 34 patients (38.6%) had stable disease. The rest 39
patients (44.3%) had progressive disease on gefitinib therapy. There was a
significantly longer median time to progression (TTP) of 7 months in females as
compared to 5 months in males (p = 0.001). A highly significant association (p = 
0.001) was observed between the grade of skin toxicity and the median time to
disease progression, with the median TTP being 4 months in patients experiencing 
no skin toxicity as compared to 7 months with those grade 2 skin toxicity and 12 
months with grade 3 skin toxicity. Gender (p = 0.003), and presence of skin
toxicity (p = 0.0001) were having significant difference in median overall
survival. On multivariate testing of the same using Cox regression analysis only 
presence of skin toxicity (p = 0.012) and gender (p = 0.003) was found to
significant factors. Thus it can be concluded that occurrence of skin rash and
female gender were associated with improved survival with gefitinib for recurrent
NSCLC patients.


PMID: 23520673  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


813. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol. 2013 May;71(5):1325-34. doi:
10.1007/s00280-013-2132-y. Epub 2013 Mar 21.

Inhibiting proliferation of gefitinib-resistant, non-small cell lung cancer.

Sudo M(1), Chin TM, Mori S, Doan NB, Said JW, Akashi M, Koeffler HP.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Science Institute, National University of Singapore, Singapore,
Singapore. makotosudo@live.jp

PURPOSE: Sensitivity to a tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) is correlated with the 
presence of somatic mutations that affect the kinase domain of epidermal growth
factor receptor (EGFR). Development of resistance to TKI is a major therapeutic
problem in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Aim of this study is to identify
agents that can overcome TKI resistance in NSCLC.
METHODS: We used a carefully selected panel of 12 NSCLC cell lines to address
this clinical problem. Initially, the cell lines were treated with a variety of
10 compounds. Cellular proliferation was measured via MTT assay. We then focused 
on the gefitinib-resistant, EGFR mutant cell lines [H1650: exon 19 and PTEN
mutations; and H1975: exons 20 (T790M) and 21 (L858R)] to identify agents that
could overcome TKI resistance.
RESULTS: Both 17-DMAG (Hsp90 inhibitor) and belinostat (histone deacetylase
inhibitor, HDACi) effectively decreased the growth of almost all NSCLC lines.
Also, belinostat markedly decreased the expression of EGFR and phospho-Akt in the
cells. Combination of 17-DMAG and belinostat synergistically inhibited in vitro
proliferation of these cells. Furthermore, both agents and their combination
almost completely prevented TKI-resistant tumor formation (EGFR T790M mutation)
in a xenograft model.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that the combination of 17-DMAG and belinostat 
should be examined in a clinical trial for TKI-resistant NSCLC cell.

DOI: 10.1007/s00280-013-2132-y 
PMCID: PMC3636434
PMID: 23515752  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


814. Zhongguo Fei Ai Za Zhi. 2013 Mar;16(3):138-43. doi:
10.3779/j.issn.1009-3419.2013.03.04.

[Efficacy of icotinib for advanced non-small cell lung cancer patients with EGFR 
status identified].

[Article in Chinese]

Song Z(1), Yu X, Cai J, Shao L, Lin B, He C, Zhang B, Zhang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemotherapy, Zhejiang Cancer Hospital, Hangzhou 310022, China.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: As the first epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine 
kinase inhibitor (EGFR-TKI) in China, icotinib shows promising anticancer
activity in vitro and vivo. The phase III clinical study (ICOGEN) showed that
icotinib has a good efficacy and tolerability in Chinese patients with advanced
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) compared with gefitinib. This retrospective
study aims to evaluate the efﬁcacy and tolerability of icotinib monotherapy for
advanced NSCLC patients with EGFR mutation and wild-type patients in our
hospital.
METHODS: Patients with advanced NSCLC who were treated with icotinib in Zhejiang 
Cancer Hospital were retrospectively analyzed from August, 2011 to August, 2012. 
Survival was estimated using Kaplan-Meier analysis and Log-rank tests.
RESULTS: The clinical data of 49 patients (13 with wild-type and 36 with EGFR
mutation) with NSCLC were enrolled in the current study. The patients' overall
objective response rate (ORR) was 58.3% and the disease control rate (DCR) in 36 
EGFR mutation patients was 88.9%. The ORR was 7.7% and DCR was 53.8% in the
wild-type patients. Median progression-free survival (PFS) with icotinib
treatment in EGFR mutation patients was 9.5 months and 2.2 months in wild-type
patients (P<0.001). Nineteen patients with EGFR mutation received icotinib as
first-line and 17 in further-line treatment. The PFS was 9.5 months in the
first-line and 8.5 months for second-line or further-line patients (P=0.41).
Median overall survival (OS) in EGFR mutation patients was not reached, but was
12.6 months in wild-type patients. Most of the drug-related adverse events were
mild (grade I or II) and reversible with no grade IV toxicity.
CONCLUSIONS: Icotinib monotherapy showed signiﬁcant antitumor activity in
advanced NSCLC EGFR mutation patients. The toxicity was well tolerated and
acceptable.

DOI: 10.3779/j.issn.1009-3419.2013.03.04 
PMID: 23514942  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


815. Cancer Lett. 2013 Jul 28;335(2):472-8. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2013.03.008. Epub
2013 Mar 16.

α-Lipoic acid-induced inhibition of proliferation and met phosphorylation in
human non-small cell lung cancer cells.

Michikoshi H(1), Nakamura T, Sakai K, Suzuki Y, Adachi E, Matsugo S, Matsumoto K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Material Engineering, Graduate School of Natural Science and
Technology, Kanazawa University, Kakuma-machi, Kanazawa 920-1192, Japan.

α-Lipoic acid (α-LA), a naturally occurring anti-oxidant and co-factor for
metabolic enzymes, suppresses the growth of different types of tumor cells. The
mechanisms that are responsible for these results, however, remain to be
elucidated. In the present study, we investigated the effects of α-LA on the
proliferation and activation status of definitive receptor tyrosine kinases,
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) and Met/hepatocyte growth factor (HGF)
receptor, in gefitinib-sensitive human non-small cell lung cancer cells harboring
EGFRs with an activating mutation. The enantiomers R-α-LA and S-α-LA suppressed
cell proliferation and increased the level of reactive oxygen species in HCC-827 
and PC-9 human non-small cell lung cancer cells in an indistinguishable
dose-dependent fashion. A phospho-receptor tyrosine kinase array and cell cycle
analysis indicated that α-LA decreased tyrosine phosphorylation levels of EGFR,
ErbB2, and Met, and this was associated with an inhibition in the cell-cycle
transition from the G1 phase to the S phase without inducing apoptosis.
Gefitinib, an inhibitor for EGFR tyrosine kinase, inhibited EGFR tyrosine
phosphorylation/activation and proliferation of the cells. Instead, the addition 
of HGF induced Met tyrosine phosphorylation, and this was associated with a
resistance to gefitinib-induced growth inhibition, which meant a gain in
proliferative ability. In the presence of gefitinib and HGF, the addition of α-LA
suppressed Met tyrosine phosphorylation, and this was associated with an
inhibition in cell growth. These results suggest that the suppression of tyrosine
phosphorylation/activation of growth factor receptors that is critical for the
proliferation of human non-small cell lung cancer cells is a mechanism by which
α-LA exerts growth inhibition for cancer cells.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.canlet.2013.03.008 
PMID: 23507559  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


816. J Chin Med Assoc. 2013 Mar;76(3):173-5. doi: 10.1016/j.jcma.2013.01.012. Epub
2013 Feb 27.

Both gefitinib and erlotinib induced drug-related interstitial lung disease in a 
patient with pulmonary adenocarcinoma.

Wang KF(1), Chang CY, Chang SC, Liu YC, Yuan MK, Yang YH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, National Yang-Ming University Hospital,
Yilan, Taiwan, ROC.

Treatment for non-small-cell lung cancer with gefitinib and erlotinib is
efficacious. However, while many studies have reported on gefitinib-related
interstitial lung disease (ILD), less published data are available regarding
erlotinib-induced ILD. Here, we report a case of pulmonary adenocarcinoma who
developed ILD due to gefitinib initially and erlotinib thereafter. The two
episodes of ILD were treated successfully with the discontinuation of the
tyrosine kinase inhibitors and high-dose intravenous corticosteroids.

Copyright © 2013. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jcma.2013.01.012 
PMID: 23497972  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


817. Onco Targets Ther. 2013;6:135-43. doi: 10.2147/OTT.S23165. Epub 2013 Mar 5.

Afatinib: emerging next-generation tyrosine kinase inhibitor for NSCLC.

Nelson V(1), Ziehr J, Agulnik M, Johnson M.

Author information: 
(1)Robert H Lurie Comprehensive Cancer Center of Northwestern University,
Chicago, IL, USA.

The discovery of epidermal growth-factor receptor (EGFR)-activating mutations and
the introduction of oral EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors (EGFR-TKIs) have
expanded the treatment options for patients with non-small cell lung cancer. The 
first two reversible EGFR-TKIs, erlotinib and gefitinib, are approved for use in 
the first-line setting in patients with known EGFR-activating mutations and in
the second- and third-line settings for all NSCLC patients. These
first-generation EGFR-TKIs improve progression-free survival when compared to
chemotherapy in patients with EGFR-activating mutations in the first-line
setting. However, nearly all patients develop resistance to EGFR-directed agents.
There is a need for further therapy options for patients with disease progression
after treatment with reversible EGFR-TKIs. Afatinib is an irreversible ErbB
family blocker that inhibits EGFR, HER2, and HER4. In vitro and in vivo, afatinib
have shown increased inhibition of the common EGFR-activating mutations as well
as the T790M resistance mutation when compared to erlotinib and gefitinib.
Clinically, afatinib has been evaluated in the LUX-Lung series of trials, with
improvement in progression-free survival reported in patients with
EGFR-activating mutations in both first- and second-/third-line settings when
compared to chemotherapy. Further investigation is needed to determine the
precise role that afatinib will play in the treatment of patients with non-small 
cell lung cancer and EGFR-activating mutations.

DOI: 10.2147/OTT.S23165 
PMCID: PMC3594037
PMID: 23493883  [PubMed]


818. Lung Cancer. 2013 Jun;80(3):344-6. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2013.02.014. Epub 2013 
Mar 13.

Successful treatment with erlotinib of severe neutropenia induced by gefitinib in
a patient with advanced non-small cell lung cancer.

Araya T(1), Kasahara K, Demura Y, Matsuoka H, Nishitsuji M, Nishi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Ishikawa Prefectural Central Hospital, 2-1
Kuratsuki-Higashi, Kanazawa 920-8530, Japan. komatsu_alone@yahoo.co.jp

Neutropenia is a rare side effect of gefitinib and was scarcely reported in many 
large-scale randomized phase III trials using gefitinib monotherapy as first-line
treatment. A 77-year-old female was referred to our institution due to abnormal
shadow of the right lung, diagnosed by CT scan and biopsy histopathology as
adenocarcinoma of the lung (cT3N1M1b). Mutation analysis with PCR-Invader assay
of tumor DNA samples revealed short in-frame deletion in exon 19. Based on the
diagnosis, first-line treatment was initiated using oral gefitinib (250 mg,
daily). During the initial 27 days of gefitinib therapy, the only side effect was
a mild skin rash. After 28 days, there was marked tumor shrinkage, indicative of 
a partial response to gefitinib; however, grade 4 neutropenia was also detected. 
The patient was switched to the oral erlotinib monotherapy (150 mg/day) as
second-line chemotherapy with careful monitoring of neutropenia. Discontinuation 
of the gefitinib, without the need for granulocyte colony-stimulating factor
support, was successful in allowing the neutrophils and leukocytes counts to
recover to normal by day 47. The patient continued oral erlotinib for more than 9
months and there has been no evidence of neutropenia, leukopenia, or disease
progression. Clinicians should be aware that gefitinib-induced neutropenia in
patients with non-small cell lung cancer can be treated successful by switching
to erlotinib.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2013.02.014 
PMID: 23489558  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


819. Lung Cancer. 2013 Jun;80(3):235-41. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2013.01.018. Epub 2013
Feb 26.

Uncommon epidermal growth factor receptor mutations in non-small cell lung cancer
and their mechanisms of EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors sensitivity and
resistance.

Massarelli E(1), Johnson FM, Erickson HS, Wistuba II, Papadimitrakopoulou V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic and Head and Neck Medical Oncology, The University of
Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Therapy targeted against the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) has
demonstrated dramatic tumor responses and favorable clinical outcomes in a select
group of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients whose tumors harbor EGFR
activating mutations. The best characterized of the mutations conferring
sensitivity to EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) are deletions in exon 19
and a point mutation in exon 21 (L858R). Likewise, the most common mutation that 
confers resistance is the T790M point mutation. However several other mutations
have been reported and several have been characterized as regards their role in
sensitivity or resistance to EGFR TKIs. Resistance to the EGFR TKIs erlotinib and
gefitinib, and the newer irreversible EGFR TKIs is a problem of fundamental
importance. Recognition of the presence and significance of specific EGFR
mutations is important for appropriate therapeutic implementation of EGFR TKIs
and research and development of mutation-specific inhibitors. We summarize the
literature and present an overview of the subject of less common EGFR mutations
and their clinical significance, with an emphasis on EGFR TKI sensitivity or
resistance.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2013.01.018 
PMID: 23485129  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


820. Drugs. 2013 Mar;73(4):357-69. doi: 10.1007/s40265-013-0020-8.

First-line management of EGFR-mutated advanced lung adenocarcinoma: recent
developments.

Liao BC(1), Lin CC, Yang JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, National Taiwan University Hospital Hsin-Chu 
Branch, Hsinchu, Taiwan.

Gefitinib and erlotinib are small-molecule reversible tyrosine kinase inhibitors 
(TKIs) of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR). Objective responses have been 
observed frequently in patients with non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
harbouring activating EGFR mutations, the most common being deletions in exon 19 
and the exon 21 L858R mutation. EGFR mutations are prevalent in female patients, 
those who have never smoked, those of Asian ethnicity and those who have
adenocarcinoma histology. Given the efficacy of EGFR TKIs in advanced NSCLC in
the salvage setting, and their favourable toxicity profile compared with
conventional chemotherapy, there is considerable interest in evaluating their
efficacy in the first-line treatment of advanced NSCLC. To date, there have been 
several phase II and phase III studies that have examined the efficacy of
first-line single-agent EGFR TKIs in unselected, clinically selected or
molecularly selected populations. Here we review and compare the differences in
these phase III trials. Most phase III trials chose progression-free survival
(PFS) rather than overall survival (OS) as their primary endpoint. PFS was
prolonged but OS was not. The recent development of novel irreversible EGFR TKIs,
such as afatinib and dacomitinib, is also reviewed.

DOI: 10.1007/s40265-013-0020-8 
PMID: 23479407  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


821. JNMA J Nepal Med Assoc. 2012 Apr-Jun;52(186):66-71.

Gefitinib monotherapy in advanced non-small-cell lung cancer: a retrospective
analysis.

Shrestha S(1), Joshi P.

Author information: 
(1)Om cancer Care Center, Om hospital and Research Center, Chabahil, Kathmandu,
Nepal.

INTRODUCTION: There is no published data in Nepal regarding the use of gefitinib 
in patients with non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Therefore, a retrospective
analysis was conducted to evaluate the response and toxicity profile of Gefitinib
alone in patients with advanced NSCLC and unknown epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR) status.
METHODS: A single institutional retrospective study was conducted for the period 
from January 2004 to December 2006 involving patients with locally advanced or
metastatic NSCLC who received gefitinib as monotherapy Primary objective was to
evaluate the objective tumor response rate.
RESULTS: A total of 36 patients with advanced NSCLC who received gefitinib 250 mg
orally once daily as 1st, 2nd, 3rd, and 4th line treatment in 7, 14, 9, and 6
patients respectively were included in the analysis. Comparable number of
patients pertaining to sex, smoking status, and tumor histology were included.
The overall response rate at 3 months was 60% including 47% in males and 68% in
females. After one month 38% and 6.6% patients with adenocarcinoma and squamous
histology respectively responded to gefitinib therapy. The median
progression-free survival was 5.7 months. Toxicities were generally mild with
diarrhea, rash and pruritus being the most commonly observed side effects.
CONCLUSION: In this single-center experience, gefitinib demonstrated clinically
significant response in overall population and provided good palliation in
pretreated patients.


PMID: 23478732  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


822. Future Oncol. 2013 Mar;9(3):327-45. doi: 10.2217/fon.13.6.

Moving towards molecular-guided treatments: erlotinib and clinical outcomes in
non-small-cell lung cancer patients.

Santarpia M(1), De Pas TM, Altavilla G, Spaggiari L, Rosell R.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Oncology Unit of Respiratory Tract & Sarcomas, New Drugs Development
Division, European Institute of Oncology, Milan, Italy. c.santarpia@hotmail.com

Erlotinib is an orally administered small-molecule inhibitor of EGF receptor
(EGFR) tyrosine kinase that is approved for the treatment of non-small-cell lung 
cancer (NSCLC) and pancreatic cancer. Erlotinib was first approved for the
treatment of unselected NSCLC patients with advanced disease after failure of at 
least one prior chemotherapy regimen, and it was subsequently demonstrated to
also confer a significant clinical benefit as maintenance therapy after
first-line platinum-based chemotherapy. In all clinical studies, erlotinib
treatment was associated with a good safety profile. Activating mutations in the 
EGFR gene have emerged as the strongest predictive marker of response to tyrosine
kinase inhibitors, erlotinib and gefitinib, independently of other clinical and
molecular features. Results from recently published, randomized Phase III trials 
showed that first-line erlotinib significantly prolongs progression-free survival
in patients with advanced EGFR mutation-positive NSCLC with favorable
tolerability, compared with standard chemotherapy. EGFR mutation testing is a
crucial factor in the decision-making process regarding the most appropriate
initial treatment option for patients. Specific molecular alterations in crucial 
genes have been discovered and associated with resistance to erlotinib, limiting 
its efficacy. New targeted agents and combined-treatment strategies are now under
evaluation in clinical trials of NSCLC patients following progression to tyrosine
kinase inhibitors.

DOI: 10.2217/fon.13.6 
PMID: 23469969  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


823. Oncol Rep. 2013 May;29(5):1975-82. doi: 10.3892/or.2013.2298. Epub 2013 Feb 21.

Blockade of DNA methylation enhances the therapeutic effect of gefitinib in
non-small cell lung cancer cells.

Li XY(1), Wu JZ, Cao HX, Ma R, Wu JQ, Zhong YJ, Feng JF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemotherapy, Jiangsu Cancer Hospital and Research Institute,
Nanjing, Jiangsu 210009, PR China.

The sensitivity of lung cancer to epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR)-tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) has been found to be associated with
mutations in the tyrosine kinase domain of EGFR. However, not all mutations are
sensitive to gefitinib. While CpG island methylation in the promoter region of
the EGFR gene and transcriptional silencing are common in solid tumors, the role 
of the EGFR gene promoter methylation in affecting resistance to TKIs in
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) remains unknown. In this study, we examined
the correlation between EGFR gene promoter methylation and the therapeutic effect
of gefitinib in NSCLC cells. Three NSCLC cell lines with different EGFR mutation 
statuses and levels of sensitivity to EGFR-TKIs were used in this study: H1650
(del E746-A750), H1299 (wild-type EGFR) and PC-9 (del E746-A750). Cells were
treated with gefitinib or 5-aza-2'-deoxy cytidine (5-aza-CdR), a methylation
inhibitor, alone or in combination. Subsequently, the methylation status of the
EGFR gene promoter was examined by methylation-specific PCR (MSP). Cell survival 
and apoptosis assays were performed using the Cell Counting Kit-8 (CCK-8) and
flow cytometry. In addition, western blot analysis and quantitative real-time PCR
were used to examine the expression levels of EGFR protein and mRNA. Our study
showed that the promoter region of the EGFR gene in PC-9 cells was unmethylated, 
and that the cells were sensitive to gefitinib. By contrast, the promoter region 
of the EGFR gene in the H1650 and H1299 cells was methylated, and the cells were 
resistant to gefitinib. Of note, the combination treatment with 5-aza-CdR and
gefitinib further enhanced the growth inhibitory effects and led to the induction
of apoptosis, while a significant reduction in the expression of EGFR protein and
mRNA was observed in the H1650 and H1299 cells. These results suggest that
blockade of DNA methylation may enhance the antitumor effects of EGFR-TKIs and
gefitinib in NSCLC cells. Thus, EGFR gene promoter methylation may be a potential
mechanism for acquired resistance to gefitinib.

DOI: 10.3892/or.2013.2298 
PMID: 23440266  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


824. J Thorac Oncol. 2013 Mar;8(3):e27-9. doi: 10.1097/JTO.0b013e318282e047.

Does T790M disappear? Successful gefitinib rechallenge after T790M disappearance 
in a patient with EGFR-mutant non-small-cell lung cancer.

Hata A, Katakami N, Kaji R, Fujita S, Imai Y.

Comment on
    J Thorac Oncol. 2012 Sep;7(9):1369-81.

DOI: 10.1097/JTO.0b013e318282e047 
PMID: 23407566  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


825. Cancer Cell Int. 2013 Feb 13;13(1):15. doi: 10.1186/1475-2867-13-15.

Association of integrin beta1 and c-MET in mediating EGFR TKI gefitinib
resistance in non-small cell lung cancer.

Ju L(1), Zhou C.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Institute, Department of Oncology, Shanghai Pulmonary Hospital, Tongji 
University, Medical School, 507 Zhengmin Road, Shanghai, 200433, China.
caicunzhou@yahoo.com.cn.

Although some patients are initially sensitive to epidermal growth factor
receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors (EGFR TKIs), resistance invariably develops. 
Therefore, it's very important to study the molecular mechanism of this
resistance. In our previous study we found that integrin beta1 can induce EGFR
TKIs resistance in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cells. Here we analyzed the
association of integrin beta1 and c-MET that is a recognized mechanism of EGFR
TKIs resistance in NSCLC to demonstrate the mechanism of integrin beta1 related
EGFR TKIs resistance. We found that the ligands of integrin beta1 and c-MET could
synergistically promote cell proliferation and their inhibitors could
synergistically improve the sensitivity to gfitinib, increase apoptosis, and
inhibit the downstream signal transduction: focal adhesion kinase (FAK) and AKT. 
On the other hand, ligand-dependent activation of integrin beta1 could induce
EGFR TKIs resistance through activating c-MET and its downstream signals. Thus,
it can be concluded that there is crosstalk between integrin beta1 and c-MET and 
integrin beta1 mediates EGFR TKI resistance associating with c-MET signaling
pathway in non-small cell lung cancer.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2867-13-15 
PMCID: PMC3583715
PMID: 23402326  [PubMed]


826. Curr Pharm Des. 2013;19(30):5333-43.

New molecular targets in the treatment of NSCLC.

Schettino C(1), Bareschino MA, Sacco PC, Maione P, Rossi A, Casaluce F, Sgambato 
A, Gridelli C.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Oncology, S. G. Moscati Hospital, Avellino, Italy.

Lung cancer is the leading cause of mortality world-wide. Non Small Cell Lung
Cancer (NSCLC) is a particularly aggressive cancer, the optimum management of
which is still being determined. In the next years modest survival improvement
can be expected by chemotherapy. Advances in understanding of the molecular
pathogenesis of lung cancer have led to the identification of several specific
targets for therapeutic agents. Targeting the epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR) has played a central role in advancing NSCLC research, treatment, and
patient outcome over the last several years. In lung cancer, 10-15% of NSCLC
contain activating mutations in the EGFR kinase conferring hypersensitivity to
the oral TKIs gefitinib and erlotinib, have been demonstrated to be important
predictive factors when selecting patients to be treated with these two agents.
More recently, another molecular abnormality, the translocation of the anaplastic
lymphoma kinase (ALK) gene that drives NSCLC in a different group of patients has
been found in 4 to 5% of NSCLC. The rearrangement results in an EML4 - AKL fusion
gene, which increases ALK activity. Inhibitors of ALK kinase have been developed 
and investigated. Crizotinib, an orally ALK and met proto-oncogene (MET)
inhibitor, was very well tolerated and produced dramatic antitumor activity in
early-stage trials which facilitated a faster than normal move into late-stage
trials for EML4-ALK -positive NSCLC patients treatment. In a phase III randomized
that showed progression free survival benefit as compared to chemotherapy in
second-line setting. Several novel selective inhibitors of ALK kinase are
currently in preclinical or early clinical testing. Since the discovery that Met 
pathway is one of the most frequently dysregulated pathways in human cancer, Met 
inhibitors, with varying kinase selectivity profiles ranging from highly
selective to multi-targeted have been studied in the clinic and good progress has
been achieved. A number of studies suggest that the PI3K/Akt signaling pathway is
central to NSCLC growth and survival. Given the importance of activated PI3K
signaling in cancer, several PI3K inhibitors are currently one of the most recent
drug targets in oncology, with several small molecules in early stages of
clinical development. This review will focus on the role of EGFR, ALK, MET, and
PI3K inhibitors in the treatment of NSCLC.


PMID: 23394083  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


827. Cancer Sci. 2013 May;104(5):584-9. doi: 10.1111/cas.12125. Epub 2013 Mar 28.

Sensitivity and kinase activity of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) exon
19 and others to EGFR-tyrosine kinase inhibitors.

Furuyama K(1), Harada T, Iwama E, Shiraishi Y, Okamura K, Ijichi K, Fujii A, Ota 
K, Wang S, Li H, Takayama K, Giaccone G, Nakanishi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute for Diseases of the Chest, Graduate School of Medical
Sciences, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan.

The presence of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) somatic mutations in
non-small-cell lung cancer patients is associated with response to treatment with
EGFR-tyrosine kinase inhibitors, such as gefitinib and erlotinib. More than 100
mutations in the kinase domain of EGFR have been identified. In particular there 
are many variations of deletion mutations in exon 19. In this study, using yellow
fluorescent protein-tagged fragments of the EGFR intracellular domain, we
examined the differences in sensitivity to gefitinib, erlotinib and afatinib
between several exon 19 mutants and other common EGFR mutations. We also used
serum of patients undergoing treatment with EGFR-tyrosine kinase inhibitors in
this system. In addition, we examined the relative kinase activity of these
mutants by measuring relative fluorescent intensity after immunofluorescence
staining. We found that both sensitivity to EGFR-tyrosine kinase inhibitors and
relative kinase activity differed among several EGFR mutations found in the same 
region of the kinase domain. This study underscores the importance of reporting
the clinical outcome of treatment in relation to different EGFR mutations.

© 2013 Japanese Cancer Association.

DOI: 10.1111/cas.12125 
PMID: 23387505  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


828. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2013 May;1833(5):1028-40. doi:
10.1016/j.bbamcr.2013.01.029. Epub 2013 Feb 4.

p300/CBP dependent hyperacetylation of histone potentiates anticancer activity of
gefitinib nanoparticles.

Kaur J(1), Tikoo K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, National Institute of
Pharmaceutical Education and Research, Punjab, India.

Gefitinib is an Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase
inhibitor, approved for patients with non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). In this
report we demonstrate that gefitinib loaded PLGA nanoparticles (GNPs), in
comparison to gefitinib, exhibited higher anti-cancer activity on A549 lung
carcinoma cells and A431 skin carcinoma cells. Increased inhibition of pEGFR in
both the cell types explains its higher anti-cancer activity. Interestingly,
gefitinib resistant, H1975 (T790M EGFR mutant) lung carcinoma cells was also
found to be sensitive to GNPs. Our data shows that GNPs hyperacetylate histone H3
in these cells, either directly or indirectly, which may account for the
augmented cell death. GNPs were proficient in activating histone
acetyltransferases (p300/CBP), which in turn induces the expression of p21 and
cell cycle arrest. Furthermore, inhibition of histone acetyltransferases by
garcinol results in alleviation of cell death caused by GNPs. In addition to
this, nuclear intrusion of GNPs results in the inhibition of NO production in
nucleus, possibly through nuclear EGFR, which might be responsible for preventing
cell proliferation in resistant cells. To best of our knowledge, we provide first
evidence that GNPs potentiate cell death by activating p300/CBP histone
acetyltransferases.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbamcr.2013.01.029 
PMID: 23384777  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


829. Cancer Res. 2013 Apr 15;73(8):2428-34. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-3479. Epub
2013 Feb 4.

EGFR-TKI resistance due to BIM polymorphism can be circumvented in combination
with HDAC inhibition.

Nakagawa T(1), Takeuchi S, Yamada T, Ebi H, Sano T, Nanjo S, Ishikawa D, Sato M, 
Hasegawa Y, Sekido Y, Yano S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Oncology, Cancer Research Institute, Kanazawa University, 
Kanazawa, Ishikawa, Japan.

BIM (BCL2L11) is a BH3-only proapoptotic member of the Bcl-2 protein family. BIM 
upregulation is required for apoptosis induction by EGF receptor (EGFR) tyrosine 
kinase inhibitors (EGFR-TKI) in EGFR-mutant forms of non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC). Notably, a BIM deletion polymorphism occurs naturally in 12.9% of East
Asian individuals, impairing the generation of the proapoptotic isoform required 
for the EGFR-TKIs gefitinib and erlotinib and therefore conferring an inherent
drug-resistant phenotype. Indeed, patients with NSCLC, who harbored this host BIM
polymorphism, exhibited significantly inferior responses to EGFR-TKI treatment
than individuals lacking this polymorphism. In an attempt to correct this
response defect in the resistant group, we investigated whether the histone
deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor vorinostat could circumvent EGFR-TKI resistance in
EGFR-mutant NSCLC cell lines that also harbored the BIM polymorphism. Consistent 
with our clinical observations, we found that such cells were much less sensitive
to gefitinib-induced apoptosis than EGFR-mutant cells, which did not harbor the
polymorphism. Notably, vorinostat increased expression in a dose-dependent manner
of the proapoptotic BH3 domain-containing isoform of BIM, which was sufficient to
restore gefitinib death sensitivity in the EGFR mutant, EGFR-TKI-resistant cells.
In xenograft models, while gefitinib induced marked regression via apoptosis of
tumors without the BIM polymorphism, its combination with vorinostat was needed
to induce marked regression of tumors with the BIM polymorphism in the same
manner. Together, our results show how HDAC inhibition can epigenetically restore
BIM function and death sensitivity of EGFR-TKI in cases of EGFR-mutant NSCLC
where resistance to EGFR-TKI is associated with a common BIM polymorphism.

©2013 AACR.

DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-3479 
PMID: 23382048  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


830. Transl Lung Cancer Res. 2013 Feb;2(1):40-9. doi:
10.3978/j.issn.2218-6751.2012.12.05.

Irreversible EGFR-TKIs: dreaming perfection.

Landi L(1), Cappuzzo F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Istituto Toscano Tumori, Ospedale Civile, Viale Alfieri 36, 57100 Livorno,
Italy.

In the last few years, the treatment of Non-Small-Cell Lung Cancer (NSCLC) has
dramatically changed. Presence of activating mutations in the Epidermal Growth
Factor Receptor (EGFR) identified a particular group of NSCLC patients with
different clinical characteristics and outcome. For EGFR mutant patients
first-generation EGFR tyrosine-kinase inhibitors (TKIs), such as gefitinib and
erlotinib, represent the best therapeutic option in first, second and maintenance
setting. Unfortunately, all patients develop acquired resistance and despite an
initial benefit, virtually all patients progress due to the development of
resistance. Several molecular mechanisms are responsible for acquired resistance 
and the two prominent are the up-regulation of the downstream signal by
mesenchymal-epidermal transition (MET) amplification and the emergence of T790M
EGFR gatekeeper mutation. Preclinical and early clinical trials suggested a
potential efficacy of a new class of panHER inhibitor, also called irreversible
or covalent inhibitor, in overcome acquired resistance related to T790M.
Afatinib, dacomitinib and neratinib, are currently in development in different
setting and results from these trials are awaited in order to establish the role 
of these new compounds in the treatment of NSCLC.

DOI: 10.3978/j.issn.2218-6751.2012.12.05 
PMCID: PMC4367645
PMID: 25806203  [PubMed]


831. BMC Cancer. 2013 Jan 29;13:39. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-13-39.

Gene-guided gefitinib switch maintenance therapy for patients with advanced EGFR 
mutation-positive non-small cell lung cancer: an economic analysis.

Zhu J(1), Li T, Wang X, Ye M, Cai J, Xu Y, Wu B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy, Shanghai Chest Hospital, affiliated with the School of
Medicine, Shanghai Jiaotong University, West Huaihai Road 241, Shanghai, China.

BACKGROUND: Maintenance therapy with gefitinib notably improves survival in
patients with advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and EGFR
mutation-positive tumors, but the economic impact of this practice is unclear.
METHODS: A decision-analytic model was developed to simulate 21-day patient
transitions in a 10-year time horizon. The clinical data were primarily obtained 
from the results of a pivotal phase III trial that assessed gefitinib maintenance
treatment in patients with advanced NSCLC. The cost data were derived from the
perspective of the Chinese health care system. The primary outcome was the
incremental cost-effectiveness ratio (ICER) at a willingness-to-pay (WTP)
threshold of 3 times the per capita GDP of China. Sensitivity analyses were used 
to explore the impact of uncertainty regarding the results. The impact of the
gefitinib patient assistance program (GPAP) was evaluated.
RESULTS: After EGFR genotyping, gefitinib maintenance treatment for advanced
NSCLC with EGFR mutations increased the life expectancy by 0.74 years and 0.46
QALYs compared with routine follow-up at an additional cost of $26,149.90 USD
($7,178.20 with the GPAP). The ICER for gefitinib maintenance was $57,066.40 and 
$15,664.80 per QALY gained (at a 3% discount rate) without and with the GPAP,
respectively. The utility of progression free survival, the hazard ratio of
progression-free survival for gefitinib treatment and the cost of gefitinib per
dose were the three factors that had the greatest influence on the results.
CONCLUSIONS: These results indicate that gene-guided maintenance therapy with
gefitinib with the GPAP might be a cost-effective treatment option.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2407-13-39 
PMCID: PMC3568065
PMID: 23360224  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


832. Clin Transl Oncol. 2013 May;15(5):343-57. doi: 10.1007/s12094-012-0964-2. Epub
2013 Jan 29.

An update on molecularly targeted therapies in second- and third-line treatment
in non-small cell lung cancer: focus on EGFR inhibitors and anti-angiogenic
agents.

Majem M(1), Pallarès C.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Oncology Service, Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau, c/Sant Antoni 
Maria Claret 167, 08025, Barcelona, Spain. mmajem@santpau.cat

Docetaxel, pemetrexed and epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase
inhibitors (gefitinib and erlotinib) are recommended second-line therapy for
advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients with disease progression.
Although erlotinib is the only recommended third-line therapy, several drugs are 
being used in the clinic. Recent studies have focused on combining targeted
agents with approved therapies, including broad-spectrum multikinase inhibitors
targeting multiple ErbB Family receptors and multitargeted anti-angiogenic agents
targeting the vascular endothelial growth factor receptor, platelet-derived
growth factor receptor and fibroblast growth factor receptor pathways. Here, we
review targeted therapies that are being evaluated in second- and third-line
settings in NSCLC, including the ErbB Family Blocker afatinib (BIBW 2992),
multityrosine kinase inhibitors (pelitinib [EKB-56]), neratinib [HKI-272],
canertinib [CI-1033], lapatinib [GW-572016], dacomitinib [PF-299804]) and
multitargeted anti-angiogenic agents (vandetanib [ZD6474], sunitinib [SU11248],
sorafenib [BAY43-9006], nintedanib [BIBF1120], axitinib [AG-013736], cediranib
[AZD2171], motesanib [AMG 706], linifanib [ABT869] and pazopanib [GW786034]).

DOI: 10.1007/s12094-012-0964-2 
PMID: 23359171  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


833. Neoplasia. 2013 Jan;15(1):61-72.

Molecular mechanisms underlying the antitumor activity of 3-aminopropanamide
irreversible inhibitors of the epidermal growth factor receptor in non-small cell
lung cancer.

Galvani E(1), Giovannetti E, Saccani F, Cavazzoni A, Leon LG, Dekker H, Alfieri
R, Carmi C, Mor M, Ardizzoni A, Petronini PG, Peters GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of Parma, Parma, 
Italy.

Overcoming the emergence of acquired resistance to clinically approved epidermal 
growth factor receptor (EGFR) inhibitors is a major challenge in the treatment of
advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). The aim of this study was to
investigate the effects of a series of novel compounds affecting viability of
NSCLC NCI-H1975 cells (carrying the EGFR T790M mutation). The inhibition of the
autophosphorylation of EGFR occurred at nanomolar concentrations and both UPR1282
and UPR1268 caused a significant induction of apoptosis. Targeting of EGFR and
downstream pathways was confirmed by a peptide substrate array, which highlighted
the inhibition of other kinases involved in NSCLC cell aggressive behavior.
Accordingly, the drugs inhibited migration (about 30% vs. control), which could
be, in part, explained also by the increase of E-cadherin expression.
Additionally, we observed a contraction of the volume of H1975 spheroids,
associated with the reduction of the cancer stem-like cell hallmark CD133. The
activity of UPR1282 was retained in H1975 xenograft models where it determined
tumor shrinkage (P < .05) and resulted well tolerated compared to canertinib. Of 
note, the kinase activity profile of UPR1282 on xenograft tumor tissues showed
overlapping results with respect to the activity in H1975 cells, unraveling the
inhibition of kinases involved in pivotal proliferation and invasive signaling
pathways. In conclusion, UPR1282 and UPR1268 are effective against various
processes involved in malignancy transformation and progression and may be
promising compounds for the future treatment of gefitinib-resistant NSCLCs.


PMCID: PMC3556939
PMID: 23359111  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


834. Clin Cancer Res. 2013 Feb 15;19(4):845-54. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-12-2621.
Epub 2013 Jan 23.

Caspase-independent cell death is involved in the negative effect of EGF receptor
inhibitors on cisplatin in non-small cell lung cancer cells.

Yamaguchi H(1), Hsu JL, Chen CT, Wang YN, Hsu MC, Chang SS, Du Y, Ko HW, Herbst
R, Hung MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Oncology, The University of Texas MD
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

PURPOSE: Results of multiple clinical trials suggest that EGF receptor (EGFR)
tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKI) exhibit negative effects on platinum-based
chemotherapy in patients with lung cancer with wild-type (WT) EGFR, but the
underlying molecular mechanisms are still uncertain. Studies that identify the
mechanism of how TKIs negatively affect patients with WT EGFR are important for
future development of effective strategies to target lung cancer. Thus, we
returned to in vitro study to investigate and determine a possible explanation
for this phenomenon.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We investigated the effects of TKIs and cisplatin on
caspase-independent cell death (CID) and the role of CID in the efficacy of each 
drug and the combination. Furthermore, we studied the mechanism by which EGFR
signaling pathway is involved in CID. Finally, on the basis of the identified
mechanism, we tested the combinational effects of cisplatin plus suberoylanilide 
hydroxamic acid (SAHA) or erastin on CID.
RESULTS: We found that gefitinib inhibited cisplatin-induced CID but not
caspase-dependent apoptotic cell death. In WT EGFR cells, gefitinib not only
inhibited CID but also failed to induce apoptosis, therefore compromising the
efficacy of cisplatin. Inhibition of EGFR-ERK/AKT by gefitinib activates FOXO3a, 
which in turn reduces reactive oxygen species (ROS) and ROS-mediated CID. To
overcome this, we showed that SAHA and erastin, the inducers of ROS-mediated CID,
strongly enhanced the effect of cisplatin in WT EGFR cells.
CONCLUSION: TKI-mediated inhibition of CID plays an important role in the
efficacy of chemotherapy. Moreover, FOXO3a is a key factor in the negative
effects of TKI by eliminating cisplatin-induced ROS.

©2012 AACR.

DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-12-2621 
PMCID: PMC3703145
PMID: 23344263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


835. J Thorac Oncol. 2013 Mar;8(3):259-69. doi: 10.1097/JTO.0b013e318279e942.

Combined treatment with erlotinib and a transforming growth factor-β type I
receptor inhibitor effectively suppresses the enhanced motility of
erlotinib-resistant non-small-cell lung cancer cells.

Serizawa M(1), Takahashi T, Yamamoto N, Koh Y.

Author information: 
(1)Drug Discovery and Development Division, and †Division of Thoracic Oncology,
Shizuoka Cancer Center Hospital, Shizuoka, Japan.

INTRODUCTION: : Despite an initial dramatic response to the epidermal growth
factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) gefitinib and erlotinib,
the majority of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients with EGFR-activating 
mutations develop acquired resistance. Therefore, there is an urgent need to
elucidate the unknown mechanisms and biological behaviors of EGFR TKI-resistant
lung tumors. We investigated the motility of EGFR TKI-resistant cells, as these
characteristics are relevant to cancer metastasis.
METHODS: : Erlotinib-resistant PC-9ER cells were generated from PC-9 NSCLC cells,
which harbor an EGFR-activating mutation, and used in this study. We investigated
the involvement of the transforming growth factor beta (TGF-β) pathway in cell
motility, and tested the effects of erlotinib and TGF-β type I receptor (RI)
inhibition on cell motility.
RESULTS: : PC-9ER cells displayed enhanced motility resulting from autocrine
activation of the TGF-β pathway. Increased TGF-β2 secretion resulting from TGF-β2
up-regulation at the transcriptional level was suggested to be responsible for
the phosphorylation of Smad2 and the subsequently elevated transcriptional
regulatory activity in PC-9ER cells. The motility of PC-9ER cells was suppressed 
by treatment with either the TGF-βRI inhibitor LY364947 or erlotinib, and greater
suppression was observed when used in combination. LY364947 or erlotinib exerted 
no growth-inhibitory effects, suggesting that motility and growth are driven by
different signaling pathways in PC-9ER cells.
CONCLUSIONS: : Our results imply that blockade of the TGF-β signaling pathway
combined with continuous EGFR TKI treatment will be beneficial in preventing
metastasis in patients with EGFR TKI-resistant NSCLC without the EGFR T790M
resistance mutation.

DOI: 10.1097/JTO.0b013e318279e942 
PMID: 23334091  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


836. Clin Lung Cancer. 2013 Jul;14(4):322-32. doi: 10.1016/j.cllc.2012.12.001. Epub
2013 Jan 16.

Preclinical rationale for PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway inhibitors as therapy for
epidermal growth factor receptor inhibitor-resistant non-small-cell lung cancer.

Gadgeel SM(1), Wozniak A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Molecular Therapeutics Program, Karmanos Cancer
Institute, Detroit, MI, USA. gadgeels@karmanos.org

Mutations in the epidermal growth factor receptor gene (EGFR) are frequently
observed in non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC), occurring in about 40% to 60% of 
never-smokers and in about 17% of patients with adenocarcinomas. EGFR tyrosine
kinase inhibitors (TKIs), such as gefitinib and erlotinib, have transformed
therapy for patients with EGFR-mutant NSCLC and have proved superior to
chemotherapy as first-line treatment for this patient group. Despite these
benefits, there are currently 2 key challenges associated with EGFR inhibitor
therapy for patients with NSCLC. First, only 85% to 90% of patients with the EGFR
mutation derive clinical benefit from EGFR TKIs, with the remainder demonstrating
innate resistance to therapy. Second, acquired resistance to EGFR TKIs inevitably
occurs in patients who initially respond to therapy, with a median duration of
response of about 10 months. Mutant EGFR activates various subcellular signaling 
cascades, including the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)/Akt/mammalian target
of rapamycin (mTOR) pathway, which demonstrates maintained activity in a variety 
of TKI-resistant cancers. Given the fundamental role of the PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway
in tumor oncogenesis, proliferation, and survival, PI3K pathway inhibitors have
emerged as a possible solution to the problem of EGFR TKI resistance. However
resistance to EGFR TKIs is associated with considerable heterogeneity and
complexity. Preclinical experiments investigating these phenomena suggest that in
some patients, PI3K inhibitors will have to be paired with other targeted agents 
if they are to be effective. This review discusses the preclinical data
supporting PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway inhibitor combinations in EGFR TKI-resistant
NSCLC from the perspective of the various agents currently being investigated in 
clinical trials.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cllc.2012.12.001 
PMID: 23332287  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


837. J Thorac Oncol. 2013 Feb;8(2):229-37. doi: 10.1097/JTO.0b013e3182773fce.

Symptom and quality of life benefit of afatinib in advanced non-small-cell lung
cancer patients previously treated with erlotinib or gefitinib: results of a
randomized phase IIb/III trial (LUX-Lung 1).

Hirsh V(1), Cadranel J, Cong XJ, Fairclough D, Finnern HW, Lorence RM, Miller VA,
Palmer M, Yang JC.

Author information: 
(1)McGill University Health Center, Montreal, Canada. hirsh@muhc.mcgill.ca

BACKGROUND: Patient-reported symptom and health-related quality of life (HRQoL)
benefit of afatinib, a novel, irreversible, ErbB Family Blocker, was investigated
in a double-blind, randomized, phase IIb/III trial (LUX-Lung 1).
METHODS: Five hundred and eighty-five patients with lung adenocarcinoma (stage
IIIb/IV), who had progressed after chemotherapy (1-2 lines) and at least 12 weeks
of erlotinib or gefitinib, were randomized (2:1) to receive either afatinib plus 
best supportive care (BSC) or placebo plus BSC. Symptom and HRQoL benefit were
measured using the lung cancer-specific European Organisation for Research and
Treatment of Cancer (QLQ-C30/LC13) and EuroQol (EQ-5D) questionnaires.
Non-small-cell lung cancer-related symptoms (cough, dyspnea, and pain) were
prespecified using three preplanned analyses (percentage of patients
improved/worsened/stable, change in scores over time, and time to deterioration
of scores).
RESULTS: Compared with patients on placebo, a significantly higher proportion of 
afatinib-treated patients showed an improvement in cough (p < 0.0001), dyspnea (p
= 0.006), and pain (p < 0.0001). Afatinib also significantly improved the mean
scores over time for cough (p < 0.0001), dyspnea (p = 0.0161), and pain (p =
0.0056); significantly delayed the time to deterioration for cough (p < 0.001);
and showed a trend in delaying dyspnea (p = 0.170) and pain (p = 0.287).
Consistent with the adverse-event profile of afatinib, a significantly (p < 0.05)
higher proportion of afatinib-treated patients showed worsening of diarrhea, sore
mouth, dysphagia, and appetite scores. However, compared with placebo, afatinib
significantly (p < 0.05) improved QoL assessed with the EQ-5D questionnaire and
global health status/QoL, physical functioning, and fatigue, which were assessed 
with the European Organisation for Research and Treatment of Cancer
questionnaires.
CONCLUSION: In the LUX-Lung 1 trial, the addition of afatinib to BSC
significantly improved non-small-cell lung cancer-related symptoms (cough,
dyspnea, and pain), fatigue, physical functioning, and HRQoL and significantly
delayed time to deterioration of cough.

DOI: 10.1097/JTO.0b013e3182773fce 
PMID: 23328549  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


838. Zhongguo Fei Ai Za Zhi. 2013 Jan;16(1):33-7. doi:
10.3779/j.issn.1009-3419.2013.01.06.

[Prospective study on surface-enhanced laser desorption/ionization protein
fingerprinting for diagnosing gene polymorphism leading to drug resistance drift:
sequential therapy with a platinum-based regimen and gefitinib for non-small cell
lung cancer].

[Article in Chinese]

Ji L(1), Pei Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Geriatric Medical Oncology, Shan Xi Da Yi Hospital, Taiyuan
030032.

BACKGROUND: This study aims to observe the long-term effects of sequential
therapy with a platinum-based regimen and gefitinib for non-small cell lung
carcinoma (NSCLC) with failed chemotherapy under the guidance of surface-enhanced
laser desorption/ionization (SELDI).
METHODS: Nine NSCLC patients with failed chemotherapy and ≤15% abundance of M/Z: 
8,693±50H+ were selected. The patients were administered with 250 mg of gefitinib
(p.o., once a day). During the therapy, SELDI was applied every 2 months. If the 
M/Z: 8,693±50H+ abundance was >25%, chemotherapy was applied; if the abundance
was ≤15%, gefitinib (p.o.) was applied. In between, we chose gefitinib according 
to the mass and tumor markers. On the base, we sequentially applied the drug and 
observed the total survival time.
RESULTS: Follow-ups until December 2010 revealed that the median overall survival
time of the nine patients was 27 months (10 months-66 months).
CONCLUSIONS: The treatment benefit ratio and benefit time of anti-NSCLC drugs can
be improved by SELDI fingerprinting.

DOI: 10.3779/j.issn.1009-3419.2013.01.06 
PMID: 23327871  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


839. Zhongguo Fei Ai Za Zhi. 2013 Jan;16(1):1-6. doi:
10.3779/j.issn.1009-3419.2013.01.01.

[The mechanism of gefitinib resistance induced by hepatocyte growth factor in
sensitive non-small cell lung cancer cells in vitro].

[Article in Chinese]

Xuan X(1), An C, Zhou C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Disease, Yanbian University Hospital, Yanji 133000, 
China.

BACKGROUND: Previous studies have reported that Met might be related to gefitinib
resistance in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). The present study aims to
explore the mechanism of hepatocyte growth factor (HGF)-induced gefitinib
resistance in different gene types of sensitive NSCLC in vitro.
METHODS: The PC-9 and H292 cell lines were chosen and induced by HGF. The cell
survival was measured using MTT assay, the cell cycle distribution was measured
using PI assay, and cell apoptosis with an Annexin V-PE assay, respectively. The 
c-Met and p-Met protein expression was determined via Western blot analysis.
RESULTS: Gefitinib inhibited the growth of PC-9 and H292 cells in a
dose-dependent manner. The concentration-survival curves of both cell lines
shifted to the right when induced with HGF. HGF did not affect PC-9 and H292 cell
proliferation. The cell also had a higher cell survival rate when treated with
HGF and gefitinib compared with that under gefitinib alone (P<0.05). The
apoptotic rate and cell cycle progression showed no significant difference
between the HG and G group (P>0.05). HGF stimulated Met phosphorylation in the
PC-9 and H292 cells. Gefitinib inhibited the HGF-induced Met phosphorylation in
PC-9 cells, but not in H292 cells.
CONCLUSIONS: HGF induces gefitinib resistance in PC-9 and H292 cells. HGF-induced
Met phosphorylation may be an important mechanism of gefitinib resistance in
sensitive NSCLC.

DOI: 10.3779/j.issn.1009-3419.2013.01.01 
PMID: 23327866  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


840. Tuberc Respir Dis (Seoul). 2012 Dec;73(6):303-11. doi: 10.4046/trd.2012.73.6.303.
Epub 2012 Dec 28.

Gefitinib in Selected Patients with Pre-Treated Non-Small-Cell Lung Cancer:
Results from a Phase IV, Multicenter, Non-Randomized Study (SELINE).

Lee KH(1), Lee KY, Jeon YJ, Jung MH, Son C, Lee MK, Ryu JS, Yang SH, Lee JC, Kim 
YC, Kim SY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Yeungnam University Medical Center, Yeungnam 
University College of Medicine, Daegu, Korea.

BACKGROUND: This study was designed to analyze the efficacy of gefitinib as a
second-line therapy, according to the clinical characteristics in Korean patients
with non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC).
METHODS: In this Phase IV observational study, we recruited patients, previously 
failed first-line chemotherapy, who had locally advanced or metastatic NSCLC, and
who were found to be either epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)
mutation-positive or satisfied 2 or more of the 3 characteristics:
adenocarcinoma, female, and non-smoker. These patients were administered with
gefitinib 250 mg/day, orally. The primary endpoints were to evaluate the
objective response rate (ORR) and to determine the relationship of ORRs,
depending on each patient's characteristics of modified intent-to-treat
population.
RESULTS: A total of 138 patients participated in this study. One subject achieved
complete response, and 42 subjects achieved partial response (ORR, 31.2%). The
subgroup analysis demonstrated that the ORR was significantly higher in patients 
with EGFR mutation-positive, compared to that of EGFR mutation-negative (45.8%
vs. 14.0%, p=0.0004). In a secondary efficacy variable, the median
progression-free survival (PFS) was 5.7 months (95% confidence interval, 3.9~8.4 
months) and the 6-month PFS and overall survival were 49.6% and 87.9%,
respectively. The most common reported adverse events were rash (34.4%), diarrhea
(26.6%), pruritus (17.5%), and cough (15.6%).
CONCLUSION: Gefitinib was observed in anti-tumor activity with favorable
tolerability profile as a second-line therapy in these selected patients. When
looking at EGFR mutation status, EGFR mutation-positive showed strong association
with gefitinib by greater response and prolonged PFS, compared with that of EGFR 
mutation-negative.

DOI: 10.4046/trd.2012.73.6.303 
PMCID: PMC3538183
PMID: 23319992  [PubMed]


841. Med Oncol. 2013 Mar;30(1):450. doi: 10.1007/s12032-012-0450-2. Epub 2013 Jan 13.

Clinical outcomes in elderly patients administered gefitinib as first-line
treatment in epidermal growth factor receptor-mutated non-small-cell lung cancer:
retrospective analysis in a Nagano Lung Cancer Research Group study.

Tateishi K(1), Ichiyama T, Hirai K, Agatsuma T, Koyama S, Hachiya T, Morozumi N, 
Shiina T, Koizumi T.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, Shinshu University, Matsumoto City,
Japan.

The clinical efficacy and outcomes of gefitinib therapy as a first-line treatment
for elderly patients with non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) with epidermal
growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutations were analyzed retrospectively. We
analyzed chemotherapy-naïve NSCLC patients aged 75 years or older who had EGFR
mutations (exon 19 deletion mutation or L858R), who were initially treated with
gefitinib (250 mg) once daily in Nagano Prefecture. A total of 55 patients (16
men, 39 women) with a median age of 81.1 years (range; 75-94 years) treated
between April 2007 and July 2012 were analyzed. The overall response rate and
disease control rate were 72.7 % (95 % confidence interval (CI); 59.5-82.9 %) and
92.7 % (95 % CI; 82.0-97.6 %), respectively. Median progression-free survival and
overall survival from the start of gefitinib treatment were 13.8 months (95 % CI;
9.9-18.8 months) and 29.1 months (95 % CI; 22.4 months-not reached),
respectively. Two-year survival rate was 59.5 % (95 % CI; 41.0-78.0 %). Major
grade 3 toxicities were skin rash (1.8 %) and increased levels of aspartate
aminotransferase or alanine aminotransferase (7.3 %). First-line treatment with
gefitinib for elderly EGFR-mutated NSCLC patients was effective and well
tolerated. The results suggest that first-line gefitinib should be considered as 
a preferable standard treatment in elderly patients with advanced NSCLC harboring
EGFR mutations.

DOI: 10.1007/s12032-012-0450-2 
PMID: 23315220  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


842. Gene. 2013 Mar 15;517(1):60-4. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2012.12.087. Epub 2013 Jan 9.

Role of EGFR SNPs in survival of advanced lung adenocarcinoma patients treated
with Gefitinib.

Zhang L(1), Yuan X, Chen Y, Du XJ, Yu S, Yang M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei Province, China.

AIM: As a novel molecularly targeting agent for non-small-cell lung cancer
(NSCLC), Gefitinib can block its tyrosine kinase activity of the epidermal growth
factor receptor (EGFR). Genetic variations in EGFR may affect its protein
function or expression and lead to diverse outcomes in NSCLC patients after
Gefitinib therapy. Therefore, this prospective study examined whether EGFR single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) are associated with different survival time in
advanced lung adenocarcinoma patients treated with Gefitinib.
METHODS: One hundred and twenty-eight patients with stage IIIB or IV lung
adenocarcinoma receiving Gefitinib target therapy between 2008 and 2010 were
recruited in this study. Six EGFR haplotype-tagging SNPs were genotyped by the
Sequenom MassArray system. Survival by different genotypes was compared using
Kaplan-Meier methods. Cox proportional hazards models were applied to estimate
the effect of prognostic factors on overall survival (OS) and progression-free
survival (PFS).
RESULTS: After the median 16.6 months of follow-up, the unfavorable EGFR
rs2293347AA or GA genotype was significantly correlated with shorter OS (AA vs.
GG: 2.0 vs. 21.0 months; hazard ratio (HR)=2.44, 95% confidence interval
(CI)=1.06-5.56; P=0.036; GA vs. GG: 15.0 vs. 21.0 months; HR=1.75,
95%CI=1.08-2.86, P=0.025) compared with the favorable rs2293347GG genotype. The
prognostic significance of EGFR rs4947492 polymorphism on OS also existed (GG
carriers vs. AA carriers: median OS=24.6 vs. 14.9 months, HR=0.29,
95%CI=0.10-0.83, P=0.021). No significant associations were found among other
EGFR SNPs and survival.
CONCLUSION: EGFR rs2293347 and rs4947492 SNPs might be potential predictive
markers of OS in advanced lung adenocarcinoma patients treated with Gefitinib.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gene.2012.12.087 
PMID: 23313300  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


843. Clin Lung Cancer. 2013 Jul;14(4):383-9. doi: 10.1016/j.cllc.2012.10.007. Epub
2013 Jan 10.

Tumor burden is predictive of survival in patients with non-small-cell lung
cancer and with activating epidermal growth factor receptor mutations who receive
gefitinib.

Park JH(1), Kim TM, Keam B, Jeon YK, Lee SH, Kim DW, Chung DH, Kim YT, Kim YW,
Heo DS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul,
Republic of Korea.

BACKGROUND: Although activating epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutations
are excellent predictors of gefitinib outcome in non-small-cell lung cancer
(NSCLC), most patients become resistant to gefitinib. Despite our knowledge of
the molecular basis of acquired resistance, clinical predictors have not been
well elucidated. This study was undertaken to evaluate predictors of clinical
outcome in patients with NSCLC and with EGFR mutations treated with gefitinib.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: A total of 170 patients with NSCLC and with EGFR mutations 
received gefitinib as a first-line (n = 50) and a second-line or more (n = 120)
treatment at Seoul National University Hospital. Treatment outcomes were compared
between groups based on clinicopathologic factors, such as treatment line,
metastatic site, and mutation subtype.
RESULTS: Survival outcomes were similar between first-line and second-line or
greater gefitinib treatment (overall response rate, 2P = .832; progression-free
survival [PFS], 2P = .373; and overall survival [OS], 2P = .290). When the number
of metastatic sites was at least 3, significantly reduced survival was observed
(median PFS 8.5 vs. 14.0 months, 2P < .001; median OS 21.4 vs. 25.6 months, 2P = 
.002). In addition, the presence of at least 3 organs with metastases was an
independent predictor of PFS (hazard ratio [HR] 1.97 [95% CI, 1.37-2.85]; 2P <
.001) and OS (HR 2.00 [95% CI, 1.18-3.39]; 2P = .010). Patients who failed to
respond to gefitinib within 6 months of treatment had more lymph node metastases 
and more sites of metastasis than those who responded later.
CONCLUSIONS: Tumor burden, expressed as the number of metastatic sites, is
predictive of inferior survival in patients with NSCLC and with activating EGFR
mutations who are treated with gefitinib.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cllc.2012.10.007 
PMID: 23313171  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


844. Gan To Kagaku Ryoho. 2013 Jan;40(1):79-81.

[Efficacy of low-dose erlotinib against gefitinib-induced hepatotoxicity in a
patient with lung adenocarcinoma harboring EGFR mutations].

[Article in Japanese]

Kitade H(1), Yamada T, Igarashi S, Hokkoku K, Mori M, Shintaku K, Sagawa M, Nakai
M, Yano S.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Pharmacy, Houju Memorial Hospital, Japan.

We report a case of a female in her 80s who was diagnosed with recurrent lung
adenocarcinoma after primary surgery. She was treated with a systemic
chemotherapy regimen consisting of carboplatin plus paclitaxel until the disease 
showed progression. On detection of epidermal growth factor
receptor(EGFR)mutations, we administered gefitinib, an EGFR tyrosine kinase
inhibitor, at a dosage of 250 mg daily. After 6 months of gefitinib therapy,
laboratory findings revealed elevated serum aspartate aminotransferase(AST)and
alanine aminotransferase(ALT)levels(grade 2), indicative of hepatotoxicity.
Gefitinib was discontinued and erlotinib was initiated at a dosage of 50 mg
daily. She continued the therapy for 3 years, during which her disease stabilized
without any further complications or hepatotoxicity. Thus, low-dose erlotinib may
be effective and well tolerated by patients with non-small cell lung cancer
harboring EGFR mutations who are intolerant to gefitinib.


PMID: 23306923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


845. Zhonghua Zhong Liu Za Zhi. 2012 Oct;34(10):780-4. doi:
10.3760/cma.j.issn.0253-3766.2012.10.013.

[Efficacy of erlotinib after the failure of gefitinib in patients with metastasis
of non-small cell lung cancer with unknown EGFR mutation status].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang Y(1), Li JL, Wang ZP, Hao XZ, Wang B, Zhang XR, Shi YK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Cancer Institute and Hospital, Chinese Academy
of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing 100021, China.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the efficacy of erlotinib in patients with metastasis of
non-small cell lung cancer who had benefits from initial gefitinib treatment but 
finally demonstrated resistance, especially in those of unknown EGFR mutation
status, and to compare the efficacy of erlotinib between patients who received
erlotinib immediately after gefitinib failure and those who received chemotherapy
before erlotinib.
METHODS: Forty Chinese patients who had been treated with erlotinib (150 mg
daily) after gefitinib (250 mg daily) failure were evaluated retrospectively. All
of these patients had achieved gefitinib treatment for at least three months with
response of partial remission or stable disease. Among them, 16 patients shifted 
to erlotinib immediately after progression (Group G-E), and the other 24 patients
inserted chemotherapy between gefitinib and erlotinib (Group G-C-E).
RESULTS: In the whole group, the disease control rate (DCR) of erlotinib was
52.5% (21/40) while the objective response rate (RR) was only 10.0% (4/40). The
RR of the group G-E was 6.2% and the group G-C-E was 12.5%, and the DCR was 56.2%
and 50.0% in the two groups, respectively, both without significant differences
(P = 0.638 and P = 0.755). There was no correlation between the efficacy of
erlotinib and that of initial gefitinib in both group G-E and group G-C-E (P =
0.365 and P = 0.658). The median progression-free survival (PFS) and overall
survival (OS) for the erlotinib treatment were 3.0 and 12.0 months in the 40
patients. Statistically no significant difference was observed in PFS (4 months
in the group G-E and 2 months in the group G-C-E, P = 0.768) and OS (12 months in
both Groups, P = 0.510).
CONCLUSIONS: Erlotinib can be considered either immediately after gefitinib
failure or following the insertion of chemotherapy after gefitinib failure in
progressive non-small cell lung cancer patients who initially benefited from
gefitinib.


PMID: 23291074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


846. Case Rep Oncol. 2012 Sep;5(3):644-50. doi: 10.1159/000345956. Epub 2012 Dec 6.

Gastroesphageal variceal hemorrhage induced by metastatic liver tumor of lung
cancer.

Honda T(1), Kobayashi H, Saiki M, Sogami Y, Miyashita Y, Inase N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Yamanashi Prefectural Central Hospital,
Kofu, Japan.

Gastroesophageal variceal hemorrhage is a lethal complication of portal
hypertension. Liver cirrhosis is often the principal cause of the portal
hypertensive state. Malignant tumors coexist with portal hypertension in some
cases. Non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is likely to become metastatic. Liver
is a frequent site of cancer metastasis, but diffuse hepatic sinusoidal
metastasis is uncommon as a metastatic form of NSCLC. This report describes a
patient with gastroesophageal variceal hemorrhage owing to a metastatic liver
tumor of NSCLC. The patient, a male smoker with stage IV NSCLC, was free of any
hepatitis viral infection and had no alcohol addiction. Liver dysfunction and
liver disease had never been pointed out in his medical history. His tumor
harbored an L858R epidermal growth factor receptor mutation. Gefitinib was
initiated but had to be ceased because of interstitial lung disease. Sequential
steroid therapy was effective and bevacizumab-containing chemotherapy was
commenced. Both chemotherapy regimens produced favorable effects against the
metastatic liver tumor, eliciting atrophic change regardless of the
chemotherapy-free interval. One day the patient was admitted to our hospital
because of black stool and hypotension. Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy revealed
a beaded appearance of the gastroesophageal varix with bloody gastric contents.
The portal hypertension might have been caused by changes in portal vein
hemodynamics induced by the conformational changes underlying the favorable
response of the liver tumor to molecular targeted chemotherapy and notable
regression.

DOI: 10.1159/000345956 
PMCID: PMC3531950
PMID: 23275780  [PubMed]


847. Exp Cell Res. 2013 Feb 15;319(4):417-23. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2012.12.018. Epub
2012 Dec 27.

Vandetanib is effective in EGFR-mutant lung cancer cells with PTEN deficiency.

Takeda H(1), Takigawa N, Ohashi K, Minami D, Kataoka I, Ichihara E, Ochi N,
Tanimoto M, Kiura K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Oncology, and Respiratory Medicine, Okayama
University Graduate School of Medicine, Dentistry and Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Okayama 700-8558, Japan.

The effectiveness of vandetanib, an agent that targets RET, VEGFR and EGFR
signaling, against EGFR-mutant lung cancer cells with PTEN loss was investigated.
Two EGFR mutant non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cell lines, PC-9 (PTEN wild
type) and NCI-H1650 (PTEN null), were used. We transfected an intact PTEN gene
into H1650 cells and knocked down PTEN expression in PC-9 cells using shRNA. The 
effectiveness of gefitinib and vandetanib was assessed using a xenograft model.
While PC-9 cells were more resistant to vandetanib than gefitinib, H1650 cells
were more sensitive to vandetanib than gefitinib. Both gefitinib and vandetanib
suppressed the activation of EGFR and MAPK in H1650 cells, although
phosphorylated AKT levels were not affected. In an H1650 cell xenograft model,
vandetanib was also more effective than gefitinib. Although PTEN-transfected
H1650 cells did not show restoration of sensitivity to gefitinib in vitro, the
xenograft tumors responded to gefitinib and vandetanib. Knockdown of PTEN in PC-9
cells caused resistance to gefitinib. In conclusion, vandetanib might be
effective in NSCLC with EGFR mutations that lack PTEN expression. The
contribution of PTEN absence to vandetanib activity in NSCLC cells harboring EGFR
mutations should be further examined.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2012.12.018 
PMID: 23274758  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


848. Structure. 2013 Feb 5;21(2):209-19. doi: 10.1016/j.str.2012.11.014. Epub 2012 Dec
27.

Insights into the aberrant activity of mutant EGFR kinase domain and drug
recognition.

Gajiwala KS(1), Feng J, Ferre R, Ryan K, Brodsky O, Weinrich S, Kath JC, Stewart 
A.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Structural Biology, Oncology Medicinal Chemistry, Pfizer Worldwide
Research and Development, 10770 Science Center Drive, San Diego, CA 92121, USA.
ketan.gajiwala@pfizer.com

The oncogenicity of the L858R mutant form of the epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR) in non-small-cell lung cancer is thought to be due to the constitutive
activation of its kinase domain. The selectivity of the marketed drugs gefitinib 
and erlotinib for L858R mutant is attributed to their specific recognition of the
active kinase and to weaker ATP binding by L858R EGFR. We present crystal
structures showing that neither L858R nor the drug-resistant L858R+T790M EGFR
kinase domain is in the constitutively active conformation. Additional co-crystal
structures show that gefitinib and dacomitinib, an irreversible
anilinoquinazoline derivative currently in clinical development, may not be
conformation specific for the active state of the enzyme. Structural data further
reveal the potential mode of recognition of one of the autophosphorylation sites 
in the C-terminal tail, Tyr-1016, by the kinase domain. Biochemical and
biophysical evidence suggest that the oncogenic mutations impact the
conformational dynamics of the enzyme.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.str.2012.11.014 
PMID: 23273428  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


849. Respir Med Case Rep. 2013 Apr 24;9:8-10. doi: 10.1016/j.rmcr.2013.02.002.
eCollection 2013.

Use of a tyrosine kinase inhibitor as neoadjuvant therapy for non-small cell lung
cancer: A case report.

López-González A(1), Almagro E(2), Salas C(3), Varela A(4), Provencio M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Oncology, H. de León, Spain. (2)Medical Oncology, H. Puerta de
Hierro-Majadahonda, Spain. (3)Pathological Anatomy, Puerta de Hierro-Majadahonda,
Spain. (4)Thoracic Surgery, Puerta de Hierro-Majadahonda, Spain.

We report here a 66-year-old woman diagnosed with bronchioloalveolar carcinoma of
the right lung cT4N2M0. The patient was from the Philippines, had never smoked,
and tested positive for an EGFR mutation. She received gefitinib as neoadjuvant
therapy for two months and displayed a partial response. The tumour was resected 
by performing a right pneumonectomy. The residual viable tumour accounted for
less than 10%. Adjuvant chemotherapy with carboplatin-taxol was administered for 
four cycles. Fifteen months post-surgery, two brain metastases were found.
Gefitinib was prescribed, and one month later complete radiological response was 
assessed. The patient remains asymptomatic and without visible disease four
months later. Controlled randomised trials are needed to clarify the role of
these target therapies in the neoadjuvant setting.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmcr.2013.02.002 
PMCID: PMC3949555
PMID: 26029620  [PubMed]


850. Cancer Biother Radiopharm. 2013 Mar;28(2):115-23. doi: 10.1089/cbr.2012.1268.
Epub 2012 Dec 27.

Gefitinib-resistance is related to BIM expression in non-small cell lung cancer
cell lines.

Li H(1), Zhou S, Li X, Wang D, Wang Y, Zhou C, Schmid-Bindert G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Shanghai Pulmonary Hospital, Tongji University
School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.

Recent evidence indicates that both the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)/AKT 
and the MEK/ERK pathways are strictly regulated by epidermal growth factor
receptor in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) that responds to Gefitinib.
Gefitinib resistance is partly owing to the activation of two major downstream
signaling pathways PI3K/AKT or MEK/ERK. In this study, we found that in
Gefitinib-sensitive cell lines, Gefitinib could induce tumor cell apoptosis via
upregulation of a proapoptotic protein BIM. Small interfering RNA results showed 
that silencing of BIM could alleviate apoptosis induced by Gefitinib. We adopted 
a combination of PI3K inhibitor (LY294002) and MEK inhibitor (U0126) against
Gefitinib resistance in cell lines. As expected, the combination substantially
induced apoptosis and restored the sensitivity to Gefitinib by increasing the
expression of BIM. Our studies provided a theoretical basis for overcoming drug
resistance in NSCLC via combination therapy.

DOI: 10.1089/cbr.2012.1268 
PMCID: PMC3589885
PMID: 23270470  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


851. Med Oncol. 2013 Mar;30(1):349. doi: 10.1007/s12032-012-0349-y. Epub 2012 Dec 22.

Comparison of adverse events and efficacy between gefitinib and erlotinib in
patients with non-small-cell lung cancer: a retrospective analysis.

Yoshida T(1), Yamada K, Azuma K, Kawahara A, Abe H, Hattori S, Yamashita F,
Zaizen Y, Kage M, Hoshino T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Respirology, Neurology, and Rheumatology, Department of Internal
Medicine, Kurume University School of Medicine, 67 Asahi-machi, Kurume City,
Fukuoka 830-0011, Japan.

Previous studies have demonstrated that both gefitinib and erlotinib are markedly
effective for the treatment of non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) with somatic
activating mutations of the epidermal growth factor receptor gene (EGFR-mt).
These agents are considered to act on EGFR through the same mechanism. However,
the efficacy of these agents against EGFR wild-type (-wt) NSCLC remains unclear, 
and the frequency of adverse events (AEs) appears to differ between them at each 
approved dose. Here, we conducted a retrospective analysis of AEs and drug
efficacy in patients with NSCLC whose EGFR mutation status had been confirmed and
who all received 250 mg gefitinib or 150 mg erlotinib once daily. The erlotinib
group (n = 35) had more AEs, including rash, fatigue, stomatitis, anorexia and
constipation. On the other hand, liver dysfunction and nail change were more
frequent in the gefitinib group (n = 107). AEs of ≥grade 2, including rash,
fatigue and nausea, were more frequent in the erlotinib group. The erlotinib
group also showed more of a tendency to require dose reduction due to AEs. With
regard to treatment efficacy for patients with EGFR-wt, there was no significant 
difference in progression-free survival between the two drug groups. However,
this study has several limitations as of the nature of retrospective design; our 
data suggest that gefitinib and erlotinib might have almost equal efficacy for
patients with EGFR-wt NSCLC, as is the case for patients with EGFR-mt tumors,
although erlotinib appears to have higher toxicity than gefitinib at each
approved dose.

DOI: 10.1007/s12032-012-0349-y 
PMID: 23263831  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


852. Lung Cancer. 2013 Mar;79(3):276-82. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2012.11.022. Epub 2012
Dec 20.

Continued treatment with gefitinib beyond progressive disease benefits patients
with activating EGFR mutations.

Asami K(1), Okuma T, Hirashima T, Kawahara M, Atagi S, Kawaguchi T, Okishio K,
Omachi N, Takeuchi N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Oncology, National Hospital Organization Kinki-Chuo
Chest Medical Center, Sakai, Japan. kazu.taizo@nifty.com

BACKGROUND: Gefitinib is an effective treatment for patients with non-small cell 
lung cancer who harbor activating epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)
mutations. However, no optimal strategy has been established for these patients
after gefitinib fails. The aim of this retrospective study was to assess the
survival benefit of continued gefitinib treatment in these cases.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We analyzed gefitinib responders with activating EGFR
mutations who developed progressive disease (PD) during the course of therapy.
Prognostic variables were analyzed using a Cox proportional-hazards model.
RESULTS: A total of 134 patients were retrospectively reviewed. Exon-19 deletion 
mutations and L858R point mutations were detected in 71 and 63 patients,
respectively. Median survival time after PD with gefitinib was 14.3 months (95%
confidence interval: 11.7-16.9). The median duration of continued gefitinib
therapy beyond PD was 3.2 months. Statistical analysis showed that good
performance status (0-1) (hazard ratio [HR]: 0.6), progression of a previously
evaluated lesion (HR: 0.6), and at least 3 months of continued treatment (HR:
0.4) were independent prognostic factors.
CONCLUSION: Continuation of gefitinib beyond PD is an effective optional
treatment in EGFR-mutated patients.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2012.11.022 
PMID: 23261231  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


853. Lung Cancer. 2013 Mar;79(3):270-5. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2012.11.017. Epub 2012 
Dec 20.

A phase I trial of gefitinib and nimotuzumab in patients with advanced non-small 
cell lung cancer (NSCLC).

Kim SH(1), Shim HS, Cho J, Jeong JH, Kim SM, Hong YK, Sung JH, Ha SJ, Kim HR,
Chang H, Kim JH, Tania C, Cho BC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Yonsei Cancer Center, Yonsei University
College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea.

BACKGROUND: Nimotuzumab (TheraCIM®) is a humanized anti-epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR) monoclonal antibody (mAb) with minimal skin toxicity. Combining a
different class of anti-EGFR drug with gefitinib is a new strategy to overcome
intrinsic and acquired resistance to gefitinib. The aim of this phase I trial was
to determine recommended phase II dose (RPIID) and the safety of gefitinib and
nimotuzumab combination treatment.
METHODS: Patients with advanced/metastatic NSCLC were treated with escalating
doses of weekly nimotuzumab (100mg or 200mg, IV) and fixed doses of daily
gefitinib (250 mg/day, PO) until disease progression or unacceptable toxicity. We
planned to enroll 10 additional patients at RPIID to ascertain the safety of
treatment. EGFR mutations and KRAS mutations were analyzed from available tumor
samples.
RESULTS: A total of 16 patients were enrolled (3 in 100mg cohort, 13 in 200mg
cohort). Six patients (37.5%) were female, and 5 (31.3%) were never smokers.
Adenocarcinoma was the major histologic type (13 patients, 81.3%). Treatment was 
well-tolerated without dose-limiting toxicity (DLT). Four patients (25.0%)
experienced grade 2 skin toxicity (1 in 100mg cohorts, 3 in 200mg cohort). Other 
common grade 1/2 toxicities were fatigue (37.5%) and diarrhea (25.0%). Among 16
evaluable patients, four patients (25.0%) achieved partial response and 7
patients (43.8%) had stable disease. Two of 4 responders had EGFR mutation (exon 
19 deletion).
CONCLUSIONS: Dual agent molecular targeting of EGFR with nimotuzumab and
gefitinib in patients with advanced NSCLC is well-tolerated. The RPIID for
nimotuzumab is 200mg weekly IV and for gefitinib 250 mg/day PO. Based upon this
phase I trial, we are planning to conduct a randomized phase II trial comparing
gefitinib and nimotuzumab with gefitinib alone in patients with advanced NSCLC.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2012.11.017 
PMID: 23261229  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


854. Onco Targets Ther. 2012;5:439-47. doi: 10.2147/OTT.S37289. Epub 2012 Dec 12.

Comparison of different methods for detecting epidermal growth factor receptor
mutations in peripheral blood and tumor tissue of non-small cell lung cancer as a
predictor of response to gefitinib.

Xu F(1), Wu J, Xue C, Zhao Y, Jiang W, Lin L, Wu X, Lu Y, Bai H, Xu J, Zhu G,
Zhang L.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Department of Medical
Oncology, Sun Yat-Sen University Cancer Center, Guangzhou, Guangdong, People's
Republic of China.

BACKGROUND: Previous studies have reported that epidermal growth factor receptor 
(EGFR) mutation in tumor tissue and peripheral blood can predict the response to 
EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC).
However, the heterogeneity of the sample sources makes it difficult to evaluate
the detecting methodologies. The goal of this study is to compare different
methods for analyzing EGFR mutation in blood and tumor tissue.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Fifty-one advanced NSCLC patients treated with gefitinib
were included in the study. The EGFR mutation status of each patients' blood was 
analyzed by denaturing high-performance liquid chromatography (DHPLC),
mutant-enriched liquidchip (ME-Liquidchip), and Scorpion Amplification Refractory
Mutation System (Scorpion-ARMS) kits. EGFR mutation information in paired tumor
samples detected by Scorpion-ARMS served as a reference. Comparative analyses
were performed on mutation status results obtained from different methods and on 
the association between the clinical outcome of TKI treatment and EGFR mutation
status.
RESULTS: The response rate (RR) in the whole group was 33.3%. EGFR mutation rates
were identified as 15.7%, 27.5%, and 29.4% by DHPLC, ME-Liquidchip, and
Scorpion-ARMS in blood, respectively. In 34 cases that had paired tumor samples, 
the mutation rate in tissue was 41.2%. The RRs of patients with mutation detected
by different methods were 71.4% (tumor), 62.5% (blood, DHPLC), 50.0% (blood,
ME-Liquidchip), and 66.7% (blood, Scorpion-ARMS). EGFR mutation detected by
Scorpion-ARMS in blood and tumor tissues had better prediction of RR to EGFR-TKI 
(P = 0.002 and P = 0.001) than mutation detected with DHPLC and ME-Liquidchip.
CONCLUSION: Tumor tissue sample is the best source for EGFR mutation analysis in 
NSCLC patients. Peripheral blood samples may be used as an alternative source
only in special conditions. Scorpion-ARMS, DHPLC, or ME-Liquidchip methods are
all optional for detecting tumor EGFR mutation from blood.

DOI: 10.2147/OTT.S37289 
PMCID: PMC3525047
PMID: 23251095  [PubMed]


855. Zhongguo Fei Ai Za Zhi. 2012 Dec;15(12):689-93. doi:
10.3779/j.issn.1009-3419.2012.12.02.

[Molecular mechanism of erlotinib resistance in epidermal growth factor receptor 
mutant non-small cell lung cancer cell line H1650].

[Article in Chinese]

Han R(1), Wang X, Zhong D, Zhao J, Chen Z, Sun L, Wang J, Zhang J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Tianjin Medical University General
Hospital, Tianjin 300052, China.

BACKGROUND: Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) overexpression and mutations 
were existed in more than 40% of the lung cancer, and it's the one of molecular
targets in clinical treatment. But the EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors
(TKI)-resistance is becoming a challenging clinical problem as following the
application of EGFR-TKIs, Gefitinib or Erlotinib. However, the mechanistic
explanation for resistance in the some cases is still lacking. Here we researched
the resistance mechanism of H1650 cells.
METHODS: Using real-time RT-PCR to analyze the EGFR mRNA expression level in EGFR
wild-type non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cells; MTT analysis detected the
cytotoxicity for NSCLC cells to Erlotinib; Western blot analysis examined the
mutant situations and the downstream signaling protein phosphorylation level in
EGFR-mutant NSCLC cells with the treatment of Erlotinib or/and PI3K inhibitor,
LY294002.
RESULTS: In the EGFR wild-type NSCLC cells, the expression level of EGFR mRNA
varied dramatically and all the cells showed resistant to Erlotinib; In the
EGFR-mutant cells, HCC827 and H1650 (the same activating-mutation type), HCC827
cells were Erlotinib-sensitive as well as H1650 demonstrated primary relative
resistance. Western blot analysis showed the loss of PTEN and the p-AKT level was
not inhibited with the treatment of Erlotinib or/and LY294002 in H1650 cells,
while HCC827 cells were no PTEN loss and definitively decrease of p-AKT level.
CONCLUSIONS: EGFR wild-type NSCLC cells were resistant to Erlotinib no matter of 
how EGFR mRNA expression level. EGFR-activating mutations correlated with
responses to Erlotinib. The PTEN loss and activation of AKT signaling pathway
contributed to Erlotinib resistance in EGFR-mutant NSCLC cell line H1650.

DOI: 10.3779/j.issn.1009-3419.2012.12.02 
PMID: 23249714  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


856. Expert Rev Anticancer Ther. 2012 Nov;12(11):1429-35. doi: 10.1586/era.12.121.

EGF receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors in the treatment of brain metastases from
non-small-cell lung cancer.

Bartolotti M(1), Franceschi E, Brandes AA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Azienda Unità Sanitaria Locale, Bologna,
Italy.

The incidence of brain metastasis (BM) is high in patients with non-small-cell
lung cancer. Available standard therapeutic options, such as whole-brain
radiation therapy and systemic chemotherapy, provide a slight improvement in
local control, overall survival and symptom relief. Novel agents, such as EGF
receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs), have now been included in
standard non-small-cell lung cancer treatments. In a small subset of patients
harboring EGFR-activating mutations, erlotinib and gefitinib administration was
followed by a response rate of 70-80%, and a longer progression-free and overall 
survival than those obtained with standard chemotherapeutic regimens. However,
since most of the larger studies on these agents have excluded BM patients from
their series, few prospective data are available on the efficacy of these agents 
in this setting. In recent years, however, several authors have reported a
growing number of cases of partial and complete response in BM patients treated
with EGFR TKIs. Data from retrospective series and Phase II studies also suggest 
that a response can be obtained using EGFR TKI treatment for patients with BM,
especially those harboring EGFR mutations.

DOI: 10.1586/era.12.121 
PMID: 23249107  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


857. Indian J Med Paediatr Oncol. 2012 Jul;33(3):146-54. doi:
10.4103/0971-5851.103141.

First report of upfront treatment with Gefitinib in comparison with chemotherapy 
in advanced non-small cell lung cancer patients from south India: Analysis of 120
patients.

Louis RA(1), Rajendranath R, Ganesan P, Sagar TG, Krishnamurthy A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Cancer Institute (WIA), Sardar Patel Road,
Adyar, Chennai, Tamil Nadu, India.

BACKGROUND: Lung cancer is the most common cause of cancer deaths in males and
sixth among females in south India. Lung cancer is being increasingly recognized 
among non-smokers.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Stage IIIB and IV advanced non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC) patients (n=120) treated from January 2009 to December 2010 were
retrospectively analyzed. Baseline clinical parameters, treatment protocol,
response to therapy and survival were noted. Decision to use upfront Gefitinib
was based on parameters like female sex, non-smoking status, adenocarcinoma
histology and poor PS. Progression-free survival (PFS) and overall survival (OS) 
were analyzed by the Kaplan Meier method and prognosis by log rank test and Cox
regression.
RESULTS: BASELINE PARAMETERS: median age: 60 years (22-78 years); male sex: 83
(69.2%); Stage IV: 95(79.2%); adenocarcinoma: 109 (90.8%); smokers: 66 (55%); PS 
2/3: 65(54.2%); first-line therapy: Gefitinib: 47 (39.2%), chemotherapy: 73
(60.8%). Among those progressing after chemotherapy, 17 (23%) received
second-line Gefitinib. After a median follow-up of 7.5 months (1-26 months),
median PFS and OS were 5 months (0-23 months) and 7.5 months (1-26 mo),
respectively. On univariate analysis, PFS was significantly improved for
non-smokers (7 months vs 4 months, P=0.010), females (7 months vs 5 months,
P=0.024) and upfront treatment with Gefitinib (10 months vs 4 months, P=0.014).
The only significant factor that affected OS was female sex (18 months vs 9
months, P=0.042). No factors were significant on multivariate analysis. Among PS 
2/3 patients, PFS was significantly higher with Gefitinib (n=36) than with
single-agent chemotherapy (n=29) [median PFS of 10 months vs 4 months (P=0.017)].
CONCLUSION: In the largest series on the use of first-line Gefitinib from India, 
we found it to be a useful agent in the treatment of NSCLC, especially in females
patients with poor PS and non-smokers, even without Epidermal Growth Factor
Receptor (EGFR) mutation testing. Second-line Gefitinib may have negated the OS
differences. However, EGFR mutation studies may help in further individualization
of therapy.

DOI: 10.4103/0971-5851.103141 
PMCID: PMC3523471
PMID: 23248420  [PubMed]


858. Clin Med Insights Oncol. 2012;6:407-21. doi: 10.4137/CMO.S7340. Epub 2012 Dec 6.

Review of the treatment of non-small cell lung cancer with gefitinib.

Araki T(1), Yashima H, Shimizu K, Aomori T, Hashita T, Kaira K, Nakamura T,
Yamamoto K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacology, Gunma University Graduate School of
Medicine, 3-39-22 Showa-machi, Maebashi 371-8511, Japan. ; Department of
Pharmacy, Gunma University Hospital, 3-39-15 Showa-machi, Maebashi 371-8511,
Japan.

Erratum in
    Clin Med Insights Oncol. 2013;7;85.

In the past decade, molecular-targeted drugs have been focused upon for the
treatment of cancer. In 2002, gefitinib, an epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR) tyrosine kinase inhibitor became available in Japan for the treatment of
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Over 80% of selected patients, such as EGFR
mutation-positive patients, respond to gefitinib treatment; however, most
patients develop acquired resistance to gefitinib within a few years. Recently,
many studies have been performed to determine precisely how to select patients
who will respond to gefitinib, the best timing for its administration, and how to
avoid the development of acquired resistance as well as adverse drug effects.
This article reviews the use of gefitinib for the treatment of NSCLC from a
pharmaceutical viewpoint.

DOI: 10.4137/CMO.S7340 
PMCID: PMC3520446
PMID: 23239933  [PubMed]


859. Yonsei Med J. 2013 Jan 1;54(1):269. doi: 10.3349/ymj.2013.54.1.269.

Retraction: Prognostic and predictive value of carcinoembryonic antigen and
cytokeratin-19 fragments levels in advanced non-small cell lung cancer patients
treated with gefitinib or erlotinib. Yonsei Med J 2012;53:931-9.

[No authors listed]

Retraction of
    Jung M, Kim SH, Hong S, Kang YA, Kim SK, Chang J, Rha SY, Kim JH, Kim DJ, Cho BC.
Yonsei Med J. 2012 Sep;53(5):931-9.

DOI: 10.3349/ymj.2013.54.1.269 
PMCID: PMC3521263
PMID: 23225832  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


860. Anticancer Res. 2012 Dec;32(12):5279-84.

Effects of voltage-gated K+ channel blockers in gefitinib-resistant H460
non-small cell lung cancer cells.

Jeon WI(1), Ryu PD, Lee SY.

Author information: 
(1)DVM, Laboratory of Veterinary Pharmacology, College of Veterinary Medicine,
Seoul National University, 599 Gwanak-ro, Gwanak-gu, Seoul, 151-742, South Korea.

Erratum in
    Anticancer Res. 2013 Sep;33(9):4135-6.

Voltage-gated K(+) (Kv) channels are known to be associated with the
proliferation of several types of cancer cells, including lung adenocarcinoma
cells, and certain Kv channel blockers inhibit cancer cell proliferation. In the 
present study, we investigated the effects of Kv channel blockers in
gefitinib-resistant H460 non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cells. Treatment with
dendrotoxin-κ (DTX-κ), which is a Kv1.1-specific blocker, reduced H460 cell
viability and arrested cells in G(1)/S transition during cell-cycle progression. 
We administered DTX-κ in a xenograft model using nude mice. The tumor volume was 
reduced by the injection of DTX-κ into the tumor tissues compared to the control 
group. These results indicate that DTX-κ has antitumor effects in
gefitinib-resistant H460 cells through the pathway governing the G(1)/S
transition both in vitro and in vivo. These findings suggest that Kv1.1 could
serve as a novel therapeutic target for gefitinib-resistant NSCLC.


PMID: 23225427  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


861. Am J Clin Oncol. 2014 Apr;37(2):148-53. doi: 10.1097/COC.0b013e31826e071b.

Gefitinib combined with stereotactic radiosurgery in previously treated patients 
with advanced non-small cell lung cancer.

Wang Z(1), Zhu XX, Wu XH, Li B, Shen TZ, Kong QT, Li J, Liu ZB, Jiang WR, Wang Y,
Hou B.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of *Radiation Oncology †Dermatology, Jinling Hospital, Medical
School of Nanjing University, Nanjing, China.

BACKGROUND: Disease progression remains the major challenge in the management of 
advanced (stage IIIb or IV) non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) after the failure 
of first-line or second-line chemotherapy, or even of targeted therapies such as 
gefitinib. The current study evaluated the tolerability and efficacy of
stereotactic body radiation therapy (SBRT) in combined with gefitinib as a
second-line or third-line treatment in patients with advanced NSCLC.
METHODS: Fourteen advanced NSCLC patients showing disease progression after
platinum-based chemotherapy regimens were recruited. Eligible patients started
taking gefitinib (250 mg/d) 7 days before SBRT and continued for 1 year until
disease progression, unacceptable toxicity or withdrawal of consent. SBRT was
delivered in median 3 fractions within 3 to 5 days. Treatment-associated toxicity
was assessed according to the Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events
(v.3.0). Local control was assessed according to the Response Evaluation Criteria
in Solid Tumors criteria and symptom assessments were measured by the Functional 
Assessment of Cancer Therapy-Lung instrument (V4.0).
RESULTS: With an overall median follow-up of 15.5 months (range, 4 to 27 mo),
most patients were well tolerated with common side effects from grade 1 to 2. No 
grade 4 or higher toxicity was encountered. The clinical disease-related symptom 
improvement rate was reached 57.1% with the median duration of symptom
improvement of 8.0 months. The 1-year local control and overall survival (OS)
rates were 83.9% and 69.6%, respectively. The median progression-free survival
and OS were 7.0 and 19.0 months, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: The SBRT combined with gefitinib is a promising treatment strategy
for advanced (stage IIIb or IV) NSCLC after the failure of previously
chemotherapy. This method improves local control and disease-related symptoms
with tolerated toxicity, and even increases the progression-free survival and OS.

DOI: 10.1097/COC.0b013e31826e071b 
PMID: 23211223  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


862. J Thorac Oncol. 2013 Jan;8(1):96-101. doi: 10.1097/JTO.0b013e3182762bfb.

Prospective assessment of continuation of erlotinib or gefitinib in patients with
acquired resistance to erlotinib or gefitinib followed by the addition of
pemetrexed.

Yoshimura N(1), Okishio K, Mitsuoka S, Kimura T, Kawaguchi T, Kobayashi M,
Hirashima T, Daga H, Takeda K, Hirata K, Kudoh S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka City
University, Abeno-ku, Osaka, Japan. y-naruo@sc4.so-net.ne.jp

INTRODUCTION: Patients with epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutation
positive non-small-cell lung cancer exhibited marked response to gefitinib or
erlotinib. In most cases, however, the patients showed disease progression after 
EGFR-tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) treatment. We evaluated the efficacy and
safety of pemetrexed in combination with EGFR-TKI in patients with disease
progression.
METHODS: Patients with EGFR-mutant stage IIIB or IV non-small-cell lung cancer
that progressed during gefitinib or erlotinib therapy were administered
pemetrexed with the continuation of EGFR-TKI treatment. Pemetrexed was
administered on day 1 at a dose of 500 mg/m, and EGFR-TKI was sequentially
administered on days 2 to 16. This treatment was repeated every 3 weeks until
disease progression. The primary endpoint was disease control rate.
RESULTS: Twenty-seven patients were enrolled in this study. The median number of 
treatment cycles was six. Overall response rate was 25.9% (95% confidence
interval, 9.4%-42.4%) and disease control rate was 77.8% (95% confidence
interval, 62.1%-93.5%). Grade 3/4 hematological toxicities were neutropenia
(22.2%), leukopenia (14.8%), and anemia (7.4%). Grade 4 nonhematological
toxicities were not observed. Major grade 3 nonhematological toxicities were
anorexia (14.8%), infection (14.8%), and fatigue (11.1%). The median
progression-free survival was 7.0 months, and median survival time was 11.4
months. No treatment-related deaths occurred.
CONCLUSIONS: Pemetrexed in combination with erlotinib or gefitinib after disease 
progression shows favorable response and acceptable toxicity.

DOI: 10.1097/JTO.0b013e3182762bfb 
PMID: 23207920  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


863. BMC Cancer. 2012 Dec 4;12:568. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-12-568.

Reduced CYP2D6 function is associated with gefitinib-induced rash in patients
with non-small cell lung cancer.

Suzumura T(1), Kimura T, Kudoh S, Umekawa K, Nagata M, Matsuura K, Tanaka H,
Mitsuoka S, Yoshimura N, Kira Y, Nakai T, Hirata K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka City
University, Osaka, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Rash, liver dysfunction, and diarrhea are known major adverse events 
associated with erlotinib and gefitinib. However, clinical trials with gefitinib 
have reported different proportions of adverse events compared to trials with
erlotinib. In an in vitro study, cytochrome P450 (CYP) 2D6 was shown to be
involved in the metabolism of gefitinib but not erlotinib. It has been
hypothesized that CYP2D6 phenotypes may be implicated in different adverse events
associated with gefitinib and erlotinib therapies.
METHODS: The frequency of each adverse event was evaluated during the period in
which the patients received gefitinib or erlotinib therapy. CYP2D6 phenotypes
were determined by analysis of CYP2D6 genotypes using real-time polymerase chain 
reaction techniques, which can detect single-nucleotide polymorphisms. The CYP2D6
phenotypes were categorized into 2 groups according to functional or reduced
metabolic levels. In addition, we evaluated the odds ratio (OR) of the adverse
events associated with each factor, including CYP2D6 activities and treatment
types.
RESULTS: A total of 232 patients received gefitinib therapy, and 86 received
erlotinib therapy. Reduced function of CYP2D6 was associated with an increased
risk of rash of grade 2 or more (OR, 0.44; 95% confidence interval [CI],
0.21-0.94; *p = 0.03), but not diarrhea ≥ grade 2 (OR, 0.49; 95% CI, 0.17-1.51;
*p = 0.20) or liver dysfunction ≥ grade 2 (OR, 1.08; 95% CI, 0.52-2.34; *p =
0.84) in the gefitinib cohort. No associations were observed between any adverse 
events in the erlotinib cohort and CYP2D6 phenotypes (rash: OR, 1.77; 95% CI,
0.54-6.41; *p = 0.35/diarrhea: OR, 1.08; 95% CI, 0.21-7.43; *p = 0.93/liver
dysfunction: OR, 0.93; 95% CI, 0.20-5.07; *p = 0.93).
CONCLUSIONS: The frequency of rash was significantly higher in patients with
reduced CYP2D6 activity who treated with gefitinib compared to patients with
functional CYP2D6. CYP2D6 phenotypes are a risk factor for the development of
rash in response to gefitinib therapy.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2407-12-568 
PMCID: PMC3536666
PMID: 23207012  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


864. PLoS One. 2012;7(11):e48748. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0048748. Epub 2012 Nov 21.

Gefitinib analogue V1801 induces apoptosis of T790M EGFR-harboring lung cancer
cells by up-regulation of the BH-3 only protein Noxa.

Zhang B(1), Jiao J, Liu Y, Guo LX, Zhou B, Li GQ, Yao ZJ, Zhou GB.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Carcinogenesis and Targeted Therapy for Cancer, State
Key Laboratory of Biomembrane and Membrane Biotechnology, Institute of Zoology,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.

Treatment of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) with drugs targeting the
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), e.g., gefitinib and erlotinib, will
eventually fail because of the development of secondary mutations such as T790M
in EGFR. Strategies to overcome this resistance are therefore an urgent need. In 
this study, we synthesized a dozen of novel gefitinib analogues and evaluated
their effects on L858R/T790M-EGFR harboring NSCLC cells, and reported that one of
these gefitinib mimetics, N-(2-bromo-5-(trifluoromethyl)
phenyl)-6-methoxy-7-(3-(piperidin-1-yl)propoxy)quinazolin-4-amine (hereafter,
V1801), triggered apoptosis of the NSCLC cells and overcame gefitinib-resistance 
in mice inoculated with NCI-H1975 cells. Though V1801 only moderately inhibited
EGFR kinase activity, it markedly induced the expression of the BH3-only protein 
Noxa, and Noxa silencing significantly reduced V1801-induced apoptosis of
NCI-H1975 cells. It is showed that V1801 interfered with the expression of the
transcription factor c-Myc and the extracellular signal regulated kinase (Erk)
pathway. V1801 in combination with proteasome inhibitor bortezomib exerted
enhanced cytotoxicity in NCI-H1975 cells possibly due to potentiated induction of
Noxa expression. These data indicate that gefinitib analogues with weak EGFR
inhibitory activity may overcome drug-resistance via activation of BH-3 only
pro-apoptotic proteins, and V1801 may have therapeutic potentials for NSCLC.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0048748 
PMCID: PMC3504066
PMID: 23185274  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


865. Lung Cancer. 2013 Feb;79(2):101-3. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2012.10.016. Epub 2012 
Nov 22.

The impact on the multidisciplinary team of molecular profiling for personalized 
therapy in non-small cell lung cancer.

Blackhall F(1), Thatcher N, Booton R, Kerr K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Christie Hospital, Manchester, UK.
Fiona.Blackhall@christie.nhs.uk

The composition of the multidisciplinary team (MDT) that treats lung cancer
varies by region and practice setting but generally includes a thoracic medical
oncologist, a thoracic surgeon, a thoracic radiation oncologist, and an
interventional radiologist, as well as a pathologist, pulmonologist, and
specialist nurses. Growing clinical evidence supports a personalized approach to 
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) treatment, and clinical trials in advanced
disease have shown the value of testing for epidermal growth factor receptor gene
(EGFR) mutations prior to first-line therapy with erlotinib or gefitinib and
testing for anaplastic lymphoma kinase gene (ALK) rearrangements prior to therapy
with crizotinib. The most recent National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN)
guidelines also recommend sequential EGFR and ALK testing for patients with a
diagnosis of recurrent or metastatic adenocarcinoma, large cell carcinoma, or not
otherwise specified histology, and simultaneous molecular screening has also been
proposed. Here, we explore potential challenges for the MDT implied by the move
toward personalized therapy in NSCLC and the increasing need for molecular
diagnoses, and anticipate how the working roles and responsibilities of team
members may develop to accommodate them.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2012.10.016 
PMID: 23182148  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


866. J Oncol Pract. 2012 Jul;8(4):224-30. doi: 10.1200/JOP.2011.000390.

Proposal for a novel methodology to screen and score cost versus survival for
anticancer drugs in metastatic disease: could cost weigh in evaluation?

Guirgis HM(1).

Author information: 
(1)University of California, Irvine, CA, USA. Cancerguir@gmail.com

Comment in
    J Oncol Pract. 2012 Jul;8(4):231-2.

PURPOSE: Rising costs of anticancer drugs prompt concerns about their approval,
use, and affordability. A methodology was developed to evaluate cost versus
survival for anticancer drugs in metastatic breast cancer and non-small-cell lung
cancer (NSCLC).
METHODS: Costs of evaluated drugs were calculated by using average wholesale
prices in US dollars. Ratios of cost to day of survival (cost/survival/d) were
obtained by dividing costs of the entire treatment by reported median survival
gain in days. A crude score of 100% was assigned to a cost/survival/d of less
than $25, and 0% to a cost/survival/d of more than $750. A strategy was designed 
to correct for overall survival (OS) versus progression-free survival (PFS),
adverse effects, and quality of life.
RESULTS: In breast cancer, PFS scores of bevacizumab varied between 0% and 60%.
In NSCLC, OS scores of bevacizumab improved from 0% to 50%, as a result of
histology, lower prices, and extended therapy. Gefitinib and erlotinib PFS scores
were 80% and 70%, respectively. Correction for longer survival with erlotinib
resulted in similar scores. In maintenance therapy, the OS score for pemetrexed
was 70% as compared with 25% for erlotinib. Generic drugs scored 70% to 90%.
CONCLUSION: Cost/survival varied with the number of cycles. In breast cancer,
bevacizumab scores failed to justify its use. In NSCLC, 10 cycles of bevacizumab 
scored 0%. Scores improved with extended treatment and lower prices. Scores for
gefitinib and erlotinib would support their approval. Erlotinib was preferred
because of longer PFS. Results tended to endorse maintenance pemetrexed but not
erlotinib. Generic drugs demonstrated high scores. Cost/survival could weigh in
drug evaluation.

DOI: 10.1200/JOP.2011.000390 
PMCID: PMC3396818
PMID: 23180986  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


867. Onco Targets Ther. 2012;5:349-55. doi: 10.2147/OTT.S38441. Epub 2012 Nov 15.

The impact of tumor size change after target therapy on survival: analysis of
patients enrolled onto three clinical trials of advanced NSCLC from one
institution.

Zhang J(1), Huang Y, Li X, Guo Y, Zhao Y, Xue C, Hu Z, Zhang L, Zhao H.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Sun Yat-Sen University Cancer
Center, Guangzhou, China.

PURPOSE: To explore whether changes in tumor size impact survival in advanced
non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) after target therapy, especially in patients
with evaluation of stable disease (SD), and to review the applicability of the
Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors (RECIST) criteria in target therapy.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Data from 88 NSCLC patients receiving gefitinib (250 mg,
daily [qd]), erlotinib (150 mg, qd), and ZD6474 (100 mg, qd) in three clinical
trials (IRESSA registration clinical trial, TRUST study, ZD6474 study) during
November 2003 to June 2005 were retrospectively analyzed. The treatment effect
(complete response, partial response, stable disease [SD], or progressive
disease) was evaluated with radiologic assessment according to the RECIST
criteria. SD patients were divided into two groups: SD-/0, in which the sum of
the longest diameter of target lesions decreased by less than 30% or did not
change; and SD+, in which the sum of the longest diameter of target lesions
increased by less than 20%. The differences of progression-free survival (PFS)
and overall survival (OS) between these groups were analyzed.
RESULTS: In the whole group, 27 patients achieved complete response or partial
response as best response, 40 achieved SD, and 22 had progressive disease. The
median PFS and OS were 4 months and 11.1 months, respectively. In SD patients, 27
were SD-/0 and 13 patients were SD+. The PFS and OS of SD+ patients was shorter
than that of SD-/0 patients (5.65 months vs 2.03 days, P < 0.001 and 12.2 months 
vs 7.1 months, P < 0.001).
CONCLUSION: The applicability of RECIST criteria was called into question in the 
evaluation of target therapy. Change in tumor size might predict survival in
advanced NSCLC patients with target therapy and may be a surrogate endpoint for
efficacy in target therapy.

DOI: 10.2147/OTT.S38441 
PMCID: PMC3501954
PMID: 23172990  [PubMed]


868. J Clin Pathol. 2013 Feb;66(2):79-89. doi: 10.1136/jclinpath-2012-201194. Epub
2012 Nov 21.

EGFR mutation testing in lung cancer: a review of available methods and their use
for analysis of tumour tissue and cytology samples.

Ellison G(1), Zhu G, Moulis A, Dearden S, Speake G, McCormack R.

Author information: 
(1)AstraZeneca, Macclesfield, Alderley Park, UK. gillian.ellison@astrazeneca.com

AIMS: Activating mutations in the gene encoding epidermal growth factor receptor 
(EGFR) can confer sensitivity to EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors such as
gefitinib in patients with advanced non-small-cell lung cancer. Testing for
mutations in EGFR is therefore an important step in the treatment-decision
pathway. We reviewed reported methods for EGFR mutation testing in patients with 
lung cancer, initially focusing on studies involving standard tumour tissue
samples. We also evaluated data on the use of cytology samples in order to
determine their suitability for EGFR mutation analysis.
METHODS: We searched the MEDLINE database for studies reporting on EGFR mutation 
testing methods in patients with lung cancer.
RESULTS: Various methods have been investigated as potential alternatives to the 
historical standard for EGFR mutation testing, direct DNA sequencing. Many of
these are targeted methods that specifically detect the most common EGFR
mutations. The development of targeted mutation testing methods and commercially 
available test kits has enabled sensitive, rapid and robust analysis of clinical 
samples. The use of screening methods, subsequent to sample micro dissection, has
also ensured that identification of more rare, uncommon mutations is now
feasible. Cytology samples including fine needle aspirate and pleural effusion
can be used successfully to determine EGFR mutation status provided that
sensitive testing methods are employed.
CONCLUSIONS: Several different testing methods offer a more sensitive alternative
to direct sequencing for the detection of common EGFR mutations. Evidence
published to date suggests cytology samples are viable alternatives for mutation 
testing when tumour tissue samples are not available.

DOI: 10.1136/jclinpath-2012-201194 
PMCID: PMC3582044
PMID: 23172555  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


869. Cancer Res. 2013 Jan 15;73(2):834-43. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-2066. Epub
2012 Nov 19.

Resistance to irreversible EGF receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors through a
multistep mechanism involving the IGF1R pathway.

Cortot AB(1), Repellin CE, Shimamura T, Capelletti M, Zejnullahu K, Ercan D,
Christensen JG, Wong KK, Gray NS, Jänne PA.

Author information: 
(1)Lowe Center for Thoracic Oncology, Department of Medical Oncology, Dana Farber
Cancer Institute, Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical School,
Boston, Massachusetts 02215, USA.

The clinical efficacy of EGF receptor (EGFR) kinase inhibitors gefitinib and
erlotinib is limited by the development of drug resistance. The most common
mechanism of drug resistance is the secondary EGFR T790M mutation. Strategies to 
overcome EGFR T790M-mediated drug resistance include the use of mutant selective 
EGFR inhibitors, including WZ4002, or the use of high concentrations of
irreversible quinazoline EGFR inhibitors such as PF299804. In the current study, 
we develop drug-resistant versions of the EGFR-mutant PC9 cell line, which
reproducibly develops EGFR T790M as a mechanism of drug resistance to gefitinib. 
Neither PF299804-resistant nor WZ4002-resistant clones of PC9 harbor EGFR T790M. 
Instead, they have shown activated insulin-like growth factor receptor (IGF1R)
signaling as a result of loss of expression of IGFBP3 with the IGF1R inhibitor,
BMS 536924, restoring EGFR inhibitor sensitivity. Intriguingly, prolonged
exposure to either PF299804 or WZ4002 results in the emergence of a more
drug-resistant subclone that exhibits ERK activation. A MEK inhibitor, CI-1040,
partially restores sensitivity to the EGFR/IGF1R inhibitor combination. Moreover,
an IGF1R or MEK inhibitor used in combination with either PF299804 or WZ4002
completely prevents the emergence of drug-resistant clones in this model system. 
Our studies suggest that more effective means of inhibiting EGFR T790M will
prevent the emergence of this common drug resistance mechanism in EGFR-mutant
non-small cell lung cancer. However, multiple drug resistance mechanisms can
still emerge. Preventing the emergence of drug resistance, by targeting pathways 
that become activated in resistant cancers, may be a more effective clinical
strategy.

DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-2066 
PMCID: PMC3994895
PMID: 23172312  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


870. Anticancer Res. 2012 Nov;32(11):4629-38.

Utility of hypertension as a surrogate marker for efficacy of antiangiogenic
therapy in NSCLC.

Evans T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania, 2 Perelman Center West, 3400 Civic
Center Blvd, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. Tracey.Evans@uphs.upenn.edu

A plateau has been reached in the efficacy of cytotoxic chemotherapy for
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), highlighting the need for novel treatments
for this poor-prognosis malignancy. Antiangiogenic agents, including the approved
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)-targeted monoclonal antibody,
bevacizumab, as well as a number of investigational tyrosine kinase inhibitors
(TKIs) that simultaneously target multiple angiogenic pathways, have demonstrated
activity in patients with NSCLC. However, unlike the epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR) TKIs erlotinib and gefitinib, for which the presence of
EGFR-activating mutations are now known to predict response, no validated markers
currently exist for the efficacy of antiangiogenic agents. Hypertension has been 
associated with antiangiogenic therapy and has also been evaluated as a surrogate
marker for efficacy with this class of agents, although analyses, to date, have
yielded conflicting results. This review provides a summary of currently
available, clinically relevant data on the incidence of hypertension with
VEGF-targeted antibodies and multitargeted antiangiogenic TKIs in advanced NSCLC 
and discusses the potential predictive role of hypertension on antiangiogenic
therapy in such patients.


PMID: 23155225  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


871. Gan To Kagaku Ryoho. 2012 Nov;39(11):1613-7.

[Therapeutic biomarkers of EGFR-TKI].

[Article in Japanese]

Seike M(1), Gemma A.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Internal Medicine, Division of Pulmonary Medicine/Infection and
Oncology, Nippon Medical School, Tokyo 113-8603, Japan.

Non-small cell lung cancer(NSCLC)patients with activating mutations of the
epidermal growth factor receptor(EGFR)gene have shown a dramatic response to EGFR
tyrosine kinase inhibitors(EGFR-TKI)such as gefitinib and erlotinib. EGFR
activating mutations including exon 19 deletion and exon 21 L858R are recognized 
as markers ofthe sensitivity to EGFR-TKI therapy in NSCLC. However, the emergence
of acquired resistance is virtually inevitable, thus limiting improvement in
patient outcomes. Several acquired-resistance mechanisms and candidates,
including exon 20 T790M secondary mutation, MET amplification, a high-level of
HGF expression, PTEN downregulation, FAS-NF-κB pathway activation,
epithelial-mesenchymal transition, and conversion to small cell lung cancer, have
been identified. Understanding the mechanisms of acquired resistance to EGFR-TKI,
followed by the development of molecular targeted drugs that can overcome the
resistance, could serve as an important advance for targeting EGFR, which is
activated in NSCLC. Further studies should be performed to clarify other
mechanisms associated with the acquired resistance to EGFR-TKI. In this review,
we summarize recent advances in the therapeutic biomarkers to EGFR-TKI.


PMID: 23152012  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


872. PLoS One. 2012;7(10):e44368. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0044368. Epub 2012 Oct 29.

Multiple analyses of G-protein coupled receptor (GPCR) expression in the
development of gefitinib-resistance in transforming non-small-cell lung cancer.

Kuzumaki N(1), Suzuki A, Narita M, Hosoya T, Nagasawa A, Imai S, Yamamizu K,
Morita H, Suzuki T, Okada Y, Okano HJ, Yamashita JK, Okano H, Narita M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Keio University, School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.
naokokuzumaki@gmail.com

There is increasing evidence that functional crosstalk between GPCRs and EGFR
contributes to the progression of colon, lung, breast, ovarian, prostate and head
and neck tumors. In this study, we performed multiple analyses of GPCR expression
in a gefitinib-resistant non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cell line, H1975,
which harbors an L858R/T790M mutation. To determine the expression profile of
mRNAs encoding 384 GPCRs in normal human lung fibroblast (NHLF) and H1975 cells, 
a GPCR-specific microarray analysis was performed. A heat-map of the microarray
revealed considerable differences in the expression of GPCRs between NHLF and
H1975 cells. From the GPCR expression list, we selected some GPCR
agonists/antagonist to investigate whether the respective ligands could affect
the growth of H1975 cells. Among them, treatment with either a selective
antagonist of adenosine A2a receptors, which were highly expressed in H1975 cell 
and another gefitinib-resistant NSCLC cells, HCC827GR cells or "small interfering
RNA" (siRNA) targeting adenosine A2a receptors produced a significant decrease in
cell viability of both H1975 and HCC827GR cells. Among up-regulated GPCRs in
H1975 cells, Gs-, Gi- and Gq-coupled GPCRs were expressed almost equally. Among
down-regulated GPCRs, Gi-coupled GPCRs were dominantly expressed in H1975 cells. 
The present results suggest that multilayered crosstalk between GPCRs and EGFR
may play an important role in orchestrating downstream signaling molecules that
are implicated in the development of gefitinib-resistant NSCLC.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0044368 
PMCID: PMC3483178
PMID: 23144692  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


873. Eur J Med Chem. 2013 Mar;61:132-45. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmech.2012.10.017. Epub 2012 
Oct 27.

Design, synthesis and in vitro anti-proliferative activity of
4,6-quinazolinediamines as potent EGFR-TK inhibitors.

Mowafy S(1), Farag NA, Abouzid KA.

Author information: 
(1)Pharmaceutical Chemistry Department, Faculty of Pharmacy, Misr International
University, Abbassia, 11566 Cairo, Egypt.

4-Anilino-6-substituted-quinazolines were designed, synthesized and evaluated for
EGFR-TK and tumor growth inhibitory activities. The target compounds were
designed with enamine ester or urea moieties appended at the C-6 of quinazoline
as additional hydrogen bond acceptor functions. Most of the synthesized compounds
displayed potent EGFR-TK inhibitory activity at 10 μM and the
6-ureido-anilinoquinazoline derivative 7a showed IC50 value of 0.061 μM.
Moreover, six compounds were tested by National Cancer Institute (NCI), USA for
their anti-proliferative activity at 10 μM in full NCI 60 cell panel. Compound 7a
was further assayed for five dose molar ranges in full NCI 60 cell panel and
exhibited remarkable growth inhibitory activity pattern against Non-Small Cell
Lung Cancer EKVX (GI50 = 0.37 μM), NCI-H322M (GI50 = 0.36 μM), Renal Cancer A498 
(GI50 = 0.46 μM), TK-10 (GI50 = 0.99 μM) and Breast Cancer MDA-MB-468 (GI50 =
1.096 μM) which are of high EGFR expression. Docking study was performed for the 
active compounds into ATP binding site of EGFR-TK which showed similar binding
mode to gefitinib and additional binding with Cys-773 at the gatekeeper of
EGFR-TK enzyme.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejmech.2012.10.017 
PMID: 23142066  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


874. Anticancer Agents Med Chem. 2014 Jun;14(5):646-50.

Erlotinib and gefitinib for elderly patients with advanced non-small-cell lung
cancer.

Passaro A, Alesini D, Pochesci A, Cortesi E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Oncology, Sapienza - University of Rome, Viale Regina
Elena, 324 - 00161, Rome, Italy. a-passaro@hotmail.it.

Erlotinib and gefitinib are tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKI) associated with the 
EGFR, which is involved in cell proliferation, growth, migration, invasion and
survival, and has been found to be overexpressed in non-small-cell lung cancer.
Erlotinib was the first target agent approved for the treatment of NSCLC in
second- and third line, in patients unselected for EGFR mutations; gefitinib was 
the first EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor approved for the treatment of NSCLC in
all lines of setting in patients harbouring EGFR mutations. In elderly patients, 
with a poor prognosis, and different co-morbidities, erlotinib and gefitinib
could be considered as valid therapeutic options. This paper reviews the role of 
both drugs, in the management of elderly patients affected by advanced NSCLC
based on an update analysis of randomised and non-randomised clinical trials.


PMID: 23140355  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


875. World J Surg Oncol. 2012 Nov 7;10:235. doi: 10.1186/1477-7819-10-235.

Activity of pemetrexed and high-dose gefitinib in an EGFR-mutated lung
adenocarcinoma with brain and leptomeningeal metastasis after response to
gefitinib.

Yuan Y(1), Tan C, Li M, Shen H, Fang X, Hu Y, Ma S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Second Affiliated Hospital Zhejiang University
College of Medicine, 88, Jiefang Road, Hangzhou 310009, Zhejiang, China.

About 20% to 40% of patients with non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) will develop
brain metastases during the natural course of their disease. The prognosis for
such patients is very poor with limited survival. In addition to the standard
whole brain radiation therapy (WBRT), some studies have shown that chemotherapy
drugs and/or epidermal growth factor receptor-tyrosine kinase inhibitors
(EGFR-TKI) can improve the outcome of these patients. Here, we report a stage
IIIA patient who developed multiple brain metastases one year after operation.
Oral gefitinib with concurrent WBRT were given as first-line therapy. Complete
response and a 50-month progression-free survival (PFS) were obtained. Double
dosage of gefitinib (500 mg per day) together with pemetrexed were given as the
second-line therapy after the patient developed new brain lesions and
leptomeningeal metastasis during the maintenance therapy of gefitinib. The PFS
for the second-line therapy was six months. In total, the patient obtained an
overall survival of 59 months since the first diagnosis of brain metastases.
Mutational analysis showed a 15-nucleotide deletion and a missense mutation in
exon 19 of the EGFR gene, and a missense mutation at codon 12 of the K-ras gene. 
These underlying genetic changes might partially explain the long-term survival
of this patient after brain metastases when treated with concurrent or sequential
therapies of EGFR-TKI, radiotherapy and chemotherapy.

DOI: 10.1186/1477-7819-10-235 
PMCID: PMC3542167
PMID: 23134665  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


876. Oncol Rep. 2013 Jan;29(1):237-43. doi: 10.3892/or.2012.2118. Epub 2012 Oct 31.

Norcantharidin suppresses cell growth and migration with enhanced anticancer
activity of gefitinib and cisplatin in human non-small cell lung cancer cells.

Lee YC(1), Lee LM, Yang CH, Lin AM, Huang YC, Hsu CC, Chen MS, Chi CW, Yin PH,
Kuo CD, Liao JF, Lee HC.

Author information: 
(1)Department and Institute of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, National
Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan, ROC.

Norcantharidin is the demethylated analog of cantharidin isolated from blister
beetles (Mylabris phalerata Pall.). In this study, we evaluated whether
norcantharidin exhibits anticancer effects against the human non-small cell lung 
cancer cell lines A549 (epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)
mutation-negative) and PC9 (EGFR mutation-positive). Our results revealed that
norcantharidin dose-dependently retards cell growth, arrests cell cycle at G2/M
phase, reduces cell migration, and even induces apoptosis at the concentration of
100 µM. Moreover, we found that norcantharidin enhances the anticancer effects of
gefitinib and cisplatin. Norcantharidin exhibited similar potency of anticancer
effects against the two cell lines with different EGFR mutation status and did
not affect EGF-induced EGFR phosphorylation, suggesting that the EGFR signaling
may not be the target of norcantharidin. In conclusion, our results suggest that 
norcantharidin exhibits anticancer effects against non-small cell lung cancer
cells in vitro and support its potential as a chemotherapeutic agent for treating
non-small cell lung cancer.

DOI: 10.3892/or.2012.2118 
PMID: 23128522  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


877. Lung Cancer. 2013 Jan;79(1):59-64. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2012.10.006. Epub 2012 
Nov 1.

VeriStrat® has a prognostic value for patients with advanced non-small cell lung 
cancer treated with erlotinib and bevacizumab in the first line: pooled analysis 
of SAKK19/05 and NTR528.

Gautschi O(1), Dingemans AM, Crowe S, Peters S, Roder H, Grigorieva J, Roder J,
Zappa F, Pless M, Brutsche M, Baty F, Bubendorf L, Hsu Schmitz SF, Na KJ, Carbone
D, Stahel R, Smit E.

Author information: 
(1)Cantonal Hospital, Luzern, Switzerland. oliver.gautschi@luks.ch

BACKGROUND: VeriStrat(®) is a serum proteomic test used to determine whether
patients with advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) who have already
received chemotherapy are likely to have good or poor outcomes from treatment
with gefitinib or erlotinib. The main objective of our retrospective study was to
evaluate the role of VS as a marker of overall survival (OS) in patients treated 
with erlotinib and bevacizumab in the first line.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Patients were pooled from two phase II trials (SAKK19/05
and NTR528). For survival analyses, a log-rank test was used to determine if
there was a statistically significant difference between groups. The hazard ratio
(HR) of any separation was assessed using Cox proportional hazards models.
RESULTS: 117 patients were analyzed. VeriStrat classified patients into two
groups which had a statistically significant difference in duration of OS (p =
0.0027, HR = 0.480, 95% confidence interval: 0.294-0.784).
CONCLUSION: VeriStrat has a prognostic role in patients with advanced,
nonsquamous NSCLC treated with erlotinib and bevacizumab in the first line.
Further work is needed to study the predictive role of VeriStrat for erlotinib
and bevacizumab in chemotherapy-untreated patients.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2012.10.006 
PMID: 23122759  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


878. Cell Biochem Biophys. 2013 May;66(1):81-92. doi: 10.1007/s12013-012-9456-9.

Apoptosis induced by benzyl isothiocyanate in gefitinib-resistant lung cancer
cells is associated with Akt/MAPK pathways and generation of reactive oxygen
species.

Liu BN(1), Yan HQ, Wu X, Pan ZH, Zhu Y, Meng ZW, Zhou QH, Xu K.

Author information: 
(1)Tianjin Key Laboratory of Lung Cancer Metastasis and Tumor Microenvironment,
Tianjin Lung Cancer Institute, Tianjin Medical University General Hospital,
Tianjin, 300052, China.

Gefitinib is the first targeted drug approved for non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC) treatment. Clinical trails showed that patients with certain clinical and
histologic characteristics (such as women, patients of East Asian descent, no
history of smoking, and adenocarcinoma) had higher rates of response and overall 
survival. Despite excellent clinical response to gefitinib in certain NSCLC
patients, nearly all patients who respond initially to gefitinib later develop
drug resistance. Isothiocyanates have been shown to possess antitumor activity,
inhibiting several types of cancer cells growth. However, there are limited
studies on their effects on chemoresistance of cancer cells. In this report, we
found that benzyl isothiocyanate (BITC) inhibited gefitinib-resistant human NSCLC
cells growth by inducing apoptosis in a dose-dependent manner, and activated
caspase-3. There were no effects of BITC on epidermal growth factor receptor and 
multidrug resistant proteins expression. BITC caused cell cycle arrest at G2/M
phase, reactive oxygen species generation, and glutathione depletion. Akt
activity and NFκB transcriptional activation were suppressed; mitogen-activated
protein kinase and activator protein 1 (AP-1) were activated. Our results
demonstrated that BITC overcame gefitinib resistance in lung cancer cells. The
further understanding of the anti-resistance mechanism of BITC would contribute
to establish it as a potent lead compound for the synthesis of novel anticancer
drugs.

DOI: 10.1007/s12013-012-9456-9 
PMID: 23111983  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


879. Osaka City Med J. 2012 Jun;58(1):25-34.

Comparison of adverse events of erlotinib with those of gefitinib in patients
with non-small cell lung cancer: a case-control study in a Japanese population.

Suzumura T(1), Kimura T, Kudoh S, Umekawa K, Nagata M, Tanaka H, Mitsuoka S,
Yoshimura N, Kira Y, Hirata K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Osaka City University, Graduate School of 
Medicine, Japan. tsuzumura@msic.med.osaka-cu.ac.jp

BACKGROUND: Rash, liver dysfunction, and diarrhea are known as adverse events of 
erlotinib and gefitinib. However, clinical trials with gefitinib have reported
different adverse events compared to those with erlotinib. In an in vitro study, 
cytochrome P450 (CYP) 2D6 was shown to be involved in the metabolism of gefitinib
and not of erlotinib. It has been hypothesized that gefitinib therapy results in 
different adverse events compared to erlotinib therapy.
METHODS: The frequency of each adverse event was evaluated in a case-control
study on Japanese patients who were treated with gefitinib or erlotinib. The
CYP2D6 phenotype was categorized into 2 groups according to functional or reduced
metabolic levels. In addition, we evaluated the odds ratio (OR) of adverse events
with each factor, including CYP2D6 activities as well as treatment types.
RESULTS: A total of 112 patients received gefitinib therapy, 74 patients received
erlotinib therapy, and 17 patients received erlotinib and gefitinib sequentially.
The OR of developing rash with gefitinib versus erlotinib treatment was 0.38 (95%
confidence interval [CI], 0.15-0.86). The OR of developing diarrhea with
gefitinib versus erlotinib treatment was 0.46 (95% CI, 0.22-0.94). The OR of
developing liver dysfunction with gefitinib versus erlotinib treatment was 3.30
(95% CI, 1.59-7.22). Reduced function of CYP2D6 was not associated with an
increased risk of any adverse events in both gefitinib and erlotinib cohorts.
CONCLUSIONS: Erlotinib had higher rate of rash and diarrhea than gefitinib. Liver
dysfunction occurred significantly more often in the gefitinib group than in the 
erlotinib group.


PMID: 23094511  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


880. Diagn Pathol. 2012 Oct 22;7:146. doi: 10.1186/1746-1596-7-146.

Molecular modeling and description of a newly characterized activating mutation
of the EGFR gene in non-small cell lung cancer.

Otto C(1), Csanadi A, Fisch P, Werner M, Kayser G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, University Medical Center Freiburg, Breisacher Strasse
115a, D-79106, Freiburg, Germany.

Lung cancer is the leading cause of death among malignant diseases in humans
worldwide. In the last decade development of new targeted drugs for the treatment
of non-small cell lung cancer proved to be a promising approach to prolong the
otherwise very poor prognosis of patients with advanced UICC stages. Epidermal
growth factor receptor (EGFR) has been in the focus of this lung cancer science
and specific activating mutations are eligible for the treatment with specific
tyrosine kinase inhibitors like gefitinib or erlotinib. Beside typical deletions 
in exon 19 and point mutations in exons 18 and 21 several insertions in exon 19
have been described and attributed activating properties as well. This is the
first European and overall the 5th description in English literature of one of
these specific insertions. To elucidate its structural changes leading to the
activating properties we performed molecular modeling studies. These revealed
conformational and electrostatic force field changes in the kinase domain of
EGFR. To not miss uncommon mutations thorough and precise characterization of
EGFR hotspots, i. e. at least exons 18, 19 and 21, should therefore be conducted 
to provide best medical care and to offer lung cancer patients appropriate cancer
treatment.VIRTUAL SLIDES: The vistual slides for this article can be found here: 
http://www.diagnosticpathology.diagnomx.eu/vs/2209889658102062.

DOI: 10.1186/1746-1596-7-146 
PMCID: PMC3523061
PMID: 23088930  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


881. J Med Case Rep. 2012 Oct 18;6:353. doi: 10.1186/1752-1947-6-353.

Orbital metastasis secondary to pulmonary adenocarcinoma treated with gefitinib: 
a case report.

Koma Y(1), Goto K, Yoshida C, Kimura K, Matsumoto Y, Koyama M, Nakashima N,
Masuya D, Matsuoka H, Yoshimatsu H, Azumi A, Suzuki Y.

Author information: 
(1)Respiratory Center, Shinko Hospital, 1-4-47, Wakinohamacho, Chuo-ku, Kobe
651-0072, Japan. yasukok@shinkohp.or.jp.

INTRODUCTION: Orbital metastases of lung cancer are rare. However, because the
number of patients diagnosed with lung cancer is increasing, the probability that
a physician will see a patient with an orbital metastasis is also increasing.
Unfortunately, the clinical course and response of these patients to cytotoxic
chemotherapy are generally poor and keeping a patient's quality of vision is
difficult. In recent years, gefitinib, an epidermal growth factor receptor
tyrosine kinase inhibitor, has brightened the outlook for patients with advanced 
non-small cell lung cancer, especially for those who carry epidermal growth
factor receptor-activating mutations.
CASE PRESENTATION: A 62-year-old Japanese man presented with swelling of the
eyelid margin and ptosis of his right eye. A physical examination revealed double
vision in his right eye and an alteration in elevator muscle mobility. A magnetic
resonance image demonstrated a right intra-orbital mass (18 × 16mm). Screening
examinations were carried out because this mass was suspected to be a metastasis 
from another organ. Chest computed tomography revealed a 42 × 37mm mass shadow on
the left side of the hilum with mediastinal lymph node metastases. Adenocarcinoma
with an epidermal growth factor receptor gene mutation (exon 19 deletion
L747-E749; A750P) was detected in a transbronchial biopsy specimen; the patient
was diagnosed with stage IV (T2N2M1) non-small cell lung cancer.Gefitinib
(250mg/day) was chosen as first-line chemotherapy because there was no
pre-existing interstitial shadow. After two months of treatment, the patient's
right eye opened completely and follow-up magnetic resonance imaging revealed a
marked reduction of the intra-orbital mass to 14 × 13mm. Three months after
treatment initiation, a follow-up computed tomography showed a marked reduction
in the size of the primary lesion to 23 × 20mm. The patient is continuing
gefitinib treatment without any adverse effects noted on computed tomography,
physical, or laboratory examination.
CONCLUSIONS: We report the case of a patient with an orbital non-small cell lung 
cancer metastasis with epidermal growth factor receptor-activating mutations.
This metastasis, as well as the primary lesion, showed a marked response to the
molecular targeting drug gefitinib, and the patient's vision was kept without an 
invasive procedure. Gefitinib may be a good first choice for patients with
orbital non-small cell lung cancer metastasis harboring epidermal growth factor
receptor-activating mutations.

DOI: 10.1186/1752-1947-6-353 
PMCID: PMC3543340
PMID: 23079208  [PubMed]


882. Clin Transl Oncol. 2013 May;15(5):384-90. doi: 10.1007/s12094-012-0939-3. Epub
2012 Oct 11.

Prognostic significance of NSE mRNA in advanced NSCLC treated with gefitinib.

Wang Y(1), Tang D, Sui A, Jiao W, Luo Y, Wang M, Yang R, Wang Z, Shen Y.

Author information: 
(1)Thoracic Surgery of the Affiliated Hospital of Medical College Qingdao
University, 16 Jiangsu Road, Qingdao, 266003, China.

PURPOSE: Current knowledge of the prognostic biomarkers of advanced non-small
cell lung cancer (NSCLC) treated with gefitinib is poor. NSE mRNA as a potential 
prognostic biomarker of the effectiveness of gefitinib treatment in NSCLC,
especially in the Chinese population, needs to be further validated.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We retrospectively reviewed 168 advanced NSCLC patients
treated with gefitinib between May 2006 and July 2010. NSE mRNA was measured
using quantitative RT-PCR analysis for correlation with the clinical outcomes.
RESULTS: We found that NSE mRNA expression was inversely correlated with
sensitivity to gefitinib in NSCLC patients. Patients without elevated NSE mRNA
had a more RR (CR + RR) 45.1 % than elevated 18.9 % (P = 0.0005). Moreover, the
time to progression was 6.0 versus 4.2 months, respectively. Log-rank test was
marginally significant (χ(2) = 12.11, P = 0.0007) and Cox multivariate analysis
revealed that NSE mRNA (HR = 3.076; 95 % CI 1.943-4.870; P < 0.0001) was an
independent prognostic factor of NSCLC patients in the Chinese population.
CONCLUSION: For NSCLC patients treated with gefitinib, patients without elevated 
NSE mRNA had a better prognosis than those with elevated NSE mRNA. Pretreatment
NSE mRNA holds great potential as a prognostic biomarker in advanced NSCLC.
Therefore, it is proposed that NSE mRNA should be routinely detected to screen
patients who are more likely to benefit from gefitinib-based treatment.

DOI: 10.1007/s12094-012-0939-3 
PMID: 23065601  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


883. Gan To Kagaku Ryoho. 2012 Oct;39(10):1539-41.

[Two cases of long-term response treated by S-1 with concurrent radiotherapy
followed by S-1 treatment for non-small cell lung cancer patients].

[Article in Japanese]

Fujimoto H(1), Suito T, Oyama T, Kameyama Y, Nakayama S.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Thoracic Surgery, Ashikaga Red Cross Hospital, Japan.

In a previous study, we reported a patient who responded to non-small cell lung
cancer treatment with S-1 and concurrent radiotherapy over an extended period.
This time, we report a long-term follow-up of the same case, and a new case which
had a complete response to S-1 and concurrent radiotherapy. Case 1 is a
35-year-old woman with a pathological diagnosis of stage T2N2M0 lung
adenocarcinoma. This case was already reported till 36 months postoperatively. 71
months postoperatively, PET-CT inspection revealed no obvious metastasis, unusual
accumulations of FDG, or unusual shadows which may suggest recurrence. Case 2 is 
a 37-year-old woman with a pathological diagnosis of stage T2N2M0 right lung
adenocarcinoma. After CBDCA/GEM and gefitinib were used as anterior
chemotherapies, the right lung was partially resected. However, since the
metastasis was developed, a total amount of 60 Gy/30 Fr was used to irradiate the
mediastinum of the right cervix. Around the same time, S-1 treatment was
started[a dose of 50mg/day(35m2/day)in two divided doses for 2 weeks, followed by
1 week of rest). As a result of S-1 treatment with concurrent radiotherapy, the
patient had a long-term response. Sixteen months postoperatively, there has been 
no observable recurrence by CT inspection.


PMID: 23064067  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


884. Oncogene. 2013 Aug 15;32(33):3846-56. doi: 10.1038/onc.2012.396. Epub 2012 Oct 8.

HGF induces novel EGFR functions involved in resistance formation to tyrosine
kinase inhibitors.

Gusenbauer S(1), Vlaicu P, Ullrich A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Max-Planck-Institute of Biochemistry,
Martinsried, Germany.

The epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is overexpressed and activated in
many human cancers and predicts poor patient prognosis. Targeting the kinase
domain with specific EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) like gefitinib and
erlotinib has been used in anticancer treatments. However, patient response rates
in different human cancers were initially low. Only a subgroup of non-small-cell 
lung cancer (NSCLC) patients harboring EGFR-activating mutations responds to EGFR
TKI treatment, but most of these responders relapse and acquire resistance.
Recent clinical studies have demonstrated that MET proto-oncogene overexpression 
correlates with resistance to EGFR TKI treatment. Similarly to MET
overexpression, the tumor microenvironment-derived ligand hepatocyte growth
factor (HGF) was shown to activate Met and thereby induce short-term resistance
to EGFR TKI treatment in gefitinib-sensitive NSCLC cell lines in vitro. However, 
only little is known about the HGF/Met-induced EGFR TKI resistance mechanism in
other human cancer types. Therefore, in order to develop possible new anticancer 
strategies for diverse human cancers, we screened 12 carcinoma cell lines
originating from the breast, kidney, liver and tongue for HGF-induced EGFR
tyrosine kinase (TK)-inhibition. In addition, in order to advance our
understanding of a TK-inactive EGFR, we used EGFR co-immunoprecipitation,
followed by mass spectrometry to identify novel HGF-induced EGFR binding
partners, which are potentially involved in tyrosine kinase-independent EGFR
signaling mechanisms. Here we show for the first time that HGF-induced EGFR
TK-inhibition is a very common mechanism in human cancers, and that the
kinase-inactive EGFR directly interacts with and stabilizes several
cancer-relevant proteins, including the receptor tyrosine kinases Axl and EphA2, 
and the CUB domain-containing protein-1. This study has strong implications for
the development of new anticancer strategies.

DOI: 10.1038/onc.2012.396 
PMID: 23045285  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


885. Cancer Treat Rev. 2013 Aug;39(5):489-97. doi: 10.1016/j.ctrv.2012.09.001. Epub
2012 Sep 28.

Should epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors be considered 
ideal drugs for the treatment of selected advanced non-small cell lung cancer
patients?

Rossi A(1), Pasquale R, Esposito C, Normanno N.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Oncology, S.G. Moscati Hospital, Avellino, Italy.
arossi_it@yahoo.it

An ideal target-based agent for the treatment of cancer patients should fulfil a 
number of requirements, including the availability of biomarkers to select the
target population, superiority over existing treatments and specific advantages
in terms of pharmacokinetics and/or metabolism. Epidermal growth factor receptor 
tyrosine kinase inhibitors (EGFR-TKIs), such as gefitinib, erlotinib and
afatinib, have been investigated in the treatment of non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC), and to date a large amount of clinical data are available. The activity 
of EGFR-TKIs was initially investigated in unselected patients leading to
unsatisfactory results. However, the discovery that response to EGFR-TKIs is
associated with the presence of activating EGFR mutations in NSCLC, has led to
the design of clinical trials in which patients were selected on the basis of the
EGFR mutational status or of clinical and pathological features that are highly
associated with the presence of EGFR mutations. In this respect, several phase
III randomized trials have demonstrated that first-line EGFR-TKIs, compared to
chemotherapy, is associated with longer progression-free survival, higher
response rate, better toxicity profile and quality of life in patients carrying
EGFR mutations. Although no survival advantage was demonstrated, all the trials
suffered of a high post-progression treatment cross-over, which predictably
undermined the results. This review will summarize the current evidence that
strongly support the hypothesis that gefitinib, erlotinib and afatinib are ideal 
drugs for NSCLC patients carrying EGFR mutations.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ctrv.2012.09.001 
PMID: 23022519  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


886. Respir Investig. 2012 Sep;50(3):117-21. doi: 10.1016/j.resinv.2012.06.002. Epub
2012 Jul 15.

Miliary brain metastases in 2 cases with advanced non-small cell lung cancer
harboring EGFR mutation during gefitinib treatment.

Mochizuki S(1), Nishimura N, Inoue A, Murakami K, Nukiwa T, Chohnabayashi N.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary Medicine, St. Luke's International Hospital,
9-1Akashi-cho, Tokyo 104-8560, Japan. sayakam0920@gmail.com

Here we report 2 cases of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) with sensitive
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) gene mutation that developed miliary
brain metastases characterized by dementia and disorientation during gefitinib
therapy. One patient's therapy was switched from gefitinib to chemotherapy
followed by whole brain radiotherapy (WBRT), which resulted in disease
progression with coma. Gefitinib reinitiation improved the patient's symptoms.
The other patient continued gefitinib during WBRT and achieved complete remission
of the miliary metastases and lived 18 months longer. These results suggest that 
gefitinib concomitant with WBRT is an optional strategy for the treatment of
patients with EGFR-mutated NSCLC with miliary metastases to prevent disease
flare.

Copyright © 2012 The Japanese Respiratory Society. Published by Elsevier B.V. All
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.resinv.2012.06.002 
PMID: 23021771  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


887. Onkologie. 2012;35(9):509-13. Epub 2012 Aug 13.

Gefitinib-induced hepatotoxicity in patients treated for non-small cell lung
cancer.

Chen J(1), Gu R, Wang Q, Dassarath M, Yin Z, Yang K, Wu G.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Center, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of 
Science and Technology, Wuhan, China.

BACKGROUND: Although epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)-specific tyrosine
kinase inhibitors (TKIs) are widely used in the management of advanced non-small 
cell lung cancer (NSCLC), gefitinib-induced hepatotoxicity has been
underappreciated and rarely reported.
CASE REPORT: The medical records of 92 NSCLC patients, who were admitted to our
cancer center in the past 5 years, were reviewed retrospectively. All patients
received treatment with gefitinib (250 mg/day), during which liver function was
monitored. Of the 92 NSCLC patients, 6 (6.5%) developed mild to moderate
hepatotoxicity during gefitinib treatment. The time of onset of hepatotoxicity
ranged from 7 days to 6 months after gefitinib administration. 1 patient (1.1%)
suffered from grade 2 hepatotoxicity, and gradually recovered her normal liver
function after reduction of the gefitinib dose. The other 5 patients with grade 1
hepatic impairment tolerated gefitinib well without requiring dose reductions or 
drug cessation.
CONCLUSION: Gefitinib-induced hepatotoxicity is not uncommon. Although the extent
of this toxicity is generally mild in nature and most patients tolerate gefitinib
well, meticulous monitoring is mandatory to avoid severe hepatic impairment.

Copyright © 2012 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000341828 
PMID: 23007149  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


888. Gan To Kagaku Ryoho. 2012 Sep;39(9):1357-61.

[Efficacy of erlotinib after gefitinib administration in patients with non-small 
cell lung cancer].

[Article in Japanese]

Murakami A(1), Ohashi R, Minakata K, Koyama R, Muraki K, Shukuya T, Namba Y, Ko
R, Yagishita S, Katsura Y, Takahashi F, Sakuraba S, Takahashi K.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Respiratory Medicine, Juntendo University, Faculty of Medicine.

We retrospectively evaluated the survival benefit of dispensing erlotinib after
gefitinib administration in patients with nonsmall cell lung cancer. Ninety
patients treated with erlotinib in our hospital were divided into two groups: G+ 
group patients who were treated with erlotinib with prior gefitinib
administration, and G- group patients who were treated with erlotinib without
prior gefitinib administration. Median survival time (MST) in all 90 patients was
275 days. MST of 22 patients in the G+ group was shorter than that of 68 patients
in G- group, but this difference was not statistically significant (283 days vs
177 days, p=0. 329). MST in 19 patients of the G+group who were administered
erlotinib for over 1 month was shorter than that of 49G-group patients who were
administered erlotinib over 1 month. However, this difference was also not
statistically significant(395 days vs 238 days, p=0. 575). Univariate analysis
demonstrated that EGFR mutation unknown, time to progression (TTP) with gefitinib
longer than 1 year, gefitnib administration longer than 1 year, and responder to 
gefitinib, suggest a better prognosis. Mutivariate analysis revealed that only
TTP with gefitinib longer than 1 year was an independent prognostic factor for
patients in the G+ group.


PMID: 22996769  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


889. Anticancer Res. 2012 Sep;32(9):3785-90.

Prognostic value of acquired resistance-related molecules in Japanese patients
with NSCLC treated with an EGFR-TKI.

Uramoto H(1), Yamada T, Yano S, Kondo N, Hasegawa S, Tanaka F.

Author information: 
(1)Second Department of Surgery, University of Occupational and Environmental
Health, Kitakyushu, Japan. hidetaka@med.uoeh-u.ac.jp

BACKGROUND: Most patients with lung cancer experience relapse, although epidermal
growth factor receptor (EGFR) of tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) has an
astounding effect on tumors with EGFR-activating mutations. It is therefore
critical to determine the mechanisms of resistance against agents and the
prognostic value of acquired resistance-related molecules to EGFR-TKI.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Tumor specimens were obtained from 19 matched specimens
before and after treatment with gefitinib. A retrospective multi-institutional
study analyzed the correlation between patients' survival and acquired
resistance-related molecules in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) samples, that 
possessed sensitive EGFR mutations (7 cases: exon 19 deletion, and 12 cases: exon
21 point mutation). The status of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) and
KRAS genes were investigated by polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-based analyses.
Real-time PCR assays were also used to evaluate MET gene amplification. The
expression of hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) and changes in the
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) status including the expression of
E-cadherin and γ-catenin as epithelial markers, and those of vimentin and
fibronectin as mesenchymal markers, were evaluated by immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: Eight of the gefitinib refractory tumors exhibited a secondary
threonine-to-methionine mutation at codon 790 in EGFR (T790M). All of the tumors 
had wild type KRAS gene expression. No MET amplification was detected in any of
the samples. A strong expression of HGF was detected in eight of the specimens at
post-treatment. A change in the EMT status between pre-and post-treatment was
found in five cases. The 5-year survival rate of patients with and without T790M 
was 86.7% and 13.3%, respectively (p=0.020). The 5-year overall survival (OS)
rate for patients with overexpresion and for those with weak expression of HGF
was 75.0% and 22.2%, respectively (p=0.259). In addition, the 5-year OS rate for 
patients with unchanged and changed EMT status was 83.3% and 40.0%, respectively 
(p=0.123).
CONCLUSION: The current results showed that the presence of T790M is associated
with favorable survival. On the other hand, the patients with weak HGF expression
and EMT change tend to have a poor survival. The current patients' selection
might be changed by discrimination of acquired resistance-related molecules in
patients with NSCLC treated with an EGFR-TKI.


PMID: 22993320  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


890. J Exp Clin Cancer Res. 2012 Sep 19;31:77. doi: 10.1186/1756-9966-31-77.

Molecular predictors of response to tyrosine kinase inhibitors in patients with
Non-Small-Cell Lung Cancer.

Murray S(1), Karavasilis V, Bobos M, Razis E, Papadopoulos S, Christodoulou C,
Kosmidis P, Fountzilas G.

Author information: 
(1)BioMarker Solutions Ltd, London, UK. smgenedb@gmail.com

INTRODUCTION: Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase inhibitors 
(TKIs) have become a treatment option in non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
patients. However, despite their use in this disease, a significant number of
patients will eventually develop resistance and relapse. In this study, we aimed 
to characterize several molecular events involved in potential resistance
mechanisms to anti-EGFR treatment and correlate our findings with clinical
outcome.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: The medical records of patients with NSCLC who received
anti-EGFR TKIs in any line within the participating centers were reviewed and
available paraffin embedded tissue was retrieved. Mutational analysis for EGFR,
KRAS, BRAF and intron-exon 14 deletions of MET; FISH analysis for chromosomal
gain or amplification for EGFR, MET and the deletion marker D7S486 were
performed. Furthermore, the expression of EGFR and MET were analysed by
immunohistochemistry. All results were correlated with treatment outcomes.
RESULTS: Between 10/2001 and 12/2009 from an initial cohort of 72 treated
patients, 59 cases (28 gefitinib/ 31 erlotinib) were included in the analysis.
The majority had adenocarcinoma histology (68%), and received treatment in the
second line setting (56%). Disease control rate (DCR) was 25.4% for all patients.
EGFR and RAS mutational rates were 33% and 10% respectively, no other mutations
were identified. High EGFR expressing tumors were found in 7 of 45 cases and
pEGFR positivity (IHC) was found in 56% of the cases; MET expression was found in
48% of tumors. EGFR gene amplification was found in 4 cases, two cases showed
high polysomy; overall, 13% cases were FISH positive for EGFR. High polysomy of
MET gene was detected in 1/43 cases tested. D7S486 locus deletion was detected in
15/37 (40%) of cases. EGFR mutational status and gene gain were both associated
with more favorable DCR. No other associations between examined biomarkers and
DCR or survival were noted.
CONCLUSIONS: EGFR mutational status is a predictor for disease control in
patients with NSCLC treated with anti-EGFR TKIs. The predictive role of several
other molecules involved in potential resistance to anti-EGFR TKIs is worthy of
additional investigation.

DOI: 10.1186/1756-9966-31-77 
PMCID: PMC3533816
PMID: 22992338  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


891. Zhongguo Fei Ai Za Zhi. 2012 Sep;15(9):513-20.

[EGFR gene mutation statuses in advanced non-small cell lung cancer patients and 
their influence on effect of gefitinib].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhong W(1), Wang M, Li L, Xia Y, Chen M, Zhang L, Zhao J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Diseases, Peking Union Medical College Hospital,
Peking Union Medical College and Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing
100730, China.

BACKGROUND: It has been proven that the status of epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR) gene mutation was related to effects of gefitinib in patients
with advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). The aim of this study is to
reports distribution of EGFR gene mutations in advanced NSCLC and their influence
on effect of gefitinib.
METHODS: From Jan 2007 to Dec 2009, 160 patients with advanced non-squamous NSCLC
received EGFR mutation tests, and EGFR exon 19 and 21 were amplified by
mutant-enriched PCR and analyzed by sequencing. Among those patients, 111
received gefitinib therapy. Overall survival (OS) and progression free survival
(PFS) were calculated using the Kaplan-Meier method and a Cox regression analysis
was used to detect differences between strata.
RESULTS: The percentage of EGFR mutation in advanced non-squamous NSCLC was 55%, 
and it was only significantly related with pathological type. OS of the patients 
with or without EGFR gene mutations were 29.0 months (95%CI: 24.2-33.8) and 21.0 
months (95% CI: 14.7-27.3) respectively, and the difference was not significant. 
PFS of patients with or without EGFR gene mutations were 17.0 months (95% CI:
5.6-17.6) and 11.6 months (95% CI 8.6-25.4), and the difference was significant
(P = 0.022). Multivariate analysis shows that OS was significantly related with
ECOG status, pathological type and EGFR mutation statuses, and PFS was
significantly related to ECOG status, former regimens number and EGFR mutation
statuses. There were no significant differences in OS and PFS between patients
with EGFR exon 19 deletions and those with exon 21 point mutation.
CONCLUSIONS: PFS of patients with EGFR mutations was better than those without
EGFR mutations, but OS was similar. There were no significant differences in OS
and PFS between patients with EGFR exon 19 deletions and those with exon 21 point
mutation.

DOI: 10.3779/j.issn.1009-3419.2012.09.03 
PMID: 22989454  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


892. Invest New Drugs. 2013 Jun;31(3):506-15. doi: 10.1007/s10637-012-9874-y. Epub
2012 Sep 18.

A pilot study for the early assessment of the effects of BMS-754807 plus
gefitinib in an H292 tumor model by [(18)F]fluorothymidine-positron emission
tomography.

Lee SJ(1), Kim EJ, Lee HJ, Kim SY, Oh SJ, Ryu JS, Moon DH, Ahn JH, Kim SW.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Innovative Cancer Research, Asan Institute for Life Science,
Asan Medical Center, Olympic-ro 43-gil, Songpa-gu, Seoul, 138-736, Korea.

BMS-754807 is an inhibitor of insulin-like growth factor-1 receptor (IGF-1R) and 
insulin receptor that also represses aurora kinase. Cancers that express high
levels of IGF-1/IGF-1R are sensitive to BMS-754807; however, it shows limited
efficacy in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) in which IGF-1R-driven signals may
not be dominant factors in cell proliferation. In this study, we investigated
whether a combination of BMS-754807 and gefitinib would be synergistic in H292
NSCLC and whether [(18)F]fluorothymidine ([(18)F]FLT)-positron emission
tomography (PET) could predict the effects. We found that BMS-754807 synergized
with gefitinib in reducing cell viability (combination index=0.38) and Akt
phosphorylation, and increasing the subG1 fraction in H292 cells. BMS-754807
alone and in combination with gefitinib increased the cells in G2M phase and
polyploid cells and decreased the phosphorylation of IGF-1R and histone H3. The
inhibition of tumor growth by gefitinib was increased by BMS-754807 (%T/C, 17.5 %
vs. 58.0 % for gefitinib alone and combined treatment, respectively), although
BMS-754807 alone had little effect. The standardized uptake value by
[(18)F]FLT-PET were increased in vehicle-treated mice by 73 %, minimally changed 
in gefitinib- or BMS-754807-treated mice, whereas decreased in co-treated mice by
-48.8 % between day 0 and day 3. The combination therapy with BMS-754807 and
gefitinib might be a more effective anticancer strategy than BMS-754807 alone in 
tumors that are less IGF-1R-dependent and that [(18)F]FLT-PET can be used to
assess early therapeutic responses.

DOI: 10.1007/s10637-012-9874-y 
PMID: 22987020  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


893. Lung Cancer. 2012 Dec;78(3):193-200. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2012.08.012. Epub
2012 Sep 15.

The synergistic effect of EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor gefitinib in combination
with aromatase inhibitor anastrozole in non-small cell lung cancer cell lines.

Shen L(1), Li Z, Shen S, Niu X, Yu Y, Li Z, Liao M, Chen Z, Lu S.

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Lung Cancer Center, Shanghai Chest Hospital Affiliated to Shanghai
Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, 200030, China.

BACKGROUND: Several studies implicated that lung cancer progression was governed 
by the interaction between estrogen receptor (ER) and epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR) signaling pathways. Combined targeting of EGFR and ER may have
the synergistic effect in lung cancer treatment. The aim of this study was to
explore the potential utility of inhibiting these two pathways with combination
of anastrozole and gefitinib in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cell lines.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The expression levels of ER (ER-α and ER-β) in lung cancer
cell lines (A549, H460, SPC-A-1, H1299) and normal bronchus epithelial cell
BEAS-2B were detected using real-time PCR and Western blot. Immunocytochemistry
was used to locate ER-α and ER-β in cell line with highest ER expression levels. 
The cells were treated with anastrozole or gefitinib alone or in combination. The
cell proliferation inhibition was detected by the CCK8 assay, cell cycle and
apoptosis effects were detected by flow cytometry; the expression levels of
phosphorylated-EGFR (p-EGFR), ERK, phosphorylated-ERK (p-ERK), AKT and
phosphorylated-AKT (p-AKT) were detected by Western blot.
RESULTS: Among these cell lines the expression levels of ER in A549 cells were
highest. In A549 cell line, ER-α was mainly localized in the cytoplasm, whereas
ER-β was mainly localized in the cytoplasm and to a lesser degree in the nucleus.
The combination of two drugs increased the proliferation inhibition rates for
24h, 48 h, 72 h to 37.66 ± 1.02%, 63.41 ± 2.02%, 70.50 ± 0.86%, respectively,
which was closely associated with elevation of the G0/G1 phase fraction (P<0.05).
Apoptosis rates of A549 cells treated with anastrozole, gefitinib alone or in
combination were 10.72 ± 1.12%, 17.40±1.28%, 23.02 ± 2.32%, respectively
(P<0.05). The synergistic effects of the combination therapy were accompanied by 
reduction of p-EGFR, p-ERK and p-AKT expression compared with individual
treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: The results of this study suggest that the combination of
anastrozole and gefitinib compared with either drug alone can maximally inhibit
cell proliferation, induce apoptosis, and affect downstream signaling pathways.
Our study supports functional interaction between the ER and the EGFR pathways in
lung cancer and provides a clinically exploitable strategy for non-small cell
lung cancer patients.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2012.08.012 
PMID: 22985911  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


894. Curr Med Res Opin. 2012 Oct;28(10):1699-708. doi: 10.1185/03007995.2012.728525.
Epub 2012 Oct 2.

Maintenance therapy of gefitinib for non-small-cell lung cancer after first-line 
chemotherapy regardless of epidermal growth factor receptor mutation: a review in
Chinese patients.

Biaoxue R(1), Shuanying Y, Wei L, Wei Z, Zongjuan M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Second Affiliated Hospital, Xi'an Jiaotong
University, Xi'an, China.

PURPOSE: Gefitinib is a well known therapy for non-small-cell lung cancer
(NSCLC). The purpose of this study was to review clinical reports of gefitinib as
maintenance therapy after first-line chemotherapy regardless of epidermal growth 
factor receptor (EGFR) mutation, and assess its efficacy and safety in Chinese
patients.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Systematic computerized searches of the following
databases were conducted from the start of each database up to July 2012; these
include Medline, EMBASE, CNKI and www.clinicaltrials.gov. Terms searched include 
'non-small-cell lung cancer', 'NSCLC', 'lung cancer', 'lung tumor', 'gefitinib', 
'Iressa', 'EGFR' and 'epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase
inhibitors'. A total of 22 studies were reviewed.
RESULTS: In general, the overall response rate (ORR), disease control rate (DCR) 
and one year survival (OYS) of gefitinib maintenance therapy were 30.89%, 67.5%
and 50.6% respectively, in addition, the median overall survival (OS) and median 
progression free survival (PFS) were 13.09 and 7.88 months respectively.
Moreover, ORR, DCR, median survival time (MST) and PFS of female, nonsmoking,
lung adenocarcinoma (LAC) patients and patients with rash had higher performance 
than male, smoking, non-LAC patients and patients without rash (p < 0.05). The
adverse events (AEs) were mainly skin rashes and diarrhea, most of which were
grades 1 or 2 and were well tolerated.
CONCLUSION: Gefitinib produced encouraging efficacy, safety and survival when
delivered as maintenance therapy for NSCLC in Chinese patients after first-line
chemotherapy regardless of EGFR mutation, especially for the patients who were
female, non-smokers, LAC and with rash. Key limitations of this review include
limited subgroup data, small sample sizes, and the lack of EGFR/KRAS data.

DOI: 10.1185/03007995.2012.728525 
PMID: 22978775  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


895. Curr Pharm Des. 2013;19(5):818-32.

Epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors: current status and
future perspectives in the development of novel irreversible inhibitors for the
treatment of mutant non-small cell lung cancer.

Galvani E(1), Alfieri R, Giovannetti E, Cavazzoni A, La Monica S, Galetti M,
Fumarola C, Bonelli M, Mor M, Tiseo M, Peters GJ, Petronini PG, Ardizzoni A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of Parma, Via
Gramsci 14, 43126 Parma, Italy.

Conventional chemotherapeutic regimens have reached an efficacy plateau against
most solid tumors and deal with significant toxicity. Recently, the goal of
oncologic research to improve outcome and reduce treatment-related side-effects
has led to the development of novel anticancer treatments targeting specific
proteins or genes involved in cancer growth and progression. In particular, the
tyrosine- kinase inhibitors (TKIs) gefitinib and erlotinib targeting the
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) have been approved for the treatment of
non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Their clinical activity has been related to
different clinical and biological parameters, such as the presence of activating 
mutations in the kinase domain of the target. Disappointingly, their clinical
efficacy is limited by the development of resistance which is caused in more than
50% of the cases by the emergence of a secondary point-mutation (T790M) in the
ATP-binding cleft of EGFR. Several novel EGFR inhibitors, able to covalently bind
the target and prolong its inactivation, have been developed with the aim to
overcome such resistance and are evaluated in ongoing clinical studies. However, 
not all clinical outcomes, including tolerability, are explained, and the
identification/validation of novel biomarkers of sensitivity or resistance to
such agents is a viable area of research to improve their clinical use. This
review summarizes the current knowledge on the functional role of activating
mutations of EGFR, pivotal primary/acquired resistance mechanisms as well as
clinical data of small molecule EGFR-TKIs, and discusses the future of such
therapeutic approach in NSCLC.


PMID: 22973953  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


896. Ann Oncol. 2013 Jan;24(1):54-9. doi: 10.1093/annonc/mds214. Epub 2012 Sep 11.

Updated overall survival results from a randomized phase III trial comparing
gefitinib with carboplatin-paclitaxel for chemo-naïve non-small cell lung cancer 
with sensitive EGFR gene mutations (NEJ002).

Inoue A(1), Kobayashi K, Maemondo M, Sugawara S, Oizumi S, Isobe H, Gemma A,
Harada M, Yoshizawa H, Kinoshita I, Fujita Y, Okinaga S, Hirano H, Yoshimori K,
Harada T, Saijo Y, Hagiwara K, Morita S, Nukiwa T; North-East Japan Study Group.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Tohoku University Hospital, Sendai, Japan.
akinoue@idac.tohoku.ac.jp

BACKGROUND: NEJ002 study, comparing gefitinib with carboplatin (CBDCA) and
paclitaxel (PTX; Taxol) as the first-line treatment for advanced non-small cell
lung cancer (NSCLC) harboring an epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)
mutation, previously reported superiority of gefitinib over CBDCA/PTX on
progression-free survival (PFS). Subsequent analysis was carried out mainly
regarding overall survival (OS).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: For all 228 patients in NEJ002, survival data were updated
in December, 2010. Detailed information regarding subsequent chemotherapy after
the protocol treatment was also assessed retrospectively and the impact of some
key drugs on OS was evaluated.
RESULTS: The median survival time (MST) was 27.7 months for the gefitinib group, 
and was 26.6 months for the CBDCA/PTX group (HR, 0.887; P=0.483). The OS of
patients who received platinum throughout their treatment (n=186) was not
statistically different from that of patients who never received platinum (n=40).
The MST of patients treated with gefitinib, platinum, and pemetrexed (PEM) or
docetaxel (DOC, Taxotere; n=76) was around 3 years.
CONCLUSIONS: No significant difference in OS was observed between gefitinib and
CBDCA/PTX in the NEJ002 study, probably due to a high crossover use of gefitinib 
in the CBDCA/PTX group. Considering the many benefits and the risk of missing an 
opportunity to use the most effective agent for EGFR-mutated NSCLC, the
first-line gefitinib is strongly recommended.

DOI: 10.1093/annonc/mds214 
PMID: 22967997  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


897. Health Qual Life Outcomes. 2012 Sep 10;10:108. doi: 10.1186/1477-7525-10-108.

Estimating quality adjusted progression free survival of first-line treatments
for EGFR mutation positive non small cell lung cancer patients in The
Netherlands.

Verduyn SC(1), Biesma B, Schramel FM, van der Scheer FW, Langenfeld MK, de Peuter
MA, Dingemans AM.

Author information: 
(1)Mapi Consultancy, Houten, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Gefitinib, a tyrosine kinase inhibitor, is an effective treatment in 
advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients with an activating mutation 
in the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR). Randomised clinical trials showed
a benefit in progression free survival for gefitinib versus doublet chemotherapy 
regimens in patients with an activated EGFR mutation (EGFR M+). From a patient
perspective, progression free survival is important, but so is health-related
quality of life. Therefore, this analysis evaluates the Quality Adjusted
progression free survival of gefitinib versus three relevant doublet
chemotherapies (gemcitabine/cisplatin (Gem/Cis); pemetrexed/cisplatin (Pem/Cis); 
paclitaxel/carboplatin (Pac/Carb)) in a Dutch health care setting in patients
with EGFR M+ stage IIIB/IV NSCLC. This study uses progression free survival
rather than overall survival for its time frame in order to better compare the
treatments and to account for the influence that subsequent treatment lines would
have on overall survival analysis.
METHODS: Mean progression free survival for Pac/Carb was obtained by
extrapolating the median progression free survival as reported in the
Iressa-Pan-Asia Study (IPASS). Data from a network meta-analysis was used to
estimate the mean progression free survival for therapies of interest relative to
Pac/Carb. Adjustment for health-related quality of life was done by incorporating
utilities for the Dutch population, obtained by converting FACT-L data (from
IPASS) to utility values and multiplying these with the mean progression free
survival for each treatment arm to determine the Quality Adjusted progression
free survival. Probabilistic sensitivity analysis was carried out to determine
95% credibility intervals.
RESULTS: The Quality Adjusted progression free survival (PFS) (mean, (95%
credibility interval)) was 5.2 months (4.5; 5.8) for Gem/Cis, 5.3 months (4.6;
6.1) for Pem/Cis; 4.9 months (4.4; 5.5) for Pac/Carb and 8.3 (7.0; 9.9) for
gefitinib.
CONCLUSIONS: In the Dutch health care setting, the previously established
progression free survival benefit of first-line gefitinib in advanced NSCLC EGFR 
M+ patients in comparison to standard doublet chemotherapy is further supported
by the Quality Adjusted PFS, which takes into account the additional
health-related quality of life benefits of gefitinib over doublet chemotherapy.

DOI: 10.1186/1477-7525-10-108 
PMCID: PMC3492197
PMID: 22963131  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


898. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol. 2012 Nov;70(5):707-16. doi:
10.1007/s00280-012-1946-3. Epub 2012 Sep 2.

Everolimus synergizes with gefitinib in non-small-cell lung cancer cell lines
resistant to epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors.

Dong S(1), Zhang XC, Cheng H, Zhu JQ, Chen ZH, Zhang YF, Xie Z, Wu YL.

Author information: 
(1)Guangdong Lung Cancer Institute, Guangdong General Hospital, Guangdong Academy
of Medical Sciences, Guangzhou, China.

PURPOSE: Epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor (EGFR-TKI)
therapy is considered as one of the most important treatments for patients with
advanced non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC). However, not all patients benefit
from this therapy because of primary or acquired resistance, both of which are
usually caused by the activation of alternative signaling pathways. Thus, a
combination of different signaling pathway inhibitors is a promising strategy. We
used the mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) inhibitor everolimus in combination
with gefitinib in NSCLC cell lines to analyze the efficacy of this combination
regimen and the underlying molecular mechanism.
METHODS: Acquired gefitinib-resistant cell lines, together with EGFR wild-type
and mutant primary gefitinib-resistant NSCLC cell lines, were treated with
everolimus alone, gefitinib alone, or the combination of the two drugs, and the
effects were evaluated using cell proliferation assays. The effects of everolimus
and gefitinib on the EGFR pathway in NSCLC cell lines were determined by Western 
blot analysis.
RESULTS: Combined treatment resulted in synergistic antitumor effects in
gefitinib-resistant cells A549 and H1975. The combination index (CI) of cells
increased with increasing dose of everolimus. Everolimus demonstrated no apparent
inhibition of phosphorylated Akt (p-Akt) and phosphorylated p44/42 MAPK (p-MAPK) 
in H1650 cells. Additionally, in gefitinib-resistant cell lines, the combination 
of gefitinib and everolimus not only showed stronger inhibition of phosphorylated
mTOR and phosphorylated p70S6K expression than either drug alone but also reduced
the levels of p-Akt and p-MAPK in both cell lines.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data showed that the combination of everolimus and gefitinib
exhibits dose-dependent synergism in primary and acquired gefitinib-resistant
NSCLC cells. Thus, a preclinical rationale exists for the use of everolimus to
enhance the efficacy of gefitinib in EGFR-TKI-resistant patients with NSCLC.

DOI: 10.1007/s00280-012-1946-3 
PMID: 22941374  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


899. Dermatology. 2012;225(1):18-21. doi: 10.1159/000341528. Epub 2012 Aug 22.

Erosive pustular dermatosis of the scalp-like eruption due to gefitinib: case
report and review of the literature of alopecia associated with EGFR inhibitors.

Toda N(1), Fujimoto N, Kato T, Fujii N, Nakanishi G, Nagao T, Tanaka T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Shiga University of Medical Science, Otsu, Japan.

A 69-year-old Japanese woman with multiple brain metastases secondary to
non-small-cell lung cancer was treated with radiosurgery, and subsequently
started oral gefitinib. Three years later, she presented with erythematous
erosive alopecia with pustules on the scalp. A biopsy specimen showed a dense
perifollicular infiltration composed of lymphocytes, neutrophils and abundant
plasma cells. Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus was cultured from the
lesions; however, treatment with antibiotics was not effective. We diagnosed an
eruption resembling erosive pustular dermatosis of the scalp. Although oral
steroids did not improve the lesions, the pustules and erythema of the scalp
rapidly improved within a few weeks after discontinuation of gefitinib. There
have been only 11 case reports of alopecia associated with epidermal growth
factor receptor (EGFR) inhibitors including our case. It is noteworthy that all
cases were female, and most cases involved the parietal scalp. Moreover, the
reduction or discontinuation of the EGFR inhibitors was needed in all cases with 
erythematous alopecia, which remained as scarring alopecia.

Copyright © 2012 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000341528 
PMID: 22922680  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


900. Zhongguo Fei Ai Za Zhi. 2012 Aug;15(8):494-8. doi:
10.3779/j.issn.1009-3419.2012.08.08.

[Four cases of interstitial lung disease induced by erlotinib and a review of the
literatures].

[Article in Chinese]

Wu X(1), Gao G, Ren S, Zhou C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Disease, Zigong First Pepole's Hospital, Zigong
643000, China.

Erlotinib is an agent of oral epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine
kinase inhibitors which are used for non-small cell lung cancer. Although this
class of agents is considered to be relatively safe, the most serious, but rare, 
adverse reaction is drug-associated interstitial lung disease (ILD). ILD induced 
by gefitinib been often described, but the ILD induced by erlotinib is relatively
less well known. We here describle four cases of ILD related to erlotinib and
review recent literatures to help physicians earlier alert erlotinib-induced ILD.
It is important to carefully monitor pulmonary symptoms in all patients who are
receiving erlotinib. Early diagnosis and timely intervention is critical in the
treatment of drug-induced ILD.

DOI: 10.3779/j.issn.1009-3419.2012.08.08 
PMID: 22901999  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


901. Eur J Cancer. 2013 Jan;49(1):106-14. doi: 10.1016/j.ejca.2012.07.014. Epub 2012
Aug 14.

Comparison of gefitinib and erlotinib efficacies as third-line therapy for
advanced non-small-cell lung cancer.

Shao YY(1), Shau WY, Lin ZZ, Chen HM, Kuo R, Yang JC, Lai MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, National Taiwan University Hospital, 7, Chung-Shan S
Rd., Taipei 10002, Taiwan.

PURPOSE: The epidermal growth factor receptor inhibitors, gefitinib and
erlotinib, are used as standard salvage therapy for advanced non-small-cell lung 
cancer (NSCLC). The aim of the present study was to compare their efficacies in
this population.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: The Taiwan Cancer Registry and the National Health
Insurance claim databases were searched for newly diagnosed patients with NSCLC
from 2004 to 2007 who received gefitinib or erlotinib as third-line therapy.
Overall survival (OS) and time to treatment failure (TTF) were determined from
registered parameters. Treatment efficacies were compared by the log-rank test in
total population and subsets with different clinical characteristics. The Cox's
proportion hazard model was used to estimate the adjusted hazard ratios in
multivariate analyses.
RESULTS: A total of 984 patients who received gefitinib (67%) or erlotinib (33%) 
were included. Patients receiving gefitinib or erlotinib had similar OS (median, 
10.2 versus 9.9 months, p=0.524) and TTF (median, 5.5 versus 3.4 months,
p=0.103). In multivariate analyses, both treatment groups had similar risk of
overall mortality (adjusted hazard ratio [HR]=1.04, p=0.629) and treatment
failure (adjusted HR=0.94, p=0.417). Comparing the treatments in subgroups based 
on age, tumour histology and gender also revealed no differences in OS and TTF.
For patients who received gefitinib or erlotinib for more than 3 or 6 months,
there was no difference in TTF but patients who received erlotinib had longer OS.
CONCLUSIONS: Gefitinib and erlotinib had similar efficacies as salvage therapy
for advanced NSCLC in Taiwan.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejca.2012.07.014 
PMID: 22897841  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


902. Asia Pac J Clin Oncol. 2012 Sep;8(3):232-43. doi:
10.1111/j.1743-7563.2012.01518.x. Epub 2012 Apr 23.

Phase III, randomized, open-label, first-line study in Asia of gefitinib versus
carboplatin/paclitaxel in clinically selected patients with advanced
non-small-cell lung cancer: evaluation of patients recruited from mainland China.

Wu YL(1), Chu DT, Han B, Liu X, Zhang L, Zhou C, Liao M, Mok T, Jiang H, Duffield
E, Fukuoka M.

Author information: 
(1)Guangdong Lung Cancer Institute, Guangdong General Hospital and Guangdong
Academy of Medical Sciences, Guangzhou, China. syylwu@live.cn

AIM: In the IRESSA Pan-Asia Study (IPASS), 1217 patients in East Asia with
pulmonary adenocarcinoma who were never-smokers or ex/light-smokers received
first-line gefitinib (250 mg/day) or carboplatin/paclitaxel (area under the curve
5/6; 200 mg/m(2) ). Efficacy analyses were pre-planned in patients in China.
METHODS: In China, 372 patients (30.6% of the overall group) were randomized. The
primary end-point was progression-free survival (PFS). Secondary end-points were 
overall survival (OS), objective response rate (ORR), health-related quality of
life (HRQoL), symptom improvement, safety and tolerability.
RESULTS: For patients in China, PFS did not significantly differ from the overall
IPASS population (interaction test P= 0.427). PFS was numerically longer (hazard 
ratio [HR] 0.79; 95% CI 0.62-1.01; P= 0.065; median PFS 6.8 months for both
treatments) and ORR significantly higher (ORR 44.6 vs 29.8%; odds ratio 1.88; 95%
CI 1.22-2.89; P= 0.004) for gefitinib than carboplatin/paclitaxel. OS (mature
data) was similar for both treatments (HR 0.92; 95% CI 0.73-1.17; P= 0.511;
median OS gefitinib 18.1 months vs 18.3 months carboplatin/paclitaxel). HRQoL
improvement rates favored gefitinib; symptom improvement rates were similar for
both treatments. Gefitinib had a more favorable tolerability profile than
carboplatin/paclitaxel. Efficacy by epidermal growth factor receptor biomarker
status (exploratory analyses) was difficult to interpret due to low patient
numbers with known biomarker status.
CONCLUSION: For the Chinese subgroup of IPASS, gefitinib demonstrated improved
PFS and ORR, similar OS, higher HRQoL, similar symptom improvement rates and a
more favorable tolerability profile than carboplatin/paclitaxel, generally
consistent with the overall IPASS population.

© 2012 Wiley Publishing Asia Pty Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1743-7563.2012.01518.x 
PMID: 22897752  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


903. J Thorac Oncol. 2012 Sep;7(9):1417-22.

First-line gefitinib in patients aged 75 or older with advanced non-small cell
lung cancer harboring epidermal growth factor receptor mutations: NEJ 003 study.

Maemondo M(1), Minegishi Y, Inoue A, Kobayashi K, Harada M, Okinaga S, Morikawa
N, Oizumi S, Tanaka T, Isobe H, Kudoh S, Hagiwara K, Nukiwa T, Gemma A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Miyagi Cancer Center, Miyagi, Japan.

Erratum in
    J Thorac Oncol. 2012 Nov;7(11):e33. Gemmah, Akihiko [corrected to Gemma,
Akihiko].

INTRODUCTION: Recent studies have demonstrated that first-line treatment with
gefitinib, an epidermal growth factor receptor (EFGR)-targeted tyrosine kinase
inhibitor, is significantly superior to standard chemotherapy for advanced
non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) harboring EGFR sensitive mutations. Meanwhile,
the efficacy of gefitinib therapy among elderly populations diagnosed with
EGFR-mutated NSCLC has not yet been elucidated. The purpose of this study was to 
investigate the efficacy and feasibility of gefitinib for chemotherapy-naive
patients aged 75 or older with NSCLC harboring EGFR mutations; generally, these
patients have no indication for treatment with platinum doublets.
METHODS: Chemotherapy-naive patients aged 75 years or older with performance
status 0 to 1 and advanced NSCLC harboring EGFR mutations, as determined by the
peptide nucleic acid-locked nucleic acid polymerase chain reaction clamp method, 
were enrolled. The enrolled patients received 250 mg/day of gefitinib orally.
RESULTS: Between January 2008 and May 2009, 31 patients were enrolled, all of
whom were eligible. The median age was 80 (range, 75-87) years. Twenty-five
patients (81%) were women, and 30 patients (97%) had adenocarcinoma. The overall 
response rate was 74% (95% confidence interval, 58%-91%), and the disease control
rate was 90%. The median progression-free survival was 12.3 months. The common
adverse events were rash, diarrhea, and liver dysfunction. One treatment-related 
death because of interstitial lung disease occurred.
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first study that verified safety and efficacy of
first-line treatment with gefitinib in elderly patients having advanced NSCLC
with EGFR mutation. Considering its strong antitumor activity and mild toxicity, 
first-line gefitinib may be preferable to standard chemotherapy for this
population.

DOI: 10.1097/JTO.0b013e318260de8b 
PMID: 22895139  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


904. Future Oncol. 2012 Aug;8(8):1015-29. doi: 10.2217/fon.12.89.

EGF receptor-targeted therapy in non-small-cell lung cancer: role of germline
polymorphisms in outcome and toxicity.

Galvani E(1), Peters GJ, Giovannetti E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, VU University Medical Center, De Boelelaan
1117, 1081 HV Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Conventional chemotherapeutic regimens have limited impact against most solid
tumors and deal with significant toxicity. Over the last 10 years, novel
anticancer treatments targeting specific molecules or genes involved in cancer
progression have been developed to improve outcome and reduce side effects. In
particular, the tyrosine kinase inhibitors gefitinib and erlotinib have been
approved for the treatment of non-small-cell lung cancer. Their clinical activity
has been related to different clinical and biological parameters, such as
EGFR-activating mutations. However, not all clinical outcomes, including
tolerability, are explained, and the identification/validation of novel
biomarkers is a viable area of research. Germline polymorphisms can be easily
assessed in blood samples, and candidate polymorphisms in EGFR and ABCG2 have
been correlated with outcome and toxicity in non-small-cell lung cancer patients 
treated with gefitinib or erlotinib. However, differences in study population and
design resulted in several controversial findings, while the prognostic versus
predictive role of the polymorphisms still needs to be validated within larger
prospective studies. More studies on the relationship of the genotype with drug
pharmacokinetics and mechanism of action are also warranted. These future
studies, as well as further development and application of novel technologies to 
decipher genetic alterations, might contribute to the validation of selected
polymorphisms as molecular markers predictive of drug activity and help in the
selection of tyrosine kinase inhibitors best suited to the individual patient.

DOI: 10.2217/fon.12.89 
PMID: 22894673  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


905. RETRACTED ARTICLE

Yonsei Med J. 2012 Sep;53(5):931-9. doi: 10.3349/ymj.2012.53.5.931.

Prognostic and predictive value of carcinoembryonic antigen and cytokeratin-19
fragments levels in advanced non-small cell lung cancer patients treated with
gefitinib or erlotinib.

Jung M(1), Kim SH, Hong S, Kang YA, Kim SK, Chang J, Rha SY, Kim JH, Kim DJ, Cho 
BC.

Author information: 
(1)Yonsei Cancer Center, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul 120-752,
Korea.

Retraction in
    Yonsei Med J. 2013 Jan 1;54(1):269.

PURPOSE: The prognostic and predictive value of pretreatment serum levels of
carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) and cytokeratin-19 fragments (CYFRA 21-1) were
assessed in advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients treated with
gefitinib or erlotinib.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Pretreatment CEA and CYFRA 21-1 were measured in 123
advanced NSCLC patients receiving gefitinib or erlotinib. High CEA levels (h-CEA)
were significantly associated with females, patients with adenocarcinoma, and
non-smokers.
RESULTS: Low CYFRA 21-1 levels (l-CYFRA) were significantly associated with a
good performance status (ECOG PS 0-1). The overall response rate (RR) was 27.6%, 
and higher RR was associated with adenocarcinoma, h-CEA, and epidermal growth
factor receptor (EGFR) mutation. Patients with h-CEA had significantly longer
progression-free survival (PFS) (p=0.021). Patients with l-CYFRA had
significantly longer PFS and overall survival (p=0.006 and p<0.001,
respectively). Of note, h-CEA and l-CYFRA had good prognosis in patients with
unknown EGFR mutation status or patients with squamous cell carcinoma (p=0.021
and p=0.015, respectively). A good ECOG PS (HR=0.45, p=0.017), h-CEA (HR=0.41,
p=0.007), l-CYFRA 21-1 (HR=0.52, p=0.025), and an EGFR mutation (HR=0.22,
p<0.001) were independently predictive of a longer PFS.
CONCLUSION: h-CEA and l-CYFRA 21-1 may be prognostic and predictive serum markers
for higher response and longer survival in patients with advanced NSCLC receiving
gefitinib or erlotinib, especially in patients with unknown EGFR mutation status 
or patients with squamous cell carcinoma.

DOI: 10.3349/ymj.2012.53.5.931 
PMCID: PMC3423836
PMID: 22869475  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


906. Mol Cancer Ther. 2012 Nov;11(11):2394-400. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-12-0644-T. 
Epub 2012 Aug 3.

Mechanism of drug efficacy within the EGF receptor revealed by microsecond
molecular dynamics simulation.

Wan S(1), Wright DW, Coveney PV.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Computational Science, Department of Chemistry, University College 
London, WC1H 0AJ, United Kingdom.

The EGF receptor (EGFR) regulates important cellular processes including
proliferation, differentiation, and apoptosis. EGFR is frequently overexpressed
in a range of cancers and is associated with disease progression and treatment.
Clinical studies have shown that EGFR mutations confer tumor sensitivity to
tyrosine kinase inhibitors in patients with non-small cell lung cancer. In this
study, we have conducted molecular dynamics simulations over several microseconds
for wild-type and L858R mutant forms of EGFR in the ligand-free state. Close
inspection of the conformations and interactions within the binding pocket
reveals, converse to the wild type, that the mutant EGFR prefers to bind
gefitinib, a targeted anticancer drug, rather than ATP, offering an explanation
for why gefitinib is more effective in patients with EGFR mutations than those
without.

©2012 AACR.

DOI: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-12-0644-T 
PMID: 22863610  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


907. Cancer Sci. 2012 Nov;103(11):1946-54. doi: 10.1111/j.1349-7006.2012.02408.x. Epub
2012 Sep 14.

Hypoxia induces gefitinib resistance in non-small-cell lung cancer with both
mutant and wild-type epidermal growth factor receptors.

Minakata K(1), Takahashi F, Nara T, Hashimoto M, Tajima K, Murakami A, Nurwidya
F, Yae S, Koizumi F, Moriyama H, Seyama K, Nishio K, Takahashi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Juntendo University, Tokyo, Japan.

Somatic mutations in the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) gene, such as
exon 19 deletion mutations, are important factors in determining therapeutic
responses to gefitinib in non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC). However, some
patients have activating mutations in EGFR and show poor responses to gefitinib. 
In this study, we examined three NSCLC cell lines, HCC827, PC9, and HCC2935, that
expressed an EGFR exon 19 deletion mutation. All cells expressed mutant EGFR, but
the PC9 and HCC2935 cells also expressed wild-type EGFR. The HCC827 cells were
highly sensitive to gefitinib under both normoxia and hypoxia. However, the PC9
and HCC2935 cells were more resistant to gefitinib under hypoxic conditions
compared to normoxia. Phosphorylation of EGFR and ERK was suppressed with
gefitinib treatment to a lesser extent under hypoxia. The expression of
transforming growth factor-α (TGFα) was dramatically upregulated under hypoxia,
and the knockdown of TGFα or hypoxia-inducible factor-1α (HIF1α) reversed the
resistance to gefitinib in hypoxic PC9 and HCC2935 cells. Finally, introduction
of the wild-type EGFR gene into the HCC827 cells caused resistance to gefitinib
under hypoxia. This phenomenon was also reversed by the knockdown of TGFα or
HIF1α. Our results indicate that hypoxia causes gefitinib resistance in
EGFR-mutant NSCLC through the activation of wild-type EGFR mediated by the
upregulation of TGFα. The presence of wild-type and mutant EGFR along with tumor 
hypoxia are important factors that should be considered when treating NSCLC
patients with gefitinib.

© 2012 Japanese Cancer Association.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1349-7006.2012.02408.x 
PMID: 22863020  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


908. Int J Oncol. 2012 Oct;41(4):1520-30. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2012.1578. Epub 2012 Jul
31.

Silencing of SNX1 by siRNA stimulates the ligand-induced endocytosis of EGFR and 
increases EGFR phosphorylation in gefitinib-resistant human lung cancer cell
lines.

Nishimura Y(1), Takiguchi S, Yoshioka K, Nakabeppu Y, Itoh K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pharmaceutical Cell Biology, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Kyushu University, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan. ynkio443@gmail.com

Gefitinib is known to suppress the activation of EGFR signaling, which is
required for cell survival and proliferation in non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC) cell lines. We previously demonstrated that the gefitinib-sensitive NSCLC
cell line PC9 shows efficient ligand-induced endocytosis of phosphorylated EGFR
(pEGFR). In contrast, the gefitinib-resistant NSCLC cell lines QG56 and A549
showed internalized pEGFR accumulation in the aggregated early endosomes, and
this was associated with SNX1, a protein that interacts with and enhances the
degradation of EGFR upon EGF stimulation. In the present study, to investigate
the role of SNX1 on EGF-stimulated EGFR/pEGFR endocytosis via the endocytic
pathway, we examined the effect of depletion of SNX1 expression by siRNA in human
NSCLC cell lines. Using immunofluorescence, we demonstrated that transfection of 
SNX1 siRNA into gefitinib-resistant NSCLC cells resulted in the disappearance of 
a large amounts of SNX1 staining. In addition, upon 15 min of EGF stimulation, we
observed an efficient EGFR phosphorylation and a rapid endocytic delivery of
pEGFR from early endosomes to late endosomes. Further, western blot analysis
revealed that silencing of SNX1 expression by siRNA in the gefitinib-resistant
cells leads to an accelerated degradation of EGFR along with a dramatic increase 
in the amounts of pEGFR after EGF stimulation. Based on these findings, we
suggest that SNX1 is involved in the negative regulation of ligand-induced EGFR
phosphorylation and mediates EGFR/pEGFR trafficking out of early endosomes for
targeting to late endosomes/lysosomes via the early/late endocytic pathway in
human lung cancer cells.

DOI: 10.3892/ijo.2012.1578 
PMID: 22859339  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


909. Int J Clin Pharmacol Ther. 2012 Oct;50(10):760-4. doi: 10.5414/CP201759.

Successful treatment with erlotinib after gefitinib-induced interstitial lung
disease: a case report and literature review.

Koma Y(1), Matsuoka H, Yoshimatsu H, Suzuki Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Shinko Hospital, Kobe, Japan.
yasukok@shinkohp.or.jp

Gefitinib and erlotinib, epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase 
inhibitors (TKIs), are widely used anticancer drugs for patients with non-small
cell lung cancer (NSCLC), especially for those with EGFR-activating mutations.
Both agents are considered to be less toxic compared with cytotoxic drugs;
however, serious adverse events including interstitial lung disease (ILD) which
can be fatal occur rarely. After such an event, physicians avoid to use another
TKI. In such cases, patients and physicians are forced to make difficult
decisions or reluctantly choose TKI when there is no other option. Here we report
a case of a patient with lung adenocarcinoma who showed good recovery from
gefitinib-induced ILD by high-dose corticosteroid therapy. The patient was then
administrated erlotinib as second-line chemotherapy and showed tumor shrinkage
without ILD after 6 months of treatment. We discuss the common features of the
cases in the previous documentations and ours which were successfully retreated
with erlotinib after gefitinib-induced ILD had previously developed.

DOI: 10.5414/CP201759 
PMID: 22853866  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


910. Expert Rev Mol Diagn. 2012 Jul;12(6):593-602. doi: 10.1586/erm.12.59.

Personalized medicine and pharmacogenetic biomarkers: progress in molecular
oncology testing.

Ong FS(1), Das K, Wang J, Vakil H, Kuo JZ, Blackwell WL, Lim SW, Goodarzi MO,
Bernstein KE, Rotter JI, Grody WW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles,
CA 90048, USA. frank.ong@cshs.org

In the field of oncology, clinical molecular diagnostics and biomarker
discoveries are constantly advancing as the intricate molecular mechanisms that
transform a normal cell into an aberrant state in concert with the dysregulation 
of alternative complementary pathways are increasingly understood. Progress in
biomarker technology, coupled with the companion clinical diagnostic laboratory
tests, continue to advance this field, where individualized and customized
treatment appropriate for each individual patient define the standard of care.
Here, we discuss the current commonly used predictive pharmacogenetic biomarkers 
in clinical oncology molecular testing: BRAF V600E for vemurafenib in melanoma;
EML4-ALK for crizotinib and EGFR for erlotinib and gefitinib in non-small-cell
lung cancer; KRAS against the use of cetuximab and panitumumab in colorectal
cancer; ERBB2 (HER2/neu) for trastuzumab in breast cancer; BCR-ABL for tyrosine
kinase inhibitors in chronic myeloid leukemia; and PML/RARα for
all-trans-retinoic acid and arsenic trioxide treatment for acute promyelocytic
leukemia.

DOI: 10.1586/erm.12.59 
PMCID: PMC3495985
PMID: 22845480  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


911. J Cancer Res Ther. 2012 Apr-Jun;8(2):247-53. doi: 10.4103/0973-1482.98979.

CT findings in non-small-cell lung cancer patients treated with gefitinib or
erlotinib.

Na II(1), Choe du H, Kim CH, Park SH, Park JH, Lee JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Korea Cancer Center Hospital, Korea Institute
of Radiological and Medical Sciences, Seoul, South Korea. hmona@kcch.re.kr

PURPOSE: We performed this study to explore the association of computed
tomography (CT) findings with outcomes of patients with non-small-cell lung
cancer (NSCLC) treated with tyrosin kinase inhibitor (TKI) such as gefitinib or
erlotinib.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We analyzed outcomes for 240 patients according to primary
tumor (T), regional nodal (N) staging and diffuse small pulmonary metastases
(DSPM) at the initial presentation. Tests for epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR) mutation were performed in 92 patients.
RESULTS: On multivariate analysis for tumor response, the N3 stage was predictive
of a poor response (P < 0.001), whereas DSPM was a favorable factor (P = 0.007). 
Multivariate analysis for progression-free survival showed that the T3-4 stage
(hazard ratio [HR]: 2.5, P < 0.001), in addition to the N3 stage (HR: 2.1, P <
0.001), was predictive of a poor outcome, whereas DSPM (HR: 0.6, P = 0.006) was a
favorable factor. Notably, the multivariate model that included the EGFR
mutational status revealed that the T3-4 stage predicted poor progression-free
survival (HR: 2.2, P = 0.017) and poor overall survival (HR: 4.1, P < 0.001).
CONCLUSION: Our data suggest that, in addition to EGFR mutational status, T-stage
based on CT is predictive of outcomes of TKI-treated NSCLC patients.

DOI: 10.4103/0973-1482.98979 
PMID: 22842370  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


912. Med J Malaysia. 2012 Apr;67(2):222-3.

Cutaneous side-effects of epidermal growth factor receptor-tyrosine kinase
inhibitor (TKI) in the treatment of lung cancer: description and its management.

Ong CK(1), Tan WC, Chan LC, Abdul Razak M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Hospital Pulau Pinang, Penang, Malaysia.
ongchookhoon@yahoo.com

Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)--tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKI) like
erlotinib and gefitinib have been approved as monotherapy for the treatment of
patients with locally advanced or metastatic non small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
after failure of at least one prior chemotherapy regimen. The use of EGFR-TKI is 
associated with unique and dramatic dermatologic side effects. We report 2
patients with NSCLC developing a typical acneiform (papulo-pustular) eruption
shortly after initiation of EGFR-TKI.


PMID: 22822651  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


913. Curr Opin Oncol. 2012 Nov;24(6):679-86. doi: 10.1097/CCO.0b013e3283571a1c.

Targeted therapy in brain metastasis.

Soffietti R(1), Trevisan E, Rudà R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neuro-oncology, Department of Neuroscience, University and San
Giovanni Battista Hospital, Torino, Italy. riccardo.soffietti@unito.it

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: To review the state of the art and new developments in the
field of targeted agents for brain metastases.
RECENT FINDINGS: The huge amount of information on new molecular compounds and
the advances in understanding the molecular pathways that mediate brain
colonization have led to an increase of interest in preclinical and clinical
investigations in the field of brain metastases. Targeted therapies can be
employed either on established brain metastases or in a prevention setting.
Targeting angiogenesis is an attractive approach. Up to date, large clinical
trial datasets have shown that antiangiogenic agents do not increase the risk of 
bleeding into the brain. Bevacizumab (an anti-VEGF agent) is undergoing
investigation in clinical trials on brain metastases from non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC), breast cancer and melanoma. Sunitinib, a multitarget small
molecule tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI), is a promising agent in brain
metastases from renal cell cancer. The EGFR inhibitors gefitinib and erlotinib
have a definite activity in brain metastases from NSCLC with activating EGFR
mutations. Regarding HER2-positive breast cancer patients with established brain 
metastases, lapatinib (small molecule TKI) seems particularly active in
association with capecitabine. Lapatinib alone is attractive in the prevention
setting. Brain metastases from melanoma with BRAF V600E mutations respond to a
specific inhibitor, such as vemurafenib. The immunomodulator ipilimumab is also
active on brain metastases from melanoma.
SUMMARY: The use of targeted agents in brain metastases from solid tumors is
promising. The setting of prevention will be probably expanded in the next years.
Well designed clinical trials with proper endpoints are needed.

DOI: 10.1097/CCO.0b013e3283571a1c 
PMID: 22820413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


914. PLoS One. 2012;7(7):e41017. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0041017. Epub 2012 Jul 17.

Loss of activating EGFR mutant gene contributes to acquired resistance to EGFR
tyrosine kinase inhibitors in lung cancer cells.

Tabara K(1), Kanda R, Sonoda K, Kubo T, Murakami Y, Kawahara A, Azuma K, Abe H,
Kage M, Yoshinaga A, Tahira T, Hayashi K, Arao T, Nishio K, Rosell R, Kuwano M,
Ono M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Oncology, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan.

Non-small-cell lung cancer harboring epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)
mutations attains a meaningful response to EGFR-tyrosine kinase inhibitors
(TKIs). However, acquired resistance to EGFR-TKIs could affect long-term outcome 
in almost all patients. To identify the potential mechanisms of resistance, we
established cell lines resistant to EGFR-TKIs from the human lung cancer cell
lines PC9 and11-18, which harbored activating EGFR mutations. One
erlotinib-resistant cell line from PC9 and two erlotinib-resistant cell lines and
two gefitinib-resistant cell lines from 11-18 were independently established.
Almost complete loss of mutant delE746-A750 EGFR gene was observed in the
erlotinib-resistant cells isolated from PC9, and partial loss of the mutant L858R
EGFR gene copy was specifically observed in the erlotinib- and
gefitinib-resistant cells from 11-18. However, constitutive activation of EGFR
downstream signaling, PI3K/Akt, was observed even after loss of the mutated EGFR 
gene in all resistant cell lines even in the presence of the drug. In the
erlotinib-resistant cells from PC9, constitutive PI3K/Akt activation was
effectively inhibited by lapatinib (a dual TKI of EGFR and HER2) or BIBW2992
(pan-TKI of EGFR family proteins). Furthermore, erlotinib with either HER2 or
HER3 knockdown by their cognate siRNAs also inhibited PI3K/Akt activation.
Transfection of activating mutant EGFR complementary DNA restored drug
sensitivity in the erlotinib-resistant cell line. Our study indicates that loss
of addiction to mutant EGFR resulted in gain of addiction to both HER2/HER3 and
PI3K/Akt signaling to acquire EGFR-TKI resistance.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0041017 
PMCID: PMC3398867
PMID: 22815900  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


915. Qual Life Res. 2013 Jun;22(5):1015-26. doi: 10.1007/s11136-012-0229-0. Epub 2012 
Jul 18.

The impact of second-line agents on patients' health-related quality of life in
the treatment for non-small cell lung cancer: a systematic review.

Ganguli A(1), Wiegand P, Gao X, Carter JA, Botteman MF, Ray S.

Author information: 
(1)Abbott Laboratories, 200 Abbott Park Road, GMH1, AP30-3NW, Abbott Park, IL
60064, USA.

PURPOSE: In advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), progressive disease
burdens patients considerably. Second-line (2L) chemotherapy improves survival
marginally but humanistic outcomes (i.e., quality of life, QOL) are
underreported. The impact of 2L therapy remains an important consideration for
patients and caregivers, and there have been QOL reviews for 1L, but not 2L,
therapies. This review assessed QOL outcomes of approved, guideline-supported 2L 
chemotherapy with docetaxel, erlotinib, gefitinib, and pemetrexed in advanced
NSCLC.
METHODS: Clinical trial reports of approved, guideline-supported 2L or
maintenance therapy for NSCLC published from 2000 to 2010 were identified from
PubMed/Medline and clinical meetings. Outcomes were stratified by overall QOL
impact, domain/symptom-specific effects, effect over time, and subgroup effects.
RESULTS: Of 145 studies identified, 24 full-text articles were retained. Studies 
with docetaxel versus best supportive care (n = 1) and active comparators (n = 4)
reported non-significant overall QOL improvements, as did studies of gefitinib
versus placebo and active comparator (n = 7). Overall QOL improvements were seen 
for gefitinib versus docetaxel (n = 2) and gefitinib in a single-arm study (n =
1). At the symptom level, studies of docetaxel (n = 4/7), gefitinib (n = 7/9),
and pemetrexed (n = 1) reported non-significant results. Subgroup analyses
indicated improved QOL outcomes for gefitinib-treated responders versus
non-responders, worse QOL for gefitinib-treated smokers versus placebo, worse QOL
for gefitinib-treated Asian patients versus placebo, and longer time to symptom
deterioration in erlotinib versus placebo-treated elderly patients.
CONCLUSIONS: Significant improvements in overall QOL with 2L chemotherapy for
advanced NSCLC were infrequent. Single-arm studies and those with less toxic
regimens more commonly provided statistically significant improvements in QOL
outcomes. Methodological heterogeneity impedes cross-study QOL comparisons.

DOI: 10.1007/s11136-012-0229-0 
PMID: 22806607  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


916. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol. 2012 Sep;70(3):399-405. doi:
10.1007/s00280-012-1929-4. Epub 2012 Jul 18.

Cerebrospinal fluid concentration of gefitinib and erlotinib in patients with
non-small cell lung cancer.

Togashi Y(1), Masago K, Masuda S, Mizuno T, Fukudo M, Ikemi Y, Sakamori Y, Nagai 
H, Kim YH, Katsura T, Mishima M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto
University, Sakyo-ku, Japan. ytogashi@kuhp.kyoto-u.ac.jp

PURPOSE: Several cases have been reported in which central nervous system (CNS)
metastases of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) resistant to gefitinib were
improved by erlotinib. However, there has been no study in which cerebrospinal
fluid (CSF) concentrations of gefitinib and erlotinib are directly compared.
Thus, we aimed to compare them.
METHODS: We examined 15 Japanese patients with NSCLC and CNS metastases with
epidermal growth factor receptor gene mutations who received CSF examinations
during epidermal growth factor receptor-tyrosine kinase inhibitors treatment (250
mg daily gefitinib or 150 mg daily erlotinib). Plasma and CSF concentrations were
determined using high-performance liquid chromatography with tandem mass
spectrometry.
RESULTS: The concentration and penetration rate of gefitinib (mean ± standard
deviation) in the CSF were 3.7 ± 1.9 ng/mL (8.2 ± 4.3 nM) and 1.13 ± 0.36 %,
respectively. The concentration and penetration rate of erlotinib in the CSF were
28.7 ± 16.8 ng/mL (66.9 ± 39.0 nM) and 2.77 ± 0.45 %, respectively. The CSF
concentration and penetration rate of erlotinib were significantly higher than
those of gefitinib (P = 0.0008 and <0.0001, respectively). The CNS response rates
of patients with erlotinib treatment were preferentially (but not significantly) 
higher than those with gefitinib treatment. (1/3 vs. 4/7, respectively).
Leptomeningeal metastases in one patient, which were refractory to gefitinib,
dramatically responded to erlotinib.
CONCLUSIONS: This study suggested that higher CSF concentration could be achieved
with erlotinib and that erlotinib could be more effective for the treatment for
CNS metastases, especially leptomeningeal metastases, than gefitinib.

DOI: 10.1007/s00280-012-1929-4 
PMID: 22806307  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


917. Lung Cancer. 2012 Sep;77(3):475-81. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2012.06.007. Epub 2012
Jul 12.

Issues surrounding clinical trial endpoints in solid malignancies with a focus on
metastatic non-small cell lung cancer.

Garon EB(1).

Author information: 
(1)David Geffen School of Medicine at the University of California, Los Angeles, 
CA, USA. EGaron@mednet.ucla.edu

Relative to best supportive care alone, cytotoxic chemotherapy has an established
role in prolonging overall survival (OS) in patients with or without previous
treatment for metastatic non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). OS has been the
principal endpoint influencing regulatory decisions regarding targeted therapies 
for metastatic NSCLC, including the vascular endothelial growth factor monoclonal
antibody bevacizumab in the frontline setting and the epidermal growth factor
receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors gefitinib and erlotinib in patients after
prior treatment. Progression-free survival (PFS), another common endpoint in
oncology clinical trials, has been discussed as a potential surrogate for OS in
metastatic NSCLC. A number of phase III clinical trials of investigational
targeted agents for treatment of metastatic NSCLC are ongoing, with OS designated
as the primary endpoint in some cases and PFS in others. Both endpoints have been
developed largely to evaluate outcomes in unselected populations in which a
fraction of patients are anticipated to derive significant benefit. New
approaches are being considered for the evaluation of targeted agents. Recent
high profile trials have been designed to assess PFS using a randomized
discontinuation design and disease control rate after 8 weeks of treatment. With 
a series of recent advances toward increasingly personalized biomarker-directed
anticancer therapies, the appropriateness of the traditional regulatory approach 
has been questioned.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2012.06.007 
PMCID: PMC3737740
PMID: 22795702  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


918. Lung Cancer. 2012 Oct;78(1):8-15. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2012.06.009. Epub 2012
Jul 12.

Relationship between skin rash and outcome in non-small-cell lung cancer patients
treated with anti-EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors: a literature-based
meta-analysis of 24 trials.

Petrelli F(1), Borgonovo K, Cabiddu M, Lonati V, Barni S.

Author information: 
(1)Azienda Ospedaliera di Treviglio, Piazzale Ospedale 1, 24047, Treviglio (BG), 
Italy. faupe@libero.it

BACKGROUND: Dermatological toxicity, usually in the form of acneiform rash, is
frequently observed in non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients treated with
anti-EGF receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs). The objective of this
review was to assess the predictive value of skin rash for outcome in patients
with NSCLC treated with erlotinib and gefitinib.
METHODS: We searched PubMed for articles reporting a correlation of skin rash
with survival, progression and response rate. In total, 349 prospective or
retrospective studies presenting data regarding patient outcome and skin toxicity
were screened. Hazard ratios (HRs) with 95% confidence intervals for progression 
and survival and risk ratios (RRs) for response rate were obtained from these
publications and pooled in a meta-analysis.
RESULTS: This meta-analysis included 24 publications (17 prospective trials and 7
retrospective case series). Skin rash was found to be an independent predictive
factor for survival (HR: 0.30; p<0.00001) and progression (HR: 0.50; p<0.00001). 
In addition, patients who developed grade 2-4 rash were more likely to respond to
treatment respect to patients with no rash (42% vs. 7%). The result for survival 
meta-analysis appears to be similar for gefitinib and erlotinib.
CONCLUSION: These results are noteworthy, because patients with severe skin rash 
may be reassured over treatment outcome Skin rash during treatment with anti-EGFR
TKIs for NSCLC represents a significantly strong predictor of the efficacy in
particular for patients with unknown EGFR mutation status.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2012.06.009 
PMID: 22795701  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


919. Curr Oncol. 2012 Jun;19(Suppl 1):S52-8. doi: 10.3747/co.19.1114.

Treatment paradigms for patients with metastatic non-small-cell lung cancer:
first-, second-, and third-line.

Leighl NB.

Metastatic non-small-cell lung cancer (nsclc) is the leading cause of cancer
mortality in Canada. Although treatment outcomes in advanced disease remain
modest, with paradigm shifts in the approach to treatment, they are steadily
improving. Customizing treatment based on histology and molecular typing has
become the standard of care. EGFR genotyping and pathology subtyping should be
considered routine in new diagnoses of metastatic nsclc. Treatment options for
those with somatic EGFR activating mutations include gefitinib until progression,
followed by standard chemotherapy. For patients with wild-type EGFR, or in
patients whose EGFR genotype is unknown, platinum-based chemotherapy remains the 
first-line standard, with single-agent chemotherapy as an option for older
patients and those who are unfit for platinum-doublet therapy. Patients with
nonsquamous histology may receive treatment regimens incorporating pemetrexed or 
bevacizumab. In patients with squamous cell carcinoma, the latter agents should
be avoided because of concerns about enhanced toxicity or decreased efficacy.
Second-line chemotherapy is offered to a selected subgroup of patients upon
progression and may include pemetrexed in non-squamous histology and docetaxel or
erlotinib (or both) in all histologies. Currently, only erlotinib is offered as a
third-line option in unselected nsclc patients after failure of first- and
second-line chemotherapy. Maintenance therapy is emerging as a new option for
patients, as are targeted therapies for particular molecular subtypes of nsclc,
such as crizotinib in tumours harbouring the EML4-ALK gene rearrangement.

DOI: 10.3747/co.19.1114 
PMCID: PMC3377755
PMID: 22787411  [PubMed]


920. Oncol Lett. 2012 Jun;3(6):1288-1292. Epub 2012 Apr 2.

Mutation status of epidermal growth factor receptor and clinical features of
patients with combined small cell lung cancer who received surgical treatment.

Lu HY(1), Mao WM, Cheng QY, Chen B, Cai JF, Wang XJ, Wang Z, Xie FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory Diagnosis and Treatment Technology on Thoracic Oncology
(esophagus, lung), Zhejiang Province, Zhejiang Cancer Hospital, Hangzhou,
Zhejiang 310022.

The mutation status of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is correlated with
the response of tumors to EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors in non-small cell lung 
cancer (NSCLC), suggesting its usefulness as a biomarker in NSCLC. The incidence 
of EGFR mutation in NSCLC is higher in China than in the United States and
European countries. There have been some case reports concerning cases of
gefitinib-responsive small cell lung cancer (SCLC) with EGFR mutations. However, 
few large studies concerning the mutation status of SCLC patients have been
performed. We detected EGFR mutations in exons 19 and 21 of 40 SCLC patients,
three of whom had combined SCLC, from the Zhejiang Cancer Hospital using xTAG
technology. Only two patients with combined SCLC had an EGFR mutation in exon 19.
To determine the EGFR mutation status and clinical features of combined SCLC, we 
retrospectively analyzed the clinical features of seven patients with combined
SCLC who had undergone surgical treatment in Zhejiang Cancer Hospital between
2007 and 2010. EGFR mutations in exons 19 and 21 were detected using the
pyrosequencing assay. Of the seven patients with combined SCLCs, 71.4% were male,
71.4% were heavy smokers, most were over 60 years old and 71.4% of the cases were
combined adenocarcinoma. Chemotherapy treatment and tumor stage were correlated
with survival time. Of the seven cases, one had a mutation in exon 19 of EGFR in 
both the conventional SCLC and SCLC combined adenocarcinoma components. Combined 
SCLC commonly occurs in patients who are heavy smokers, male and over 60 years
old, and most of the combined type cases are adenocarcinoma. The treatment of
combined SCLC may be applied to cases of conventional SCLC. EGFR mutations may
therefore occur in combined SCLCs, especially in SCLC combined adenocarcinoma in 
China.

DOI: 10.3892/ol.2012.666 
PMCID: PMC3392594
PMID: 22783435  [PubMed]


921. Oncol Lett. 2012 Jun;3(6):1280-1282. Epub 2012 Mar 16.

Successful rechallenge with reduced dose of erlotinib in a patient with lung
adenocarcinoma who developed erlotinib-associated leukocytoclastic vasculitis: A 
case report.

Su BA(1), Shen WL, Chang ST, Feng LY, Wu CJ, Feng YH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infection, Chi-Mei Medical Center, Yong Kang, Tainan 71004.

The oral tyrosine kinase inhibitors of epidermal growth factor, erlotinib and
gefitinib, are active in the treatment of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC).
However, a number of skin manifestations have been found in patients receiving
erlotinib therapy. Leukocytoclastic vasculitis is a rare side-effect of erlotinib
therapy. However, whether or not erlotinib treatment should be continued when
disseminated ulceration of leukocytoclastic vasculitis is encountered remains to 
be determined. In this study, we report a patient with NSCLC who remains
responsive to erlotinib treatment following successful rechallenge with a reduced
dose of erlonitib after presenting with severe degree of leukoclastic vasculitis.

DOI: 10.3892/ol.2012.647 
PMCID: PMC3392574
PMID: 22783433  [PubMed]


922. Oncol Lett. 2012 May;3(5):1064-1068. Epub 2012 Mar 5.

Clinical observation of gefitinib as a first-line therapy in sixty-eight patients
with advanced NSCLC.

Gao Z(1), Han B, Wang H, Shi C, Xiong L, Gu A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Chest Hospital Affiliated to Shanghai
JiaoTong University, Shanghai 200030, P.R. China.

The aim of this study was to evaluate the efficacy and safety of gefitinib as a
first-line therapy for advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Patients with
advanced NSCLC who did not tolerate or who refused chemotherapy received 250
mg/day of gefitinib orally as first-line therapy. A total of 68 NSCLC patients
were enrolled, and the overall response rate (RR) and disease controlled rate
(DCR) with gefitinib treatment was 35.3 and 77.9%, respectively. The median
progression-free survival (PFS) was 6.6 months and the median survival was 15.5
months. The median PFS of the adenocarcinoma patients and the non-smokers was
significantly longer compared to that of the non-adenocarcinoma patients and the 
smokers (P<0.05). The median survival of the patients with Eastern Cooperative
Oncology Group Performance Status (ECOG PS) 0-1 was significantly longer compared
to that of the patients with PS ≥2 (P<0.05). The most common side effects of
gefitinib treatment were mild rash and diarrhea. Therefore, first-line therapy
with gefitinib is an effective and tolerable treatment regimen for advanced
NSCLC.

DOI: 10.3892/ol.2012.631 
PMCID: PMC3389644
PMID: 22783392  [PubMed]


923. Oncogene. 2013 May 2;32(18):2346-55, 2355.e1-10. doi: 10.1038/onc.2012.240. Epub 
2012 Jul 9.

Diminished functional role and altered localization of SHP2 in non-small cell
lung cancer cells with EGFR-activating mutations.

Furcht CM(1), Muñoz Rojas AR, Nihalani D, Lazzara MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.

Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cells harboring activating mutations of the
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) tend to display elevated activity of
several survival signaling pathways. Surprisingly, these mutations also correlate
with reduced phosphorylation of ERK and SHP2, a protein tyrosine phosphatase
required for complete ERK activation downstream of most receptor tyrosine
kinases. As ERK activity influences cellular response to EGFR inhibition, altered
SHP2 function could have a role in the striking response to gefitinib witnessed
with EGFR mutation. Here, we demonstrate that impaired SHP2 phosphorylation
correlates with diminished SHP2 function in NSCLC cells expressing mutant, versus
wild-type, EGFR. In NSCLC cells expressing wild-type EGFR, SHP2 knockdown
decreased ERK phosphorylation, basally and in response to gefitinib, and
increased cellular sensitivity to gefitinib. In cells expressing EGFR mutants,
these effects of SHP2 knockdown were less substantial, but the expression of
constitutively active SHP2 reduced cellular sensitivity to gefitinib. In cells
expressing EGFR mutants, which do not undergo efficient ligand-mediated
endocytosis, SHP2 was basally associated with GRB2-associated binder 1 (GAB1) and
EGFR, and SHP2's presence in membrane fractions was dependent on EGFR activity.
Whereas EGF promoted a more uniform intracellular distribution of initially
centrally localized SHP2 in cells expressing wild-type EGFR, SHP2 was basally
evenly distributed and did not redistribute in response to EGF in cells with EGFR
mutation. Thus, EGFR mutation may promote association of a fraction of SHP2 at
the plasma membrane with adapters that promote SHP2 activity. Consistent with
this, SHP2 immunoprecipitated from cells with EGFR mutation was active, and EGF
treatment did not change this activity. Overall, our data suggest that a fraction
of SHP2 is sequestered at the plasma membrane in cells with EGFR mutation in a
way that impedes SHP2's ability to promote ERK activity and identify SHP2 as a
potential target for co-inhibition with EGFR in NSCLC.

DOI: 10.1038/onc.2012.240 
PMCID: PMC3727284
PMID: 22777356  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


924. J Proteomics. 2012 Dec 5;76 Spec No.:91-101. doi: 10.1016/j.jprot.2012.06.022.
Epub 2012 Jul 4.

SAA1 is over-expressed in plasma of non small cell lung cancer patients with poor
outcome after treatment with epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine-kinase
inhibitors.

Milan E(1), Lazzari C, Anand S, Floriani I, Torri V, Sorlini C, Gregorc V, Bachi 
A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Genetics & Cell Biology, San Raffaele Scientific Institute,
Milano, Italy.

It has been shown that a proteomic algorithm based on 8 MALDI TOF MS signals
obtained from plasma of NSCLC patients treated with EGFR TKIs, is able to predict
patients' clinical outcome. In the current study, we identified the proteins
originating 4 out of 8 mass signals in the classification algorithm. Plasma
samples collected before the beginning of gefitinib therapy were analyzed by
MALDI TOF MS and classified according to the proteomic algorithm in good and poor
profiles. Two pools of good and poor classified samples were prepared using MARS 
and ProteoMiner Protein Enrichment kit before 2DE analysis. Proteins
differentially expressed between good and poor 2DE samples were excised from gels
and analyzed with MALDI TOF MS and LC MS/MS. The identified proteins were
validated by Immunodepletion and Western blot analyses. serum amyloid A protein 1
(SAA1), together with its two truncated forms, was over-expressed in plasma of
poor classified patients, and was identified as the protein that generates 4 out 
of the 8 mass signals composing the proteomic algorithm VeriStrat. SAA levels
measured by ELISA in 97 NSCLC patients treated with gefitinib correlated with the
clinical outcome of the patients. This article is part of a Special Issue
entitled: Integrated omics.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jprot.2012.06.022 
PMID: 22771314  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


925. Lung Cancer. 2012 Oct;78(1):81-6. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2012.06.005. Epub 2012
Jul 4.

Impact of specific mutant KRAS on clinical outcome of EGFR-TKI-treated advanced
non-small cell lung cancer patients with an EGFR wild type genotype.

Metro G(1), Chiari R, Duranti S, Siggillino A, Fischer MJ, Giannarelli D,
Ludovini V, Bennati C, Marcomigni L, Baldi A, Giansanti M, Minotti V, Crinò L.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Oncology, Santa Maria della Misericordia Hospital, Azienda Ospedaliera
di Perugia, Perugia, Italy. giulio.metro@yahoo.com

INTRODUCTION: This retrospective study was undertaken to investigate the impact
of specific mutant KRAS on clinical outcome to either gefitinib or erlotinib
(EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor, EGFR-TKI) in patients with EGFR wild type (WT)
advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC).
METHODS: Patients with an EGFR WT genotype who were treated with an EGFR-TKI for 
advanced disease at our Institution were identified. Simultaneous availability of
KRAS mutation status was required for study inclusion.
RESULTS: Sixty-seven patients were eligible. Median age was 60 years (39-84), and
10 patients (14.9%) had received an EGFR-TKI as upfront therapy. Overall, the
median progression-free survival (PFS) and overall survival (OS) were 2.9 months 
and 18.0 months, respectively. KRAS mutant patients (n=18) experienced a
significantly shorter PFS compared with those carrying a KRAS WT genotype (n=49) 
(1.6 months vs 3.0 months, respectively, P=0.04; HR=1.92). However, within the
KRAS mutant group a great variability in terms of sensitivity to treatment was
noted (PFS ranging from 0.7 months to 38.7 months). KRAS codon 13 mutant patients
(n=4) experienced the worse outcome when compared with KRAS codon 12 mutants
(n=14) and KRAS WT patients (P<0.0001 and P=0.01 for PFS and OS, respectively).
CONCLUSIONS: Though we found that EGFR WT/KRAS mutant advanced NSCLC patients are
associated with an increased resistance to treatment, specific mutant KRAS may
account for differential sensitivity to an EGFR-TKI. KRAS codon 13 mutants are
those who seem to experience the worse clinical outcome.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2012.06.005 
PMID: 22770374  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


926. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol. 2012 Nov;138(11):1963-9. doi: 10.1007/s00432-012-1278-z.
Epub 2012 Jul 5.

Surrogate end points for survival in the target treatment of advanced
non-small-cell lung cancer with gefitinib or erlotinib.

Li X(1), Liu S, Gu H, Wang D.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Therapy Center, Affiliated Hospital of Jiangsu University, Zhenjiang,
China.

BACKGROUND: It is controversial for the use of survival surrogate end points
including response rate (RR), disease control rate (DCR), time to progression,
and progression-free survival (PFS) in trials of molecular targeted agents. Our
aim was to determine the correlations of these surrogates with survival in the
treatment of advanced non-small-cell lung cancer (ANSCLC) with epidermal growth
factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors (EGFR-TKIs), gefitinib and erlotinib.
METHODS: Summary data of median survival time (MST) and surrogates from
prospective trials of EGFR-TKIs in ANSCLC were identified. Patient- or
trial-related characteristics were introduced as covariates. Simple and
multivariate linear regression models were fitted for MST and each surrogate,
respectively. And the significance of each surrogate as a survival marker was
compared by calculating the area under their receiver operating characteristic
(ROC) curves.
RESULTS: Sixty eligible trials (9,903 patients) were enrolled. RR, DCR, and PFS
were all strongly associated with MST. In their simple linear regression models, 
the coefficient of determination (R(2)) was 0.83 (p < 0.000001), 0.58 (p <
0.0001), and 0.70 (p < 0.0001), respectively. And in their multivariate linear
regression models, the standard coefficient was 0.71 (p < 0.001), 0.40 (p <
0.001), and 0.74 (p < 0.001), respectively, while RR and PFS were the preferred
survival predictors in the ROC analysis.
CONCLUSION: RR or PFS may serve as an appropriate survival surrogate in the
clinical trials of EGFR-TKIs for ANSCLC.

DOI: 10.1007/s00432-012-1278-z 
PMID: 22763646  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


927. Expert Opin Ther Targets. 2012 Aug;16(8):771-81. doi:
10.1517/14728222.2012.697155. Epub 2012 Jul 5.

Recent understanding of the molecular mechanisms for the efficacy and resistance 
of EGF receptor-specific tyrosine kinase inhibitors in non-small cell lung
cancer.

Nakata A(1), Gotoh N.

Author information: 
(1)University of Tokyo, Institute of Medical Science, Division of Systems
Biomedical Technology, 4-6-1 Shirokanedai, Minatoku, Tokyo, 108-8639, Japan.

INTRODUCTION: The epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) and its family members 
are involved in many aspects of tumor biological processes. Aberrant activation
of the EGFR tyrosine kinase by mutations or protein overexpression is observed in
various types of human cancer, including lung cancer. EGFR tyrosine kinase
inhibitors (EGFR-TKIs), such as gefitinib and erlotinib, are highly effective in 
lung cancer patients who harbor active mutations in the EGFR gene. However,
patients who are initially sensitive to EGFR-TKIs eventually relapse within few
years.
AREAS COVERED: Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is the most common type of lung
cancer and is associated with a high frequency of EGFR mutations. This review
describes the EGFR mutations that determine the sensitivity to EGFR-TKIs and the 
current understanding of the molecular mechanisms of acquired resistance to
EGFR-TKIs in NSCLC. Furthermore, the authors describe recent strategies developed
to overcome acquired resistance using second-generation EGFR-TKIs and combination
therapies with several molecular-targeting drugs.
EXPERT OPINION: Although recent findings have contributed to our understanding of
the mechanism of acquired resistance and helped the development of novel
strategies to overcome such resistance, the underlying mechanisms are complex and
additional research is necessary to develop effective therapeutic strategies for 
individual patients with lung cancer.

DOI: 10.1517/14728222.2012.697155 
PMID: 22762482  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


928. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol. 2012 Aug;70(2):315-20. doi:
10.1007/s00280-012-1876-0. Epub 2012 Jul 4.

Efficacy of EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors for non-adenocarcinoma NSCLC patients
with EGFR mutation.

Cho SH(1), Park LC, Ji JH, Park S, Hwang DW, Lee JY, Choi YL, Han JH, Sun JM, Ahn
JS, Park K, Ahn MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Department of Medicine, Samsung Medical
Center, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Seoul 135-710, Korea.

PURPOSE: The epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors (EGFR
TKIs) gefitinib and erlotinib have shown dramatic response rate (RR) and
significant prolongation of progression-free survival (PFS) in non-small-cell
lung cancer (NSCLC) patients with EGFR mutation. Since only a few patients with
non-adenocarcinoma histology have been enrolled in clinical trials, the efficacy 
of EGFR TKIs in non-adenocarcinoma NSCLC patients with EGFR mutation has not yet 
been fully determined.
METHODS: We retrospectively analyzed clinical outcomes, including RR, PFS, and
OS, in patients who were treated with the EGFR TKIs gefitinib or erlotinib and
compared the results with those of adenocarcinoma patients with EGFR mutation and
non-adenocarcinoma patients with wild-type EGFR.
RESULTS: Among 250 patients with non-adenocarcinoma of the lung who underwent
EGFR mutation genotyping, 21 were found to have an EGFR mutation (8.4 %). Twelve 
of the 21 patients were treated with the EGFR TKIs gefitinib (n = 6) or erlotinib
(n = 6). The most common mutation was exon 19 deletion (n = 7). The RR and
disease control rate for 12 patients receiving EGFR TKIs were 50 and 75 %,
respectively. The median PFS was 3.67 months (95 % CI: 1.34-5.99), which was
significantly lower than that of 269 adenocarcinoma patients with EGFR mutation
(13.53 months) but better than that of 32 non-adenocarcinoma patients with
wild-type EGFR (1.83 months) who were treated with EGFR TKIs.
CONCLUSIONS: The results of this study show that the EGFR mutation rate in Korean
patients with non-adenocarcinoma of the lung is relatively high and that the
clinical outcomes of EGFR TKIs are modest.

DOI: 10.1007/s00280-012-1876-0 
PMID: 22760226  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


929. Ther Adv Med Oncol. 2012 Jul;4(4):173-81. doi: 10.1177/1758834012440015.

Combining chemotherapy with epidermal growth factor receptor inhibition in
advanced non-small cell lung cancer.

Leung L(1), Mok TS, Loong H.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory in Oncology in South China, Sir Y.K. Pao Centre for
Cancer, Department of Clinical Oncology, Hong Kong Cancer Institute, Prince of
Wales Hospital, and The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China.

Treatment of advanced stage lung cancer is changing rapidly. With the new found
knowledge on molecular targets such as the epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR), effective therapy is now available in a selected population with the
target mutation. Single-agent epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase
inhibitor (EGFR-TKI) is a standard first-line therapy for patients with
activating-EGFR mutation such as base-pair deletion in exon 19 or point mutation 
at exon 21. At the same time, this class of drugs may be combined with
chemotherapy. Studies on the concurrent combination of chemotherapy and EGFR-TKI 
confirmed a lack of efficacy. A phase II study on sequential intercalated
combination has demonstrated an improvement in progression-free survival (PFS),
but this needs to be validated by the ongoing phase III study. The third approach
is to combine EGFR-TKI as maintenance therapy after tumour response or stable
disease to cytotoxic chemotherapy. Two phase III studies have shown improvement
in PFS, but the use of biomarkers for the selection of maintenance therapy
remains debatable. Cetuximab is a monoclonal antibody against EGFR and its
combination with chemotherapy was shown to improve overall survival in an
unselected population. A new biomarker using the H-score will help to select
patients for this combination.

DOI: 10.1177/1758834012440015 
PMCID: PMC3384091
PMID: 22754591  [PubMed]


930. Anticancer Res. 2012 Jul;32(7):2919-23.

Novel liposomal gefitinib (L-GEF) formulations.

Zhou X(1), Yung B, Huang Y, Li H, Hu X, Xiang G, Lee RJ.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Virology, Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of
Combinatorial Biosynthesis and Drug Discovery, Wuhan University School of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Wuhan, PR China.

BACKGROUND: Gefitinib is a promising agent for the treatment of non-small cell
lung cancer. The purpose of this study was to develop a novel liposomal
formulation for gefitinib (L-GEF) to improve its therapeutic index.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Several L-GEF formulations were prepared and characterized
for their physical chemical properties and cytotoxicity. The pharmacokinetic
parameters of the liposomes were determined in mice. The effect of lipid
composition, transmembrane pH gradient, and incorporation of
hydroxypropyl-β-cyclodextrin (HPβCD) on drug-loading efficiency, liposomal
stability, and the rate of drug release were investigated.
RESULTS: The L-GEF formulation composed of hydrogenated soy phosphatidylcholine
(HSPC)/cholesterol (Chol)/monomethoxy polyethylene glycol 2000-distearoyl
phosphatidyl-ethanolamine (mPEG-DSPE) encapsulating 0.3 M (NH4)2SO4 and 0.1 M
HPβCD (L-GEF-HSPC), had a drug-loading efficiency (DLE) of 85.5%. In vitro
release studies showed that gefitinib release from L-GEF-HSPC in the presence of 
human plasma was slow and exhibited non-Fickian kinetics. Pharmacokinetic study
in mice after i.v. bolus administration of L-GEF-HSPC showed that the area under 
the plasma concentration time curve (AUC) for gefitinib was 32.41 μg·h /ml and
six times that of free gefitinib. The elimination half life (t(1/2β)) of
L-GEF-HSPC was 7.29 h, while that of free gefitinib was 2.26 h.
CONCLUSION: It was shown that gefitinib can be efficiently loaded into L-GEF-HSPC
composed of HSPC/Chol/mPEG-DSPE (55/40/5 mol/mol) with 0.3 M (NH(4))(2)SO(4) and 
0.1 M HPβCD as trapping agents. Compared with the free drug, L-GEF-HSPC had high 
drug loading, good stability, and long-circulating properties.


PMID: 22753756  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


931. Cancer Res. 2012 Aug 15;72(16):4154-64. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-2848. Epub 
2012 Jun 27.

Tankyrase and the canonical Wnt pathway protect lung cancer cells from EGFR
inhibition.

Casás-Selves M(1), Kim J, Zhang Z, Helfrich BA, Gao D, Porter CC, Scarborough HA,
Bunn PA Jr, Chan DC, Tan AC, DeGregori J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, Program in Molecular
Biology, University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora, Colorado 80045, USA.

Lung cancer is the leading cause of death worldwide. Adenocarcinomas, the most
common histologic subtype of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), are frequently
associated with activating mutations in the epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR) gene. Although these patients often respond clinically to the EGFR
tyrosine kinase inhibitors erlotinib and gefitinib, relapse inevitably occurs,
suggesting the development of escape mechanisms that promote cell survival. Using
a loss-of-function, whole genome short hairpin RNA (shRNA) screen, we identified 
that the canonical Wnt pathway contributes to the maintenance of NSCLC cells
during EGFR inhibition, particularly the poly-ADP-ribosylating enzymes tankyrase 
1 and 2 that positively regulate canonical Wnt signaling. Inhibition of tankyrase
and various other components of the Wnt pathway with shRNAs or small molecules
significantly increased the efficacy of EGFR inhibitors both in vitro and in
vivo. Our findings therefore reveal a critical role for tankyrase and the
canonical Wnt pathway in maintaining lung cancer cells during EGFR inhibition.
Targeting the Wnt-tankyrase-β-catenin pathway together with EGFR inhibition may
improve clinical outcome in patients with NSCLC.

©2012 AACR.

DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-2848 
PMCID: PMC3673784
PMID: 22738915  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


932. Clin Cancer Res. 2012 Aug 15;18(16):4406-14. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-12-0357. 
Epub 2012 Jun 25.

The impact of initial gefitinib or erlotinib versus chemotherapy on central
nervous system progression in advanced non-small cell lung cancer with EGFR
mutations.

Heon S(1), Yeap BY, Lindeman NI, Joshi VA, Butaney M, Britt GJ, Costa DB, Rabin
MS, Jackman DM, Johnson BE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA, USA.

PURPOSE: This retrospective study was undertaken to investigate the impact of
initial gefitinib or erlotinib (EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor, EGFR-TKI) versus 
chemotherapy on the risk of central nervous system (CNS) progression in advanced 
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) with EGFR mutations.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Patients with stage IV or relapsed NSCLC with a sensitizing 
EGFR mutation initially treated with gefitinib, erlotinib, or chemotherapy were
identified. The cumulative risk of CNS progression was calculated using death as 
a competing risk.
RESULTS: One hundred and fifty-five patients were eligible (EGFR-TKI: 101,
chemotherapy: 54). Twenty-four patients (24%) in the EGFR-TKI group and 12
patients (22%) in the chemotherapy group had brain metastases at the time of
diagnosis of advanced NSCLC (P = 1.000); 32 of the 36 received CNS therapy before
initiating systemic treatment. Thirty-three patients (33%) in the EGFR-TKI group 
and 26 patients (48%) in the chemotherapy group developed CNS progression after a
median follow-up of 25 months. The 6-, 12-, and 24-month cumulative risk of CNS
progression was 1%, 6%, and 21% in the EGFR-TKI group compared with corresponding
rates of 7%, 19%, and 32% in the chemotherapy group (P = 0.026). The HR of CNS
progression for upfront EGFR-TKI versus chemotherapy was 0.56 [95% confidence
interval (CI), 0.34-0.94].
CONCLUSIONS: Our data show lower rates of CNS progression in EGFR-mutant advanced
NSCLC patients initially treated with an EGFR-TKI compared with upfront
chemotherapy. If validated, our results suggest that gefitinib and erlotinib may 
have a role in the chemoprevention of CNS metastases from NSCLC.

DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-12-0357 
PMCID: PMC3682221
PMID: 22733536  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


933. Medicine (Baltimore). 2012 Jul;91(4):179-94. doi: 10.1097/MD.0b013e3182574a0b.

Choroidal metastasis as a presenting manifestation of lung cancer: a report of 3 
cases and systematic review of the literature.

Singh N(1), Kulkarni P, Aggarwal AN, Rai Mittal B, Gupta N, Behera D, Gupta A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Postgraduate Institute of Medical Education 
and Research, Chandigarh, India. navneetchd@yahoo.com

Symptomatic choroidal metastasis is a rare presenting manifestation of lung
cancer. We describe here 3 patients with non-squamous non-small cell lung cancer 
who presented with choroidal metastasis and who were diagnosed and treated by the
authors. We performed a systematic literature review of the previously reported
patients with choroidal metastasis from lung cancer in the English-language
literature. We excluded case series lacking individual patient data and
identified 75 patients. In 23 of these patients, choroidal metastasis was not the
presenting manifestation of lung cancer. Therefore, we included 55 patients (3
index and 52 previously reported) in the analysis. We present the demographic
profile, histology, disease stage, ocular and lung lesions, diagnostic and
treatment (systemic and ocular) modalities, and treatment outcomes. The majority 
of patients were male (67.3%) and were current or ex-smokers (78.3%); the mean
age was 55.1 (standard deviation 11.2) years. Adenocarcinoma (n = 23) was the
most common histologic type followed by squamous (n = 11) and small cell (n = 8).
Left eye (n = 32) involvement was more common than right eye (n = 19) or
bilateral (n = 4). Among patients for whom the location of primary lesion was
specified, the left upper lobe (n = 13) was the most common site. The most common
diagnostic modalities were bronchoscopic lung biopsy (n = 15) and enucleation (n 
= 13), while the liver (30.9%) was the most common extraocular metastatic site
identified. Systemic chemotherapy was given in 56.4% of cases, and disease
progression was the most common outcome among evaluable patients. Ocular
treatment modalities included radiation (n = 23), enucleation (n = 14), and
systemic steroids (n = 8). Regression of choroidal metastases with treatment was 
observed in 66.7% of patients who did not undergo enucleation as the primary
treatment modality. Of the 3 index patients, 2 each received pemetrexed-cisplatin
(as first-line therapy), gefitinib or erlotinib (as second- or third-line
therapy), and intravitreal bevacizumab; and 1 patient received systemic
bevacizumab. Two patients had partial response radiologically with systemic
treatment, and all 3 patients had regression of choroidal metastases with ocular 
treatment. Recommendations regarding systemic and local (ocular) management of
patients with choroidal metastasis as the presenting manifestation of lung cancer
are provided.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0b013e3182574a0b 
PMID: 22732948  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


934. J Thorac Oncol. 2012 Sep;7(9):1337-44. doi: 10.1097/JTO.0b013e31825cca4c.

MET increases the sensitivity of gefitinib-resistant cells to SN-38, an active
metabolite of irinotecan, by up-regulating the topoisomerase I activity.

Sakai A(1), Kasahara K, Ohmori T, Kimura H, Sone T, Fujimura M, Nakao S.

Author information: 
(1)Respiratory Medicine, Cellular Transplantation Biology, Division of Cancer
Medicine, Kanazawa University Graduate School of Medical Science, Kanazawa,
Japan.

INTRODUCTION: Most non-small-cell lung cancer tumors with epidermal growth factor
receptor mutations are responsive to EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors, such as
gefitinib and erlotinib, but almost all such tumors ultimately acquire
resistance. We previously found that a gefitinib-resistant cell line, PC-9/Met in
which MET (MNNG-HOS transforming gene) is amplified, was more sensitive than its 
parent cell line (PC-9) to 7-ethyl-10-hydroxy-camptothecin (SN-38), an active
metabolite of irinotecan. The purpose of this study was to investigate the
mechanisms responsible for the increased sensitivity of the gefitinib-resistant
cell line to SN-38.
METHODS: The sensitivity of PC-9 and PC-9/Met to SN-38 was assessed by performing
water soluble tetrazolium salt (WST-1) assays. Topoisomerase I (topo I)
activities were determined for the cell lines cultured in the presence of
hepatocyte growth factor and for those of which MET expression was knocked down
by introducing a MET-specific small interfering RNA.
RESULTS: PC-9/Met exhibited higher topo I activities, and higher topo I gene and 
protein expression levels than PC-9 did. Suppression of MET expression by a
MET-specific small interfering RNA led to a decrease in the topo I protein
expression in the PC-9/Met cells. The stimulation of PC-9 with hepatocyte growth 
factor caused an increase in the topo I protein level via the activation of MET.
CONCLUSIONS: The increased sensitivity of PC-9/Met cells to SN-38 compared with
that of PC-9 cells was partially because of topo I activities resulting from
increased topo I mRNA and protein expression caused by MET signaling.

DOI: 10.1097/JTO.0b013e31825cca4c 
PMID: 22722827  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


935. J Thorac Oncol. 2012 May;7(5):941-2. doi: 10.1097/JTO.0b013e31825134ac.

Rare and novel epidermal growth factor receptor mutations in non-small-cell lung 
cancer and lack of clinical response to gefitinib in two cases.

Sharma A, Tan TH, Cheetham G, Scott HS, Brown MP.

Comment in
    J Thorac Oncol. 2012 May;7(5):775-6.

DOI: 10.1097/JTO.0b013e31825134ac 
PMID: 22722798  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


936. J Clin Med Res. 2012 Jun;4(3):216-20. doi: 10.4021/jocmr816e. Epub 2012 May 15.

Remarkable Effect of Gefitinib Retreatment in a Lung Cancer Patient With Lepidic 
Predominat Adenocarcinoma who had Experienced Favorable Results From Initial
Treatment With Gefitinib: A Case Report.

Lee SJ(1), Lee HS, Choi JS, Na JO, Seo KH, Oh MH, Jou SS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal medicine, Collage of Medicine, Soonchunhyang
University, Cheonan, Republic of Korea.

Gefitnib is an oral agent of epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase
inhibitor, and it has a certain efficacy against non-small cell lung cancer.
There are some reports that the non-small cell lung cancer patients who
experienced disease progression after responding to gefitinib were again
sensitive to re-administration of gefitinib following temporary cessation of
gefitinib. This is the case report showing a remarkable effect of gefitinib
re-treatment in a patient with metastatic invasive adenocarinoma who had
experienced favorable results from the initial treatment with gefitinib.

DOI: 10.4021/jocmr816e 
PMCID: PMC3376882
PMID: 22719810  [PubMed]


937. Drugs. 2012 Jun 19;72 Suppl 1:28-36. doi: 10.2165/1163012-S0-000000000-00000.

Prognostic and predictive value of K-RAS mutations in non-small cell lung cancer.

Califano R(1), Landi L, Cappuzzo F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, The Christie NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester,
UK.

Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is a heterogeneous disease, caused by the
presence of different clinically relevant molecular subtypes. Genetic mutations
are emerging as potential biomarkers of response and treatment selection in
patients with NSCLC. Over the past few years, activating mutations of epidermal
growth factor receptor (EGFR) have been recognized as the most important
predictor of response to EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) such as gefitinib
and erlotinib and also as a favourable prognostic factor. The RAS genes,
including H-RAS, K-RAS and N-RAS, encode a family of proteins regulating cell
growth, differentiation and apoptosis. Mutations in the K-RAS gene, mainly in
codons 12 and 13, have been found in 20-30% of NSCLC tumor samples and occur most
commonly, but not exclusively, in adenocarcinoma histology and in heavy smokers. 
In NSCLC, the presence of K-RAS mutations has generally been considered to be
associated with worse prognosis and resistance to systemic therapy in the
adjuvant as well as the metastatic setting. In early stage NSCLC, the prognostic 
role of K-RAS mutations has been evaluated in several studies without definitive 
conclusion. On the other hand, in advanced NSCLC, the presence of K-RAS mutations
identifies a subgroup of patients who do not respond to EGFR-TKI therapy but, at 
the same time, a positive survival effect from EGFR-TKIs cannot be excluded in
these patients. Similarly, K-RAS mutational status does not predict benefit from 
the anti-EGFR monoclonal antibody cetuximab, highlighting the biological
difference between lung cancer and colorectal cancer. As a result of the lack of 
conclusive data, K-RAS mutations do not represent a validated biomarker for the
negative selection of patients who are candidates for anti-EGFR therapy. The aim 
of this article is to review and discuss the data on the prognostic and
predictive value of K-RAS mutations in NSCLC.

DOI: 10.2165/1163012-S0-000000000-00000 
PMID: 22712795  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


938. Cancer Sci. 2012 Oct;103(10):1795-802. doi: 10.1111/j.1349-7006.2012.02363.x.
Epub 2012 Jul 24.

JAK2-related pathway induces acquired erlotinib resistance in lung cancer cells
harboring an epidermal growth factor receptor-activating mutation.

Harada D(1), Takigawa N, Ochi N, Ninomiya T, Yasugi M, Kubo T, Takeda H, Ichihara
E, Ohashi K, Takata S, Tanimoto M, Kiura K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Oncology, and Respiratory Medicine, Okayama
University Graduate School of Medicine, Dentistry and Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Japan.

Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase inhibitors, such as
gefitinib and erlotinib, are effective for non-small cell lung cancer with
activating EGFR mutations. However, even in patients with an initial dramatic
response to such a drug, acquired resistance develops after 6-12 months. A
secondary mutation of T790M in EGFR and amplification of the MET gene account for
this resistance; however, the mechanism(s) of approximately 30% of acquired
resistance cases remain unknown. We established an erlotinib-resistant lung
cancer cell line named PC-9/ER3 that harbors an EGFR mutation after continuously 
exposing PC-9 cells to erlotinib. PC-9/ER3 cells were 136-fold more resistant to 
erlotinib than the parental cells. Although the PC-9/ER3 cells did not carry the 
T790M mutation or MET amplification and had similar levels of phosphorylated (p) 
STAT3, pJAK2 increased in the resistant cells. It was found in the present study 
that 3-12 h of exposure to erlotinib in both cell lines did not affect pJAK2
expression, but did result in increased pSTAT3 expression. pAkt in PC-9/ER3 cells
was less suppressed than in PC-9 cells, although pEGFR and pMAPK were markedly
suppressed in both cell lines. The combined treatment of erlotinib plus a JAK2
inhibitor (JSI-124) suppressed pAkt in PC-9/ER3 cells. Similarly, the combination
of erlotinib plus JSI-124 or siRNA against JAK2 restored sensitivity to erlotinib
in PC-9/ER3 cells. The combination of erlotinib plus JSI-124 was also effective
for reducing PC-9/ER3 tumors in a murine xenograft model. Our results suggest
that the activation of JAK2 partially accounts for acquired erlotinib resistance.

© 2012 Japanese Cancer Association.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1349-7006.2012.02363.x 
PMID: 22712764  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


939. Gan To Kagaku Ryoho. 2012 Jun;39(6):857-62.

[The mechanisms of resistance to EGFR-TKIs and challenges to overcome resistance 
in EGFR mutant non-small cell lung cancer].

[Article in Japanese]

Yamaoka T(1), Ohmori T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Oncology, Showa University, Tokyo, Japan.

Somatic activating mutations in the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) gene 
were first identified in 2004 from tumor tissues of non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC) patients and pulmonary adenocarcinoma cell lines. Although pulmonary
adenocarcinoma patients harboring EGFR mutations have increased sensitivity to
EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs), gefitinib and erlotinib, the primary and 
acquired resistant cases remain major clinical problems. Therapeutic strategies
for such oncogene-driven carcinomas were intensively investigated at both the
clinical and preclinical levels. In this review, we focused on one particular
molecularly-defined subset of NSCLC that harbors activating mutations in the EGFR
gene. We summarized the rational dissection of the mechanisms of drug sensitivity
and resistance to EGFR-TKIs, and the promising molecular-centric strategies for
further improving the outcomes of NSCLC patients with EGFR activating mutations.


PMID: 22705678  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


940. Zhongguo Fei Ai Za Zhi. 2012 Jun;15(6):332-9. doi:
10.3779/j.issn.1009-3419.2012.06.03.

[A study on the long-term non-small cell lung cancer survivors in the Expand
Access Program of gefitinib in China].

[Article in Chinese]

Li L(1), Zhong W, Liao M, Chen L, Han B, Guan Z, Yu S, Liu X, Wu Y, Jiang G, Xu
J, Chen J, Tao M, Luo R, Li W, Xu N, Zhao X, Wang M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Diseases, Peking Union Medical College Hospital,
Peking Union Medical College and Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, 100730
Beijing, China. lilongyun_pumch@126.com

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: The Expand Access Program (EAP) of Iressa(gefitinib,
ZD1839) in China was initiated in 2001 with the aim of providing gefitinib to
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients who failed to respond to standard
treatment or who could not tolerate chemotherapy. The primary objective was to
describe the quality of life (QoL), tumor control status, drug safety, and
clinical/genomic features of active long-term survivors enrolled in the EAP. The 
secondary objective was to determine the clinical characteristics of long-term
survivors in the EAP program.
METHODS: In this descriptive observational study, data were collected based on
epidemiological research methods. The data of patients who were actively
participating in the EAP and still undergoing gefitinib treatment were collected 
in a cross-sectional manner to reflect the current status of each patient.
Meanwhile, the data of patients who had been on gefitinib treatment for more than
three years and had already been terminated from the EAP or those who were fast
progressors were collected retrospectively.
RESULTS: A total of 934 patients were screened in the EAP database. Among these
patients, 25 were active long-term survivors still enrolled in the EAP and 34
were long-term survivors who had been terminated from the program. These 59
patients were enrolled in 15 different centers in China, and the remaining 875
patients were fast progressors. The median scores for the Functional Assessment
of Cancer Therapy-Lung (FACT-L), Trial Outcome Index (TOI), and Lung Cancer
Subscale (LCS) of the 25 long-term survivors were 64.5, 37 and 12.5,
respectively. The performance status 0-1 accounted for 91.6% of the data observed
during the cross-sectional survey. For active long-term survivors, the objective 
response rate was 37.5%, the disease control rate was 87.5%, and the median
duration of response time was almost 68 months. In the long-term survivor group, 
no serious and new adverse events were reported. Patients who were aged under 65 
years (68.5%), affected with adenocarcinoma (81.4%), female (55.9%), or had never
smoked (71%) accounted for majority of the long-term survivors. The percentage of
females was significantly higher in the long-term survivor group than in the fast
progressor group (P=0.02). Three tissue samples were collected from each of the
24 active long-term survivors, and one patient was found to be positive of EGFR
mutation. Twenty-two blood samples were also collected, and one patient tested
positive for EGFR mutation. The Ki67 protein expression was also tested in three 
tissue samples, and two of these were found positive for Ki67 protein expression,
with a response duration time of over 73 months.
CONCLUSIONS: A 250 mg dose of gefitinib offers good QoL and is safe for advanced 
NSCLC long-term survivors even after more than three years of treatment.
According to the evaluation of the current tumor control statuses of patients,
gefitinib demonstrates good efficacy in these active long-term survivors.

DOI: 10.3779/j.issn.1009-3419.2012.06.03 
PMID: 22681919  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


941. Zhongguo Fei Ai Za Zhi. 2012 Jun;15(6):324-31. doi:
10.3779/j.issn.1009-3419.2012.06.02.

[Effect and mechanism of gefitinib inhibition on non-small cell lung cancer
radiosensitivity of HCC827 and H358 cell lines].

[Article in Chinese]

Gao Z(1), Zhuang L, Chen Y.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Center, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and
Technology, Wuhan 430030, China.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: The epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is an
important determinant of tumor response to ionizing radiation. Elevated levels of
EGFR expression and activity are frequently correlated with the radiotherapy
resistance of tumors, including that of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). The
molecular inhibition of EGFR signaling is a promising therapeutic strategy for
enhancing the cytotoxic effects of radiotherapy. The aim of the present study is 
to determine whether gefitinib, a selective EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor, can
radiosensitize the NSCLC H358 and HCC827 cell lines. The study also aims to
elucidate the mechanism, by which this drug restores the radiosensitivity of
NSCLC cells.
METHODS: The two cell lines were divided into two groups, the X-ray and
gefitinib-interfering groups. The former was irradiated with X-rays only, and the
latter was treated with 1 μmol/L gefitinib for 24 h before irradiation under the 
same conditions as those for the first group. Clonogenic cell survival assay was 
performed to determine the radiosensitivity of both cell groups. Immunostaining
for confocal microscopy was performed to observe nuclear γ-H2AX repair and EGFR
foci after irradiation. Nuclear EGFR expression was also detected by Western blot
analysis after radiotherapy.
RESULTS: The clonogenic cell survival assay revealed that the surviving fraction 
at 2 Gy (SF2) of the gefitinib-interfering group (0.355) was lower than that of
the X-ray group (0.433) in H358 cells. There was no significant difference
between the SF2 values of the two respective groups in HCC827 cells (0.223 vs
0.242). The confocal microscopy results found that gefitinib increased the
average number of γ-H2AX foci after irradiation in H358 cells, but did not affect
the foci in HCC827 cells. Based on confocal microscopy and Western blot analyses,
gefitinib also inhibited the translocation of EFGR into the nuclei of H358 cells.
However, EGFR was not observed in the nuclei of HCC827 cells for both treatment
groups.
CONCLUSIONS: Gefitinib enhances the radioresponse of H358 cells, which may be
attributed to the suppression of EGFR transport into the nucleus. However,
gefitinib does not affect HCC827 cells, where EGFR remains in the cytoplasm after
irradiation.

DOI: 10.3779/j.issn.1009-3419.2012.06.02 
PMID: 22681918  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


942. Lung Cancer. 2012 Sep;77(3):556-60. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2012.05.092. Epub 2012
Jun 5.

Efficacy of epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors for brain
metastasis in non-small cell lung cancer patients harboring either exon 19 or 21 
mutation.

Park SJ(1), Kim HT, Lee DH, Kim KP, Kim SW, Suh C, Lee JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Asan Medical Center, University of Ulsan College of
Medicine, 88 Olympic-ro 43-gil, Songpa-gu, Seoul 138-736, Republic of Korea.

Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) harboring an activating epidermal growth
factor receptor (EGFR) mutation shows good and rapid response to EGFR tyrosine
kinase inhibitors (TKIs). We prospectively evaluated the efficacy of EGFR TKI for
metastatic brain tumors in NSCLC patients harboring EGFR mutation. This was an
open-label, single-institution, phase II study. Patients diagnosed with NSCLC
harboring EGFR mutation and measurable metastatic brain tumors were eligible.
They received either erlotinib or gefitinib once a day. Out of total 28 patients 
enrolled, 23 patients (83%) showed a partial response (PR) and 3 patients (11%)
did stable disease (SD), giving a disease control rate of 93%. Median progression
free survival (PFS) and overall survival (OS) were 6.6 months (95% CI, 3.8-9.3
months) and 15.9 months (95% CI, 7.2-24.6 months), respectively. There was no
difference in PFS and OS according to EGFR TKIs used. After discontinuation of
the treatment, 14 patients (50%) received local therapy for metastatic brain
tumors during their disease course, either whole brain radiotherapy or
radiosurgery, giving a local therapy-free interval of 12.6 months (95% CI,
7.6-17.6 months). EGFR TKI therapy might be the treatment of choice for
metastatic brain tumors in NSCLC patients harboring an activating EGFR mutation.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2012.05.092 
PMID: 22677429  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


943. J Thorac Oncol. 2012 Aug;7(8):1218-27. doi: 10.1097/JTO.0b013e318258cf17.

Gefitinib enhances cytotoxicities of antimicrotubule agents in non-small-cell
lung cancer cells exhibiting no sensitizing epidermal growth factor receptor
mutation.

Tsai CM(1), Chiu CH, Chang KT, Chen JT, Lai CL, Chen YM, Hsiao SY.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Thoracic Oncology, Department of Chest Medicine, Taipei Veterans
General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan. cmtsai@vghtpe.gov.tw

INTRODUCTIONS: Although randomized clinical trials showed no benefit from
combining epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase inhibitors
(TKIs) with standard chemotherapy for advanced non-small-cell lung cancer
(NSCLC), better results might be obtained by combining EGFR-TKI with individual
agents that are substrates for the adenosine triphosphate binding cassette
transporters (ABCTs) because EGFR-TKIs can inhibit their efflux. The combination 
effects deserved to be further examined in vitro.
METHODS: The combination effects of gefitinib with three antimicrotubule agents
(AMTAs), paclitaxel, docetaxel or vinorelbine, or with gemcitabine were tested in
17 NSCLC cell lines using the tetrazolium colorimetric assay and classical
isobole method. The effects of drug combinations, identified by the values of
mean combination index (mCIs), were correlated with the expression levels of
ABCTs. Dose-versus-log-response curves were analyzed to further evaluate the
possible mechanisms of drug interactions.
RESULTS: Synergistic gefitinib/AMTA interactions were observed in the tested cell
lines. The synergism was more robust in the four lines overexpressing de novo or 
acquired P-glycoprotein (Pgp; individual mCIs range, 0.484-0.859; all p values
were < 0.05), or in 12 cell lines exhibiting no sensitizing EGFR mutations (group
mCIs for gefitinib/paclitaxel, gefitinib/docetaxel, and gefitinib/vinorelbine
were 0.869, 0.82, and 0.853, respectively. All p values were < 0.02). The
synergism could be observed in cells expressing nearly undetectable Pgp and other
ABCTs tested in this study. The combination of gefitinib/gemcitabine was additive
(mCI = 1.027).
CONCLUSIONS: Combined gefitinib/AMTAs showed synergism in NSCLC cells harboring
no sensitizing EGFR mutations. Gefitinib could enhance AMTA effects through
mechanisms not restricted to Pgp blockage.

DOI: 10.1097/JTO.0b013e318258cf17 
PMID: 22659964  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


944. Transl Lung Cancer Res. 2012 Jun;1(2):149-51. doi:
10.3978/j.issn.2218-6751.2012.05.01.

Treating acquired resistance to EGFR-tyrosine kinase inhibitors:still a work in
progress.

Pennell NA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Assistant Professor, Solid Tumor Oncology, Cleveland Clinic Taussig Cancer
Institute, 9500 Euclid Ave., R-35, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA.

While most patients with metastatic non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) containing
sensitizing mutations in the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) gene will
achieve an objective response to EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) such as
erlotinib or gefitinib, patients inevitably develop resistance to these agents.
One of the strategies being tested to overcome acquired resistance to EGFR TKIs
is the use of irreversible EGFR inhibitors such as afatinib. In the randomized
phase 2b/3 LUX-Lung 1 trial in advanced NSCLC patients who progressed after at
least 12 weeks of benefit from EGFR TKIs, afatinib failed to improve overall
survival compared to placebo. Although the liberal entry criteria likely allowed 
the inclusion of some patients without true acquired resistance, the failure of
this study calls into question the viability of irreversible EGFR inhibitors in
this patient population.

DOI: 10.3978/j.issn.2218-6751.2012.05.01 
PMCID: PMC4367570
PMID: 25806172  [PubMed]


945. Transl Lung Cancer Res. 2012 Jun;1(2):129-44. doi:
10.3978/j.issn.2218-6751.2012.06.01.

Erlotinib in patients with advanced non-small-cell lung cancer: A meta-analysis.

Gao H(1), Ding X(2), Wei D(1), Cheng P(1), Su X(1), Liu H(1), Aziz F(3), Wang
D(1), Zhang T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, PLA General Hospital of Chengdu Military Region,
Chengdu 610083 PR China ; (2)Department of Neurology, PLA General Hospital of
Chengdu Military Region, Chengdu 610083 PR China ; (3)Department of Internal
Medicine, Mount Sinai School of Medicine-Jersey City Campus, Jersey City, NJ,
USA.

Erlotinib is a potent reversible HER1/epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)
tyrosine kinase inhibitor with single-agent activity in patients with
non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC). In this article, we updated the evidence of
erlotinib in treating advanced NSCLC by adding new results of RCTs published
between January 2011 and May 2012 into a pooled analysis which had been published
in 2011. Outcomes analyzed were objective response rate (ORR), progression free
survival (PFS), overall survival (OS) and adverse events. Twenty trials including
9,005 patients were identified, and six of them were recently published. As
first-line therapy compared to placebo or chemotherapy, there was a similar ORR
(P=0.29 and 0.42), PFS (P=0.09 and 0.25) and OS (P=0.73 and 0.49). However, for
the patients with EGFR mutations, erlotinib based regimens could significantly
improve ORR (P<0.01), prolong PFS (P<0.0), but did not prolong OS (P=0.22). As
maintenance therapy compared with placebo, erlotinib based regimens significantly
increased ORR (P<0.01), prolonged PFS (P<0.01), but did not improve OS (P=0.22). 
As second/third-line therapy comparing with placebo, erlotinib based regimens
also significantly increased ORR (P<0.01), prolonged PFS (P<0.01), and improved
OS (P<0.01). As second/third-line therapy compared with chemotherapy, gefitinib, 
or vandetanib, the outcomes were similar between two arms. However, compared with
PF299804, there was a decreased ORR (P=0.02), and shorten PFS (P=0.02).
Meanwhile, The patients treated with erlotinib based regimens suffered from more 
diarrhea, rash, and less fatigue, neutropenia, and thrombocytopenia than other
agent based regimens. Our meta analysis showed that erlotinib based regimens
could significantly increase ORR, improve PFS as first-line maintenance therapy
or second/third-line therapy comparing with placebo or PF299804.

DOI: 10.3978/j.issn.2218-6751.2012.06.01 
PMCID: PMC4367576
PMID: 25806169  [PubMed]


946. Transl Lung Cancer Res. 2012 Jun;1(2):102-4. doi:
10.3978/j.issn.2218-6751.2012.06.03.

INFORM; C-TONG 0805: A multicenter, double blind randomized phase III trial of
maintenance gefitinib compared to placebo in advanced non-small cell lung cancer.

Stinchcombe TE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center at the University of North Carolina at 
Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA.

DOI: 10.3978/j.issn.2218-6751.2012.06.03 
PMCID: PMC4367578
PMID: 25806165  [PubMed]


947. Nihon Rinsho. 2012 May;70(5):809-15.

[Diagnostic and therapeutic biomarkers for lung cancer patients].

[Article in Japanese]

Seike M(1), Gemma A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary Medicine/Infection and Oncology, Department of Internal 
Medicine, Nippon Medical School.

Identification of sensitive biomarkers predictive of diagnosis, prognosis and
drug sensitivity could have a clinically significant impact on non-small cell
lung cancer (NSCLC) treatment strategies. Recently, molecular-targeted therapies 
have been developed for NSCLC treatment. NSCLC patients with epidermal growth
factor receptor (EGFR) gene mutations have shown a dramatic response to EGFR
tyrosine kinase inhibitors (EGFR-TKI) such as gefitinib and erlotinib. In
addition, target therapies against echinoderm microtubule-associated protein-like
4-anaplastic lymphoma kinase (EML4-ALK) fusion protein present in approximately
5% of the Japanese patients with adenocarcinomas are currently under development.
In this paper, we reviewed diagnostic and therapeutic biomarkers for lung cancer 
patients.


PMID: 22620005  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


948. Cleve Clin J Med. 2012 May;79 Electronic Suppl 1:eS56-60. doi:
10.3949/ccjm.79.s2.12.

Personalized targeted therapy in advanced non-small cell lung cancer.

Ma PC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Solid Tumor Oncology, Taussig Cancer Institute, Cleveland
Clinic, 9500 Euclid Avenue, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA. map@ccf.org

Personalized targeted therapy for advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
primarily relies on the concept of "oncogene addiction," in which multiple
genetic abnormalities are addicted to one or a few genes for tumor cell
maintenance and survival. Several molecular aberrations have been identified in
NSCLC, with subsequent development of drugs targeted to these aberrations;
gefitinib, erlotinib, and cetuximab for the treatment of NSCLC harboring
epidermal growth factor receptor mutation or overexpression, and crizotinib for
the treatment of NSCLC with the EML4-ALK fusion translocation oncogene being some
examples. A more recent actionable target is MET, a multifaceted receptor
tyrosine kinase within the human kinome. Cellular heterogeneity within an
oncogene-addicted tumor can cause resistance to targeted therapy after an initial
response. As our understanding of tumor heterogeneity and tumor resistance
mechanisms evolves, more rational therapies and combinations of therapies can be 
expected.

DOI: 10.3949/ccjm.79.s2.12 
PMID: 22614968  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


949. BMC Cancer. 2012 May 21;12:185. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-12-185.

Customized chemotherapy based on epidermal growth factor receptor mutation status
for elderly patients with advanced non-small-cell lung cancer: a phase II trial.

Fujita S(1), Katakami N, Masago K, Yoshioka H, Tomii K, Kaneda T, Hirabayashi M, 
Kunimasa K, Morizane T, Mio T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedical Research and Innovation Hospital, 2-2 Minatojima
Minami-machi, Chuo-ku, Kobe, 650-0047, Japan. jp.shirofujita@gmail.com

BACKGROUND: Elderly patients are more vulnerable to toxicity from chemotherapy.
Activating epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutations in non-small-cell
lung cancer (NSCLC) are associated with enhanced response to EGFR tyrosine-kinase
inhibitors. We studied patients with advanced NSCLC for whom treatment was
customized based on EGFR mutation status.
METHODS: We screened 57 chemotherapy-naïve patients with histologically or
cytologically confirmed NSCLC, stage IIIB or IV, aged 70 years or older, and with
an Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group performance status 0 or 1, for EGFR exon 19
codon 746-750 deletion and exon 21 L858R mutation. Twenty-two patients with EGFR 
mutations received gefitinib; 32 patients without mutations received vinorelbine 
or gemcitabine. The primary endpoint was the response rate.
RESULTS: The response rate was 45.5% (95% confidence interval [CI]: 24.4%, 67.8%)
in patients with EGFR mutations and 18.8% (95% CI: 7.2%, 36.4%) in patients
without EGFR mutations. The median overall survival was 27.9 months (95%CI:
24.4 months, undeterminable months) in patients with EGFR mutations and
14.9 months (95%CI: 11.0 months, 22.4 months) in patients without EGFR mutations.
In the gefitinib group, grade 3/4 hepatic dysfunction and dermatitis occurred in 
23% and 5% of patients, respectively. In patients treated with vinorelbine or
gemcitabine, the most common grade 3 or 4 adverse events were neutropenia (47%;
four had febrile neutropenia), anemia (13%), and anorexia (9%). No
treatment-related deaths occurred.
CONCLUSIONS: Treatment customization based on EGFR mutation status deserves
consideration, particularly for elderly patients who often cannot receive
second-line chemotherapy due to poor organ function or comorbidities.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: This trial is registered at University hospital Medical
Information Network-clinical trial registration
(http://www.umin.ac.jp/ctr/index/htm) with the registration identification number
C000000436.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2407-12-185 
PMCID: PMC3404930
PMID: 22613958  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


950. Zhongguo Fei Ai Za Zhi. 2012 May;15(5):305-8. doi:
10.3779/j.issn.1009-3419.2012.05.11.

[Selected arterial infusion chemotherapy combined with target drugs for non-small
cell lung cancer with multiple brain metastase].

[Article in Chinese]

Li J(1), Guo Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Intervention, Tianjin Medical University Cancer Institute and
Hospital, Key Laboratory of Cancer Prevention and Therapy, Tianjin 300060, China.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study is to evaluate the efficacy of
selected arterial infusion chemotherapy in treating non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC) with multiple brain metastases and corresponding factors to influencing
prognosis.
METHODS: From September 2008 to October 2011, a total of 31 patients of NSCLC
with multiple brain metastases (≥3) received selected incranial, bronchial and
corresponding target arterial infusion chemotherapy combined with EGFR-TKIs.
Interventional treatment was performed every four weeks, two-six cycles with
synchronized or sequential targeted drugs (erlotinib, gefitinib or icotinib).
Follow-up CT and MRI were regularly finished at interval of four weeks after two 
cycles of interventional treatment were finished or during taking targeted drugs 
in order to evaluate efficacy of the therapy. The procedure was stopped for the
tumor disease was worse or the patient could not tolerate the toxity of drugs any
longer.
RESULTS: 31 patients was performed two to six cycles of interventional therapy, 3
cycles at average. Response assessment showed that 5 (16.1%) patients got a
complete response (CR), 7 (22.6%) had a partial response (PR), 11 (35.5%) had a
stable disease (SD) and 8 (25.8%) had a progressive disease (PD). The objective
response rate (ORR) was 38.7%, and the disease control rate was 74.2%. The median
progression free survival (PFS) and overall survival (OS) were 13.1 months and
15.1 months. The 6-month survival rate, one-year survival rate and two-year
survival rate were 79%, 61.1%, and 31.1%, respectively. The patients' OS and PFS 
were influenced by smoking state, tumor pathology, extracranial metastases,
period of targeted drug taking and performance status, not by sex, age, before
therapy and the total of brain metastases.
CONCLUSION: Selected arterial infusion chemotherapy with targeted drugs is one of
the most effective and safe treatment to NSCLC with multiple brain metastases.
Smoking status, tumor pathology, extracranial metastases, targeted drug taking
and performance status are corresponding the patient's prognosis.

DOI: 10.3779/j.issn.1009-3419.2012.05.11 
PMID: 22613338  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


951. Zhongguo Fei Ai Za Zhi. 2012 May;15(5):299-304. doi:
10.3779/j.issn.1009-3419.2012.05.09.

[Clinical observation of EGFR-TKI as a first-line therapy on advanced non-small
cell lung cancer].

[Article in Chinese]

Li J(1), Qu L, Wei X, Gao H, Wang W, Qin H, Tang C, Guo W, Wang H, Liu X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonary Neoplasms internal medicine, Affiliated Hospital of
Academy of the Military Medical Science, Beijing 100071, China.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: It has been proven that epidermal growth factor
receptor-tyrosine kinase inhibitor (EGFR-TKI) significantly benefits advanced
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients harboring EGFR mutations in
progression-free survival time with better tolerance. This study is undertaken to
analyze efficacy and tolerance of advanced NSCLC patients harboring EGFR
mutations taking EGFR-TKI as a first-line therapy.
METHODS: Tumor samples from 54 patients with advanced NSCLC were examined for
EGFR activating mutations (deletion mutation in exon 19 and the L858R point
mutation in exon 21) by direct sequencing. The patients were first-line treated
with oral administration of EGFR-TKI until disease progression. The efficacy and 
adverse events were observed, and survival was followed up.
RESULTS: Among the patients, 61% (33 of 54) had EGFR exon 19 deletion, and 39%
(21 of 54) had EGFR L858R point mutation. All patients received first-line TKI
therapy. The total response rate was 96%, median progression free survival (PFS) 
was 8.3 months and median survival was 19.5 months. The patients with EGFR exon
19 deletion had significantly longer median PFS (9 versus 7 months, P=0.002) and 
longer median overall survival (OS)(25 versus 16 months, P=0.001) than patients
with EGFR L858R point mutation. There is no significance in efficacy between
gefitinib and erlotinib, and gefitinib is safer than erlotinib. The most common
adverse events were rash and diarrhea. Two (4%) grade 4 skin toxity effects, two 
(4%) grade 3 aminotransferase level elevations, and one (1) grade 3 stomatitis
were observed.
CONCLUSION: The first-line EGFR-TKI treatment in advanced NSCLC patients
harboring EGFR mutations is efficient and safe, which is more efficient in
patients with EGFR exon 19 deletion than those with EGFR L858R mutation.

DOI: 10.3779/j.issn.1009-3419.2012.05.09 
PMID: 22613337  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


952. Bioorg Med Chem. 2012 Jun 15;20(12):3756-67. doi: 10.1016/j.bmc.2012.04.042. Epub
2012 Apr 27.

Identification of novel drug-resistant EGFR mutant inhibitors by in silico
screening using comprehensive assessments of protein structures.

Sato T(1), Watanabe H, Tsuganezawa K, Yuki H, Mikuni J, Yoshikawa S,
Kukimoto-Niino M, Fujimoto T, Terazawa Y, Wakiyama M, Kojima H, Okabe T, Nagano
T, Shirouzu M, Yokoyama S, Tanaka A, Honma T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biophysics and Biochemistry, Graduate School of Science, The
University of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan.

EGFR is a target protein for the treatment of non small cell lung cancer (NSCLC).
The mutations associated with the activation of EGFR kinase activity, such as
L858R and G719S, destabilize the inactive conformation of EGFR and are closely
linked with the development of NSCLC. The additional T790M mutation reportedly
causes drug resistance against the commercially available EGFR inhibitors,
gefitinib and erlotinib. In this study, we searched for novel G719S/T790M EGFR
inhibitors by a new in silico screening strategy, using two datasets. The results
of in silico screening using protein-ligand docking are affected by the selection
of 3D structure of the target protein. As the first strategy, we chose the 3D
structures for in silico screening by test dockings using the G719S/T790M crystal
structure, its molecular dynamics snapshots, and known inhibitors of the
drug-resistant EGFR. In the second strategy, we selected the 3D structures by
test dockings using all of the EGFR structures, regardless of the mutations, and 
all of the known EGFR inhibitors. Using each of the 3D structures selected by the
strategies, 1000 compounds were chosen from the 71,588 compounds. Kinase assays
identified 15 G719S/T790M EGFR inhibitors, including two compounds with novel
scaffolds. Analyses of their structure-activity relationships revealed that
interactions with the mutated Met790 residue specifically increase the inhibitory
activity against G719S/T790M EGFR.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmc.2012.04.042 
PMID: 22607878  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


953. Clin Lung Cancer. 2013 Jan;14(1):55-61. doi: 10.1016/j.cllc.2012.03.009. Epub
2012 May 17.

Gefitinib-related interstitial lung disease in Taiwanese patients with
non-small-cell lung cancer.

Chang SC(1), Chang CY, Chang SJ, Yuan MK, Lai YC, Liu YC, Chen CY, Kuo LC, Yu CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, National Yang-Ming University Hospital,
Yilan, Taiwan. 11319@ymuh.ym.edu.tw

BACKGROUND: Gefitinib (Iressa; AstreZeneca, Wilmington, DE) is effective in the
treatment of NSCLC, especially in the Asian population. However, ILD is usually a
serious pulmonary adverse effect and almost leads to cessation of gefitinib
treatment. In this study, we investigated the incidence, clinical features, and
prognosis of gefitinib-related ILD in Taiwanese patients with NSCLC.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: This was a retrospective observational study conducted in 2
medical centers and a local teaching hospital.
RESULTS: A total of 1080 patients with NSCLC, who received at least 1 dose (250
mg per day) of gefitinib treatment, were enrolled. Of these, 42 patients were
diagnosed with ILD. Twenty-five of the 42 patients were diagnosed with
gefitinib-related ILD (incidence, 2.3%). The main manifestations of ILD included 
dyspnea, cough, and hypoxemia. Six of the 25 patients (24%) with
gefitinib-related ILD required invasive mechanical ventilation and all patients
were treated with steroids. Twenty-two patients (88%) discontinued gefitinib
treatment without further rechallenge. Ten (40%) patients died directly from ILD 
and in-hospital mortality was 52%. Eleven patients received subsequent cytotoxic 
chemotherapy with a mean of 33.5 days after ILD events. Kaplan-Meier analysis
demonstrated that gefitinib nonresponder and gefitinib use rather than first-line
treatment were associated with poor prognosis when ILD developed during gefitinib
treatment.
CONCLUSION: Taiwanese patients with NSCLC had a relatively high incidence of ILD 
during gefitinib treatment. Gefitinib-related ILD is usually life-threatening,
especially in gefitinib nonresponders and gefitinib use rather than first-line
treatment.

Crown Copyright © 2013. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cllc.2012.03.009 
PMID: 22607779  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


954. Anticancer Res. 2012 May;32(5):1705-10.

Utility of insulin-like growth factor receptor-1 expression in gefitinib-treated 
patients with non-small cell lung cancer.

Fidler MJ(1), Basu S, Buckingham L, Walters K, McCormack S, Batus M, Coon J 4th, 
Bonomi P.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Medical Oncology, Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, IL, USA.
mary_fidler@rush.edu

BACKGROUND: Insulin-like growth factor receptor 1 (IGF1R) is a proposed mechanism
of resistance to epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase
inhibitors. Newer agents targeting this pathway make it of clinical interest.
This study evaluates the IGF1R expression in regard to outcomes and molecular
markers of EGFR activity in lung cancer patients treated with gefitinib.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Gefitinib-treated patients with sufficient archived tissue
were included. The IGF1R activity was measured by immunohistochemistry and the
EGFR by immunohistochemistry, fluorescent in situ hybridization, and gene
mutation testing. Logistic regression and cox proportional hazards models were
used.
RESULTS: A total of 83 patients were included in the study: 71% were positive for
IGF1R expression which was not associated with EGFR parameters or clinical
outcomes. Exploratory analyses showed counter-intuitive improved outcomes with
co-expression of IGF1R and EGFR.
CONCLUSION: IGF1R expression measured by immunohistochemistry does not appear to 
be related to gefitinib resistance.


PMID: 22593449  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


955. Cancer Discov. 2012 May;2(5):398-400. doi: 10.1158/2159-8290.CD-12-0144.

Occupy EGFR.

Park JH(1), Lemmon MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics and Graduate Group in Biochemistry
and Molecular Biophysics, Perelman School of Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19194-6059, USA.

Comment on
    Cancer Discov. 2012 May;2(5):458-71.
    Cancer Discov. 2012 May;2(5):450-7.

Erlotinib and gefitinib inhibit the growth of non-small cell lung cancer tumors
that harbor activating epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutations but are 
ineffective against EGFR variants found in glioblastoma. New studies by Barkovich
and colleagues and Vivanco and colleagues show that these drugs only occupy the
active sites of glioblastoma-derived EGFR mutants to a limited extent and fail to
inhibit the activated receptor. Other EGFR inhibitors that target distinct
receptor conformations are more effective in the treatment of glioblastoma. These
studies reveal distinct drug selectivities for different EGFR mutations and show 
that an analysis of binding-site occupancy should be considered as a biomarker
for inhibitor efficacy in targeting EGFR.

© 2012 AACR.

DOI: 10.1158/2159-8290.CD-12-0144 
PMCID: PMC3354646
PMID: 22588876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


956. Gan To Kagaku Ryoho. 2012 May;39(5):797-9.

[Rapid multidisciplinary therapy for an advanced lung cancer patient with severe 
tracheal stenosis resulting in long-term survival].

[Article in Japanese]

Shimada M(1), Matsumoto I, Tanaka Y, Tanaka N, Waseda R, Takizawa M, Oda M,
Watanabe G, Kasahara K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General and Cardiothoracic Surgery, Kanazawa University.

A 61-year-old female was admitted to our hospital due to dyspnea and facial
edema. A chest CT scan showed stenosis of the trachea and superior vena cava due 
to a tumor around the trachea. She underwent partial resection of the tracheal
tumor via a rigid bronchoscope introduced into the trachea, and placement of a
Dumon Y-stent. Undifferentiated non-small cell lung cancer was diagnosed. After
airway management, she underwent cisplatin-based chemoradiotherapy and total 56
Gy stereotactic radiotherapy for the tumor. The tumor size was reduced by 40%
immediately after chemoradiotherapy. Six months after the tracheal stent
insertion, bone metastases were pointed out, and we changed the chemotherapy
regimen to gefitinib. She has been in good condition without tumor growth for
more than six years after tracheal stent insertion.


PMID: 22584334  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


957. Oncologist. 2012;17(6):863-70. doi: 10.1634/theoncologist.2011-0426. Epub 2012
May 11.

Quality of life with gefitinib in patients with EGFR-mutated non-small cell lung 
cancer: quality of life analysis of North East Japan Study Group 002 Trial.

Oizumi S(1), Kobayashi K, Inoue A, Maemondo M, Sugawara S, Yoshizawa H, Isobe H, 
Harada M, Kinoshita I, Okinaga S, Kato T, Harada T, Gemma A, Saijo Y, Yokomizo Y,
Morita S, Hagiwara K, Nukiwa T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Saitama International Medical Center,
1397-1 Yamane, Hidaka City, Japan.

BACKGROUND: For non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients with epidermal growth
factor receptor (EGFR) mutations, first-line gefitinib produced a longer
progression-free survival interval than first-line carboplatin plus paclitaxel
but did not show any survival advantage in the North East Japan 002 study. This
report describes the quality of life (QoL) analysis of that study.
METHODS: Chemotherapy-naïve patients with sensitive EGFR-mutated, advanced NSCLC 
were randomized to receive gefitinib or chemotherapy (carboplatin and
paclitaxel). Patient QoL was assessed weekly using the Care Notebook, and the
primary endpoint of the QoL analysis was time to deterioration from baseline on
each of the physical, mental, and life well-being QoL scales. Kaplan-Meier
probability curves and log-rank tests were employed to clarify differences.
RESULTS: QoL data from 148 patients (72 in the gefitinib arm and 76 in the
carboplatin plus paclitaxel arm) were analyzed. Time to defined deterioration in 
physical and life well-being significantly favored gefitinib over chemotherapy
(hazard ratio [HR] of time to deterioration, 0.34; 95% confidence interval [CI], 
0.23-0.50; p < .0001 and HR, 0.43; 95% CI, 0.28-0.65; p < .0001, respectively).
CONCLUSION: QoL was maintained much longer in patients treated with gefitinib
than in patients treated with standard chemotherapy, indicating that gefitinib
should be considered as the standard first-line therapy for advanced EGFR-mutated
NSCLC in spite of no survival advantage.

DOI: 10.1634/theoncologist.2011-0426 
PMCID: PMC3380886
PMID: 22581822  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


958. Lung Cancer. 2012 Aug;77(2):371-5. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2012.04.014. Epub 2012 
May 10.

National survey of the medical treatment status for non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC) in China.

Xue C(1), Hu Z, Jiang W, Zhao Y, Xu F, Huang Y, Zhao H, Wu J, Zhang Y, Zhao L,
Zhang J, Chen L, Zhang L.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Department of Medical
Oncology, Sun Yat-Sen University Cancer Center, Guangzhou, People's Republic of
China.

INTRODUCTION: Treatment choice for NSCLC in China has not previously been
reported. This paper explores the clinical practice and adherence to treatment
guidelines for NSCLC.
METHODS: A specifically designed questionnaire was used. It consisted of personal
information of the responders and treatment details (patient identification data 
was excluded). Questionnaires were delivered to doctors in 12 major cities in
China. Doctors were asked to answer the questionnaires based on real cases in
their daily practice.
RESULTS: 987 cases of NSCLC were included. In first-line chemotherapy, regimens
were mostly platinum-based among which gemcitabine plus platinum was
predominately used (27.4%), followed by docetaxel plus platinum (16.2%) and
paclitaxel plus platinum (13.5%). In second-line therapy some were treated with
single agents, such as docetaxel (12.9%), gefitinib (11.1%), pemetrexed (9.3%),
and erlotinib (3.5%). 44.5% were with doublet therapy. Detection rate of
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutation was only 9.6% because of the
limited prevalence of testing technology. EGFR mutation rate was 46.8%.
EGFR-tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) were used more frequently as salvage
(14.8%) rather than upfront therapy (5.3%).
CONCLUSIONS: This survey reveals the daily clinical treatment for NSCLC in China.
Overall data showed modest adherence to the national guideline (NCCN guideline
Chinese version) for first-line chemotherapy. We believe this survey is valuable 
to provide a reference for further clinical trial design and policy making.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2012.04.014 
PMID: 22579298  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


959. Lung Cancer. 2012 Aug;77(2):365-70. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2012.04.009. Epub 2012
May 11.

Chemotherapy for pulmonary large cell neuroendocrine carcinoma: similar to that
for small cell lung cancer or non-small cell lung cancer?

Sun JM(1), Ahn MJ, Ahn JS, Um SW, Kim H, Kim HK, Choi YS, Han J, Kim J, Kwon OJ, 
Shim YM, Park K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Department of Medicine, Samsung Medical
Center, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea.

BACKGROUND: There is controversy regarding palliative chemotherapy for large cell
neuroendocrine carcinoma (LCNEC). We evaluated whether advanced LCNEC should be
treated similarly to small cell lung cancer (SCLC) or non-small cell lung cancer 
(NSCLC).
PATIENTS AND METHODS: The clinical reports and tumor specimens of 45 consecutive 
patients who were diagnosed with advanced LCNEC were reviewed. They were divided 
into SCLC (n=11) and NSCLC regimen groups (n=34) according to first-line
chemotherapeutic regimens.
RESULTS: Most patients were male (96%) and smokers (93%) with a median age of 64 
years. Neuroendocrine differentiation was established in 42 (93%) tumors by
immunohistochemical analyses. Regarding the efficacy of first-line chemotherapy
in the SCLC and NSCLC regimen groups, the response rates were 73% and 50%
(P=0.19), and the median progression-free survival times were 6.1 and 4.9 months 
(P=0.41), respectively. The difference in overall survival between the two
treatment groups was 7.3 months (16.5 vs. 9.2 months, P=0.10). There was also a
considerable difference in the type and efficacy of salvage chemotherapeutic
regimens between the two groups: salvage regimens with irinotecan, platinum, or
taxanes were commonly used with relatively high objective responses in the SCLC
regimen group, whereas frequently used agents in the NSCLC regimen group such as 
pemetrexed, gefitinib, or erlotinib were associated with no objective response.
CONCLUSION: Regarding palliative chemotherapy for advanced LCNEC, treatment
similar to SCLC is more appropriate than NSCLC.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2012.04.009 
PMID: 22579297  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


960. Biomed Pharmacother. 2012 Jul;66(5):384-9. doi: 10.1016/j.biopha.2012.02.004.
Epub 2012 Apr 1.

Combine therapy of gefitinib and fulvestrant enhances antitumor effects on NSCLC 
cell lines with acquired resistance to gefitinib.

Xu R(1), Shen H, Guo R, Sun J, Gao W, Shu Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, the Jiangsu Province Hospital, Nanjing 210029, China.

Gefitinib, an EGFR receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor, is approved for clinical
use in the treatment of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), but the emergence of 
mutations resistant to these inhibitors, such as T790M, has become a clinical
problem. According to statistics, female patients, the presence of adenocarcinoma
or non-smokers experienced a higher response rate. This may be involved in
interaction between the estrogen receptor (ER) and the epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR). To test whether inhibition of the ER signaling pathway affects
the antitumor effect of gefitinib, gefitinib and an ER antagonist, fulvestrant,
were administered to NSCLC cell lines with acquired resistance to gefitinib.
Compared with treatment of either fulvestrant or gefitinib alone, drug
combination obviously decreased proliferation of H1976, H1650 and PC-9 cells
coming from adenocarcinoma. Rapid activations of EGFR pathway by E2β were
observed in H1975 cells with T790M mutation. Additionally, EGFR and ERs
expression were down-regulated respectively in response to estrogen and EGF but
up-regulated in response to fulvestrant and gefitinib in vitro. These results
suggest that there is a functional cross-signaling between the EGFR/ER pathways
in NSCLC with acquired resistance to gefitinib, possibly providing rationale for 
combining gefitinib with anti-estrogen therapy for advanced NSCLC treatment.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biopha.2012.02.004 
PMID: 22560634  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


961. Biochem Pharmacol. 2012 Aug 1;84(3):260-7. doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2012.04.010. Epub
2012 Apr 21.

Interaction of the EGFR inhibitors gefitinib, vandetanib, pelitinib and neratinib
with the ABCG2 multidrug transporter: implications for the emergence and reversal
of cancer drug resistance.

Hegedüs C(1), Truta-Feles K, Antalffy G, Várady G, Német K, Ozvegy-Laczka C, Kéri
G, Orfi L, Szakács G, Settleman J, Váradi A, Sarkadi B.

Author information: 
(1)Membrane Research Group of the Hungarian Academy of Sciences, Department of
Biophysics, Semmelweis University and National Blood Center, Budapest, Hungary.
csilla.hegedus@biomembrane.hu

Human ABCG2 is a plasma membrane glycoprotein that provides physiological
protection against xenobiotics. ABCG2 also significantly influences
biodistribution of drugs through pharmacological tissue barriers and confers
multidrug resistance to cancer cells. Moreover, ABCG2 is the molecular
determinant of the side population that is characteristically enriched in normal 
and cancer stem cells. Numerous tumors depend on unregulated EGFR signaling, thus
inhibition of this receptor by small molecular weight inhibitors such as
gefitinib, and the novel second generation agents vandetanib, pelitinib and
neratinib, is a promising therapeutic option. In the present study, we provide
detailed biochemical characterization regarding the interaction of these EGFR
inhibitors with ABCG2. We show that ABCG2 confers resistance to gefitinib and
pelitinib, whereas the intracellular action of vandetanib and neratinib is
unaltered by the presence of the transporter. At higher concentrations, however, 
all these EGFR inhibitors inhibit ABCG2 function, thereby promoting accumulation 
of ABCG2 substrate drugs. We also report enhanced expression of ABCG2 in
gefitinib-resistant non-small cell lung cancer cells, suggesting potential
clinical relevance of ABCG2 in acquired drug resistance. Since ABCG2 has
important impact on both the pharmacological properties and anti-cancer
efficiencies of drugs, our results regarding the novel EGFR inhibitors should
provide useful information about their therapeutic applicability against
ABCG2-expressing cancer cells depending on EGFR signaling. In addition, the
finding that these EGFR inhibitors efficiently block ABCG2 function may help to
design novel drug-combination therapeutic strategies.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bcp.2012.04.010 
PMID: 22548830  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


962. Discov Med. 2012 Apr;13(71):287-97.

Recent advances in non-small cell lung cancer biology and clinical management.

Saintigny P(1), Burger JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic/Head and Neck Medical Oncology, The University of Texas
MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas 77230, USA.

Despite advances in surgery, chemotherapy, and radiotherapy over the last
decades, the death rate from lung cancer has remained largely unchanged, which is
mainly due to metastatic disease. Because of the overall poor prognosis, new
treatment strategies for lung cancer patients are urgently needed. In this
review, we summarize recent advances in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
screening and diagnostic workup. We discuss current clinical management,
highlighting stage-specific therapy approaches, chemotherapy options for
advanced-stage patients, along with new agents such as vascular endothelial
growth factor (VEGF) and epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) monoclonal
antibodies, and the EGFR-targeting tyrosine kinase inhibitors erlotinib and
gefitinib, and the anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) inhibitor crizotinib.
Finally, we give an outlook into NSCLC disease biology, focusing on the
importance of EGFR activating mutations and the role of the
tumor-microenvironment. CXCR4 chemokine receptors expressed on NSCLC cells are a 
central pathway of NSCLC cross talk with the tumor microenvironment, as they
induce activation, migration, and tumor cell adhesion to stromal cells, which in 
turn provides growth- and drug resistance-signals. Because of the growing
evidence that the microenvironment in NSCLC promotes disease progression, we
expect that selected molecular pathways of cross talk between NSCLC cells and
their microenvironment will become alternative therapeutic targets in the near
future.


PMID: 22541616  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


963. Lung Cancer. 2012 Aug;77(2):346-52. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2012.03.011. Epub 2012
Apr 23.

Randomized phase II trial of first-line treatment with pemetrexed-cisplatin,
followed sequentially by gefitinib or pemetrexed, in East Asian, never-smoker
patients with advanced non-small cell lung cancer.

Ahn MJ(1), Yang JC, Liang J, Kang JH, Xiu Q, Chen YM, Blair JM, Peng G, Linn C,
Orlando M.

Author information: 
(1)Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Seoul,
Republic of Korea. silk.ahn@samsung.com

INTRODUCTION: Treatment with epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)-tyrosine
kinase inhibitors or chemotherapy have shown improved survival outcomes in East
Asian, never-smoker patients with non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). However,
treatment sequence has not been optimized in patients with unknown EGFR mutation 
status. This trial compared first-line chemotherapy with pemetrexed (P)-cisplatin
(C), followed by either gefitinib (G) or P maintenance.
METHODS: East Asian, never-smoker, chemo-naïve patients with stage IIIB/IV NSCLC,
performance status ≤1 and unknown EGFR mutation status were randomized 1:1 to
receive 4 cycles of pemetrexed [500 mg/m(2)]+cisplatin [75 mg/m(2)] q3 weeks,
followed by maintenance with either gefitinib [250 mg/d] (PC/G) or pemetrexed
[500 mg/m(2)] q3 weeks and ≤2 optional cycles of cisplatin (PC/P). The primary
endpoint, progression-free survival (PFS), was calculated from randomization
date.
RESULTS: Between Feb and Nov 2007, 70 patients from China, Korea, and Taiwan were
randomized and treated, among whom 59 patients (84.3%) had non-squamous NSCLC.
Forty-nine patients (70.0%) completed the full sequential treatment (n=25 G; n=24
P). Median PFS was numerically longer for patients on PC/G (9.95 months) than
those on PC/P (6.83 months; hazard ratio [HR]=0.53, 95% confidence interval
[CI]=0.27, 1.04). In contrast, median overall survival was numerically higher for
patients on PC/P (HR=2.15, 95% CI=0.83, 5.60), though there was a high censoring 
rate. Response rate was similar in both arms. Treatment arms were similar for
grade 3/4/5 toxicities.
CONCLUSIONS: East Asian never-smoker patients with advanced NSCLC and unknown
EGFR mutation status had improved PFS following treatment with first-line PC and 
sequential G. Irrespective of subsequent maintenance treatment, induction PC was 
safe and efficacious, leading to prolonged OS in the Asian patient population.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2012.03.011 
PMID: 22534669  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


964. Oncologist. 2012;17(5):682-93. doi: 10.1634/theoncologist.2012-0020. Epub 2012
Apr 24.

Novel approaches of chemoradiotherapy in unresectable stage IIIA and stage IIIB
non-small cell lung cancer.

Stinchcombe TE(1), Bogart JA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology and Oncology, Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center at
the University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North Carolina 27599-7305, USA.
Thomas_Stinchcombe@med.unc.edu

Approximately one third of patients with non-small cell lung cancer have
unresectable stage IIIA or stage IIIB disease, and appropriate patients are
candidates for chemoradiotherapy with curative intent. The optimal treatment
paradigm is currently undefined. Concurrent chemoradiotherapy, compared with
sequential chemotherapy and thoracic radiation therapy (TRT), results in superior
overall survival outcomes as a result of better locoregional control. Recent
trials have revealed efficacy for newer chemotherapy combinations similar to that
of older chemotherapy combinations with concurrent TRT and a lower rate of some
toxicities. Ongoing phase III trials will determine the roles of cisplatin and
pemetrexed concurrent with TRT in patients with nonsquamous histology, cetuximab,
and the L-BLP25 vaccine. It is unlikely that bevacizumab will have a role in
stage III disease because of its toxicity. Erlotinib, gefitinib, and crizotinib
have not been evaluated in stage III patients selected based on molecular
characteristics. The preliminary results of a phase III trial that compared
conventionally fractionated standard-dose TRT (60 Gy) with high-dose TRT (74 Gy) 
revealed an inferior survival outcome among patients assigned to the high-dose
arm. Hyperfractionation was investigated previously with promising results, but
adoption has been limited because of logistical considerations. More recent
trials have investigated hypofractionated TRT in chemoradiotherapy. Advances in
tumor targeting and radiation treatment planning have made this approach more
feasible and reduced the risk for normal tissue toxicity. Adaptive radiotherapy
uses changes in tumor volume to adjust the TRT treatment plan during therapy, and
trials using this strategy are ongoing. Ongoing trials with proton therapy will
provide initial efficacy and safety data.

DOI: 10.1634/theoncologist.2012-0020 
PMCID: PMC3360908
PMID: 22531360  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


965. Curr Oncol. 2012 Apr;19(2):e67-74. doi: 10.3747/co.19.862.

EGFR tyrosine kinase mutation testing in the treatment of non-small-cell lung
cancer.

Kamel-Reid S(1), Chong G, Ionescu DN, Magliocco AM, Spatz A, Tsao M, Weng X,
Young S, Zhang T, Soulieres D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The University Health Network, Toronto, ON.

BACKGROUND: Non-small-cell lung cancer (nsclc) tumours with activating mutations 
of the epidermal growth factor receptor (efgr) tyrosine kinase are highly
sensitized to the effects of oral tyrosine kinase inhibitors such as gefitinib
and erlotinib, suggesting the possibility of targeted treatment of nsclc based on
EFGR mutation status. However, no standardized method exists for assessing the
EGFR mutation status of tumours. Also, it is not known if available methods are
feasible for routine screening. To address that question, we conducted a
validation study of methods used for detecting EGFR mutations in exons 19 and 21 
at molecular laboratories located in five specialized Canadian cancer centres.
METHODS: The screening methods were first optimized using cell lines harbouring
the mutations in question. A validation phase using anonymized patient samples
followed.
RESULTS: The methods used at the sites were highly specific and sensitive in
detecting both mutations in cell-line dna (specificity of 100% and sensitivity of
at least 1% across all centres). In the validation phase, we observed excellent
concordance between the laboratories for detecting mutations in the patient
samples. Concordant results were obtained in 26 of 30 samples (approximately
87%). In general, the samples for which results were discordant were also less
optimal, containing small amounts of tumour.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that currently available methods are capable of 
reliably detecting exon 19 and exon 21 mutations of EFGR in tumour samples
(provided that sufficient tumour material is available) and that routine
screening for those mutations is feasible in clinical practice.

DOI: 10.3747/co.19.862 
PMCID: PMC3320234
PMID: 22514499  [PubMed]


966. Lancet Oncol. 2012 May;13(5):466-75. doi: 10.1016/S1470-2045(12)70117-1. Epub
2012 Apr 17.

Gefitinib versus placebo as maintenance therapy in patients with locally advanced
or metastatic non-small-cell lung cancer (INFORM; C-TONG 0804): a multicentre,
double-blind randomised phase 3 trial.

Zhang L(1), Ma S, Song X, Han B, Cheng Y, Huang C, Yang S, Liu X, Liu Y, Lu S,
Wang J, Zhang S, Zhou C, Zhang X, Hayashi N, Wang M; INFORM investigators.

Collaborators: Zhang L, Ma SL, Han BH, Song XQ, Cheng Y, Huang C, Zhang L, Yang
SJ, Liu XQ, Liu YP, Wang MZ, Lu S, Zhang SC, Lu KH, Zhou JY, Hou M, Cai L, Wu G, 
Zhao H, Fan M, Liu WC, Wang J, Liang J, Zhou CC, Pulmonary SH, Li Q, Wang CL, Wu 
SX.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Centre, Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou, China. li-zhang@csco.org.cn

Comment in
    Lancet Oncol. 2012 May;13(5):435-6.

BACKGROUND: Maintenance treatment of patients with advanced non-small-cell lung
cancer (NSCLC) without disease progression after first-line chemotherapy is a
subject of ongoing research. The aim of the randomised, double-blind,
placebo-controlled, INFORM study was to investigate the efficacy, safety, and
tolerability of the EGFR-tyrosine-kinase inhibitor gefitinib in the maintenance
setting.
METHODS: Patients were aged 18 years or older, were of east Asian ethnic origin, 
had a life expectancy of more than 12 weeks, histologically or cytologically
confirmed stage IIIb or IV NSCLC, a WHO performance status of 0-2, and had
completed four cycles of first-line platinum-based doublet chemotherapy without
disease progression or unacceptable toxic effects. Between Sept 28, 2008 and Aug 
11, 2009, 296 patients were randomly assigned 1:1 to receive either gefitinib
(250 mg per day orally) or placebo (orally) within 3-6 weeks after chemotherapy
until progression or unacceptable toxic effects. Randomisation was done via an
interactive web response system with computer-generated randomisation codes. Our 
primary endpoint was progression-free survival assessed in the intention-to-treat
population. This completed study is registered with Clinicaltrials.gov, number
NCT00770588.
FINDINGS: Progression-free survival was significantly longer with gefitinib
(n=148) than with placebo (148) (median progression-free survival 4·8 months [95%
CI 3·2-8·5] vs 2·6 months [1·6-2·8]; hazard ratio [HR] 0·42, 95% CI 0·33-0·55;
p<0·0001). Adverse events occurred more frequently with gefitinib than with
placebo; the most common adverse events of any grade were rash (73 [50%] of 147
in the gefitinib group vs 14 [9%] of 148 in the placebo group), diarrhoea (37
[25%] vs 13 [9%]), and alanine aminotransferase increase (31 [21%] vs 12 [8%]).
The most commonly reported grade 3 or 4 adverse event was alanine
aminotransferase increase (3 [2%] of 147 in the gefitinib group, none of 148 in
the placebo group). Ten of 147 (7%) patients given gefitinib and five of 148 (3%)
patients given placebo had serious adverse events. Three deaths were thought to
be related to treatment with gefitinib: one from interstitial lung disease; one
from lung infection; and one from pneumonia.
INTERPRETATION: Maintenance treatment with gefitinib significantly prolonged
progression-free survival compared with placebo in patients from east Asia with
advanced NSCLC who achieved disease control after first-line chemotherapy.
Clinicians should consider these data when making decisions about maintenance
treatment in such patients.
FUNDING: AstraZeneca.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S1470-2045(12)70117-1 
PMID: 22512843  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


967. Clin Lung Cancer. 2012 Nov;13(6):488-93. doi: 10.1016/j.cllc.2012.02.003. Epub
2012 Apr 12.

Knockdown of the epidermal growth factor receptor gene to investigate its
therapeutic potential for the treatment of non-small-cell lung cancers.

Shien K(1), Ueno T, Tsukuda K, Soh J, Suda K, Kubo T, Furukawa M, Muraoka T, Maki
Y, Tanaka N, Yamamoto H, Kiura K, Mitsudomi T, Toyooka S, Miyoshi S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer and Thoracic Surgery, Okayama University Graduate School 
of Medicine, Dentistry and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Okayama, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is often overexpressed in
non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Anti-EGFR agents, including EGFR-tyrosine
kinase inhibitors are considered to be effective when a drug-sensitive EGFR
mutation is present. However, inherent and acquired resistances are major
problems of EGFR-targeting therapies. In this study, we performed EGFR knockdown 
by using small interfering RNAs in NSCLC cell lines to examine the significance
of targeting EGFR for NSCLC therapy.
METHODS: We treated 13 NSCLC cell lines, including 8 EGFR mutant and 5 EGFR wild 
type by using gefitinib or small interfering RNAs against EGFR (siEGFR). Three
cell lines (PC-9-GR1, RPC-9, and HCC827-ER) were experimentally established with 
acquired resistance to EGFR-tyrosine kinase inhibitors. The antitumor effect was 
determined by using an
3-[4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl]-5-[3-carboxymethoxyphenyl]-2-[4-sulfophenyl]-2H-tetr
azolium, inner salt (MTS) or colony formation assay. The protein expression was
evaluated by using Western blotting.
RESULTS: All 13 cell lines expressed EGFR protein, and siEGFR downregulated EGFR 
protein expression in all. The cell viability was suppressed by siEGFR in 6 of 8 
EGFR-mutant cell lines (suppressed 57%-92% of control cells), including PC-9-GR1 
and RPC-9. The NCI-H1650 and HCC827-ER harbored EGFR mutations but were not
suppressed. Of note, PTEN (phosphatase and tensin homolog) was deleted in
NCI-H1650, and c-MET was amplified in HCC827-ER. It was not suppressed in any of 
the EGFR wild-type cells except in the NCI-H411, in which EGFR is phosphorylated,
which indicates its activation.
CONCLUSIONS: Analysis of the results indicated that EGFR can be a therapeutic
target in NSCLCs with EGFR activation. In contrast, targeting EGFR is not
appropriate for tumors in which EGFR is not activated, even if EGFR is expressed.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cllc.2012.02.003 
PMID: 22503506  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


968. Expert Rev Anticancer Ther. 2012 Apr;12(4):519-28. doi: 10.1586/era.12.16.

Targeting the Met pathway in lung cancer.

Belalcazar A(1), Azaña D, Perez CA, Raez LE, Santos ES.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Tennessee Health Science
Center, Memphis, TN, USA.

Dysregulation of Met signaling has been implicated in the initiation, progression
and metastasis of human cancers, and therefore represents an attractive target
for anticancer drug development. Met is overexpressed in non-small-cell lung
cancer and its lack of staining in normal lung tissue makes it an attractive
target. To date, erlotinib and gefitinib have established themselves as
first-line therapy for non-small-cell lung cancer patients whose tumors harbor an
EGF receptor gene mutation, and hence, it is crucial that we identify mechanisms 
of resistance that could be targeted by novel agents, while keeping an acceptable
toxicity profile at the same time; something very important when we develop these
new drugs. Inhibitors of the Met pathway represent a therapeutic alternative in
this setting. In this review, we discuss the early clinical studies reported
using two Met inhibitors, a monoclonal antibody (MetMAb) and a small molecule
tyrosine kinase inhibitor (MGCD265).

DOI: 10.1586/era.12.16 
PMID: 22500688  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


969. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2012 Feb 28;92(8):524-7.

[Evaluation of gefitinib plus radiotherapy in non-small-cell lung cancer patients
with brain metastases].

[Article in Chinese]

Fu H(1), Zhang XL, Xiao Y, Liu XJ, Long C, Hu YD.

Author information: 
(1)PLA Cancer Institute of Xinqiao Hospital, Third Military Medical University,
Chongqing 400037, China.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the efficacies of gefitinib plus radiotherapy in the
treatment of brain metastases in non-small-cell lung carcinoma (NSCLC) patients.
METHODS: A retrospective analysis was conducted for 161 NSCLC patients with brain
metastases treated in Xinqiao Hospital from January 2001 to January 2010. And 38 
patients aged 38 - 77 years old received the combined regimen of gefitinib plus
radiotherapy. It consisted of synchronically practicing general or stereotactic
brain radiotherapy and an oral intake of gefitinib (250 mg, QD for at least 8
consecutive weeks). The efficacies and toxicity were evaluated at Week 12 after
the initial treatment. A total of 123 patients aged 37 - 76 years old undergoing 
whole brain or stereotactic radiotherapy were used as control. χ(2) test between 
two groups was carried out to evaluate the objective response rate (ORR), disease
control rate (DCR), brain metastasis related symptoms and III-IV degree of
toxicity. Non-parametric rank tests were performed to compare the U.S. Eastern
Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) performance status score between two groups.
RESULTS: In the combination therapy group, the levels of ORR and DCR were
significantly higher than those in the conventional treatment group (31.6%, 78.9%
vs 15.4%, 60.2%). The differences were statistically significant (χ(2) = 4.859, P
= 0.027 and χ(2) = 4.479, P = 0.034); significant difference existed in brain
metastasis-related symptoms between two groups (χ(2) = 4.612, P = 0.037); the
ECOG scores were evaluated in the combination therapy group. And they were as
follows: 0 - 1 (n = 18), 2 (n = 11), 3 - 4 (n = 9) at pre-treatment vs 0 - 1 (n =
27), 2 (n = 6), 3 - 4 (n = 5) at post-treatment. The ECOG score significantly
improved after treatment (Z = -2.012, P = 0.044). Regarding the III-IV degree of 
toxicity, the combination therapy group had 4 patients with acne-like rash and it
was significantly higher than that in the conventional therapy group (n = 0) (P =
0.003). But no difference existed in the occurrence of fatigue, nausea, vomiting,
diarrhea and myelosuppression.
CONCLUSION: The combined regimen of gefitinib plus radiotherapy can improve the
therapeutic efficacies of brain metastases and enhance the quality-of-life in
NSCLC patients, side effects are tolerable.


PMID: 22490154  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


970. Lung Cancer. 2012 Jul;77(1):183-91. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2012.03.003. Epub 2012
Apr 7.

The gefitinib long-term responder (LTR)--a cancer stem-like cell story? Insights 
from molecular analyses of German long-term responders treated in the IRESSA
expanded access program (EAP).

Gottschling S(1), Herpel E, Eberhardt WE, Heigener DF, Fischer JR, Köhne CH,
Kortsik C, Kuhnt T, Muley T, Meister M, Bischoff HG, Klein P, Moldenhauer I,
Schnabel PA, Thomas M, Penzel R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Oncology, Thoraxklinik/University of Heidelberg,
Amalienstr 5, 69126 Heidelberg, Germany.
sandra.gottschling@thoraxklinik-heidelberg.de

BACKGROUND: In selected patients with advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
the EGFR (epidermal growth factor receptor) tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI)
gefitinib (IRESSA) shows response rates of ≥ 70% and a significant prolongation
of progression free survival (PFS). However, cogent biomarkers predicting
long-term response to EGFR-TKIs are yet lacking. Cancer stem-like cells (CSC) are
thought to play a pivotal role in tumor regeneration and appear to be influenced 
by the EGFR-pathway. This makes them a promising candidate for predicting
long-term response to EGFR-TKIs.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We analyzed pre-therapeutic tissue specimens of a rare and
specific subset of previously treated German patients with advanced NSCLC who
experienced ≥ 3 year response to gefitinib within the International IRESSA EAP.
11/20 identified long-term responders (LTRs) had appropriate tissue specimens
available. Those were analyzed for EGFR and k-ras (Kirsten rat sarcoma)
mutations, EGFR and c-met (met proto-oncogene) amplifications and protein
expression of EGFR, E-cadherin/vimentin and the CSC antigens CD133 and BCRP1
(breast cancer resistance protein 1). The results were compared to primary
resistant patients (RPs) and intermediate responders (IRs) showing a median
response of 8.6 months.
RESULTS: Each group consisted of 6 women and 5 men, with 1 squamous cell
carcinoma (SCC) and 10 adenocarcinoma (AC). Along the LTRs, all but the SCC had
EGFR mutations, whereas the RPs had no EGFR, but k-ras mutations in 5/11 cases.
8/11 IRs had EGFR and 3/11 k-ras mutations, of which 2 occurred concomitantly.
One patient of each group had an EGFR and/or c-met amplification. EGFR and
E-cadherin/vimentin expression was not different between the groups, whereas
CD133 was expressed only in 4/10 LTRs and BCRP1 predominantly in responders. The 
LTRs showed a substantially longer mean PFS to previous therapies, a
substantially lower number of metastatic sites and almost exclusively pulmonary
or pleural metastasis.
CONCLUSION: LTRs display established properties of EGFR-TKI responders. Antigens 
characterizing CSC might identify a fraction of LTRs and matter of interest for
further evaluation.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2012.03.003 
PMID: 22483783  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


971. Jpn J Clin Oncol. 2012 Jun;42(6):528-33. doi: 10.1093/jjco/hys042. Epub 2012 Mar 
28.

Clinical impact of switching to a second EGFR-TKI after a severe AE related to a 
first EGFR-TKI in EGFR-mutated NSCLC.

Takeda M(1), Okamoto I, Tsurutani J, Oiso N, Kawada A, Nakagawa K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Kinki University Faculty of Medicine, 377-2
Ohno-higashi, Osaka-Sayama, Osaka, Japan. chi-okamoto@dotd.med.kindai.ac.jp

OBJECTIVE: Somatic mutations in the epidermal growth factor receptor gene are
associated with a therapeutic response to epidermal growth factor receptor
tyrosine kinase inhibitors such as gefitinib and erlotinib in patients with
non-small cell lung cancer. Although the safety profile of these drugs is
favorable, a small proportion of patients with EGFR mutation-positive non-small
cell lung cancer must discontinue treatment because of adverse events such as
interstitial lung disease and hepatotoxicity. Subsequent chemotherapy has not
been optimized in such patients.
METHODS: We performed a retrospective analysis of EGFR mutation-positive
non-small cell lung cancer patients who received both gefitinib and erlotinib at 
our institution. Patients received the second epidermal growth factor
receptor-tyrosine kinase inhibitor after experiencing an adverse event or
progressive disease on the first epidermal growth factor receptor-tyrosine kinase
inhibitor.
RESULTS: We identified 14 patients who received both gefitinib and erlotinib in
the course of their treatment. Three patients initially treated with gefitinib
and two with erlotinib discontinued epidermal growth factor receptor-tyrosine
kinase inhibitor therapy because of severe non-hematologic toxicity (one because 
of gefitinib-induced interstitial lung disease, one because of erlotinib-induced 
lupus erythematosus-like eruption and three because of hepatotoxicity). All five 
of these patients were able successfully to continue therapy with the second
epidermal growth factor receptor-tyrosine kinase inhibitor with no evidence of a 
recurrent adverse event. Progression-free survival was significantly longer in
these five patients than in the nine patients who discontinued treatment with the
first epidermal growth factor receptor-tyrosine kinase inhibitor because of
disease progression.
CONCLUSIONS: EGFR mutation-positive non-small cell lung cancer patients who
discontinue treatment with a first epidermal growth factor receptor-tyrosine
kinase inhibitor because of an adverse event benefit substantially from switching
to a second epidermal growth factor receptor-tyrosine kinase inhibitor before the
development of drug resistance.

DOI: 10.1093/jjco/hys042 
PMID: 22457323  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


972. Lancet Oncol. 2012 May;13(5):528-38. doi: 10.1016/S1470-2045(12)70087-6. Epub
2012 Mar 26.

Afatinib versus placebo for patients with advanced, metastatic non-small-cell
lung cancer after failure of erlotinib, gefitinib, or both, and one or two lines 
of chemotherapy (LUX-Lung 1): a phase 2b/3 randomised trial.

Miller VA(1), Hirsh V, Cadranel J, Chen YM, Park K, Kim SW, Zhou C, Su WC, Wang
M, Sun Y, Heo DS, Crino L, Tan EH, Chao TY, Shahidi M, Cong XJ, Lorence RM, Yang 
JC.

Author information: 
(1)Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York City, NY, USA; Weill Cornell 
Medical College, New York City, NY, USA.

Erratum in
    Lancet Oncol. 2012 May;13(5):e186.

Comment in
    Lancet Oncol. 2012 May;13(5):442-3.

BACKGROUND: Afatinib, an irreversible ErbB-family blocker, has shown preclinical 
activity when tested in EGFR mutant models with mutations that confer resistance 
to EGFR tyrosine-kinase inhibitors. We aimed to assess its efficacy in patients
with advanced lung adenocarcinoma with previous treatment failure on EGFR
tyrosine-kinase inhibitors.
METHODS: In this phase 2b/3 trial, we enrolled patients with stage IIIB or IV
adenocarcinoma and an Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group performance (ECOG)
performance score of 0-2 who had received one or two previous chemotherapy
regimens and had disease progression after at least 12 weeks of treatment with
erlotinib or gefitinib. We used a computer-generated sequence to randomly
allocate patients (2:1) to either afatinib (50 mg per day) or placebo; all
patients received best supportive care. Randomisation was done in blocks of three
and was stratified by sex and baseline ECOG performance status (0-1 vs 2).
Investigators, patients, and the trial sponsor were masked to treatment
assignment. The primary endpoint was overall survival (from date of randomisation
to death), analysed on an intention-to-treat basis. This study is registered with
ClinicalTrials.gov, number NCT00656136.
FINDINGS: Between May 26, 2008, and Sept 21, 2009, we identified 697 patients,
585 of whom were randomly allocated to treatment (390 to afatinib, 195 to
placebo). Median overall survival was 10·8 months (95% CI 10·0-12·0) in the
afatinib group and 12·0 months (10·2-14·3) in the placebo group (hazard ratio
1·08, 95% CI 0·86-1·35; p=0·74). Median progression-free survival was longer in
the afatinib group (3·3 months, 95% CI 2·79-4·40) than it was in the placebo
group (1·1 months, 0·95-1·68; hazard ratio 0·38, 95% CI 0·31-0·48; p<0·0001). No 
complete responses to treatment were noted; 29 (7%) patients had a partial
response in the afatinib group, as did one patient in the placebo group.
Subsequent cancer treatment was given to 257 (68%) patients in the afatinib group
and 153 (79%) patients in the placebo group. The most common adverse events in
the afatinib group were diarrhoea (339 [87%] of 390 patients; 66 [17%] were grade
3) and rash or acne (305 [78%] patients; 56 [14%] were grade 3). These events
occurred less often in the placebo group (18 [9%] of 195 patients had diarrhoea; 
31 [16%] had rash or acne), all being grade 1 or 2. Drug-related serious adverse 
events occurred in 39 (10%) patients in the afatinib group and one (<1%) patient 
in the placebo group. We recorded two possibly treatment-related deaths in the
afatinib group.
INTERPRETATION: Although we recorded no benefit in terms of overall survival with
afatinib (which might have been affected by cancer treatments given after
progression in both groups), our findings for progression-free survival and
response to treatment suggest that afatinib could be of some benefit to patients 
with advanced lung adenocarcinoma who have failed at least 12 weeks of previous
EGFR tyrosine-kinase inhibitor treatment.
FUNDING: Boehringer Ingelheim Inc.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S1470-2045(12)70087-6 
PMID: 22452896  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


973. Acta Pharmacol Sin. 2012 May;33(5):675-81. doi: 10.1038/aps.2011.188. Epub 2012
Mar 26.

FoxM1 mediated resistance to gefitinib in non-small-cell lung cancer cells.

Xu N(1), Zhang X, Wang X, Ge HY, Wang XY, Garfield D, Yang P, Song YL, Bai CX.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan University,
Shanghai, China.

AIM: Gefitinib is effective in only approximately 20% of patients with
non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC), and the underlying mechanism remains unclear.
FoxM1 is upregulated in NSCLC and associated with a poor prognosis in NSCLC
patients. In this study, we examined the possible role of FoxM1 in gefitinib
resistance and the related mechanisms.
METHODS: Gefitinib resistant human lung adenocarcinoma cell line SPC-A-1 and
gefitinib-sensitive human lung mucoepidermoid carcinoma cell line NCI-H292 were
used. mRNA and protein expression of FoxM1 and other factors were tested with
quantitative RT PCR and Western blot analysis. RNA interference was performed to 
suppress FoxM1 expression in SPC-A-1 cells, and lentiviral infection was used to 
overexpress FoxM1 in H292 cells. MTT assay and flow cytometry were used to
examine the proliferation and apoptosis of the cells.
RESULTS: Treatment of SPC-A-1 cells with gefitinib (1 and 10 μmol/L) upregulated 
the expression of FoxM1 in time- and concentration-dependent manners, while
gefitinib (1 μmol/L) downregulated in H292 cells. In SPC-A-1 cells treated with
gefitinib (1 μmol/L), the expression of several downstream targets of FoxM1,
including survivin, cyclin B1, SKP2, PLK1, Aurora B kinase and CDC25B, were
significantly upregulated. Overexpression of FoxM1 increased the resistance in
H292 cells, while attenuated FoxM1 expression restored the sensitivity to
gefitinib in SPC-A-1 cells by inhibiting proliferation and inducing apoptosis.
CONCLUSION: The results suggest that FoxM1 plays an important role in the
resistance of NSCLC cells to gefitinib in vitro. FoxM1 could be used as a
therapeutic target to overcome the resistance to gefitinib.

DOI: 10.1038/aps.2011.188 
PMCID: PMC4010351
PMID: 22447226  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


974. Oncol Rep. 2012 Jun;27(6):2066-72. doi: 10.3892/or.2012.1741. Epub 2012 Mar 22.

Effects of icotinib, a novel epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase
inhibitor, in EGFR-mutated non-small cell lung cancer.

Yang G(1), Yao Y, Zhou J, Zhao Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Disease, The First Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang
University, School of Medicine, Hangzhou 310003, Zhejiang, PR China.

Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is one of the most promising targets for 
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Our study demonstrated the antitumor effects 
of icotinib hydrochloride, a highly selective epidermal growth factor receptor
tyrosine kinase inhibitor (EGFR TKI), in two EGFR-mutated lung cancer cell lines 
compared to A549, a cell line without EGFR mutations. We incubated PC-9 and
HCC827 human lung cancer cell lines both with (E746-A750) mutations with various 
concentrations of icotinib and gefitinib for 48 h. Cell proliferation and
migration were determined using a real-time cell invasion and migration assay and
cytotoxicity assay. Apoptosis was assessed by measuring Annexin V staining using 
flow cytometry. The antitumor effects of icotinib compared to gefitinib were
similar and were most effective in reducing the proliferation of EGFR-mutated
cells compared to non-mutated controls. Our results suggest the possibility of
icotinib as a new therapeutic agent of EGFR-mutated cancer cells, which has the
potential to be used in the first-line treatment of EGFR-mutated NSCLC.

DOI: 10.3892/or.2012.1741 
PMID: 22446631  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


975. Expert Opin Ther Targets. 2012 Apr;16 Suppl 2:S55-60. doi:
10.1517/14728222.2011.652617. Epub 2012 Mar 23.

Oral tyrosine kinase inhibitors in the first-line treatment of advanced non-small
cell lung cancer.

Gori B(1), Ricciardi S, del Signore E, Fulvi A, de Marinis F.

Author information: 
(1)High Specialization Hospitals, Oncological Pulmonary 1st Unit, San
Camillo-Forlanini, Rome, Italy. bruno.gori@yahoo.it

INTRODUCTION: In EGFR mutated advanced NSCLC, tyrosine kinase inhibitors are new 
valid options as first-line treatment. Gefitinib appears a valid alternative to
chemotherapy as first-line therapy, in EGFR mutated elderly or unfit patients
too, while erlotinib remains an option for subsequent lines of treatment.
AREAS COVERED: Areas covered in this review include two international trials,
which evaluated erlotinib in chemo-naive EGFR mutated patients both in an Asian
and caucasian population, showing a dramatic advantage in terms of
progression-free survival and overall response rate as well as gefitinib. Results
showed a good safety profile, with side effects of mild to moderate intensity,
usually manageable with temporary interruption of treatment.
EXPERT OPINION: Investigating EGFR mutations is critical in order to obtain
sufficient data. It has now become mandatory for molecular characterization, as
part of baseline diagnostic procedures. This approach is also becoming
increasingly important during progression of the disease as a sort of 'molecular 
follow up'. It plays a central role in the right choice of treatment, in an aim
to give the best drug to the right patients, overcoming other well known
prognostic factors.

DOI: 10.1517/14728222.2011.652617 
PMID: 22443258  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


976. BMC Med. 2012 Mar 21;10:28. doi: 10.1186/1741-7015-10-28.

Targeting the epidermal growth factor receptor in non-small cell lung cancer
cells: the effect of combining RNA interference with tyrosine kinase inhibitors
or cetuximab.

Chen G(1), Kronenberger P, Teugels E, Umelo IA, De Grève J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Medical and Molecular Oncology and Department of Medical
Oncology, Universitair Ziekenhuis Brussel, Vrije Universiteit Brussel,
Laarbeeklaan 101, 1090, Brussels, Belgium.

BACKGROUND: The epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is a validated
therapeutic target in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). However, current single
agent receptor targeting does not achieve a maximal therapeutic effect, and some 
mutations confer resistance to current available agents. In the current study we 
have examined, in different NSCLC cell lines, the combined effect of RNA
interference targeting the EGFR mRNA, and inactivation of EGFR signaling using
different receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) or a monoclonal antibody
cetuximab.
METHODS: NSCLC cells (cell lines HCC827, H292, H358, H1650, and H1975) were
transfected with EGFR siRNA and/or treated with the TKIs gefitinib, erlotinib,
and afatinib, and/or with the monoclonal antibody cetuximab. The reduction of
EGFR mRNA expression was measured by real-time quantitative RT-PCR. The
down-regulation of EGFR protein expression was measured by western blot, and the 
proliferation, viability, caspase3/7 activity, and apoptotic morphology were
monitored by spectrophotometry, fluorimetry, and fluorescence microscopy. The
combined effect of EGFR siRNA and different drugs was evaluated using a
combination index.
RESULTS: EGFR-specific siRNA strongly inhibited EGFR protein expression almost
equally in all cell lines and inhibited cell growth and induced cell apoptosis in
all NSCLC cell lines studied, albeit with a different magnitude. The effects on
growth obtained with siRNA was strikingly different from the effects obtained
with TKIs. The effects of siRNA probably correlate with the overall oncogenic
significance of the receptor, which is only partly inhibited by the TKIs. The
cells which showed weak response to TKIs, such as the H1975 cell line containing 
the T790M resistance mutation, were found to be responsive to siRNA knockdown of 
EGFR, as were cell lines with downstream TKI resistance mutations. The cell line 
HCC827, harboring an exon 19 deletion mutation, was more than 10-fold more
sensitive to TKI proliferation inhibition and apoptosis induction than any of the
other cell lines. Cetuximab alone had no relevant in vitro activity at
concentrations obtainable in the clinic. The addition of EGFR siRNA to either
TKIs or cetuximab additively enhanced growth inhibition and induction of
apoptosis in all five cell lines, independent of the EGFR mutation status
(wild-type or sensitizing mutation or resistant mutation). The strongest
biological effect was observed when afatinib was combined with an EGFR-specific
siRNA.
CONCLUSIONS: EGFR knockdown by siRNA further decreases the cell growth of lung
cancer cells that are treated with TKIs or cetuximab alone, confirming that
single agent drug targeting does not achieve a maximal biological effect. The
siRNA inhibits EGFR oncogenic activity that bypasses downstream "resistance"
mutations such as KRAS and PTEN. The combined treatment of siRNA and EGFR
inhibitory agents is additive. The combination of a potent, irreversible kinase
inhibitor such as afatinib, with EGFR-specific siRNAs should be further
investigated as a new strategy in the treatment of lung cancer and other EGFR
dependent cancers, including those with downstream resistance mutations.

DOI: 10.1186/1741-7015-10-28 
PMCID: PMC3334713
PMID: 22436374  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


977. Zhongguo Fei Ai Za Zhi. 2012 Mar;15(3):127-38. doi:
10.3779/j.issn.1009-3419.2012.03.01.

[Sequence-dependent effect of docetaxel with gefitinib on the proliferation and
apoptosis of lung adenocarcinoma cell H1975].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhang X(1), Liu G, Zhu X, Wang W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy, Bengbu Medical College, Bengbu 233000, China.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase
inhibitors (TKIs) such as gefitinib and erlotinib show promising therapeutic
effects in patients with advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). However,
despite an initial response to EGFR-TKIs treatment among responsive patients,
most inevitably acquire resistance after a progression-free period of about 10
months. The percentage of T790M in TKI acquired-resistant patients in most
studies is around 50%. The aim of this study is to assess the effects of the
sequential administration of docetaxel and gefitinib on cell proliferation and
apoptosis of lung adenocarcinoma cell H1975.
METHODS: An MTT assay was used to measure cell proliferation. The potency of the 
sequential administration of docetaxel and gefitinib were determined by
isobolograms and combination index (CI). Cell apoptosis and cycle distribution
were determined by flow cytometry. The Hoechst 33258 method was used to observe
the apoptotic morphology. Chemical colorimetric luminescence was used to measure 
the caspase activity.
RESULTS: The isobolograms and CI showed that the sequential administration of
docetaxel following gefitinib remarkably inhibits cell proliferation and cell
apoptosis compared with other sequential administration models. The cycle
distribution results indicate that sequential docetaxel administration following 
gefitinib blocked the cells in the G₂/M phase but not in the G0/G1. The
activation of the Caspase-8/Caspase-3 cascade is mainly involved in the apoptotic
pathway of lung adenocarcinoma cell H1975 in all sequential administration
models.
CONCLUSIONS: The docetaxel administration following gefitinib might be a new
stratagy for lung cancer with T790M mutation after having EGFR-TKIs resistance.

DOI: 10.3779/j.issn.1009-3419.2012.03.01 
PMID: 22429575  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


978. Clin Lung Cancer. 2012 Sep;13(5):369-74. doi: 10.1016/j.cllc.2012.01.008. Epub
2012 Mar 10.

Direct comparison of 3 PCR methods in detecting EGFR mutations in patients with
advanced non-small-cell lung cancer.

Ikeda T(1), Nakamura Y, Yamaguchi H, Tomonaga N, Doi S, Nakatomi K, Iida T,
Motoshima K, Mizoguchi K, Nagayasu T, Tsukamoto K, Kohno S.

Author information: 
(1)Second Department of Internal Medicine, Nagasaki University School of
Medicine, Nagasaki, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutations are predictive of
response to EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) in NSCLC. Several methods have
been used to detect EGFR mutations; however, it is not clear which is the most
suitable for use in the clinic. In this study, we directly compare the clinical
sensitivity and specificity of 3 PCR methods.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We compared the 3 PCR methods (mutant-enriched PCR, PNA-LNA
PCR, and PCR clamp) in patients with advanced NSCLC. A patient who showed
sensitive mutations by at least 1 PCR method was treated with gefitinib. A
patient who showed no sensitive mutations was treated with chemotherapy with
cytotoxic agents.
RESULTS: Fifty patients with advanced NSCLC previously untreated with EGFR-TKIs
were enrolled in this trial. Seventeen patients were harboring EGFR mutations, 5 
of whom showed discrepancies between the results of different PCR methods. All 5 
patients responded to gefitinib. All patients harboring EGFR mutations received
gefitinib treatment and 21 of 33 EGFR-mutation-negative patients received
chemotherapy with cytotoxic agents. Median progression-free survival of the
gefitinib group and the chemotherapy group were 8.2 and 5.9 months, respectively.
CONCLUSION: We considered that all the discrepancies might be false negatives
because the patients responded to gefitinib. To clarify the reason for the false 
negatives of each PCR method, and establish the clinical sensitivity and
specificity of each PCR method, a large prospective clinical trial is warranted.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cllc.2012.01.008 
PMID: 22410386  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


979. Comb Chem High Throughput Screen. 2012 Sep;15(8):641-55.

Targeted therapies for advanced non-small cell lung cancer.

Starakis I(1), Nikolakopoulos A, Mazokopakis EE.

Author information: 
(1)Patras University Hospital, 26500 Rion-Patras, Greece. istarakis@yahoo.com

The incorporation of targeted agents has considerably improved the management of 
patients with advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) over the last years.
The main targets include the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) and the
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF). Currently available agents with
established role in NSCLC include the anti-EGFR tyrosine-kinase inhibitors (TKIs)
erlotinib/gefitinib and the anti-VEGF monoclonal antibody bevacizumab. Moreover, 
several other agents targeting critical pathways in lung carcinogenesis are
currently under preclinical or clinical evaluation. This review presents an
update on the role of targeted agents in advanced NSCLC. In addition, we present 
the main clinical studies investigating the activity of these agents in NSCLC and
we provide recent data with respect to future therapeutic strategies.


PMID: 22409867  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


980. Expert Opin Pharmacother. 2012 Apr;13(5):685-97. doi:
10.1517/14656566.2012.668530. Epub 2012 Mar 10.

Maintenance therapy for advanced non-small-cell lung cancer: switch versus
continuation.

Joshi M(1), Jiang Y, Belani CP.

Author information: 
(1)Penn State Hershey Medical Center, Department of Medicine, Hershey, PA, USA.

INTRODUCTION: The concept of maintenance therapy in lung cancer has stirred a
great deal of interest over the last decade. Several randomized studies have been
conducted to find out the usefulness of maintenance therapies for advanced
non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC).
AREAS COVERED: This article reviews the major benchmark clinical trials and
strategies in the field of maintenance chemotherapy in advanced NSCLC. The two
strategies used in maintenance therapy are: i) continuation maintenance -
continuation of one of the initial treatments; and ii) switch maintenance -
switching to a different agent not administered as initial treatment. Both
chemotherapeutic and molecular targeted agents have been studied in the
maintenance setting. These include docetaxel, gemcitabine, pemetrexed,
bevacizumab, erlotinib and gefitinib. This paper discusses the relevant clinical 
trials using these agents and the two different strategies in the maintenance
therapy in advanced NSCLC.
EXPERT OPINION: Despite some controversy regarding the choice or the timing of
the maintenance therapy, most of the clinical trials have demonstrated a
significant improvement of progression-free survival, translating to a survival
benefit with pemetrexed and erlotinib. The approval of pemetrexed and erlotinib
by the FDA has certainly shifted the pendulum towards maintenance therapy.

DOI: 10.1517/14656566.2012.668530 
PMID: 22404744  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


981. Clin Lung Cancer. 2012 Nov;13(6):458-63. doi: 10.1016/j.cllc.2012.01.006. Epub
2012 Mar 7.

Prospective study of gefitinib readministration after chemotherapy in patients
with advanced non-small-cell lung cancer who previously responded to gefitinib.

Koizumi T(1), Agatsuma T, Ikegami K, Suzuki T, Kobayashi T, Kanda S, Yoshikawa S,
Kubo K, Shiina T, Takasuna K, Matsuo A, Hayasaka M, Morikawa M, Ameshima S.

Author information: 
(1)Respiratory Center, Shinshu University School of Medicine, Matsumoto, Japan.
tomonobu@shinshu-u.ac.jp

INTRODUCTION: Salvage treatment for acquired resistance to epidermal growth
factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor in patients with non-small-cell lung
cancer is a matter of clinical concern. Several retrospective reports have
indicated the usefulness of epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase
inhibitor readministration; however, there have been few prospective studies.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: This study was designed to prospectively evaluate the
clinical efficacy of gefitinib readministration in patients with advanced or
metastatic non-small-cell lung cancer who responded well to initial gefitinib
treatment. The subjects received at least 1 regimen of cytotoxic chemotherapy
after progressive disease with the initial gefitinib therapy. Gefitinib
administration (250 mg/d, orally) was started after progressive disease with the 
previous chemotherapeutic regimen. The primary endpoint in the present study was 
the response rate.
RESULTS: Twenty patients were enrolled between April 2007 and May 2011. Three
patients achieved partial response, and 6 showed stable disease. Thus, the
overall response rate and disease control rate of gefitinib readministration were
15% (95% CI, 3.21-37.9) and 45% (95% CI, 23.1-68.5), respectively. Median
progression-free survival and overall survival from the start of gefitinib
readministration were 2.0 months (95% CI, 0.9-3.1 months) and 12.0 months (95%
CI, 8.0-16.0 months), respectively.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that gefitinib readministration may be an
option, albeit with a low response rate and short progression-free survival, for 
patients who responded well to initial gefitinib followed by systemic
chemotherapy. These findings provide valuable information for the management of
previous gefitinib responders.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cllc.2012.01.006 
PMID: 22402083  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


982. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2012 Jun;341(3):873-81. doi: 10.1124/jpet.111.190033. Epub 
2012 Mar 2.

Pituitary adenylate cyclase-activating polypeptide causes tyrosine
phosphorylation of the epidermal growth factor receptor in lung cancer cells.

Moody TW(1), Osefo N, Nuche-Berenguer B, Ridnour L, Wink D, Jensen RT.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of 
Health, Building 31, Room 4A48, 31 Center Drive, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.
moodyt@mail.nih.gov

Pituitary adenylate cyclase-activating polypeptide (PACAP) is an autocrine growth
factor for some lung cancer cells. The activated PACAP receptor (PAC1) causes
phosphatidylinositol turnover, elevates cAMP, and increases the proliferation of 
lung cancer cells. PAC1 and epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) are present
in non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cells, and the growth of NSCLC cells is
inhibited by the PAC1 antagonist PACAP(6-38) and the EGFR tyrosine kinase
inhibitor gefitinib. Here, the ability of PACAP to transactivate the EGFR was
investigated. Western blot analysis indicated that the addition of PACAP but not 
the structurally related vasoactive intestinal peptide increased EGFR tyrosine
phosphorylation in NCI-H838 or H345 cells. PACAP-27, in a concentration-dependent
manner, increased EGFR transactivation 4-fold 2 min after addition to NCI-H838
cells. The ability of 100 nM PACAP-27 to increase EGFR or extracellular
signal-regulated kinase tyrosine phosphorylation in NCI-H838 cells was inhibited 
by PACAP(6-38), gefitinib,
4-amino-5-(4-chlorophenyl)-7-(dimethylethyl)pyrazolo[3,4-d]pyrimidine (PP2; Src
inhibitor),
(R)-N4-hydroxy-N1-[(S)-2-(1H-indol-3-yl)-1-methylcarbamoyl-ethyl]-2-isobutyl-succ
inamide (GM6001; matrix metalloprotease inhibitor), or antibody to transforming
growth factor α (TGFα). By enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay, PACAP addition to
NCI-H838 cells increased TGFα secretion into conditioned media. EGFR
transactivation caused by the addition of PACAP to NCI-H838 cells was inhibited
by N-acetyl-cysteine (antioxidant), tiron (superoxide scavenger), diphenylene
iodonium (NADPH oxidase inhibitor), or
1-[6-[[(17β)-3-methoxyestra-1,3,5(10)-trien-17-yl]amino]hexyl]-1H-pyrrole-2,5-dio
ne (U73122; phospholipase C inhibitor), but not
N-[2-[[3-(4-bromophenyl)-2-propenyl]amino]ethyl]-5-isoquinolinesulfonamide (H89; 
protein kinase A inhibitor). PACAP addition to NCI-H838 cells significantly
increased reactive oxygen species, and the increase was inhibited by tiron. The
results indicate that PACAP causes transactivation of the EGFR in NSCLC cells in 
an oxygen-dependent manner that involves phospholipase C but not protein kinase
A.

DOI: 10.1124/jpet.111.190033 
PMCID: PMC3362890
PMID: 22389426  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


983. Oncogene. 2013 Jan 10;32(2):209-21. doi: 10.1038/onc.2012.37. Epub 2012 Feb 27.

Upregulation of CXCR4 is functionally crucial for maintenance of stemness in
drug-resistant non-small cell lung cancer cells.

Jung MJ(1), Rho JK, Kim YM, Jung JE, Jin YB, Ko YG, Lee JS, Lee SJ, Lee JC, Park 
MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Divisions of Radiation Cancer Research, Korea Institute of Radiological and
Medical Sciences, Seoul, Korea.

The hypothesis of cancer stem cells has been proposed to explain the therapeutic 
failure in a variety of cancers including lung cancers. Previously, we
demonstrated acquisition of epithelial-mesenchymal transition, a feature highly
reminiscent of cancer stem-like cells, in gefitinib-resistant A549 cells
(A549/GR). Here, we show that A549/GR cells contain a high proportion of CXCR4+
cells that are responsible for having high potential of self-renewal activity in 
vitro and tumorigenicity in vivo. A549/GR cells exhibited strong sphere-forming
activity and high CXCR4 expression and SDF-1α secretion compared with parent
cells. Pharmacological inhibition (AMD3100) and/or siRNA transfection targeting
CXCR4 significantly suppressed sphere-forming activity in A549 and A549/GR cells,
and in various non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cell lines. A549/GR cells
showed enhanced Akt, mTOR and STAT3 (Y705) phosphorylation. Pharmacological
inhibition of phosphatidyl inositol 3-kinase or transfection with wild-type PTEN 
suppressed phosphorylation of Akt, mTOR and STAT3 (Y705), sphere formation, and
CXCR4 expression in A549/GR cells, whereas mutant PTEN enhanced these events.
Inhibition of STAT3 by WP1066 or siSTAT3 significantly suppressed the sphere
formation, but not CXCR4 expression, indicating that STAT3 is a downstream
effector of CXCR4-mediated signaling. FACS-sorted CXCR4+ A549/GR cells formed
many large spheres, had self-renewal capacity, demonstrated radiation resistance 
in vitro and exhibited stronger tumorigenic potential in vivo than CXCR4- cells. 
Lentiviral-transduction of CXCR4 enhanced sphere formation and tumorigenicity in 
H460 and A549 cells, whereas introduction of siCXCR4 suppressed these activities 
in A549/GR cells. Our data indicate that CXCR4+ NSCLC cells are strong candidates
for tumorigenic stem-like cancer cells that maintain stemness through a
CXCR4-medated STAT3 pathway and provide a potential therapeutic target for
eliminating these malignant cells in NSCLC.

DOI: 10.1038/onc.2012.37 
PMID: 22370645  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


984. Asia Pac J Clin Oncol. 2012 Mar;8(1):53-61. doi:
10.1111/j.1743-7563.2012.01528.x.

Cost-utility and budget impact analyses of gefitinib in second-line treatment for
advanced non-small cell lung cancer from Thai payer perspective.

Thongprasert S(1), Tinmanee S, Permsuwan U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Maharaj Nakorn Chiang Mai Hospital, Bangkok, 
Thailand.

AIM: To evaluate the cost utility and budget impact of second-line gefitinib for 
non-small cell lung cancer from a Thai payer perspective.
METHODS:   A Markov model with three health states (pre-progression,
post-progression and death) was constructed to estimate direct medical costs and 
outcomes comparing four treatment options, i.e., gefitinib, erlotinib, pemetrexed
and docetaxel. The model followed patients for 2 years with discount rate of 3%
annually. Clinical inputs and patients' characteristics were based on a
randomized phase III trial (INTEREST). Costs were based on reference prices
published by the Ministry of Public Health, Thailand, and other information
related to treatment from expert opinion and presented in 2010. Deterministic and
probabilistic sensitivity analyses were performed to determine the impact of
model parameters on results.
RESULTS: In the base case model, gefitinib and erlotinib yielded equal
quality-adjusted life years (QALY) but 0.0140 and 0.0110 more QALY compared with 
docetaxel and pemetrexed, respectively. Total costs were 188 848 Baht (US$6237)
for gefitinib, 196 313 Baht (US$6483) for docetaxel, 249 177 Baht (US$8229) for
erlotinib and 275 303 Baht (US$9092) for pemetrexed. Drug acquisition contributed
the greatest component. A series of sensitivity analyses demonstrated the
robustness to various parameter variations except for docetaxel cost and duration
of treatment. The budget impact analyses demonstrate the greater the percentage
of substitution of gefitinib for docetaxel (ranging from 10-60%) the greater the 
cost saving.
CONCLUSION:   Gefitinib is a dominant cost saving strategy compared with
docetaxel for the second-line treatment of advanced NSCLC from the Thai payer
perspective.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Asia Pty Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1743-7563.2012.01528.x 
PMID: 22369444  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


985. Transl Lung Cancer Res. 2012 Mar;1(1):5-13. doi:
10.3978/j.issn.2218-6751.2011.12.01.

Advances on EGFR mutation for lung cancer.

Metro G(1), Crinò L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Oncology, Santa Maria della Misericordia Hospital, Azienda
Ospedaliera di Perugia, via Dottori, 106156 Perugia, Italy.

Patients with advanced non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and somatic activating 
mutations of the tyrosine kinase (TK) domain of the epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR) gene represent a biologically distinct disease entity that shows 
exquisite sensitivity to the reversible EGFR-TK inhibitors (-TKIs) gefitinib or
erlotinib. Phase III randomized studies have clearly demonstrated that a
reversible EGFR-TKI is significantly superior in terms of response rate,
progression-free survival and quality of life to platinum-based chemotherapy in
advanced NSCLC patients who carry an activating EGFR mutation, thus resulting
into a new standard of care for this biologically selected group of patients.
Unfortunately, approximately one third of EGFR-mutated patients show primary
resistance to gefitinib or erlotinib, whereas virtually all patients who
initially benefit from treatment will eventually develop acquired resistance.
Importantly, revealing the molecular mechanisms that underlie resistance to
reversible EGFR-TKIs is key to the development of EGFR-targeting strategies with 
the potential to prevent, delay or overcome such resistance. Early results of
clinical trials with irreversible EGFR-TKIs or dual combination strategies aiming
to block EGFR-mediated signaling at different levels have shown encouraging
results in EGFR-mutated patients pretreated or not with a reversible EGFR-TKI.
Therefore, in the near future it is reasonable to hypothesize that EGFR-mutated
NSCLCs could be treated with multiple lines of EGFR-targeting therapies beyond
disease progression, limiting chemotherapy to selected cases of resistant
disease. This evolving treatment scenario highlights once again how important is 
the identification of a single oncogenic "addiction" that functions as unique
determinant of progression and survival of NSCLC.

DOI: 10.3978/j.issn.2218-6751.2011.12.01 
PMCID: PMC4367583
PMID: 25806150  [PubMed]


986. Cancer Biol Med. 2012 Mar;9(1):18-22. doi: 10.3969/j.issn.2095-3941.2012.01.003.

Molecular mechanisms contributing to resistance to tyrosine kinase-targeted
therapy for non-small cell lung cancer.

Nurwidya F(1), Murakami A, Takahashi F, Takahashi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Juntendo University School of Medicine,
Tokyo 113-8421, Japan.

One of the most important pathways in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is the
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) pathway. This pathway affects several
crucial processes in tumor development and progression, including tumor cell
proliferation, apoptosis regulation, angiogenesis, and metastatic invasion.
Targeting EGFR is currently being intensely explored. We are witnessing the
development of a number of potential molecular-inhibiting treatments for
application in clinical oncology. In the last decade, the tyrosine kinase (TK)
domain of the EGFR was identified in NSCLC patients, and it has responded very
well with a dramatic clinical improvement to TK inhibitors such are gefitinib and
erlotinib. Unfortunately, there were primary and/or secondary resistance to these
treatments, as shown by clinical trials. Subsequent molecular biology studies
provided some explanations for the drug resistance phenomenon. The molecular
mechanisms of resistance need to be clarified. An in-depth understanding of these
targeted-therapy resistance may help us explore new strategies for overcoming or 
reversing the resistance to these inhibitors for the future of NSCLC treatment.

DOI: 10.3969/j.issn.2095-3941.2012.01.003 
PMCID: PMC3643639
PMID: 23691449  [PubMed]


987. Ann Oncol. 2012 Sep;23(9):2253-8. doi: 10.1093/annonc/mds012. Epub 2012 Feb 22.

Induction chemotherapy followed by gefitinib and concurrent thoracic radiotherapy
for unresectable locally advanced adenocarcinoma of the lung: a multicenter
feasibility study (JCOG 0402).

Niho S(1), Ohe Y, Ishikura S, Atagi S, Yokoyama A, Ichinose Y, Okamoto H, Takeda 
K, Shibata T, Tamura T, Saijo N, Fukuoka M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Thoracic Oncology, National Cancer Center Hospital East, Kashiwa, 
Chiba, Japan. siniho@east.ncc.go.jp

BACKGROUND: We conducted a feasibility study of induction chemotherapy followed
by gefitinib and thoracic radiotherapy (TRT) for unresectable locally advanced
adenocarcinoma of the lung.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Patients received induction chemotherapy with cisplatin (80
mg/m(2), days 1 and 22) and vinorelbine (25 mg/m(2), days 1, 8, 22, and 29)
followed by gefitinib (250 mg daily, beginning on day 43, for 1 year) and TRT (60
Gy/30 fractions, days 57-98). The primary end point was feasibility, which was
defined as the proportion of patients who completed 60 Gy of TRT and received
>75% of the planned dose of gefitinib without developing grade 2 or worse
pneumonitis.
RESULTS: Of the 38 enrolled patients, 23 patients [60.5% ; 80% confidence
interval (CI) 48.8-71.3] completed treatment without experiencing grade 2 or
worse pneumonitis. During the chemoradiation phase, grade 3-4 alanine
aminotransferase elevations were observed in 37.1% of the patients. The overall
response rate was 73.0% . The median survival time was 28.5 months (95% CI
22.5-38.2), and the 2-year survival rate was 65.4% .
CONCLUSIONS: Although the results did not meet our criterion for feasibility, the
toxicity was acceptable. This treatment warrants further evaluation among
patients with locally advanced non-small-cell lung cancer harboring epidermal
growth factor receptor mutations.

DOI: 10.1093/annonc/mds012 
PMID: 22357446  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


988. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol. 2012 Jun;69(6):1407-12. doi:
10.1007/s00280-012-1848-4. Epub 2012 Feb 21.

The administration of gefitinib in patients with advanced non-small-cell lung
cancer after the failure of erlotinib.

Grossi F(1), Rijavec E, Dal Bello MG, Defferrari C, Brianti A, Barletta G, Genova
C, Murolo C, Cosso M, Fontanini G, Boldrini L, Truini M, Pronzato P.

Author information: 
(1)S.S. Tumori Polmonari, Istituto Nazionale per la Ricerca sul Cancro, L.go
Benzi, 10, 16132, Genoa, Italy. francesco.grossi@istge.it

PURPOSE: Recent studies have demonstrated that erlotinib therapy may be
considered an option for patients with advanced non-small-cell lung cancer who
experienced disease progression after treatment with gefitinib, particularly in
patients in whom the disease had been stabilized for a long time prior to
gefitinib therapy. The aim of this study was to evaluate the disease control rate
and toxicity of gefitinib in patients whose disease progressed after erlotinib
therapy.
METHODS: From May 2005 to August 2006, 15 patients received a 250 mg/day dosage
of gefitinib after having disease progression while taking erlotinib at a dose of
150 mg/day.
RESULTS: Among patients who received erlotinib, 1 (7%) achieved a partial
response (PR), and 5 (33%) achieved stable disease (SD). Among patients who
received gefitinib, none achieved a PR, and 6 achieved SD (40%). Five out of 6
patients who achieved PR/SD with erlotinib also achieved SD with gefitinib; 8 out
of 9 patients who achieved a progressive disease (PD) with erlotinib also
achieved a PD with gefitinib. The median time to progression (TTP) and overall
survival (OS) were 2.3 and 3.5 months, respectively. The TTP and OS in SD
patients were 3.7 and 7.4 months, respectively. The most common toxicities of
gefitinib were dry skin (grade 1-2) in 27% of patients and acneiform rashes and
rashes/desquamation in 20% of patients. Diarrhea (grade 1-2) occurred in 7% of
patients.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest that patients who achieved PR/SD with erlotinib
also benefit from taking gefitinib. Conversely, gefitinib is not recommended in
patients whose disease progressed after taking erlotinib.

DOI: 10.1007/s00280-012-1848-4 
PMID: 22349923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


989. Oncogene. 2013 Jan 3;32(1):27-38. doi: 10.1038/onc.2012.21. Epub 2012 Feb 20.

Structural basis for the altered drug sensitivities of non-small cell lung
cancer-associated mutants of human epidermal growth factor receptor.

Yoshikawa S(1), Kukimoto-Niino M, Parker L, Handa N, Terada T, Fujimoto T,
Terazawa Y, Wakiyama M, Sato M, Sano S, Kobayashi T, Tanaka T, Chen L, Liu ZJ,
Wang BC, Shirouzu M, Kawa S, Semba K, Yamamoto T, Yokoyama S.

Author information: 
(1)RIKEN Systems and Structural Biology Center, Yokohama Institute, Yokohama,
Japan.

The epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) has an essential role in multiple
signaling pathways, including cell proliferation and migration, through
extracellular ligand binding and subsequent activation of its intracellular
tyrosine kinase (TK) domain. The non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)-associated
EGFR mutants, L858R and G719S, are constitutively active and oncogenic. They
display sensitivity to TK inhibitors, including gefitinib and erlotinib. In
contrast, the secondary mutation of the gatekeeper residue, T790M, reportedly
confers inhibitor resistance on the oncogenic EGFR mutants. In this study, our
biochemical analyses revealed that the introduction of the T790M mutation confers
gefitinib resistance on the G719S mutant. The G719S/T790M double mutant has
enhanced activity and retains high gefitinib-binding affinity. The T790M mutation
increases the ATP affinity of the G719S mutant, explaining the acquired drug
resistance of the double mutant. Structural analyses of the G719S/T790M double
mutant, as well as the wild type and the G719S and L858R mutants, revealed that
the T790M mutation stabilizes the hydrophobic spine of the active EGFR-TK
conformation. The Met790 side chain of the G719S/T790M double mutant, in the apo 
form and gefitinib- and AMPPNP-bound forms, adopts different conformations that
explain the accommodation of these ligands. In the L858R mutant structure, the
active-site cleft is expanded by the repositioning of Phe723 within the P-loop.
Notably, the introduction of the F723A mutation greatly enhanced the gefitinib
sensitivity of the wild-type EGFR in vivo, supporting our hypothesis that the
expansion of the active-site cleft results in enhanced gefitinib sensitivity.
Taken together, our results provide a structural basis for the altered drug
sensitivities caused by distinct NSCLC-associated EGFR mutations.

DOI: 10.1038/onc.2012.21 
PMID: 22349823  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


990. Br J Cancer. 2012 Mar 13;106(6):1148-52. doi: 10.1038/bjc.2011.574. Epub 2012 Feb
16.

Effect of κ-opioid receptor agonist on the growth of non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC) cells.

Kuzumaki N(1), Suzuki A, Narita M, Hosoya T, Nagasawa A, Imai S, Yamamizu K,
Morita H, Nagase H, Okada Y, Okano HJ, Yamashita JK, Okano H, Suzuki T, Narita M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Keio University, School of Medicine, 35 Shinanomachi
Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 160-8582, Japan.

BACKGROUND: It is becoming increasingly recognised that opioids are responsible
for tumour growth. However, the effects of opioids on tumour growth have been
controversial.
METHODS: The effects of κ-opioid receptor (KOR) agonist on the growth of
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cells were assessed by a cell proliferation
assay. Western blotting was performed to ascertain the mechanism by which
treatment with KOR agonist suppresses tumour growth.
RESULTS: Addition of the selective KOR agonist U50,488H to gefitinib-sensitive
(HCC827) and gefitinib-resistant (H1975) NSCLC cells produced a
concentration-dependent decrease in their growth. These effects were abolished by
co-treatment with the selective KOR antagonist nor-BNI. Furthermore, the
growth-inhibitory effect of gefitinib in HCC827 cells was further enhanced by
co-treatment with U50,488H. With regard to the inhibition of tumour growth, the
addition of U50, 488H to H1975 cells produced a concentration-dependent decrease 
in phosphorylated-glycogen synthase kinase 3β (p-GSK3β).
CONCLUSION: The present results showed that stimulation of KOR reduces the growth
of gefitinib-resistant NSCLC cells through the activation of GSK3β.

DOI: 10.1038/bjc.2011.574 
PMCID: PMC3304401
PMID: 22343623  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


991. J Med Chem. 2012 Mar 22;55(6):2711-23. doi: 10.1021/jm201591k. Epub 2012 Mar 1.

Design, synthesis, and biological evaluation of novel conformationally
constrained inhibitors targeting epidermal growth factor receptor threonine⁷⁹⁰ → 
methionine⁷⁹⁰ mutant.

Chang S(1), Zhang L, Xu S, Luo J, Lu X, Zhang Z, Xu T, Liu Y, Tu Z, Xu Y, Ren X, 
Geng M, Ding J, Pei D, Ding K.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Regenerative Biology and Institute of Chemical Biology,
Guangzhou Institutes of Biomedicine and Health, Chinese Academy of Sciences, #190
Kaiyuan Avenue, Guangzhou 510530, China.

The EGFR(T790M) mutant contributes approximately 50% to clinically acquired
resistance against gefitinib or erlotinib. However, almost all the single agent
clinical trials of the second generation irreversible EGFR inhibitors appear
inadequate to overcome the EGFR(T790M)-related resistance. We have designed and
synthesized a series of 2-oxo-3,4-dihydropyrimido[4,5-d]pyrimidinyl derivatives
as novel EGFR inhibitors. The most potent compounds, 2q and 2s, inhibited the
enzymatic activities of wild-type and mutated EGFRs, with IC(50) values in
subnanomolar ranges, including the T790M mutants. The kinase inhibitory
efficiencies of the compounds were further validated by Western blot analysis of 
the activation of EGFR and downstream signaling in cancer cells harboring
different mutants of EGFR. The compounds also strongly inhibited the
proliferation of H1975 non small cell lung cancer cells bearing
EGFR(L858R/T790M), while being significantly less toxic to normal cells.
Moreover, 2s displayed promising anticancer efficacy in a human NSCLC (H1975)
xenograft nude mouse model.

DOI: 10.1021/jm201591k 
PMID: 22339342  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


992. Lung Cancer. 2012 Jul;77(1):64-9. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2011.12.017. Epub 2012
Feb 13.

Metastatic brain tumors from non-small cell lung cancer with EGFR mutations:
distinguishing influence of exon 19 deletion on radiographic features.

Sekine A(1), Kato T, Hagiwara E, Shinohara T, Komagata T, Iwasawa T, Satoh H,
Tamura K, Kasamatsu T, Hayashihara K, Saito T, Takahashi H, Ogura T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Kanagawa Prefectural Cardiovascular and
Respiratory Center, Yokohama, Japan. Akimasa.Sekine@gmail.com

INTRODUCTION: Miliary brain metastasis is a rarity and refers to the presence of 
numerous small tumors in a perivascular distribution without intraparenchymal
invasion and focal edema. Although the presence of epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR) mutation and good response to gefitinib have been reported in
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients with miliary brain metastases, the
influence of the EGFR mutations on the radiographic features remains unclear.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: All NSCLC patients with synchronous brain metastases
detected at the time of a new diagnosis of NSCLC from March 2005 through May 2011
were divided according to EGFR mutation status. The number of brain tumors, size 
of the largest brain tumors, and size of peritumoral brain edema were compared
among the groups.
RESULTS: Fifty-seven patients who met the criteria were divided into three
groups: wild-type EGFR group (31 patients), exon 19 deletion group (18 patients),
and exon 21 point mutation group (8 patients). The exon 19 deletion group had
more multiple and smaller brain tumors with smaller peritumoral brain edema than 
did the wild-type group (P = 0.024, P = 0.0016, and P = 0.0036, respectively).
The exon 21 point mutation group showed no significant difference in any of the
radiographic values when compared with the wild-type group.
CONCLUSION: Our results indicate that NSCLC patients with the exon 19 deletion
have such a peculiar pattern of brain metastases as multiple small metastases
with small brain edema. This metastatic pattern may be similar to that of miliary
brain metastases. Because it is unclear whether or not severe neurologic symptoms
develop during their clinical courses like miliary brain metastases, regular
evaluation with brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) should be considered,
regardless of the presence of neurologic symptoms. Accumulation of knowledge
about specific pattern of brain metastasis will help approach to "individual"
management.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2011.12.017 
PMID: 22335887  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


993. Lung Cancer. 2012 Jul;77(1):121-7. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2012.01.012. Epub 2012 
Feb 12.

Retreatment of gefitinib in patients with non-small-cell lung cancer who
previously controlled to gefitinib: a single-arm, open-label, phase II study.

Oh IJ(1), Ban HJ, Kim KS, Kim YC.

Author information: 
(1)Lung and Esophageal Cancer Clinic, Chonnam National University Hwasun
Hospital, Jeonnam 519-809, South Korea. droij@chonnam.ac.kr

Most patients with non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) who initially respond to
epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors (EGFR-TKIs)
eventually experience progression of disease. Based on previous trials which
showed second response after switching to another EGFR-TKI, we hypothesized that 
the reintroduction of gefitinib would lead to disease control rate (DCR) in more 
than 30% of patients. This was a single-arm, open-label, prospective, phase II
trial of gefitinib for the treatment of advanced or metastatic NSCLC. Eligible
patients had previously responded to, or had experienced disease stabilization
with, initial gefitinib treatment for at least 3 months. Prior to retreatment,
progressive disease (PD) should be observed, with at least one cytotoxic
treatment following initial gefitinib failure. Twenty-three patients were
recruited and defined as the intention to treat (ITT) group. Most of the enrolled
patients were female (86.9%), never-smokers (91.3%), and adenocarcinoma patients 
(95.7%). Responses to initial gefitinib were partial response (PR) in 10 cases
(43.5%) and stable disease (SD) in 13 cases (56.5%). PR and DCR were observed in 
21.7% (5 patients) and 65.2% (15 patients) in the ITT group. Among 14 DNA
samples, 13 cases had either exon 19 deletion or L858R point mutation, whereas
one patient evidenced the wild-type EGFR gene. Re-initiation of EGFR-TKI can be
considered as an option after failure of chemotherapy for those patients who
previously controlled to EGFR-TKI treatment.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2012.01.012 
PMID: 22333554  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


994. Lung Cancer. 2012 Jul;77(1):2-8. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2011.12.014. Epub 2012
Jan 24.

EGFR-TKI resistant non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC): new developments and
implications for future treatment.

Brugger W(1), Thomas M.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Center II, Department of Hematology/Oncology, Schwarzwald-Baar Clinic,
Academic Teaching Hospital University of Freiburg, Villingen-Schwenningen,
Germany. wolfram.brugger@sbk-vs.de

Treatment with receptor-tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) has improved
progression-free and overall survival in patients with advanced non-small cell
lung cancer (NSCLC). One major target for treatment with TKI is the epidermal
growth factor receptor (EGFR), particularly in patients harboring activating
mutations. However, despite initial responses and long lasting remissions, the
development of secondary resistance inevitably leads to treatment failure.
Analyzing recent data from various phase II/III trials it seems obvious that the 
single mode of action of gefitinib or erlotinib can provide temporary success
only. Both preclinical and clinical evidence suggest that irreversible TKIs such 
as afatinib or PF00299804, or combined approaches using multiple kinase
inhibition (e.g. EGFR and MET) and vertical inhibition by combination of small
molecules and antibodies, seem to be more promising and will be the prevailing
concepts to overcome secondary EGFR-TKI resistance for the near future.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2011.12.014 
PMID: 22281074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


995. Crit Rev Oncol Hematol. 2012 Sep;83(3):407-21. doi:
10.1016/j.critrevonc.2011.11.010. Epub 2012 Jan 17.

Second-generation irreversible epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine
kinase inhibitors (TKIs): a better mousetrap? A review of the clinical evidence.

Ou SH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Chao Family Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of California Irvine
Medical Center, Building 56, Room 241, RT81, Orange, CA 92868, USA. siou@uci.edu

The discovery of activating epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutations in 
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) in 2004 heralded the era of molecular targeted
therapy in NSCLC. First-generation small molecule, reversible tyrosine kinase
inhibitors (TKIs) of EGFR, gefitinib and erlotinib, had been approved for second-
or third-line treatment of NSCLC prior to the knowledge of these mutations.
However, resistance to gefitinib and erlotinib invariably develops after
prolonged clinical use. Two second-generation irreversible EGFR TKIs, afatinib
(BIBW 2992) and dacomitinib (PF-00299804), that can potentially overcome the
majority of these resistances are in late stage clinical development. Here I will
review the clinical data of EGFR TKIs and discuss the appropriate future role of 
afatinib and dacomitinib in NSCLC: whether as replacement of erlotinib or
gefitinib or only after erlotinib or gefitinib failure and whether different
subgroups would benefit from different approaches.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.critrevonc.2011.11.010 
PMID: 22257651  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


996. Curr Cancer Drug Targets. 2012 Mar;12(3):237-46.

Role of EGFR inhibitors in the treatment of central nervous system metastases
from non-small cell lung cancer.

Ceresoli GL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Oncology Unit, Cliniche Humanitas Gavazzeni, Bergamo, Italy.
giovanni_luca.ceresoli@gavazzeni.it

Brain metastases (BM) are a common occurrence in patients with non-small cell
lung cancer (NSCLC). Standard therapy options include whole brain radiotherapy
and, in selected patients, surgery or stereotactic radiosurgery. The role of
systemic treatment is controversial. There is a strong clinical rationale for the
use of targeted therapies, because patients often have a poor performance status,
and are not candidates for cytotoxic chemotherapy or radiotherapy, yet treatment 
is required to improve the extra-cranial disease. The efficacy of epidermal
growth factor receptor (EGFR) inhibitors in the treatment of patients with BM
from NSCLC has been reported mainly in case reports or small retrospective case
series, with only a few prospective trials. Current evidence suggests that the
use of EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) gefitinib and erlotinib should be
considered in patients with asymptomatic CNS involvement, when clinical
characteristics suggest a high likelihood of response; these characteristics are 
adenocarcinoma histology, never-smoker status, female gender and East Asian
ethnicity. Upfront therapy with EGFR TKIs should be strongly considered in
asymptomatic patients harboring activating EGFR mutations. In symptomatic BM,
radiotherapy (RT) remains the standard treatment. Based on currently available
data, treatment with concurrent RT and EGFR TKIs should be investigated in
experimental trials only.


PMID: 22229252  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


997. Mol Cancer Ther. 2012 Mar;11(3):784-91. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-11-0750. Epub 
2012 Jan 6.

The EGFR T790M mutation in acquired resistance to an irreversible
second-generation EGFR inhibitor.

Kim Y(1), Ko J, Cui Z, Abolhoda A, Ahn JS, Ou SH, Ahn MJ, Park K.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Nano-Element Development Center, Samsung Biomedical Research
Institute, Seoul, Korea.

Molecular target therapies using first-generation, reversible epidermal growth
factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKI), such as gefitinib or
erlotinib, have been shown to be effective for patients with non-small cell lung 
cancer (NSCLC) who harbor activating mutations in EGFR. However, these patients
eventually develop resistance to the reversible TKIs, and this has led to the
development of second-generation, irreversible EGFR inhibitors. Currently, the
mechanism of acquired resistance to irreversible EGFR inhibitors is not clear.
Using an in vitro cell culture system, we modeled the acquired resistance to
first-line treatment with second-generation EGFR-TKIs using an EGFR-mutant NSCLC 
cell line. Here, we report a mechanism of resistance involving T790M secondary
mutation as well as a corresponding clinical case. The results of these findings 
suggest that inhibition of EGFR by currently available second-generation
EGFR-TKIs may not be sufficient to physiologically prevent the emergence of cells
that are still dependent on EGFR signaling. This finding bears important
implications on the limitations of currently available second-generation
EGFR-TKIs.

DOI: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-11-0750 
PMID: 22228822  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


998. Lung Cancer Int. 2012;2012:354657. doi: 10.1155/2012/354657. Epub 2012 Nov 8.

Treatment of Non-Small-Cell Lung Cancer with Erlotinib following
Gefitinib-Induced Hepatotoxicity: Review of 8 Clinical Cases.

Yano Y(1), Namba Y(1), Mori M(1), Nakazawa Y(1), Nashi A(2), Kagami S(1), Niinaka
M(1), Yoneda T(1), Kimura H(1), Yamaguchi T(1), Yokota S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Oncology, National Hospital Organization Toneyama
National Hospital, 5-1-1 Toneyama, Toyonaka, Osaka 560-8552, Japan.
(2)Pharmaceutical Department, National Hospital Organization Toneyama National
Hospital, Toyonaka, Osaka, Japan.

Objective. Gefitinib often induces liver damage. A few reports have described
that the subsequent administration of erlotinib was associated with less
hepatotoxicity, but the safety and efficacy of this treatment are still not fully
investigated. Therefore, we evaluated retrospectively the patients with erlotinib
following gefitinib-induced hepatotoxicity. Methods and Patients. We
retrospectively reviewed the medical records between December 2007 and March
2010. The patients were evaluated including the following information: age,
gender, histology of lung cancer, performance status, smoking status, epidermal
growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutation status, liver metastasis, viral hepatitis,
alcoholic liver injury, clinical response, and hepatotoxicity due to EGFR
tyrosine kinase inhibitors. Results. We identified 8 patients with erlotinib
following gefitinib-induced hepatotoxicity. All achieved disease control by
gefitinib. Hepatotoxicity was grades 2 and 3 in 3 and 5 patients, respectively.
The median duration of treatment with gefitinib was 112.5 days and the median
time to gefitinib-induced hepatotoxicity was 51.5 days. The median duration of
treatment with erlotinib was 171.5 days. Grade 1 and 2 erlotinib-induced
hepatotoxicity was observed in 2 and 1 patient, respectively. Conclusions.
Erlotinib administration with careful monitoring is thought to be a good
alternative strategy for patients who respond well to gefitinib treatment but
experience hepatotoxicity.

DOI: 10.1155/2012/354657 
PMCID: PMC4437396
PMID: 26316933  [PubMed]


999. J Pers Med. 2012 Apr 10;2(2):35-49. doi: 10.3390/jpm2020035.

Molecular therapeutic advances in personalized therapy of melanoma and non-small 
cell lung cancer.

Kelleher FC(1), Solomon B(2), McArthur GA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Divisions of Cancer Medicine/Cancer Research, Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre,
Locked Bag 1A'Beckett St Victoria 8006, Australia. fergal.kelleher@petermac.org. 
(2)Divisions of Cancer Medicine/Cancer Research, Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre,
Locked Bag 1A'Beckett St Victoria 8006, Australia. ben.solomon@petermac.org.
(3)Divisions of Cancer Medicine/Cancer Research, Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre,
Locked Bag 1A'Beckett St Victoria 8006, Australia. grant.mcarthur@petermac.org.

The incorporation of individualized molecular therapeutics into routine clinical 
practice for both non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and melanoma are amongst the
most significant advances of the last decades in medical oncology. In NSCLC
activating somatic mutations in exons encoding the tyrosine kinase domain of the 
Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor (EGFR) gene have been found to be predictive of 
a response to treatment with tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKI), erlotinib or
gefitinib. More recently the EML4-ALK fusion gene which occurs in 3-5% of NSCLC
has been found to predict sensitivity to crizotinib an inhibitor of the
anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) receptor tyrosine kinase. Similarly in melanoma,
50% of cases have BRAF mutations in exon 15 mostly V600E and these cases are
sensitive to the BRAF inhibitors vemurafenib or dabrafenib. In a Phase III study 
of advanced melanoma cases with this mutation vemurafenib improved survival from 
64% to 84% at 6 months, when compared with dacarbazine. In both NSCLC and
melanoma clinical benefit is not obtained in patients without these genomic
changes, and moreover in the case of vemurafenib the therapy may theoretically
induce proliferation of cases of melanoma without BRAF mutations. An emerging
clinical challenge is that of acquired resistance after initial responses to
targeted therapeutics. Resistance to the TKI's in NSCLC is most frequently due to
acquisition of secondary mutations within the tyrosine kinase of the EGFR or
alternatively activation of alternative tyrosine kinases such as C-MET.
Mechanisms of drug resistance in melanoma to vemurafenib do not involve mutations
in BRAF itself but are associated with a variety of molecular changes including
RAF1 or COT gene over expression, activating mutations in RAS or increased
activation of the receptor tyrosine kinase PDGFRβ. Importantly these data support
introducing re-biopsy of tumors at progression to continue to personalize the
choice of therapy throughout the patient's disease course.

DOI: 10.3390/jpm2020035 
PMCID: PMC4251364
PMID: 25562798  [PubMed]


1000. Contemp Oncol (Pozn). 2012;16(2):170-5. doi: 10.5114/wo.2012.28798. Epub 2012 May
29.

Erlotinib in salvage treatment of patients with advanced non-small cell lung
cancer: results of an expanded access programme in Poland.

Kowalski DM(1), Krzakowski M, Ramlau R, Jaskiewicz P, Janowicz-Żebrowska A.

Author information: 
(1)The Maria Sklodowska-Curie Memorial Cancer Centre and Institute, Department of
Lung Cancer and Chest Tumours, Warsaw, Poland.

AIM OF THE STUDY: Erlotinib and gefitinib are reversible EGFR-TKI administered
orally. Results of the phase III study JBR.21 proved the clinical efficacy of
erlotinib-based regimens as second- or third-line treatment of advanced NSCLC. We
analyze efficacy of treatment with erlotinib in patients suffering from advanced 
stage NSCLC who participated in the multicentre, international phase IV study -
MO 18109 TRUST (expanded access clinical program of Tarceva™ in patients with
advanced stage IIIB/IV NSCLC). Our analysis was performed based on clinical data 
derived from centres with the largest number of patients who received erlotinib.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Between May and November 2005, a total of 56 patients (19
women and 37 men) with histologic or cytologic diagnosis of NSCLC were included
in the study. The histological diagnosis was: squamous-cell (n = 23),
adenocarcinoma (n = 20), broncho-alveolar carcinoma (n = 2). In 11 patients the
type of NSCLC was not specified.
RESULTS: Patients received erlotinib in a single dose of 150 mg per day. Partial 
response (PR), stable disease (SD) or progressive disease (PD) were observed in 5
(9%), 33 (59%) and 16 (29%) patients respectively. Median PFS was 16.0 weeks. In 
the study population adverse events (AE) were noted in 12 (21%) patients.
CONCLUSIONS: Results of the TRUST study in the Polish population confirmed the
efficacy of erlotinib in advanced NSCLC after failure of prior platinum-based
chemotherapy. Treatment with erlotinib was associated with longer PFS as compared
to the JBR.2 study, whole TRUST study population and Italian population included 
in the TRUST study.

DOI: 10.5114/wo.2012.28798 
PMCID: PMC3687401
PMID: 23788872  [PubMed]


1001. J Pharm Biomed Anal. 2012 Mar 5;61:86-92. doi: 10.1016/j.jpba.2011.11.034. Epub
2011 Dec 8.

Method development and validation for rapid quantification of hydroxychloroquine 
in human blood using liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry.

Wang LZ(1), Ong RY, Chin TM, Thuya WL, Wan SC, Wong AL, Chan SY, Ho PC, Goh BC.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Science Institute of Singapore, National University of Singapore,
Singapore. csiwl@nus.edu.sg

A novel and specific liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometric method
(LC-MS/MS) was developed and validated for the quantification of
hydroxychloroquine in human blood using its stable labeled isotope,
hydroxychloroquine-d4 as the internal standard. Chromatographic separation of
analytes was achieved using an Agilent ZORBAX Eclipse XDB - C8 analytical HPLC
column (50 mm × 2.1 mm, 5 μm). The mobile phase comprising water containing 0.1% 
formic acid-acetonitrile (94:6, v/v) was delivered isocratically at a flow rate
of 0.5 mL/min. The column effluent was detected by API 4000 triple quadrupole
mass spectrometer using electrospray ionization (ESI) and monitored by multiple
reaction monitoring with positive mode. The precursor to product ion transitions 
of m/z 336 → 247 and m/z 340 → 251 were used to measure the analyte and IS,
respectively. The assay demonstrated a good linear dynamic range of 5-2000 ng/mL 
for hydroxychloroquine in human blood, with coefficient of determination (r(2))
of =0.9999. The values for intra-day and inter-day precisions of
hydroxychloroquine were ≤ 7.86% with the accuracies ranged from 93.8% to 107.6%. 
The chromatographic run time was 3 min, making it possible to achieve a high
throughput analysis. This method was used as a bio-analytical tool in a phase I
clinical trial to quantify blood hydroxychloroquine concentrations in patients
with non-small cell lung cancer receiving both hydroxychloroquine and gefitinib
in their treatment.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jpba.2011.11.034 
PMID: 22197155  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


1002. Lung Cancer. 2012 May;76(2):131-7. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2011.11.013. Epub 2011 
Dec 15.

The role of molecular analyses in the era of personalized therapy for advanced
NSCLC.

Tanner NT(1), Pastis NJ, Sherman C, Simon GR, Lewin D, Silvestri GA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Medical University of South 
Carolina, Charleston, SC 29425, USA.

Platinum-based doublet chemotherapy is the traditional treatment of choice for
advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC); however, the efficacy of these
regimens has reached a plateau. Increasing evidence demonstrates that patients
with sensitizing mutations in the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)
experience improved progression-free survival and response rates with first-line 
gefitinib or erlotinib therapy relative to traditional platinum-based
chemotherapy, while patients with EGFR-mutation negative tumors gain greater
benefit from platinum-based chemotherapy. These results highlight the importance 
of molecular testing prior to the initiation of first-line therapy for advanced
NSCLC. Routine molecular testing of tumor samples represents an important
paradigm shift in NSCLC therapy and would allow for individualized therapy in
specific subsets of patients. As these and other advances in personalized
treatment are integrated into everyday clinical practice, pulmonologists will
play a vital role in ensuring that tumor samples of adequate quality and quantity
are collected in order to perform appropriate molecular analyses to guide
treatment decisions. This article provides an overview of clinical trial data
supporting molecular analysis of NSCLC, describes specimen acquisition and
testing methods currently in use, and discusses future directions of personalized
therapy for patients with NSCLC.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2011.11.013 
PMCID: PMC3403712
PMID: 22176813  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


1003. Mol Biol Rep. 2012 Apr;39(4):4971-9. doi: 10.1007/s11033-011-1293-1. Epub 2011
Dec 9.

Synergistic inhibitory effects by the combination of gefitinib and genistein on
NSCLC with acquired drug-resistance in vitro and in vivo.

Zhu H(1), Cheng H, Ren Y, Liu ZG, Zhang YF, De Luo B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Child and Adolescent Health, School of Public Health and
Tropical Medicine, Southern Medical University, 1023 Southern Shatai Road,
Guangzhou, 510515, China.

In clinical practice, most patients with non small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) who
respond to tyrosine kinase inhibitors eventually progress because of an acquired 
resistance mutation, T790M, in epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR). Thus, it 
is important to identify a new drug to reduce resistance. The aim of this study
was to test whether genistein combined with gefitinib is effective against NSCLC 
in a cell line carrying T790M, and to clarify the underlying mechanisms. The
human lung cancer cell line H1975 was used as an in vitro and in vivo model.
Cells were treated with gefitinib, genistein, or a combination at a range of
concentrations. Cell proliferation was calculated to assess the anticancer
effects of the compounds in vitro. Flow cytometry and Western blotting were
employed to determine the inhibitory effects on proliferation and the induction
of apoptosis. The in vivo effects of the compounds were examined using a
xenografted nude mouse model for validation. Gefitinib together with genistein
enhanced both growth inhibition and apoptosis; however, the greatest synergistic 
effect was observed at low concentrations. p-EGFR, p-Akt, and p-mTOR expressions 
in vitro were reduced more by the combined use of the drugs, whereas caspase-3
and PARP activities were increased. Significantly more tumor growth inhibition
was detected following combination treatment in the in vivo model. These findings
suggest that genistein enhanced the antitumor effects of gefitinib in a NSCLC
cell line carrying the T790M mutation. This synergistic activity may be due to
increased inhibition of the downstream molecular and pro-apoptotic effects of
EGFR.

DOI: 10.1007/s11033-011-1293-1 
PMID: 22160570  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


1004. Clin Lung Cancer. 2012 Jul;13(4):267-79. doi: 10.1016/j.cllc.2011.09.001. Epub
2011 Dec 9.

Overcoming molecular mechanisms of resistance to first-generation epidermal
growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors.

Bar J(1), Onn A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Oncology, The Ottawa Hospital Cancer Center, Ottawa,
Ontario, Canada. bar.jair@gmail.com

The epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs)
gefitinib and erlotinib have provided substantial benefits to patients with
advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). However resistance to these agents
has emerged as a significant clinical issue; most patients who initially respond 
to treatment eventually experience relapse. The mechanisms underlying gefitinib
and erlotinib resistance are multifactorial and several have been described.
Clearly there is a need for novel and more effective therapies that can overcome 
resistance to the currently available TKIs. Several agents are in clinical
development, including irreversible EGFR TKIs, inhibitors of the MET pathway, and
others. In this review we discuss the various underlying mechanisms of gefitinib 
and erlotinib resistance and highlight the agents currently in clinical
development that may have potential for overcoming this resistance.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cllc.2011.09.001 
PMID: 22154113  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


1005. Cancer Treat Rev. 2012 Aug;38(5):416-30. doi: 10.1016/j.ctrv.2011.10.003. Epub
2011 Nov 25.

EGFR-mutated oncogene-addicted non-small cell lung cancer: current trends and
future prospects.

Soria JC(1), Mok TS, Cappuzzo F, Jänne PA.

Author information: 
(1)Service des Innovations Thérapeutiques Précoces, Institut Gustave Roussy,
INSERM Unit 981 and Paris University XI, 39 rue Camille Desmoulins, 94805
Villejuif, France. jean-charles.soria@igr.fr

Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) tumours with certain mutations in the
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase have been termed
'oncogene addicted' to reflect their dependence on EGFR-mediated pro-survival
signalling and their high susceptibility to apoptosis induced by EGFR tyrosine
kinase inhibitors (EGFR-TKIs, e.g. gefitinib and erlotinib). The most common
mutations (L858R and exon 19 deletions) predict an improved clinical response to 
first-line oral EGFR-TKIs compared with standard platinum-based chemotherapy in
patients with advanced NSCLC. Moreover, these mutations are also prognostic of a 
relatively indolent course of disease, regardless of treatment, as compared with 
classical NSCLC. Treatment strategies for oncogene-addicted NSCLC are therefore
distinct from those for non-oncogene addicted NSCLC, and will depend on the
specific genetic mutation present.

Copyright © 2011. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ctrv.2011.10.003 
PMID: 22119437  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


1006. Lung Cancer. 2012 May;76(2):177-82. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2011.10.023. Epub 2011
Nov 22.

Icotinib (BPI-2009H), a novel EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor, displays potent
efficacy in preclinical studies.

Tan F(1), Shen X, Wang D, Xie G, Zhang X, Ding L, Hu Y, He W, Wang Y, Wang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Zhejiang Beta Pharma Inc., R&D Center, 1 North Disheng St., 29, BPUSP, Beijing
100176, China.

Icotinib, one of the leading compounds selected from our compound library, was
found to be a potent and specific epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)
tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) with an IC(50) of 5 nM. When profiled with 88
kinases, Icotinib only showed meaningful inhibitory activity to EGFR and its
mutants. Icotinib blocked EGFR-mediated intracellular tyrosine phosphorylation
(IC(50)=45 nM) in the human epidermoid carcinoma A431 cell line and inhibits
tumor cell proliferation. In vivo studies demonstrated that Icotinib exhibited
potent dose-dependent antitumor effects in nude mice carrying a variety of human 
tumor-derived xenografts. The drug was well tolerated at doses up to 120
mg/kg/day in mice without mortality or significant body weight loss during the
treatment. A head to head randomized, double blind phase III trial using
Gefitinib as an active control for patients with advanced non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC) was finished recently (Trial registration ID: NCT01040780). The
data shows that Icotinib was non-inferior to Gefitinib in terms of median
progression free survival (PFS) and safety superior favor to Icotinib compared to
Gefitinib.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2011.10.023 
PMID: 22112293  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


1007. Lung Cancer. 2012 May;76(2):235-41. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2011.10.020. Epub 2011
Nov 22.

Histopathological and immunohistochemical features associated with clinical
response to neoadjuvant gefitinib therapy in early stage non-small cell lung
cancer.

Lara-Guerra H(1), Chung CT, Schwock J, Pintilie M, Hwang DM, Leighl NB, Waddell
TK, Tsao MS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Thoracic Surgery, University Health Network, Toronto, ON, Canada.

To define the pathological features associated with response to epidermal growth 
factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) in NSCLC, we have
evaluated tumor histopathological features and immunohistochemical markers of
proliferation (Ki-67) and epithelial mesenchymal transition (EMT) in 36 resected 
early stage NSCLC from patients treated preoperatively with gefitinib for 28
days. Tumors studied included 7 squamous cell carcinoma, 27 adenocarcinoma (ADC),
one adenosquamous carcinoma, and one large cell carcinoma. Six of the ADC
harboured an EGFR tyrosine kinase domain (TKD) mutation; five were the
sensitizing type. Five ADC with TKD mutation demonstrated non-mucinous lepidic
growth pattern as the dominant histological feature. Post-gefitinib treated EGFR 
TKD mutant tumors demonstrated lower tumor cellularity and proliferative index
compared to wild type ADC and non-ADC cases, features correlating with clinical
response. Responding tumors also showed large areas of fibrosis, within which
focal residual viable tumor cells were noted. However, there was no significant
correlation between the degree of fibrosis and radiological changes in tumor
size. Expression of EMT markers was not associated with significant change in
tumor size. The results suggest that radiologically assessed response to EGFR TKI
in NSCLC is related to loss of tumor cellularity and reduced tumor cell
proliferation, but residual viable tumor cells may persist even after prolonged
treatment. Neoadjuvant studies in early stage NSCLC offer a unique opportunity to
evaluate pathological and biomarker changes induced by targeted drugs.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2011.10.020 
PMID: 22112291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


1008. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol. 2012 Apr;69(4):891-9. doi: 10.1007/s00280-011-1738-1.
Epub 2011 Nov 10.

Phase I study of continuous afatinib (BIBW 2992) in patients with advanced
non-small cell lung cancer after prior chemotherapy/erlotinib/gefitinib (LUX-Lung
4).

Murakami H(1), Tamura T, Takahashi T, Nokihara H, Naito T, Nakamura Y, Nishio K, 
Seki Y, Sarashina A, Shahidi M, Yamamoto N.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Thoracic Oncology, Shizuoka Cancer Center, 1007 Shimonagakubo
Nagaizumi-cho Sunto-gun, Shizuoka 411-8777, Japan.

PURPOSE: This Phase I study determined the maximum-tolerated dose (MTD) of
afatinib (Afatinib is an investigational compound and its safety and efficacy
have not yet been established) (BIBW 2992; trade name not yet approved by FDA),
an irreversible inhibitor of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)/human
epidermal growth factor receptor (HER)1 and 2, up to a dose of 50 mg/day in
advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), to establish the recommended dose
for Phase II.
METHODS: Patients with advanced NSCLC who had received prior platinum-doublet
chemotherapy and/or erlotinib/gefitinib therapy, or who were ineligible for, or
not amenable to, treatment with established therapies, received oral afatinib
once daily. The MTD was determined based on dose-limiting toxicities (DLTs);
other assessments included safety, pharmacokinetic profile, antitumour activity
according to response evaluation criteria in solid tumours and EGFR/HER1 mutation
analysis where possible.
RESULTS: Twelve evaluable patients were treated at doses of 20-50 mg/day. One DLT
was observed at 50 mg/day in Course 1 (Grade 3 mucositis). The most frequent
drug-related adverse events were diarrhoea, dry skin, stomatitis, rash,
paronychia and anorexia; most were Grade 1 or 2. Six out of 12 patients had
tumour size reductions; durable stable disease was achieved in three patients
including one with EGFR/HER1 exon 19 and T790 M mutations. Peak plasma
concentrations of afatinib were reached 3-4 h after administration and declined
with a half-life of 30-40 h. Afatinib 50 mg/day was well tolerated with an
acceptable safety profile during Phase I.
CONCLUSION: Recommended dose for Phase II was defined as 50 mg/day for Japanese
patients; the same as for non-Japanese patients.

DOI: 10.1007/s00280-011-1738-1 
PMID: 22071596  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


1009. Clin Lung Cancer. 2012 Mar;13(2):107-14. doi: 10.1016/j.cllc.2011.08.005. Epub
2011 Nov 6.

Efficacy of EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors in patients with EGFR-mutated
non-small-cell lung cancer: a meta-analysis of 13 randomized trials.

Petrelli F(1), Borgonovo K, Cabiddu M, Barni S.

Author information: 
(1)Azienda Ospedaliera Treviglio-Caravaggio, Unità operativa di Oncologia,
Treviglio (BG), Italy. faupe@libero.it

Advanced non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) harboring activating mutations of
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) are particularly sensitive to tyrosine
kinase inhibitors (TKIs), namely erlotinib and gefitinib. The purpose of this
meta-analysis was to evaluate the benefit of EGFR TKIs in EGFR-mutated NSCLCs.
Eligible studies included published randomized controlled trials in which
erlotinib or gefitinib (alone or with chemotherapy) were compared with standard
therapy in 1260 patients with EGFR-mutated NSCLCs who were included in 13 trials.
The mutational status was obtained through a retrospective or prospective
analysis. Relative risk (RR) was calculated for response rate, and hazard ratios 
(HRs) were calculated for progression-free and overall survival. EGFR TKIs
increase the chance of obtaining an objective response almost 2-fold when
compared with chemotherapy (RR, 2.06; 2p < .00001). The response rate was 70% vs.
33.2% in first-line trials. In 3 second-line trials, response rates were 47.4%
vs. 28.5%, with a benefit similar to first-line trials (RR, 1.79; 2p = .04). EGFR
TKIs reduced the hazard of progression by 70% in all trials (HR, 0.30; 2p <
.00001) and by 65% in first-line trials only (HR, 0.35; 2p < .00001). Overall,
however, they do not improve survival (HR, 0.96; 2p = .71). NSCLCs harboring EGFR
mutations derive greater benefit from erlotinib or gefitinib than from
chemotherapy. All patients affected by NSCLC with an EGFR-positive mutation test 
result must be offered the opportunity to be treated with an EGFR TKI upfront or 
during the natural course of the disease if not previously exposed.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cllc.2011.08.005 
PMID: 22056888  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


1010. Anticancer Agents Med Chem. 2012 May;12(4):391-406.

Recent developments of small molecule EGFR inhibitors based on the quinazoline
core scaffolds.

Yu-Jing YJ(1), Zhang CM, Liu ZP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Organic Chemistry, School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Shandong
University, Jinan, P. R. China.

Progress in identifying and understanding the molecular and cellular causes of
cancer has led to the discovery of anomalies that characterize cancer cells and
that represent targets for the development of cancer therapeutics. One such
target is the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), a transmembrane protein
that is frequently dysregulated in cancer cells and associated with the
development, progression and aggressiveness of a number of malignancies.
Inhibition of EGFR signaling has thus been identified as an attractive strategy
in control of tumor proliferation, and over a decade of intense activity in the
field has culminated in the discoveries and subsequent approvals of gefitinib and
erlotinib for the treatment of non-small cell lung cancer. However, the drug's
resistance to gefitinib and erlotinib has been clinically observed. Therefore,
intensive efforts have been made in the discovery of novel potent and selective
EGFR inhibitors. This review will focus on the developments of small molecule
EGFR inhibitors based on the quinazoline core scaffolds in recent 5 years.
Diverse EGFR inhibitors are classified as 4-anilinoquinazolines and
4-nonanilininoquinazolines, their biological data are described, and the
structure-activity relationships (SARs) are discussed.


PMID: 22043991  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


1011. Clin Oncol (R Coll Radiol). 2012 Aug;24(6):396-401. doi:
10.1016/j.clon.2011.09.013. Epub 2011 Oct 22.

Gefitinib compared with systemic chemotherapy as first-line treatment for
chemotherapy-naive patients with advanced non-small cell lung cancer: a
meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials.

Wang F(1), Wang LD, Li B, Sheng ZX.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiac Surgery, Affiliated Hospital of Binzhou Medical College,
China.

To define the efficacy of gefitinib in chemotherapy-naive patients with advanced 
non-small cell lung cancer, we carried out a meta-analysis of randomised
controlled trials. Medline, Embase, the Cochrane controlled trials register and
the Science Citation Index were searched. Seven trials were identified, covering 
a total of 4656 subjects. As compared with chemotherapy, gefitinib was effective 
in the selected patients: the corresponding summary hazard ratios (gefitinib
versus chemotherapy) for progression-free survival were 0.43 (0.32, 0.58) (P <
0.001) for the subgroup of patients with epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) 
mutant treated with gefitinib monotherapy, 0.71 (0.60, 0.83) (P < 0.001) for the 
subgroup of patients with lung adenocarcinoma; but was detrimental for the
patients without EGFR mutant treated by gefitinib monotherapy [hazard ratio =
2.16 (1.17, 3.99), P = 0.01]. Significantly improved survival was found in the
gefitinib group compared with the control in the subgroup of patients with lung
adenocarcinoma [hazard ratio = 0.89 (0.81, 0.99); P = 0.03], but not found in the
subgroup of patients with EGFR mutant [hazard ratio = 0.87 (0.68, 1.12); P =
0.28]. In conclusion, first-line treatment with gefitinib conferred prolonged
progression-free survival than treatment with systemic chemotherapy in a
molecularly or histologically defined population of patients with non-small cell 
lung cancer, and improved survival in the subgroup of patients with lung
adenocarcinoma.

Copyright © 2011 The Royal College of Radiologists. Published by Elsevier Ltd.
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clon.2011.09.013 
PMID: 22019482  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


1012. Histopathology. 2012 Mar;60(4):531-46. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2559.2011.03854.x.
Epub 2011 Sep 14.

Personalized medicine for lung cancer: new challenges for pathology.

Kerr KM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Aberdeen University Medical School, Aberdeen Royal Infirmary, Foresterhill,
Aberdeen, UK. k.kerr@abdn.ac.uk

Recent advances in non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) therapy mean the relatively
simple discrimination between small-cell and 'non-small-cell' carcinoma is
insufficient to determine the best treatment for individual patients. Safety,
efficacy and prescribing requirements mandate more specific subtyping of NSCLC
for several new drugs: practice made difficult by the tumour heterogeneity
combined with the paucity of tissue in most diagnostic samples.
Immunohistochemical approaches have emerged as accurate predictors of probable
tumour histotype. P63 and/or cytokeratins 5 and 6 and thyroid transcription
factor 1 (TTF1) are among the best predictors, respectively, of squamous and
adenocarcinoma histology. Molecular characteristics may predict response to both 
newer molecular targeted agents and traditional cytotoxic agents. Specific
mutations in the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) gene as predictors of
response to EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors (erlotinib, gefitinib) is the first
example of markers which predict response to targeted agents. Actual drug targets
[e.g. thymidilate synthase (TS) - pemetrexed] or markers of the tumour's ability 
to repair cytotoxic drug-induced damage [e.g. excision repair
cross-complementation group 1 (ERCC1) - cisplatin] may well also complement NSCLC
diagnosis. This extended diagnostic requirement from increasingly limited
material provided by minimally invasive biopsy techniques poses major challenges 
for pathology.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Limited.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2559.2011.03854.x 
PMID: 21916947  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


1013. Med Oncol. 2012 Sep;29(3):1614-21. doi: 10.1007/s12032-011-0009-7. Epub 2011 Jul 
21.

Clinical significance of serum hepatocyte growth factor and epidermal growth
factor gene somatic mutations in patients with non-squamous non-small cell lung
cancer receiving gefitinib or erlotinib.

Masago K(1), Togashi Y, Fujita S, Sakamori Y, Okuda C, Kim YH, Mio T, Mishima M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto
University, 54 Shogoin-Kawaracho, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan.
masago@kuhp.kyoto-u.ac.jp

A study of patients with advanced non-squamous non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
evaluated epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutation status and serum
hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) for their associations with response to gefitinib 
therapy and prognostic impact. An enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay was used to
determine levels of HGF in serum from 96 Japanese patients with advanced
non-squamous NSCLC. The peptic nucleic acid-locked nucleic acid clamp method was 
used to determine their EGFR somatic mutation status. We evaluated the
relationship between each independent clinicopathological variable and the
response to gefitinib therapy and risk factors associated with prognosis.
HGF-positive serum status (hazard ratio, 1.536; 95% confidence interval,
1.042-2.400; P = 0.0295) had a significant and independent negative effect on
progression-free survival among patients with wild-type EGFR. We demonstrate that
having HGF-positive serum is predictive of a negative response to gefitinib
therapy in patients with advanced NSCLC who harbor wild-type EGFR.

DOI: 10.1007/s12032-011-0009-7 
PMID: 21779929  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


1014. Med Oncol. 2012 Jun;29(2):595-9. doi: 10.1007/s12032-011-9891-2. Epub 2011 Mar
12.

Phase II trial of gefitinib in pretreated Chinese women with advanced
non-small-cell lung cancer.

Deng J(1), Fang WJ, Zhang XC, Wu DP, Fang HM, Chen J, Qian J, Mou HB, Chu BB, Xu 
N, Teng LS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, The First Hospital Affiliated to Medical
School of Zhejiang University, 79 Qingchun Road, 310003 Hangzhou, Zhejiang,
China.

A phase II clinical trial was performed to evaluate the efficacy and safety of
gefitinib on pretreated Chinese female non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
patients. Chinese female patients with locally advanced or metastatic NSCLC who
failed at least one platinum-based chemotherapy received gefitinib monotherapy
(250 mg/day) between April 2002 and January 2010. The primary endpoint was
overall response rate (ORR), and secondary endpoints were overall survival (OS)
and progression-free survival (PFS). Of the 40 evaluable female patients, the ORR
was 62.5%. All patients have responded with one (2.5%) complete response, 24
(60%) partial response, 12 (30%) stable disease, and 3 (7.5%) progressive
disease. The OS and PFS were 20 months (95% CI: 11.9-28 months) and 13 months
(95% CI: 8.0-17.9 months), respectively. Survival (OS and PFS) were longer in
patients with good performance status and in patients older than 65 years (P <
0.05). The most frequently observed toxicities were rash/dry skin (80%), diarrhea
(42.5%), and vomiting/anorexia (32.5%). Four patients developed grade 3
toxicities (rash and diarrhea) but did not require either dose reduction or
discontinuation. Gefitinib is a highly effective and well-tolerated agent for
Chinese women with pretreated advanced NSCLC.

DOI: 10.1007/s12032-011-9891-2 
PMID: 21399997  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]

1. Transl Lung Cancer Res. 2016 Dec;5(6):610-627. doi: 10.21037/tlcr.2016.09.03.

Anti-angiogenetic therapies for central nervous system metastases from non-small 
cell lung cancer.

Buttigliero C(1), Bertaglia V(1), Novello S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, San Luigi Hospital, University of Turin, Orbassano,
Turin, Italy.

Central nervous system (CNS) metastases are common in patients with advanced
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), occurring in 24% to 44% of patients in the
course of their disease and confer significant morbidity and mortality. Systemic 
therapies have been deemed ineffective in brain metastases (BM) under the
hypothesis that the blood-brain barrier (BBB) limits their delivery to the brain.
Angiogenesis, which is mainly mediated by vascular endothelial growth factor
(VEGF) pathway, is crucial for tumor survival, growth and invasion both in
primary and metastatic brain lesions. Two major categories of agents have been
developed to target this pathway: antibody-based agents and VEGF receptor
tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs). Clinical benefits have been shown with
anti-angiogenetic therapies in the treatment of metastatic NSCLC. However,
patients with CNS metastases were often excluded from trials with these agents,
due to concerns about a potentially greater risk of cerebral haemorrhage and
thromboembolic disease. Therefore, the overall efficacy and safety of
angiogenetic agents in patients with BM from NSCLC are yet to be clarified. This 
paper aims to review available data about the efficacy and safety of
anti-angiogenetic therapies for CNS metastases in NSCLC patients.

DOI: 10.21037/tlcr.2016.09.03 
PMCID: PMC5233881
PMID: 28149756  [PubMed - in process]


2. BMJ Open Respir Res. 2017 Jan 10;4(1):e000163. doi: 10.1136/bmjresp-2016-000163. 
eCollection 2017.

Accuracy of transbronchial biopsy as a rebiopsy method for patients with relapse 
of advanced non-small-cell lung cancer after systemic chemotherapy.

Ishii H(1), Azuma K(1), Yamada K(1), Matsuo N(1), Nakamura M(1), Tokito T(1),
Kinoshita T(1), Hoshino T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Respirology, Neurology, and Rheumatology, Department of Internal
Medicine , Kurume University School of Medicine , Kurume, Fukuoka , Japan.

INTRODUCTION: Rebiopsy in patients with advanced non-small-cell lung cancer
(NSCLC) resistant to systemic chemotherapy may yield information on the
mechanisms of resistance and planning of subsequent treatment. Transbronchial
biopsy (TBB) using a flexible bronchoscope has been commonly used for
establishing the initial diagnosis of lung cancer. The aim of this study was to
assess the accuracy and safety of TBB in patients with NSCLC relapse, and the
factors affecting its diagnostic yield.
METHODS: We retrospectively screened patients with advanced NSCLC who underwent
TBB for rebiopsy after developing resistance to systemic chemotherapy at Kurume
University Hospital between January 2012 and June 2016. A positive diagnostic
result obtained by TBB was defined as malignancy determined on the basis of
histological features that were adequate for mutational analysis or
immunohistochemistry. Severe postprocedural complications were defined as those
requiring invasive medical procedures or prolonged hospitalisation.
RESULTS: 109 patients were enrolled in this retrospective study. Adequate tumour 
samples were collected from 88 of these patients, giving a high diagnostic yield 
of 80.7%. The diagnostic yield of TBB was not associated with tumour mutational
status, the previous treatment regimen, or efficacy of the previous treatment.
There were no severe postprocedural complications such as pneumothorax or serious
haemorrhage.
CONCLUSIONS: TBB is considered one of the safest and most useful procedures for
rebiopsy of NSCLC that has relapsed after chemotherapy, regardless of patient
background and treatment history.

DOI: 10.1136/bmjresp-2016-000163 
PMCID: PMC5253608
PMID: 28123750  [PubMed]


3. Strahlenther Onkol. 2017 Jan 23. doi: 10.1007/s00066-016-1095-4. [Epub ahead of
print]

DART-bid for loco-regionally advanced NSCLC : Summary of acute and late toxicity 
with long-term follow-up; experiences with pulmonary dose constraints.

Wurstbauer K(1), Zehentmayr F(2,)(3), Deutschmann H(2,)(3), Dagn K(3), Exeli
AK(3), Kopp P(3), Porsch P(4), Maurer B(4), Studnicka M(4), Sedlmayer F(2,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for research and development on Advanced Radiation Technologies
(radART), Paracelsus Medical University, Müllner Hauptstraße 48, 5020, Salzburg, 
Austria. k.wurstbauer@salk.at. (2)Institute for research and development on
Advanced Radiation Technologies (radART), Paracelsus Medical University, Müllner 
Hauptstraße 48, 5020, Salzburg, Austria. (3)Department of Radiotherapy and
Radiation Oncology , Landeskrankenhaus, Paracelsus Medical University Clinics,
Salzburg, Austria. (4)Departement of Pneumology, Paracelsus Medical University
Clinics, Salzburg, Austria.

BACKGROUND: To report acute and late toxicity with long-term follow-up, and to
describe our experiences with pulmonary dose constraints.
METHODS: Between 2002 and 2009, 150 patients with 155
histologically/cytologically proven non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC; tumor
stages II, IIIA, IIIB in 6, 55 and 39%, respectively) received the following
median doses: primary tumors 79.2 Gy (range 72.0-90.0 Gy), lymph node metastases 
59.4 Gy (54.0-73.8 Gy), nodes electively 45 Gy; with fractional doses of 1.8 Gy
twice daily (bid). In all, 86% of patients received 2 cycles of chemotherapy
previously.
RESULTS: Five treatment-related deaths occurred: pneumonitis, n = 1; progressive 
pulmonary fibrosis in patients with pre-existing pulmonary fibrosis, n = 2;
haemorrhage, n = 2. In all, 8% of patients experienced grade 3 and 1.3% grade 4
pneumonitis; 11% showed late fibrotic alterations grade 2 in lung parenchyma.
Clinically relevant acute esophagitis (grade 2 and 3) was seen in 33.3% of
patients, 2 patients developed late esophageal stenosis (G3). Patients with upper
lobe, middle lobe and central lower lobe tumours (n = 130) were treated with V20 
(total lung) up to 50% and patients with peripheral lower lobe tumours (n = 14,
basal lateral tumours excluded) up to 42%, without observing acute or late
pulmonary toxicity >grade 3. Only patients with basal lateral lower lobe tumours 
(n = 5) experienced grade 4/5 pulmonary toxicity; V20 for this latter group
ranged between 30 and 53%. The mean lung dose was below the QUANTEC
recommendation of 20-23 Gy in all patients. The median follow-up time of all
patients is 26.3 months (range 2.9-149.4) and of patients alive 80.2 months
(range 63.9-149.4.). The median overall survival time of all patients is
26.3 months; the 2-, 5- and 8‑year survival rates of 54, 21 and 15%,
respectively. The local tumour control rate at 2 and 5 years is 70 and 64%, the
regional control rate 90 and 88%, respectively.
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION: Grade 4 or 5 toxicity occurred in 7/150 patients
(4.7%), which can be partially avoided in the future (e.g. by excluding patients 
with pre-existing pulmonary fibrosis). Tolerance and oncologic outcome compare
favourably to concomitant chemoradiation also in long-term follow-up.

DOI: 10.1007/s00066-016-1095-4 
PMID: 28116446  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


4. Cancer Imaging. 2016 Dec 28;16(1):44. doi: 10.1186/s40644-016-0102-4.

Clinical and radiological features driving patient selection for antiangiogenic
therapy in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC).

Gridelli C(1), Camerini A(2), Pappagallo G(3), Pennella A(4), Anzidei M(5),
Bellomi M(6,)(7), Buosi R(8), Grasso RF(9).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Oncology, S. G. Moscati Hospital, Contrada Amoretta 8,
83100, Avellino, Italy. cgridelli@libero.it. (2)Medical Oncology, Versilia
Hospital and Istituto Toscano Tumori, Lido di Camaiore (LU), Italy.
(3)Epidemiology & Clinical Trials Office, General Hospital, Mirano (VE), Italy.
(4)Psychologist, Psychotherapist, Lecturer at the School of Specialization in
Health Psychology, "Sapienza" University, Rome, Italy. (5)Department of
Radiology, "Sapienza" University, Rome, Italy. (6)Division of Radiology, Istituto
Europeo di Oncologia, Milan, Italy. (7)Department of Oncology, University of
Milan, Milan, Italy. (8)Medical Oncology, East Piedmont University, Maggiore
della Carità Hospital, Novara, Italy. (9)Department of Radiology, Campus
BioMedico University, Rome, Italy.

BACKGROUND: The use of antiangiogenic therapy in non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC) requires thorough evaluation of patient characteristics in order to avoid
potential safety issues, particularly pulmonary haemorrhage (PH). The aim of this
consensus by a panel of experts was to identify important criteria for the
selection of patients with NSCLC who would benefit from antiangiogenic therapy.
METHODS: Radiologists and oncologists were selected for the expert panel. The
nominal group technique (NGT) and the Delphi questionnaire were used for
consensus generation. The NGT consisted of four steps, the result of which was
used to set the Delphi questionnaire. A final report was generated based on the
opinions of the experts from the panel.
RESULTS: An extremely important prerequisite for the evaluation of an
antiangiogenic therapeutic approach in patients with NSCLC was thorough clinical 
and radiological analysis of the relationships between tumour and vascular or
anatomical structures (performed in close co-operation by oncologists and
radiologists). The panel identified major parameters to be considered before the 
use of antiangiogenic treatment, collectively agreeing on the relevance of tumour
cavitation, vascular infiltration, endobronchial growth and thromboembolism for
chest tumour sites, and of the presence of aneurysms, extra-thoracic bleeding,
brain metastases or thrombi for extra-thoracic sites. Moreover, a structured
report containing information not only on the tumour but also on the general
vascular status is essential to guide the treatment choice The experts agreed
that tumour localization in the absence of vessel infiltration, cavitation, and
the use of antiplatelet therapy are relevant parameters to be assessed, but their
presence should not necessarily exclude a patient from receiving antiangiogenic
therapy.
CONCLUSION: Close co-operation between oncologists and radiologists in the
diagnosis, treatment selection, and assessment of response is essential for
ensuring therapeutic appropriateness in the NSCLC setting. It should be noted
that neither the use of antiplatelet therapy nor tumour localisation are to be
considered as contraindications to antiangiogenic treatment.

DOI: 10.1186/s40644-016-0102-4 
PMCID: PMC5192596
PMID: 28031049  [PubMed - in process]


5. Lancet Oncol. 2016 Dec;17(12):1643-1652. doi: 10.1016/S1470-2045(16)30508-3. Epub
2016 Oct 14.

Osimertinib for pretreated EGFR Thr790Met-positive advanced non-small-cell lung
cancer (AURA2): a multicentre, open-label, single-arm, phase 2 study.

Goss G(1), Tsai CM(2), Shepherd FA(3), Bazhenova L(4), Lee JS(5), Chang GC(6),
Crino L(7), Satouchi M(8), Chu Q(9), Hida T(10), Han JY(11), Juan O(12), Dunphy
F(13), Nishio M(14), Kang JH(15), Majem M(16), Mann H(17), Cantarini M(18),
Ghiorghiu S(17), Mitsudomi T(19).

Author information: 
(1)The Ottawa Hospital Cancer Centre, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada.
Electronic address: ggoss@toh.on.ca. (2)Department of Chest Medicine,
Taipei-Veterans General Hospital and School of Medicine, National Yang-Ming
University, Taipei, Taiwan. (3)Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, Toronto, ON,
Canada. (4)UC San Diego, Moores Cancer Center, La Jolla, CA, USA. (5)Seoul
National University, Bundang Hospital, Seongnam, South Korea. (6)Division of
Chest Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine, Taichung Veterans General
Hospital, Taichung, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan. (7)Perugia
University Medical School, Perugia, Italy. (8)Hyogo Cancer Center, Akashi, Japan.
(9)University of Alberta, Cross Cancer Institute, Edmonton, AB, Canada. (10)Aichi
Cancer Center Hospital, Nagoya, Japan. (11)National Cancer Center, Goyang-si,
Republic of Korea. (12)La Fe University Hospital, Valencia, Spain. (13)Duke
University Medical Center, Durham, NC, USA. (14)The Cancer Institute Hospital of 
Japanese Foundation for Cancer Research, Tokyo, Japan. (15)The Catholic
University of Korea, South Korea. (16)Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau,
Barcelona, Spain. (17)AstraZeneca, Cambridge, UK. (18)AstraZeneca, Alderley Park,
UK. (19)Kindai University Faculty of Medicine, Osaka-Sayama, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Osimertinib (AZD9291) is an oral, potent, irreversible EGFR
tyrosine-kinase inhibitor selective for EGFR tyrosine-kinase inhibitor
sensitising mutations, and the EGFR Thr790Met resistance mutation. We assessed
the efficacy and safety of osimertinib in patients with EGFR Thr790Met-positive
non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC), who had progressed after previous therapy
with an approved EGFR tyrosine-kinase inhibitor.
METHODS: In this phase 2, open-label, single-arm study (AURA2), patients aged at 
least 18 years with centrally confirmed EGFR Thr790Met-positive mutations,
locally advanced or metastatic (stage IIIB/IV) NSCLC who progressed on previous
EGFR tyrosine-kinase inhibitor therapy received osimertinib 80 mg orally once
daily; treatment could continue beyond progression if the investigator observed a
clinical benefit. Patients with asymptomatic, stable CNS metastases not requiring
steroids were allowed to enrol. The primary endpoint was the proportion of
patients achieving an objective response by blinded independent central review
using Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors, version 1.1. Response
endpoints were assessed in the evaluable for response analysis set (ie, all
patients who received at least one dose of osimertinib and had measurable disease
at baseline according to blinded independent central review). Other endpoints and
safety were assessed in all patients receiving at least one osimertinib dose
(full analysis set). The study is ongoing and patients are still receiving
treatment. This study is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, number NCT02094261.
FINDINGS: Between May 20, 2014, and Sept 12, 2014, 472 patients were screened, of
whom 210 started osimertinib treatment between June 13, 2014, and Oct 27, 2014;
11 patients were excluded from the evaluable for response analysis set (n=199)
due to absence of measurable disease at baseline by blinded independent central
review. At data cutoff (Nov 1, 2015), 122 (58%) patients remained on treatment.
The median duration of follow-up was 13·0 months (IQR 7·6-14·2). 140 (70%; 95% CI
64-77) of 199 patients achieved an objective response by blinded independent
central review: confirmed complete responses were achieved in six (3%) patients
and partial responses were achieved in 134 (67%) patients. The most common
all-causality grade 3 and 4 adverse events were pulmonary embolism (seven [3%]), 
prolonged electrocardiogram QT (five [2%]), decreased neutrophil count (four
[2%]), anaemia, dyspnoea, hyponatraemia, increased alanine aminotransferase, and 
thrombocytopenia (three [1%] each). Serious adverse events were reported in 52
(25%) patients, of which 11 (5%) were investigator assessed as possibly
treatment-related to osimertinib. Seven deaths were due to adverse events; these 
were pneumonia (n=2), pneumonia aspiration (n=1), rectal haemorrhage (n=1),
dyspnoea (n=1), failure to thrive (n=1), and interstitial lung disease (n=1). The
only fatal event assessed as possibly treatment-related by the investigator was
due to interstitial lung disease.
INTERPRETATION: Osimertinib showed clinical activity with manageable side-effects
in patients with EGFR Thr790Met-positive NSCLC. Therefore, osimertinib could be a
suitable treatment for patients with EGFR Thr790Met-positive disease who have
progressed on an EGFR tyrosine-kinase inhibitor.
FUNDING: AstraZeneca.

Copyright Â© 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S1470-2045(16)30508-3 
PMID: 27751847  [PubMed - in process]


6. Lancet Oncol. 2016 Jul;17(7):984-93. doi: 10.1016/S1470-2045(16)30146-2. Epub
2016 Jun 6.

Dabrafenib plus trametinib in patients with previously treated BRAF(V600E)-mutant
metastatic non-small cell lung cancer: an open-label, multicentre phase 2 trial.

Planchard D(1), Besse B(2), Groen HJ(3), Souquet PJ(4), Quoix E(5), Baik CS(6),
Barlesi F(7), Kim TM(8), Mazieres J(9), Novello S(10), Rigas JR(11), Upalawanna
A(12), D'Amelio AM Jr(13), Zhang P(13), Mookerjee B(13), Johnson BE(14).

Author information: 
(1)Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France. (2)Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France;
Paris-Sud University, Orsay, France. (3)University of Groningen, Groningen,
Netherlands; University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, the Netherlands.
(4)Hopital Lyon Sud, Pierre-Bénite, France. (5)University Hospital, Nouvel
Hôpital Civil, Strasbourg, France. (6)University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA.
(7)Aix-Marseille University, Assistance Publique Hôpitaux de Marseille,
Multidisciplinary Oncology & Therapeutic Innovations Department, Hôpital Nord,
Marseille, France. (8)Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul, South Korea.
(9)Rangueil-Larrey Hospital, Toulouse, France; Paul Sabatier University,
Toulouse, France. (10)Department of Oncology, University of Turin, Orbassano,
Italy. (11)The Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth, Hanover, NH, USA.
(12)Novartis Pharma AG, Postfach, Basel, Switzerland. (13)Novartis
Pharmaceuticals Corporation, East Hanover, NJ, USA. (14)Dana-Farber Cancer
Institute, Boston, MA, USA. Electronic address: Bruce_Johnson@dfci.harvard.edu.

Comment in
    J Thorac Dis. 2016 Sep;8(9):2369-2371.

BACKGROUND: BRAF mutations act as an oncogenic driver via the mitogen-activated
protein kinase (MAPK) pathway in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). BRAF
inhibition has shown antitumour activity in patients with BRAF(V600E)-mutant
NSCLC. Dual MAPK pathway inhibition with BRAF and MEK inhibitors in
BRAF(V600E)-mutant NSCLC might improve efficacy over BRAF inhibitor monotherapy
based on observations in BRAF(V600)-mutant melanoma. We aimed to assess the
antitumour activity and safety of dabrafenib plus trametinib in patients with
BRAF(V600E)-mutant NSCLC.
METHODS: In this phase 2, multicentre, non-randomised, open-label study, we
enrolled adult patients (aged ≥18 years) with pretreated metastatic stage IV
BRAF(V600E)-mutant NSCLC who had documented tumour progression after at least one
previous platinum-based chemotherapy and had had no more than three previous
systemic anticancer therapies. Patients with previous BRAF or MEK inhibitor
treatment were ineligible. Patients with brain metastases were allowed to enrol
only if the lesions were asymptomatic, untreated (or stable more than 3 weeks
after local therapy if treated), and measured less than 1 cm. Enrolled patients
received oral dabrafenib (150 mg twice daily) plus oral trametinib (2 mg once
daily) in continuous 21-day cycles until disease progression, unacceptable
adverse events, withdrawal of consent, or death. The primary endpoint was
investigator-assessed overall response, which was assessed by intention to treat 
in the protocol-defined population (patients who received second-line or later
treatment); safety was also assessed in this population and was assessed at least
once every 3 weeks, with adverse events, laboratory values, and vital signs
graded according to the Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events version
4.0. The study is ongoing but no longer recruiting patients. This trial is
registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, number NCT01336634.
FINDINGS: Between Dec 20, 2013, and Jan 14, 2015, 59 patients from 30 centres in 
nine countries across North America, Europe, and Asia met eligibility criteria.
Two patients who had previously been untreated due to protocol deviation were
excluded; thus, 57 eligible patients were enrolled. 36 patients (63·2% [95% CI
49·3-75·6]) achieved an investigator-assessed overall response. Serious adverse
events were reported in 32 (56%) of 57 patients and included pyrexia in nine
(16%), anaemia in three (5%), confusional state in two (4%), decreased appetite
in two (4%), haemoptysis in two (4%), hypercalcaemia in two (4%), nausea in two
(4%), and cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma in two (4%). The most common grade
3-4 adverse events were neutropenia in five patients (9%), hyponatraemia in four 
(7%), and anaemia in three (5%). Four patients died during the study from fatal
adverse events judged to be unrelated to treatment (one retroperitoneal
haemorrhage, one subarachnoid haemorrhage, one respiratory distress, and one from
disease progression that was more severe than typical progression, as assessed by
the investigator).
INTERPRETATION: Dabrafenib plus trametinib could represent a new targeted therapy
with robust antitumour activity and a manageable safety profile in patients with 
BRAF(V600E)-mutant NSCLC.
FUNDING: GlaxoSmithKline.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S1470-2045(16)30146-2 
PMCID: PMC4993103
PMID: 27283860  [PubMed - in process]


7. Lancet Oncol. 2016 May;17(5):642-50. doi: 10.1016/S1470-2045(16)00077-2. Epub
2016 Apr 11.

Dabrafenib in patients with BRAF(V600E)-positive advanced non-small-cell lung
cancer: a single-arm, multicentre, open-label, phase 2 trial.

Planchard D(1), Kim TM(2), Mazieres J(3), Quoix E(4), Riely G(5), Barlesi F(6),
Souquet PJ(7), Smit EF(8), Groen HJ(9), Kelly RJ(10), Cho BC(11), Socinski
MA(12), Pandite L(13), Nase C(14), Ma B(15), D'Amelio A Jr(16), Mookerjee B(17), 
Curtis CM Jr(18), Johnson BE(19).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul,
South Korea. (3)Thoracic Oncology Unit, Rangueil-Larrey Hospital, Toulouse,
France; Paul Sabatier University, Toulouse, France. (4)Pneumology Department,
University Hospital of Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France. (5)Department of Medicine,
Thoracic Oncology Service, Division of Solid Tumor Oncology, Memorial Sloan
Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, USA; Joan and Sanfor I Weill Department of
Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, NY, USA. (6)Multidisciplinary 
Oncology and Therapeutic Innovations Department, Aix-Marseille University,
Assistance Publique Hôpitaux de Marseille, Livon, Marseille, France. (7)Acute
Respiratory Medicine and Thoracic Oncology Department, Centre Hospitalier
Lyon-Sud, Pierre-Bénite, France. (8)Department of Pulmonary Diseases, Vrije
Universiteit VU Medical Centre, Amsterdam, Netherlands. (9)Department of
Pulmonary Diseases, University of Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands; University
Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands. (10)Upper Aerodigestive
Malignancies Division, Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center at Johns
Hopkins, Baltimore, MD, USA. (11)College of Medicine, Yonsei University, Seoul,
South Korea. (12)Lung Cancer Section, Division of Hematology/Oncology, University
of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA. (13)Adaptimmune LLC, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(14)GlaxoSmithKline, Collegeville, Pennsylvania, PA, USA. (15)Biothera, Eagan,
MN, USA. (16)Novartis Pharmaceuticals, King of Prussia, PA, USA. (17)Novartis
Pharmaceuticals, East Hanover, NJ, USA. (18)Novartis Pharmaceuticals,
Morrisville, NC, USA. (19)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer
Institute, Boston, MA, USA. Electronic address: Bruce_Johnson@dfci.harvard.edu.

Comment in
    Transl Lung Cancer Res. 2016 Aug;5(4):367-9.

BACKGROUND: Activating BRAF(V600E) (Val600Glu) mutations are found in about 1-2% 
of lung adenocarcinomas, which might provide an opportunity for targeted
treatment in these patients. Dabrafenib is an oral selective inhibitor of BRAF
kinase. We did a trial to assess the clinical activity of dabrafenib in patients 
with advanced non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) positive for the BRAF(V600E)
mutation.
METHODS: In this phase 2, multicentre, non-randomised, open-label study, we
enrolled previously treated and untreated patients with stage IV metastatic
BRAF(V600E)-positive NSCLC. Patients received oral dabrafenib 150 mg twice daily.
The primary endpoint was investigator-assessed overall response, which was
assessed in patients who had received at least one dose of dabrafenib; safety was
also assessed in this population. The study is ongoing but not enrolling patients
in this cohort. This trial is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, number
NCT01336634.
FINDINGS: Between Aug 3, 2011, and Feb 25, 2014, 84 patients were enrolled, six
of whom had not previously received systemic treatment for NSCLC. 26 of the 78
previously treated patients achieved an investigator-assessed overall response
(33% [95% CI 23-45]). Four of the six previously untreated patients had an
objective response. One patient died from an intracranial haemorrhage that was
judged by the investigator to be due to the study drug. Serious adverse events
were reported in 35 (42%) of 84 patients. The most frequent grade 3 or worse
adverse events were cutaneous squamous-cell carcinoma in ten (12%), asthenia in
four (5%), and basal-cell carcinoma in four (5%).
INTERPRETATION: Dabrafenib showed clinical activity in BRAF(V600E)-positive
NSCLC. Our findings suggest that dabrafenib could represent a treatment option
for a population of patients with limited therapeutic options.
FUNDING: GlaxoSmithKline.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S1470-2045(16)00077-2 
PMCID: PMC5006181
PMID: 27080216  [PubMed - in process]


8. Eur J Cancer. 2016 May;58:30-7. doi: 10.1016/j.ejca.2016.01.013. Epub 2016 Feb
27.

Maintenance therapy with pemetrexed and bevacizumab versus pemetrexed monotherapy
after induction therapy with carboplatin, pemetrexed, and bevacizumab in patients
with advanced non-squamous non small cell lung cancer.

Karayama M(1), Inui N(2), Fujisawa T(3), Enomoto N(3), Nakamura Y(3), Kuroishi
S(4), Yokomura K(5), Koshimizu N(6), Sato M(7), Toyoshima M(8), Shirai T(9),
Masuda M(10), Yamada T(11), Imokawa S(12), Suda T(3).

Author information: 
(1)Second Division, Department of Internal Medicine, Hamamatsu University School 
of Medicine, 1-20-1 Handayama, Hamamatsu 431-3192, Japan; Department of Clinical 
Oncology, Hamamatsu University School of Medicine, 1-20-1 Handayama, Hamamatsu
431-3192, Japan. (2)Second Division, Department of Internal Medicine, Hamamatsu
University School of Medicine, 1-20-1 Handayama, Hamamatsu 431-3192, Japan;
Department of Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics, Hamamatsu University School
of Medicine, 1-20-1 Handayama, Hamamatsu 431-3192, Japan. Electronic address:
inui@hama-med.ac.jp. (3)Second Division, Department of Internal Medicine,
Hamamatsu University School of Medicine, 1-20-1 Handayama, Hamamatsu 431-3192,
Japan. (4)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Ensyu Hospital, 1-1-1 Chuou,
Hamamatsu 430-0929, Japan. (5)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Seirei
Mikatahara General Hospital, 3453 Mikatahara-cho, Hamamatsu 433-8558, Japan.
(6)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Fujieda Municipal General Hospital, 4-1-11
Surugadai, Fujieda 426-8677, Japan. (7)Department of Respiratory Medicine,
Japanese Red Cross Hamamatsu Hospital, 1088-1 Kobayashi, Hamamatsu 434-8533,
Japan. (8)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Hamamatsu Rosai Hospital, 25
Shougen-cho, Hamamatsu, Japan. (9)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Shizuoka
General Hospital, 4-27-1 Kita-ando, Shizuoka 420-0881, Japan. (10)Department of
Respiratory Medicine, Shizuoka City Shimizu Hospital, 1231 Miyakami, Shizuoka
424-8636, Japan. (11)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Shizuoka City Hospital, 
10-93 Ote-cho, Shizuoka 420-8630, Japan. (12)Department of Respiratory Medicine, 
Iwata City Hospital, 513-2 Ohkubo, Iwata 438-8550, Japan.

OBJECTIVES: Single agent maintenance therapy is widely accepted for advanced
non-squamous non small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). However, there is no consensus
on the initial and maintenance phase regimens, and the clinical benefit of adding
bevacizumab to cytotoxic drugs in the maintenance phase remains unclear.
METHODS: Chemotherapy-naïve patients with non-squamous NSCLC were randomly
assigned to maintenance therapy with pemetrexed and bevacizumab or pemetrexed
alone, after achieving disease control after four cycles of induction therapy
with carboplatin (area under the curve = 6), pemetrexed (500 mg/m(2)), and
bevacizumab (15 mg/kg). The primary end-point was 1-year progression-free
survival (PFS) rate.
RESULTS: One hundred ten patients were enrolled in the study, with 55 patients
assigned to the two groups. The mean 1-year PFS rate was 43.9% (95% confidence
interval [CI]: 29.6-59.2%) in the combination maintenance group and 35.2% (95%
CI: 22.1-51.0%) in the pemetrexed maintenance group, and the difference was not
significant (p = 0.433). Median PFS measured from enrolment was 11.5 months (95% 
CI: 7.1-19.0) in the combination maintenance group and 7.3 months (95% CI:
5.7-14.1, hazard ratio: 0.73, 95% CI: 0.44-1.19, log-rank p = 0.198) in the
pemetrexed maintenance group. Nasal haemorrhage, hypertension, and proteinuria
were significantly more frequent in the combination maintenance group, but they
were mild and tolerable.
CONCLUSION: Both maintenance therapy with pemetrexed alone and pemetrexed and
bevacizumab in combination were feasible in patients with non-squamous NSCLC who 
have achieved disease control after induction therapy with carboplatin,
pemetrexed, and bevacizumab. According to the selection design, differences in
the superiority between these maintenance therapies were not demonstrated.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejca.2016.01.013 
PMID: 26922170  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Lancet Oncol. 2016 Feb;17(2):234-42. doi: 10.1016/S1470-2045(15)00488-X. Epub
2015 Dec 19.

Alectinib in ALK-positive, crizotinib-resistant, non-small-cell lung cancer: a
single-group, multicentre, phase 2 trial.

Shaw AT(1), Gandhi L(2), Gadgeel S(3), Riely GJ(4), Cetnar J(5), West H(6),
Camidge DR(7), Socinski MA(8), Chiappori A(9), Mekhail T(10), Chao BH(11),
Borghaei H(12), Gold KA(13), Zeaiter A(14), Bordogna W(14), Balas B(14), Puig
O(14), Henschel V(14), Ou SH(15); study investigators.

Collaborators: Shaw AT, Ou SH, Riely GJ, Centar J, Gandhi L, West H, Camidge DR, 
Socinski MA, Chiappori A, Mekhail T, Leal T, Shirai K, Chao BH, Tseng JE,
Borghaei H, Bazhenova L, Goldman J, Gold K, Cohen V, Gadgeel S, Chen H, Ruiz J,
Carr L, Devore R 3rd, Belman N, Santos E, Belani C.

Author information: 
(1)Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA. Electronic address:
ASHAW1@mgh.harvard.edu. (2)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA, USA.
(3)Karmanos Cancer Institute, Wayne State University, Detroit, MI, USA.
(4)Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, USA. (5)Oregon Health
and Sciences University, Portland, OR, USA. (6)Swedish Cancer Center, Seattle,
WA, USA. (7)University of Colorado, Boulder, CO, USA. (8)University of Pittsburgh
Medical Center, Pittsburgh, PA, USA. (9)Moffitt Cancer Center, Tampa, FL, USA.
(10)Florida Hospital Cancer Institute, Orlando, FL, USA. (11)Ohio State
University, Columbus, OH, USA. (12)Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, PA,
USA. (13)M D Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA. (14)F Hoffmann-La Roche,
Basel, Switzerland. (15)Chao Family Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of
California, Irvine School of Medicine, Orange, CA, USA.

Comment in
    Lancet Oncol. 2016 Feb;17(2):134-5.
    Transl Lung Cancer Res. 2016 Jun;5(3):343-6.
    J Thorac Dis. 2016 Oct;8(10 ):E1311-E1316.
    J Thorac Dis. 2016 Nov;8(11):2997-3002.

BACKGROUND: Alectinib--a highly selective, CNS-active, ALK inhibitor-showed
promising clinical activity in crizotinib-naive and crizotinib-resistant patients
with ALK-rearranged (ALK-positive) non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC). We aimed
to assess the safety and efficacy of alectinib in patients with ALK-positive
NSCLC who progressed on previous crizotinib.
METHODS: We did a phase 2 study at 27 centres in the USA and Canada. We enrolled 
patients aged 18 years or older with stage IIIB-IV, ALK-positive NSCLC who had
progressed after crizotinib. Patients were treated with oral alectinib 600 mg
twice daily until progression, death, or withdrawal. The primary endpoint was the
proportion of patients achieving an objective response by an independent review
committee using Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors, version 1.1.
Response endpoints were assessed in the response-evaluable population (ie,
patients with measurable disease at baseline who received at least one dose of
study drug), and efficacy and safety analyses were done in the intention-to-treat
population (all enrolled patients). This study is registered with
ClinicalTrials.gov, number NCT01871805. The study is ongoing and patients are
still receiving treatment.
FINDINGS: Between Sept 4, 2013, and Aug 4, 2014, 87 patients were enrolled into
the study (intention-to-treat population). At the time of the primary analysis
(median follow-up 4·8 months [IQR 3·3-7·1]), 33 of 69 patients with measurable
disease at baseline had a confirmed partial response; thus, the proportion of
patients achieving an objective response by the independent review committee was 
48% (95% CI 36-60). Adverse events were predominantly grade 1 or 2, most commonly
constipation (31 [36%]), fatigue (29 [33%]), myalgia 21 [24%]), and peripheral
oedema 20 [23%]). The most common grade 3 and 4 adverse events were changes in
laboratory values, including increased blood creatine phosphokinase (seven [8%]),
increased alanine aminotransferase (five [6%]), and increased aspartate
aminotransferase (four [5%]). Two patients died: one had a haemorrhage (judged
related to study treatment), and one had disease progression and a history of
stroke (judged unrelated to treatment).
INTERPRETATION: Alectinib showed clinical activity and was well tolerated in
patients with ALK-positive NSCLC who had progressed on crizotinib. Therefore,
alectinib could be a suitable treatment for patients with ALK-positive disease
who have progressed on crizotinib.
FUNDING: F Hoffmann-La Roche.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S1470-2045(15)00488-X 
PMCID: PMC4752892
PMID: 26708155  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Ann Oncol. 2015 Aug;26(8):1734-40. doi: 10.1093/annonc/mdv219. Epub 2015 May 4.

Cilengitide combined with cetuximab and platinum-based chemotherapy as first-line
treatment in advanced non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients: results of an 
open-label, randomized, controlled phase II study (CERTO).

Vansteenkiste J(1), Barlesi F(2), Waller CF(3), Bennouna J(4), Gridelli C(5),
Goekkurt E(6), Verhoeven D(7), Szczesna A(8), Feurer M(9), Milanowski J(10),
Germonpre P(11), Lena H(12), Atanackovic D(13), Krzakowski M(14), Hicking C(15), 
Straub J(15), Picard M(15), Schuette W(16), O'Byrne K(17).

Author information: 
(1)Respiratory Oncology Unit, Department of Respiratory Medicine, University
Hospitals KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium johan.vansteenkiste@uzleuven.be.
(2)Multidisciplinary Oncology and Therapeutic Innovations, Aix Marseille
University-Assistance Publique Hôpitaux de Marseille, Marseille, France.
(3)Haematology, Oncology and Stem Cell Transplantation, University Hospital of
Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany. (4)Département d'Oncologie Médicale, Centre Rene
Gauducheau, Saint-Herblain Cedex, France. (5)Division of Medical Oncology,
Azienda Ospedaliera 'S.G. Moscati', Avellino, Italy. (6)Department of Oncology,
Hematology, Stem Cell Transplantation and Hemostaseology, University Hospital
Aachen, Aachen, Germany. (7)Iridium Cancer Network, Medical Oncology, AZ Klina,
Antwerp, Belgium. (8)Mazowieckie Centrum Leczenia Chorób Pluc i Gruźlicy, Otwock,
Poland. (9)Lungenpraxis Munich, Munich, Germany. (10)Department of Pneumology,
Oncology and Allergology, Medical University of Lublin, Lublin, Poland.
(11)Pulmonary Medicine, AZ Maria Middelares, Ghent, Belgium. (12)Pneumology, CHU 
Rennes, Rennes, France. (13)Oncology/Hematology/Stem Cell Transplantation,
University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany. (14)The Maria
Sklodowska-Curie Memorial Cancer Center and Institute of Oncology, Lung and
Thoracic Tumours, Warsaw, Poland. (15)Merck KGaA, Darmstadt. (16)Krankenhaus
Martha-Maria Halle-Dölau, Klinik für Innere Medizin II, Halle, Germany.
(17)Cancer Services, Princess Alexandra Hospital, Brisbane, Australia.

BACKGROUND: This multicentre, open-label, randomized, controlled phase II study
evaluated cilengitide in combination with cetuximab and platinum-based
chemotherapy, compared with cetuximab and chemotherapy alone, as first-line
treatment of patients with advanced non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC).
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Patients were randomized 1:1:1 to receive cetuximab plus
platinum-based chemotherapy alone (control), or combined with cilengitide 2000 mg
1×/week i.v. (CIL-once) or 2×/week i.v. (CIL-twice). A protocol amendment limited
enrolment to patients with epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) histoscore
≥200 and closed the CIL-twice arm for practical feasibility issues. Primary end
point was progression-free survival (PFS; independent read); secondary end points
included overall survival (OS), safety, and biomarker analyses. A comparison
between the CIL-once and control arms is reported, both for the total cohorts, as
well as for patients with EGFR histoscore ≥200.
RESULTS: There were 85 patients in the CIL-once group and 84 in the control
group. The PFS (independent read) was 6.2 versus 5.0 months for CIL-once versus
control [hazard ratio (HR) 0.72; P = 0.085]; for patients with EGFR histoscore
≥200, PFS was 6.8 versus 5.6 months, respectively (HR 0.57; P = 0.0446). Median
OS was 13.6 for CIL-once versus 9.7 months for control (HR 0.81; P = 0.265). In
patients with EGFR ≥200, OS was 13.2 versus 11.8 months, respectively (HR 0.95; P
= 0.855). No major differences in adverse events between CIL-once and control
were reported; nausea (59% versus 56%, respectively) and neutropenia (54% versus 
46%, respectively) were the most frequent. There was no increased incidence of
thromboembolic events or haemorrhage in cilengitide-treated patients. αvβ3 and
αvβ5 expression was neither a predictive nor a prognostic indicator.
CONCLUSIONS: The addition of cilengitide to cetuximab/chemotherapy indicated
potential clinical activity, with a trend for PFS difference in the
independent-read analysis. However, the observed inconsistencies across end
points suggest additional investigations are required to substantiate a potential
role of other integrin inhibitors in NSCLC treatment.
CLINICAL TRIAL REGISTRATION ID NUMBER: NCT00842712.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the European
Society for Medical Oncology. All rights reserved. For permissions, please email:
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/annonc/mdv219 
PMID: 25939894  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Drugs. 2014 Oct;74(16):1891-925. doi: 10.1007/s40265-014-0302-9.

Bevacizumab: a review of its use in advanced cancer.

Keating GM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Springer, Private Bag 65901, Mairangi Bay, 0754, Auckland, New Zealand,
demail@springer.com.

The humanized monoclonal antibody bevacizumab (Avastin(®)) has been available in 
the EU since 2005. Results of phase III trials demonstrate that adding
intravenous bevacizumab to antineoplastic agents improves progression-free
survival and/or overall survival in patients with advanced cancer, including when
used as first- or second-line therapy in metastatic colorectal cancer, as
first-line therapy in advanced nonsquamous non-small cell lung cancer, as
first-line therapy in metastatic renal cell carcinoma, as first-line therapy in
metastatic breast cancer, and as first-line therapy in epithelial ovarian,
fallopian tube or primary peritoneal cancer or in recurrent, platinum-sensitive
or platinum-resistant disease. Results of these studies are supported by the
findings of routine oncology practice studies conducted in real-world settings.
The tolerability profile of bevacizumab is well defined and adverse events
associated with its use (e.g. hypertension, proteinuria, haemorrhage, wound
healing complications, arterial thromboembolism, gastrointestinal perforation)
are generally manageable. In conclusion, bevacizumab remains an important option 
for use in patients with advanced cancer.

DOI: 10.1007/s40265-014-0302-9 
PMID: 25315029  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Lancet. 2014 Aug 23;384(9944):665-73. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(14)60845-X. Epub
2014 Jun 2.

Ramucirumab plus docetaxel versus placebo plus docetaxel for second-line
treatment of stage IV non-small-cell lung cancer after disease progression on
platinum-based therapy (REVEL): a multicentre, double-blind, randomised phase 3
trial.

Garon EB(1), Ciuleanu TE(2), Arrieta O(3), Prabhash K(4), Syrigos KN(5), Goksel
T(6), Park K(7), Gorbunova V(8), Kowalyszyn RD(9), Pikiel J(10), Czyzewicz G(11),
Orlov SV(12), Lewanski CR(13), Thomas M(14), Bidoli P(15), Dakhil S(16), Gans
S(17), Kim JH(18), Grigorescu A(19), Karaseva N(20), Reck M(21), Cappuzzo F(22), 
Alexandris E(23), Sashegyi A(24), Yurasov S(23), Pérol M(25).

Author information: 
(1)David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA/Translational Research in Oncology-US 
Network, Los Angeles, CA, USA. Electronic address: egaron@mednet.ucla.edu.
(2)Institute of Oncology Ion Chiricuta and University of Medicine and Pharmacy
Iuliu Hatieganu, Cluj-Napoca, Romania. (3)Instituto Nacional de Cancerologia
(INCAN), Mexico City, Mexico. (4)Tata Memorial Centre, Mumbai, India. (5)Oncology
Unit GPP, Sotiria General Hospital, Athens School of Medicine, Athens, Greece.
(6)Ege University School of Medicine, Izmir, Turkey. (7)Department of Medicine,
Division of Hematology-Oncology, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University 
School of Medicine, Seoul, South Korea. (8)Department of Chemotherapy, N N
Blokhin Cancer Research Center, Moscow, Russia. (9)Centro de Investigaciones
Clínicas, Clínica Viedma, Argentina. (10)Wojewódzkie Centrum Onkologii, Gdansk,
Poland. (11)Chemotherapy Department, John Paul II Hospital, Krakow, Poland.
(12)Pavlov State Medical University, St Petersburg, Russia. (13)Charing Cross
Hospital, London, UK. (14)Internistische Onkologie der Thoraxtumoren,
Thoraxklinik im Universitätsklinikum Heidelberg, Translational Lung Research
Center Heidelberg (TLRC-H), German Center for Lung Research (DZL), Heidelberg,
Germany. (15)Medical Oncology, San Gerardo Hospital, Monza, Italy. (16)Cancer
Center of Kansas, Wichita, KS, USA. (17)St Jansdal Hospital, Herderwijk,
Netherlands. (18)Yonsei Cancer Center, Yonsei University Health System, Seoul,
South Korea. (19)Department of Medical Oncology, Institute of Oncology,
Bucharest, Romania. (20)City Clinical Oncology Dispensary, St Petersburg, Russia.
(21)LungenClinic Grosshansdorf, German Center for Lung Research (DZL),
Grosshansdorf, Germany. (22)Istituto Toscano Tumori, Livorno, Italy. (23)ImClone 
Systems, Eli Lilly, Bridgewater, NJ, USA. (24)Eli Lilly, Indianapolis, IN, USA.
(25)Léon-Bérard Cancer Centre, Lyon, France.

Comment in
    Lancet. 2014 Aug 23;384(9944):640-2.

BACKGROUND: Ramucirumab is a human IgG1 monoclonal antibody that targets the
extracellular domain of VEGFR-2. We aimed to assess efficacy and safety of
treatment with docetaxel plus ramucirumab or placebo as second-line treatment for
patients with stage IV non-small-cell-lung cancer (NSCLC) after platinum-based
therapy.
METHODS: In this multicentre, double-blind, randomised phase 3 trial (REVEL), we 
enrolled patients with squamous or non-squamous NSCLC who had progressed during
or after a first-line platinum-based chemotherapy regimen. Patients were randomly
allocated (1:1) with a centralised, interactive voice-response system (stratified
by sex, region, performance status, and previous maintenance therapy [yes vs no])
to receive docetaxel 75 mg/m(2) and either ramucirumab (10 mg/kg) or placebo on
day 1 of a 21 day cycle until disease progression, unacceptable toxicity,
withdrawal, or death. The primary endpoint was overall survival in all patients
allocated to treatment. We assessed adverse events according to treatment
received. This study is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, number NCT01168973.
FINDINGS: Between Dec 3, 2010, and Jan 24, 2013, we screened 1825 patients, of
whom 1253 patients were randomly allocated to treatment. Median overall survival 
was 10·5 months (IQR 5·1-21·2) for 628 patients allocated ramucirumab plus
docetaxel and 9·1 months (4·2-18·0) for 625 patients who received placebo plus
docetaxel (hazard ratio 0·86, 95% CI 0·75-0·98; p=0·023). Median progression-free
survival was 4·5 months (IQR 2·3-8·3) for the ramucirumab group compared with 3·0
months (1·4-6·9) for the control group (0·76, 0·68-0·86; p<0·0001). We noted
treatment-emergent adverse events in 613 (98%) of 627 patients in the ramucirumab
safety population and 594 (95%) of 618 patients in the control safety population.
The most common grade 3 or worse adverse events were neutropenia (306 patients
[49%] in the ramucirumab group vs 246 [40%] in the control group), febrile
neutropenia (100 [16%] vs 62 [10%]), fatigue (88 [14%] vs 65 [10%]), leucopenia
(86 [14%] vs 77 [12%]), and hypertension (35 [6%] vs 13 [2%]). The numbers of
deaths from adverse events (31 [5%] vs 35 [6%]) and grade 3 or worse pulmonary
haemorrhage (eight [1%] vs eight [1%]) did not differ between groups. Toxicities 
were manageable with appropriate dose reductions and supportive care.
INTERPRETATION: Ramucirumab plus docetaxel improves survival as second-line
treatment of patients with stage IV NSCLC.
FUNDING: Eli Lilly.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(14)60845-X 
PMID: 24933332  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol. 2014 Feb;73(2):231-6. doi: 10.1007/s00280-013-2342-3.
Epub 2013 Nov 13.

Phase I dose-escalation study of oral vinflunine in combination with erlotinib in
pre-treated and unselected EGFR patients with locally advanced or metastatic
non-small-cell lung cancer.

Krzakowski M(1), Bennouna J, Dansin E, Kowalski D, Hiret S, Penel N, Favrel S,
Tourani JM.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Oncology, Warsaw, Poland, maciekk@coi.waw.pl.

BACKGROUND: Erlotinib, the epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase
inhibitor, and the intra-venous vinflunine vinca alkaloid microtubule inhibitor
have been shown to be effective in the setting of non-small-cell lung cancer
(NSCLC) palliative patients with acceptable toxicities. This phase I study was
conducted to determine the maximal tolerated dose (MTD) and the safety of an
all-oral combination. A potential pharmacokinetic drug-drug interaction was also 
investigated.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Patients with unresectable stage IIIB or stage IV NSCLC who
failed one or two previous chemotherapy regimens were treated with flat doses of 
oral vinflunine from day 1 to day 5 and from day 8 to day 12 every 3 weeks and
erlotinib daily on a continuous basis. The dose levels of vinflunine/erlotinib
were 95/100, 115/100, 115/150 and 135/100 mg.
RESULTS: Thirty patients were enroled. The recommended dose was 115/150 mg and
the MTD 135/100 mg. Dose-limiting toxicities included grade 3 febrile neutropenia
(1 patient) and related death (1 patient). Non-haematologic grade 3/4 toxicities 
included fatigue, condition aggravated, hypokalaemia, tumour pain, acneiform
dermatitis, diarrhoea, hyperbilirubinaemia and pulmonary haemorrhage, in one
patient each. Of 25 patients evaluable for tumour response, 2 patients had
partial response and 20 patients had stable disease.
CONCLUSION: The recommended doses for oral vinflunine and erlotinib combination
were, respectively, 115 mg/day from day 1 to day 5 and from day 8 to day 12 every
3 weeks and 150 mg/day. There was no mutual impact on pharmacokinetics. The
combination was safe but evaluation in phase II is needed to further refine the
activity and toxicity that can be expected with prolonged administration of this 
dose schedule.

DOI: 10.1007/s00280-013-2342-3 
PMCID: PMC3909260
PMID: 24220936  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Clin Oncol (R Coll Radiol). 2013 Jan;25(1):e7-e15. doi:
10.1016/j.clon.2012.09.005. Epub 2012 Nov 21.

Chemotherapy plus Vandetanib or chemotherapy alone in advanced non-small cell
lung cancer: a meta-analysis of four randomised controlled trials.

Xiao YY(1), Zhan P, Yuan DM, Liu HB, Lv TF, Shi Y, Song Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, Jinling Hospital,
Nanjing University School of Medicine, Nanjing, China.

AIMS: Most patients with advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) require
systemic chemotherapy. Vandetanib, targeting epidermal growth factor receptor and
vascular endothelial growth factor receptor signalling in NSCLC, has recently
been evaluated in combination chemotherapy in advanced NSCLC. However, the
advantage of chemotherapy plus vandetanib over chemotherapy alone in advanced
NSCLC remains largely unknown. A meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials
was carried out to compare the efficacy and toxicity of chemotherapy plus
vandetanib with chemotherapy alone in advanced NSCLC.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The PubMed database, American Society of Clinical
Oncology, European Society for Medical Oncology and the Cochrane Library and
references of published trials were searched. Two reviewers independently
assessed the quality of the trials. Data were extracted and the overall response 
rate, pooled progression-free survival, overall survival with 95% confidence
intervals and main toxicity were analysed.
RESULTS: Four randomised controlled trials involving 2160 patients with advanced 
NSCLC were ultimately analysed. Compared with chemotherapy alone, chemotherapy
plus vandetanib significantly increased the overall response rate (relative
risk = 1.96, 95% confidence interval = 1.53--2.52) and progression-free survival 
(hazard ratio = 0.79, 95% confidence interval = 0.71-0.87), but there was no
significant difference in overall survival (hazard ratio = 0.91, 95% confidence
interval = 0.79-1.03). Patients who received chemotherapy plus vandetanib had
more rash, diarrhoea, hypertension and QTc prolongation (odds ratio = 2.32, 95%
confidence interval = 1.93-2.79; odds ratio = 1.64, 95% confidence
interval = 1.37-1.97; odds ratio = 4.08, 95% confidence interval = 2.51-6.01,
odds ratio = 17.77, 95% confidence interval = 3.54-61.66, respectively), and less
nausea and vomiting (odds ratio = 0.70, 95% confidence interval = 0.58-0.85; odds
ratio = 0.69, 95% confidence interval = 0.55-0.86, respectively). The incidences 
of haemorrhage, fatigue and cough were comparable between the two groups.
CONCLUSIONS: Although similar in overall survival, chemotherapy plus vandetanib
showed particular advantages over chemotherapy alone in terms of progression-free
survival and overall response rate. The toxicity was comparable between the two
groups. Therefore, chemotherapy plus vandetanib might be a safe and valid
therapeutic option for advanced NSCLC patients.

Copyright © 2012 The Royal College of Radiologists. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clon.2012.09.005 
PMID: 23177099  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Curr Cancer Drug Targets. 2012 Mar;12(3):289-99.

Targeting angiogenesis for treatment of NSCLC brain metastases.

Schettino C(1), Bareschino MA, Rossi A, Maione P, Sacco PC, Colantuoni G, Rossi
E, Gridelli C.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Oncology, "S.G. Moscati" Hospital, Avellino, Italy.
cgridelli@libero.it

Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer-related mortality worldwide, and
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) accounts for about 85% of all new lung cancer 
diagnosis. The majority of people with NSCLC are unsuitable for surgery since
most patients have metastatic disease at diagnosis. About 60% of brain metastases
arise from lung cancer. Therapeutic approaches to brain metastases include
surgery, whole brain radiotherapy (WBRT), stereotactic radiosurgery, chemotherapy
and new biologic agents. Angiogenesis is essential for the development and
progression of cancer, and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) is a
critical mediator of tumour angiogenesis. One of the targeted approaches most
widely studied in the treatment of NSCLC is the inhibition of angiogenesis.
Bevacizumab, an anti-VEGF recombinant humanized monoclonal antibody, is the first
targeted agent which, when combined with chemotherapy, has shown superior
efficacy versus chemotherapy alone as first-line treatment of advanced
non-squamous NSCLC patients. Patients with central nervous system (CNS)
metastases have initially been excluded from bevacizumab trials for the risk of
cerebral haemorrhage as a result of the treatment. Nevertheless, the available
data suggest an equal risk of intracranial bleeding in patients with CNS
metastases treated with or without bevacizumab therapy. Several other
anti-angiogenetic drugs are being investigated in the treatment of advanced NSCLC
patients, but results of their activity specifically in CNS metastases are still 
lacking. This review will focus on the potential role of bevacizumab and other
anti-angiogenetic agents in the treatment of brain metastases from NSCLC.


PMID: 22229249  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Ann Oncol. 2012 May;23(5):1111-20. doi: 10.1093/annonc/mdr463. Epub 2011 Nov 4.

Predicting and managing the risk of pulmonary haemorrhage in patients with NSCLC 
treated with bevacizumab: a consensus report from a panel of experts.

Reck M(1), Barlesi F, Crinò L, Henschke CI, Isla D, Stiebeler S, Spigel DR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Oncology, Hospital Grosshansdorf, Grosshansdorf,
Germany. dr.martin.reck@web.de

BACKGROUND: Bevacizumab is a monoclonal antibody against vascular endothelial
growth factor. Severe pulmonary haemorrhage (PH) is a rare but serious potential 
adverse event associated with bevacizumab therapy for advanced non-squamous
non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC).
METHODS: A panel of expert oncologists, pulmonologists and radiologists reviewed 
the available data to identify predictive factors for PH in order to help guide
physicians using bevacizumab in patients with NSCLC.
RESULTS: Patients with NSCLC are at an increased risk of PH owing to the
underlying disease process. Patients with squamous histology and/or a history of 
grade ≥ 2 haemoptysis (≥ 2.5 ml per event) should not receive bevacizumab. No
clinical or radiological features (including cavitation and central tumour
location) reliably predict severe PH in bevacizumab-treated patients. Major blood
vessel infiltration and bronchial vessel infiltration, encasement and abutting
may predict PH; however, standardised radiological criteria for defining
infiltration have not been established. Eligibility for bevacizumab is not
affected by patient age, performance status or anticoagulation or antiplatelet
therapy.
CONCLUSIONS: An individualised risk-benefit assessment should be undertaken in
all patients with NSCLC in whom bevacizumab is being considered. Further research
is required to elucidate the mechanisms underlying PH and the clinical risk
factors.

DOI: 10.1093/annonc/mdr463 
PMCID: PMC3335247
PMID: 22056855  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Onco Targets Ther. 2017 Jan 18;10:447-452. doi: 10.2147/OTT.S126613. eCollection 
2017.

Apatinib as post second-line therapy in EGFR wild-type and ALK-negative advanced 
lung adenocarcinoma.

Fang SC(1), Zhang HT(2), Zhang YM(2), Xie WP(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine Center, Nanjing Chest Hospital; Department 
of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, The First Affiliated Hospital of
Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, Jiangsu, People's Republic of China.
(2)Department of Respiratory Medicine Center, Nanjing Chest Hospital.
(3)Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, The First Affiliated
Hospital of Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, Jiangsu, People's Republic of
China.

In the absence of a driver mutation, chemotherapy is the standard treatment
option as first- and second-line therapy for advanced non-small-cell lung cancer 
(NSCLC). Though a large number of patients are suitable for post second-line
therapies, the quality and quantity of the available drugs in this setting is
poor. Apatinib, a small molecule vascular endothelial growth factor receptor-2
(VEGFR-2) tyrosine kinase inhibitor, is a first-generation oral antiangiogenesis 
drug approved in the People's Republic of China for use as a subsequent line of
treatment for advanced gastric cancer. Herein, we report three cases of advanced 
NSCLC with epidermal growth factor receptor wild-type and anaplastic lymphoma
kinase-negative status, wherein the patients showed partial response to apatinib.
Moreover, the three patients have achieved a progression-free survival of 2.8,
5.8, and 6 months, respectively. The main toxicities were hypertension,
proteinuria, and hand-foot syndrome. Apatinib may provide an additional option
for the treatment of advanced NSCLC, especially for advanced lung adenocarcinoma 
without a driver mutation.

DOI: 10.2147/OTT.S126613 
PMCID: PMC5261838
PMID: 28176910  [PubMed - in process]


2. J Thorac Oncol. 2017 Feb 1. pii: S1556-0864(17)30089-8. doi:
10.1016/j.jtho.2017.01.022. [Epub ahead of print]

Maintenance Sunitinib following Initial Platinum-Based Combination Chemotherapy
in Advanced Stage IIIB/IV Non-small cell Lung Cancer: A Randomized, Double-Blind,
Placebo-Controlled Phase III Study - CALGB 30607 (Alliance).

Baggstrom MQ(1), Socinski MA(2), Wang XF(3), Gu L(3), Stinchcombe TE(4), Edelman 
MJ(5), Baker S Jr(6), Feliciano J(5), Novotny P(7), Hahn O(8), Crawford JA(9),
Vokes EE(10).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Oncology, Washington University School of Medicine, 660 South
Euclid Ave., Box 8056, St. Louis, MO 63110 USA. Electronic address:
Mbaggstr@wustl.edu. (2)Division of Oncology, University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill, 170 Manning Drive, CB #7305, Chapel Hill, NC 27599 and Division of
Oncology, University of Pittsburgh, UPMC Cancer Pavilion, 5150 Centre Avenue,
5(th) Floor, Pittsburgh, PA 15232. Present address: Florida Hospital Cancer
Institute, 2501 N. Orange Avenue, Orlando, FL 32804 USA. (3)Alliance Statistics
and Data Center, Hock Plaza, 2424 Erwin Road, Suite 802, Durham, NC 27705, USA.
(4)Division of Oncology, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, 170 Manning
Drive, CB #7305, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA. Present address: Division of
Oncology, Duke Cancer Institute, Duke University Medical Center, Campus Box 3406,
Durham, NC 27710, USA. (5)Division of Oncology, University of Maryland Greenebaum
Cancer Center, 22 S. Greene Street, Room N9E09, Baltimore, MD 21201-1595, USA.
(6)Division of Oncology, Virginia Commonwealth University Massey Cancer Center,
1300 East Marshall Street, North Hospital, Richmond, VA 23219, USA. (7)Division
of Oncology, Mayo Clinic, Gonda Building, 200 First St. SW, Rochester, MN, 55905,
USA. (8)Alliance Protocol Operations Office, University of Chicago, 5841 S.
Maryland Ave, MC 2115, Chicago, IL 60637, USA. (9)Division of Oncology, Duke
Cancer Institute, Duke University Medical Center, 443 Seely G. Mudd Bldg, Durham,
NC 27710, USA. (10)Division of Oncology, University of Chicago Medicine and
Biological Sciences, 5841 S. Maryland Avenue, MC 2115, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.

INTRODUCTION: To evaluate efficacy of maintenance sunitinib after first-line
chemotherapy for stage IIIB/IV non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC).
METHODS: Cancer and Leukemia Group B (CALGB) 30607 trial was a randomized,
double-blind, placebo-controlled, phase III study that enrolled patients without 
progression after four cycles of first-line platinum-based doublet chemotherapy
with or without bevacizumab. Bevacizumab was only allowed during the four cycles 
of chemotherapy. Patients were randomized to sunitinib 37.5 mg per day or placebo
and were treated until unacceptable adverse event(s), progression, or death.
Primary endpoint was progression-free survival (PFS).
RESULTS: Two hundred ten patients were enrolled, randomized, and were included in
the intent-to-treat (ITT) analysis. Ten patients did not receive maintenance
therapy (4 on placebo and 6 on sunitinib). Grade 3/4 adverse events affecting
more than 5% of the patients were fatigue (25%), thrombocytopenia (12%),
hypertension (12%), rash (11%), mucositis (11%), neutropenia (7%), and anemia
(6%) for sunitinib and none for placebo. There were three grade 5 events on
sunitinib (1 pulmonary hemorrhage, 1 other pulmonary, and 1 death not associated 
with a CTCAE term) and two grade 5 events on placebo (1 pulmonary other and 1
thromboembolism). Median PFS was 4.3 months for sunitinib and 2.6 months for
placebo (HR, 0.62; 95% CI, 0.47 - 0.82, P=0.0006). Median overall survival (OS)
was 11.7 months for sunitinib versus 12.1 months for placebo versus (HR, 0.98,
95% CI, 0.73-1.31; P=0.89).
CONCLUSION: Maintenance sunitinib was safe and improved PFS as maintenance
therapy in stage IIIB/IV NSCLC but had no impact on overall survival. There is no
room for future investigations of sunitinib in this setting.

Copyright © 2017. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jtho.2017.01.022 
PMID: 28161554  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


3. Invest New Drugs. 2017 Feb 1. doi: 10.1007/s10637-017-0436-1. [Epub ahead of
print]

A phase II study of carboplatin plus weekly paclitaxel with bevacizumab for
elderly patients with non-squamous non-small-cell lung cancer (NEJ016).

Miura S(1,)(2), Maemondo M(3), Iwashima A(4), Harada T(5), Sugawara S(6),
Kobayashi K(7), Inoue A(8), Nakagawa T(9), Takiguchi Y(10), Watanabe H(11),
Ishida T(12), Terada M(13), Kagamu H(14,)(7), Gemma A(15), Yoshizawa H(14,)(16).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Niigata Cancer Center Hospital, 2-15-3,
Kawagishicho, Chuo-ku, Niigata, 951-8566, Japan. miusat1118@niigata-cc.jp.
(2)Department of Respiratory Medicine and Infectious Disease, Niigata University 
Medical and Dental Hospital, Niigata, Japan. miusat1118@niigata-cc.jp.
(3)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Miyagi Cancer Center, Natori, Japan.
(4)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Nagaoka Chuo General Hospital, Nagaoka,
Japan. (5)Center for Respiratory Diseases, Japan Community Health Care
Organization Hokkaido Hospital, Sapporo, Japan. (6)Department of Pulmonary
Medicine, Sendai Kousei Hospital, Sendai, Japan. (7)Department of Respiratory
Medicine, Saitama Medical University International Medical Center, Hidaka, Japan.
(8)Department of Palliative Medicine, Tohoku University School of Medicine,
Sendai, Japan. (9)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Omagari Kosei Medical Center,
Akita, Japan. (10)Department of Medical Oncology, Graduate School of Medicine,
Chiba University, Chiba, Japan. (11)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Saka
General Hospital, Shiogama, Japan. (12)Department of Internal Medicine, Niigata
Prefectural Central Hospital, Joetsu, Japan. (13)Department of Respiratory
Medicine, Saiseikai Niigata Daini Hospital, Niigata, Japan. (14)Department of
Respiratory Medicine and Infectious Disease, Niigata University Medical and
Dental Hospital, Niigata, Japan. (15)Department of Pulmonary Medicine and
Oncology, Nippon Medical School, Graduate School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.
(16)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Niigata Medical Center Hospital, Niigata,
Japan.

Background The efficacy and safety of bevacizumab in elderly patients with
non-small cell lung cancer remain controversial. This study focused on both
selecting fit elderly patients and overcoming interpatient variability with
respect to pharmacodynamics. Methods Elderly (age: ≥70 years) patients with
advanced non-squamous non-small cell lung cancer were enrolled. Patients with
uncontrolled congestive heart failure and uncontrolled diabetes were excluded.
The treatment regimen comprised carboplatin at an area under the curve of
5 mg/ml/min on day 1, paclitaxel at 90 mg/m(2) on days 1 and 8, and bevacizumab
at 15 mg/kg on day 1 every 21 days for up to 4 cycles, followed by maintenance
bevacizumab. Dose reduction due to side effects was performed, with a wide range 
of doses of paclitaxel from 23 mg/m(2)/week to 60 mg/m(2)/week. Results Of the 36
patients entered, 38.9% required a dose reduction or cancellation of paclitaxel
administration on day 8, and 75% patients were able to complete 4 cycles of
triplet therapy. The response rate, primary endpoint, was 69.4% (95% confidence
interval [CI]: 51.9-83.7). The median progression free survival and overall
survival were 8.4 months and 29.2 months, respectively. The most common adverse
events included neutropenia, hypertension, anemia, and infection. Although
Grade ≥ 3 adverse events were observed in 24 patients (66.7%), there were no
deaths due to toxicity. Conclusion Carboplatin plus weekly paclitaxel with
bevacizumab is a feasible, effective first-line regimen for elderly non-small
cell lung cancer patients. (UMIN00006622).

DOI: 10.1007/s10637-017-0436-1 
PMID: 28150074  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


4. J Clin Oncol. 2017 Jan 23:JCO2016700229. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2016.70.0229. [Epub
ahead of print]

Cardiac Toxicity After Radiotherapy for Stage III Non-Small-Cell Lung Cancer:
Pooled Analysis of Dose-Escalation Trials Delivering 70 to 90 Gy.

Wang K(1), Eblan MJ(1), Deal AM(1), Lipner M(1), Zagar TM(1), Wang Y(1),
Mavroidis P(1), Lee CB(1), Jensen BC(1), Rosenman JG(1), Socinski MA(1),
Stinchcombe TE(1), Marks LB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Kyle Wang, Michael J. Eblan, Matthew Lipner, Timothy M. Zagar, Panayiotis
Mavroidis, Carrie B. Lee, Brian C. Jensen, Julian G. Rosenman, and Lawrence B.
Marks, University of North Carolina Hospitals; Allison M. Deal and Yue Wang,
Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center Biostatistics Core, University of North
Carolina Hospitals, Chapel Hill; Thomas E. Stinchcombe, Duke University
Hospitals, Durham, NC; and Mark A. Socinski, Florida Hospital Cancer Institute,
Orlando, FL.

Purpose The significance of radiotherapy (RT) -associated cardiac injury for
stage III non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is unclear, but higher heart doses
were associated with worse overall survival in the Radiation Therapy Oncology
Group (RTOG) 0617 study. We assessed the impact of heart dose in patients treated
at our institution on several prospective dose-escalation trials. Patients and
Methods From 1996 to 2009, 127 patients with stage III NSCLC (Eastern Cooperative
Oncology Group performance status, 0 to 1) received dose-escalated RT to 70 to 90
Gy (median, 74 Gy) in six trials. RT plans and cardiac doses were reviewed.
Records were reviewed for the primary end point: symptomatic cardiac events
(symptomatic pericardial effusion, acute coronary syndrome, pericarditis,
significant arrhythmia, and heart failure). Cardiac risk was assessed by noting
baseline coronary artery disease and calculating the WHO/International Society of
Hypertension score. Competing risks analysis was used. Results In all, 112
patients were analyzed. Median follow-up for surviving patients was 8.8 years.
Twenty-six patients (23%) had one or more events at a median of 26 months to
first event (effusion [n = 7], myocardial infarction [n = 5], unstable angina [n 
= 3], pericarditis [n = 2], arrhythmia [n = 12], and heart failure [n = 1]).
Heart doses (eg, heart mean dose; hazard ratio, 1.03/Gy; P = .002,), coronary
artery disease ( P < .001), and WHO/International Society of Hypertension score (
P = .04) were associated with events on univariable analysis. Heart doses
remained significant on multivariable analysis that accounted for baseline risk. 
Two-year competing risk-adjusted event rates for patients with heart mean dose < 
10 Gy, 10 to 20 Gy, or ≥ 20 Gy were 4%, 7%, and 21%, respectively. Heart doses
were not associated with overall survival. Conclusion Cardiac events were
relatively common after high-dose thoracic RT and were independently associated
with both heart dose and baseline cardiac risk. RT-associated cardiac toxicity
after treatment of stage III NSCLC may occur earlier than historically
understood, and heart doses should be minimized.

DOI: 10.1200/JCO.2016.70.0229 
PMID: 28113017  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


5. Front Med (Lausanne). 2016 Dec 19;3:68. doi: 10.3389/fmed.2016.00068. eCollection
2016.

Focus on Nintedanib in NSCLC and Other Tumors.

Manzo A(1), Carillio G(2), Montanino A(1), Costanzo R(1), Sandomenico C(1), Rocco
G(3), Morabito A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Thoracic Medical Oncology, Istituto Nazionale Tumori, "Fondazione G. Pascale" 
- IRCCS , Napoli , Italy. (2)Department of Oncology and Hematology, Azienda
Ospedaliera Pugliese-Ciaccio , Catanzaro , Italy. (3)Thoracic Surgery, Istituto
Nazionale Tumori, "Fondazione G. Pascale" - IRCCS , Napoli , Italy.

Nintedanib is a new triple angiokinase inhibitor that potently blocks the
proangiogenic pathways mediated by vascular endothelial growth factor receptors, 
platelet-derived growth factor receptors, and fibroblast growth factor receptors.
Evidence about its efficacy in addition to second-line chemotherapy in non-small 
cell lung cancer (NSCLC) has been produced by two large randomized phase III
clinical trials (LUME-Lung 1 and LUME-Lung 2), conducted in patients with
pretreated NSCLC, without major risk factors for bleeding. In the LUME-Lung 1,
the addition of nintedanib to docetaxel significantly improved progression-free
survival, which was the primary end point of the trial (3.4 vs. 2.7 months,
hazard ratio: 0.79; p = 0.0019). Furthermore, a significant improvement in median
overall survival (from 10.3 to 12.6 months) was observed in patients with
adenocarcinoma histology, with a greater advantage in patients who progressed
within 9 months after start of first-line treatment (from 7.9 to 10.9 months) and
in patients who were most refractory to first-line chemotherapy (from 6.3 to
9.8 months). Adverse events were more common in the docetaxel plus nintedanib
group, and they included diarrhea and increased liver enzymes, while no
statistically significant increase in the incidence of bleeding and hypertension 
events by the addition of nintedanib was observed. On these bases, the
combination of docetaxel and nintedanib can be considered a new option for the
second-line treatment for patients with advanced NSCLC with adenocarcinoma
histology. Future challenges are the identification of predictive factors to help
the decision of using nintedanib in eligible patients.

DOI: 10.3389/fmed.2016.00068 
PMCID: PMC5165233
PMID: 28066768  [PubMed - in process]


6. Lung Cancer. 2016 Dec;102:65-73. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2016.10.011. Epub 2016
Oct 27.

Nintedanib plus pemetrexed versus placebo plus pemetrexed in patients with
relapsed or refractory, advanced non-small cell lung cancer (LUME-Lung 2): A
randomized, double-blind, phase III trial.

Hanna NH(1), Kaiser R(2), Sullivan RN(3), Aren OR(4), Ahn MJ(5), Tiangco B(6),
Voccia I(7), Pawel JV(8), Kovcin V(9), Agulnik J(10), Gaschler-Markefski B(11),
Barrueco J(12), Sikken P(11), Schloss C(12), Kim JH(13); LUME-Lung 2 Study group.

Author information: 
(1)Melvin and Bren Simon Cancer Center, Indiana University School of Medicine,
Indiana University, Indianapolis, IN, USA. Electronic address: nhanna@iupui.edu. 
(2)Boehringer Ingelheim Pharmaceuticals GmbH & Co. KG, Biberach, Germany;
Institute of Clinical Pharmacology, Georg-August-University Göttingen, Germany.
(3)Department of Oncology, Auckland City Hospital, Auckland, New Zealand.
(4)Instituto Nacional del Cáncer, Santiago, Chile. (5)Department of Medicine,
Division of Hematology-Oncology, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University 
School of Medicine, Seoul, South Korea. (6)Internal Medicine, National Kidney and
Transplant Institute, Quezon City, Philippines. (7)Boehringer Ingelheim (Canada) 
Ltd, Burlington, ON, Canada. (8)Pneumology Clinic, Asklepios Fachkliniken,
Gauting, Germany. (9)Clinical Hospital Center Bezanijska Kosa, Belgrade, Serbia. 
(10)Jewish General Hospital, Montréal, Québec, Canada. (11)Boehringer Ingelheim
Pharmaceuticals GmbH & Co. KG, Biberach, Germany. (12)Boehringer Ingelheim
Pharmaceuticals Inc., Ridgefield, CT, USA. (13)Yonsei Cancer Center, Yonsei
University Health System, Seoul, South Korea.

OBJECTIVES: LUME-Lung 2 investigated the efficacy/safety of nintedanib plus
pemetrexed in patients with pretreated non-squamous non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Patients with stage IIIB/IV or recurrent non-squamous
NSCLC who had received one prior chemotherapy regimen were randomized (1:1
stratified by histology [adenocarcinoma/non-adenocarcinoma], prior bevacizumab,
Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group performance status and presence of brain
metastases) to receive intravenous pemetrexed 500mg/m(2) on Day 1 plus nintedanib
200mg orally twice daily or matching placebo on Days 2-21, every 3 weeks until
progression/unacceptable toxicity. Progression-free survival (PFS) by independent
central review was the primary endpoint. Overall survival (OS) was the key
secondary endpoint.
RESULTS: Based on the pre-planned futility analysis of investigator-assessed PFS,
conducted by an independent data monitoring committee, recruitment was halted on 
18 June 2011 after 713 (n=353 nintedanib/pemetrexed; n=360
placebo/pemetrexed)/1300 planned patients had enrolled. There were no safety
concerns. Subsequent analysis demonstrated a significant improvement in PFS
favoring nintedanib/pemetrexed over placebo/pemetrexed (median 4.4 months vs 3.6 
months; hazard ratio [HR]=0.83, 95% confidence interval [CI] 0.70-0.99,
p=0.0435). There was no significant difference in OS (median 12.0 months vs 12.7 
months; HR=1.01, 95% CI 0.85-1.21, p=0.8940) after 514 deaths.
Nintedanib/pemetrexed resulted in a higher incidence of grade ≥3 elevated alanine
aminotransferase (23.3% vs 7.3%), elevated aspartate aminotransferase (12.1% vs
1.7%) and diarrhea (3.5% vs 1.1%) compared with placebo/pemetrexed, but no
difference in hypertension, bleeding or thrombosis.
CONCLUSION: Although recruitment stopped prematurely, combining nintedanib with
pemetrexed significantly prolonged PFS in patients with advanced non-squamous
NSCLC after first-line chemotherapy, with a manageable safety profile.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2016.10.011 
PMID: 27987591  [PubMed - in process]


7. Medicine (Baltimore). 2016 Dec;95(50):e5599.

The efficacy and safety of platinum plus gemcitabine (PG) chemotherapy with or
without molecular targeted agent (MTA) in first-line treatment of non-small cell 
lung cancer (NSCLC).

Yang J(1), He J, Yu M, Li T, Luo L, Liu P.

Author information: 
(1)aDepartment of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, School of Public Health,
Southeast University, Nanjing, Jiangsu bDepartment of Neurology, Shanghai General
Hospital, Shanghai JiaoTong University, Shanghai cDepartment of Neuropsychiatry, 
Affiliated ZhongDa Hospital, School of Medicine, Southeast University, Nanjing,
Jiangsu, China.

BACKGROUND: Trials investigating the efficacy and safety of combining molecular
targeted agent (MTA) with platinum-gemcitabine (PG) in first-line treatment of
advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) have shown inconsistent findings.
This meta-analysis aimed to explore whether the addition of MTAs to PG in NSCLC
could provide a survival benefit with a tolerable toxicity.
METHODS: Web of knowledge, PubMed, Ovid, Embase, and Cochrane Library were
searched to identify relevant studies and extract data on overall survival (OS), 
progression-free survival (PFS), objective response rate (ORR), and common grade 
3 or 4 adverse events. Subgroup analyses were conducted on the basis of race and 
the type of MTA.
RESULTS: Twelve trials with a total of 6143 patients were included in this
meta-analysis. Compared with PG chemotherapy, combination therapy of MTA with PG 
did not improve OS (hazard ratio [HR] = 0.96, 95% confidence interval
[CI] = 0.90-1.01) but improved PFS (HR = 0.77, 95% CI = 0.66-0.89) and ORR (risk 
ratio [RR] = 1.33, 95% CI = 1.11-1.60). Subanalysis indicated that there was more
incidence of grade 3 or 4 rash (RR = 11.20, 95% CI = 6.07-20.68), anemia
(RR = 1.21, 95% CI = 1.01-1.46), diarrhea (RR = 2.62, 95% CI = 1.21-5.65), and
anorexia (RR = 2.08, 95% CI = 1.12-3.88) in combining epidermal growth factor
receptor targeted therapy group compared to PG group. An increased risk of grade 
3 or 4 rash (RR = 5.08, 95% CI = 1.53-16.79), thrombocytopenia (RR = 1.50, 95%
CI = 1.03-2.18), and hypertension (RR = 2.36, 95% CI = 1.05-5.32) was observed in
sorafenib combination group.
CONCLUSION: The combination of PG plus MTA was superior to PG alone in terms of
PFS and ORR but not in OS. The combination chemotherapy also showed a higher
frequency of grade 3 or higher toxic effects in patients with advanced NSCLC than
PG chemotherapy.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000005599 
PMCID: PMC5268042
PMID: 27977596  [PubMed - in process]


8. Onco Targets Ther. 2016 Nov 30;9:7275-7283. eCollection 2016.

A randomized Phase II trial of the tumor vascular disrupting agent CA4P
(fosbretabulin tromethamine) with carboplatin, paclitaxel, and bevacizumab in
advanced nonsquamous non-small-cell lung cancer.

Garon EB(1), Neidhart JD(2), Gabrail NY(3), de Oliveira MR(4), Balkissoon J(5),
Kabbinavar F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine; Department of Hematology and Oncology, David Geffen
School of Medicine at University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA.
(2)San Juan Oncology Associates, Farmington, NM. (3)Gabrail Cancer Center,
Canton, OH. (4)Northwest Medical Specialties, Tacoma, WA. (5)Global Product
Development and Immuno-Oncology, PPD, Wilmington, NC, USA.

INTRODUCTION: Combretastatin A4-phosphate, fosbretabulin tromethamine (CA4P) is a
vascular disrupting agent that targets tumor vasculature. This study evaluated
the safety of CA4P when combined with carboplatin, paclitaxel, and bevacizumab in
chemotherapy-naïve subjects with advanced nonsquamous, non-small-cell lung
cancer.
METHODS: Adult subjects with confirmed American Joint Committee on Cancer six
stage IIIB/IV non-small-cell lung cancer and an Eastern Cooperative Oncology
Group performance score of 0 or 1 were randomized to receive six cycles
(treatment phase) of paclitaxel (200 mg/m(2)), carboplatin (area under the
concentration versus time curve 6), and bevacizumab (15 mg/kg) on day 1 and
repeated every 21 days, or this regimen plus CA4P (60 mg/m(2)) on days 7, 14, and
21 of each cycle. Subjects could then receive additional maintenance treatment
(excluding carboplatin and paclitaxel) for up to 1 year.
RESULTS: Sixty-three subjects were randomized, 31 to control and 32 to CA4P, and 
19 (61.3%) and 17 (53.1%), respectively, completed the treatment phase. Exposure 
to study treatment and dose modifications were comparable between the randomized 
groups. The overall incidence of treatment-emergent adverse events was similar
between groups, with increased neutropenia, leukopenia, and hypertension in the
CA4P group. Deaths, serious adverse events, and early discontinuations from
treatment were comparable between the randomized treatment groups. The overall
tumor response rate with CA4P was 50% versus 32% in controls. Overall and
progression-free survival rates were comparable between the groups.
CONCLUSION: CA4P plus carboplatin, paclitaxel, and bevacizumab appears to be a
tolerable regimen with an acceptable toxicity profile in subjects with advanced
non-small-cell lung cancer.

DOI: 10.2147/OTT.S109186 
PMCID: PMC5138047
PMID: 27942221  [PubMed - in process]


9. Lancet Oncol. 2016 Dec;17(12):1683-1696. doi: 10.1016/S1470-2045(16)30392-8. Epub
2016 Nov 8.

Activity and safety of brigatinib in ALK-rearranged non-small-cell lung cancer
and other malignancies: a single-arm, open-label, phase 1/2 trial.

Gettinger SN(1), Bazhenova LA(2), Langer CJ(3), Salgia R(4), Gold KA(2), Rosell
R(5), Shaw AT(6), Weiss GJ(7), Tugnait M(8), Narasimhan NI(8), Dorer DJ(8),
Kerstein D(8), Rivera VM(8), Clackson T(8), Haluska FG(8), Camidge DR(9).

Author information: 
(1)Yale School of Medicine, Yale Cancer Center, New Haven, CT, USA. Electronic
address: scott.gettinger@yale.edu. (2)Moores Cancer Center, University of
California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA. (3)Abramson Cancer Center, University
of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA. (4)Department of Medical Oncology and
Therapeutics Research, City of Hope, Duarte, CA, USA. (5)Catalan Institute of
Oncology, Germans Trias i Pujol Health Sciences Institute and Hospital, Badalona,
Spain. (6)Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center, Boston, MA, USA.
(7)Western Regional Medical Center, Cancer Treatment Centers of America,
Goodyear, AZ, USA. (8)ARIAD Pharmaceuticals, Cambridge, MA, USA. (9)University of
Colorado Cancer Center, Aurora, CO, USA.

BACKGROUND: Anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) gene rearrangements are oncogenic
drivers of non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Brigatinib (AP26113) is an
investigational ALK inhibitor with potent preclinical activity against ALK
mutants resistant to crizotinib and other ALK inhibitors. We aimed to assess
brigatinib in patients with advanced malignancies, particularly ALK-rearranged
NSCLC.
METHODS: In this ongoing, single-arm, open-label, phase 1/2 trial, we recruited
patients from nine academic hospitals or cancer centres in the USA and Spain.
Eligible patients were at least 18 years of age and had advanced malignancies,
including ALK-rearranged NSCLC, and disease that was refractory to available
therapies or for which no curative treatments existed. In the initial
dose-escalation phase 1 stage of the trial, patients received oral brigatinib at 
total daily doses of 30-300 mg (according to a standard 3 + 3 design). The phase 
1 primary endpoint was establishment of the recommended phase 2 dose. In the
phase 2 expansion stage, we assessed three oral once-daily regimens: 90 mg, 180
mg, and 180 mg with a 7 day lead-in at 90 mg; one patient received 90 mg twice
daily. We enrolled patients in phase 2 into five cohorts: ALK inhibitor-naive
ALK-rearranged NSCLC (cohort 1), crizotinib-treated ALK-rearranged NSCLC (cohort 
2), EGFR(T790M)-positive NSCLC and resistance to one previous EGFR tyrosine
kinase inhibitor (cohort 3), other cancers with abnormalities in brigatinib
targets (cohort 4), and crizotinib-naive or crizotinib-treated ALK-rearranged
NSCLC with active, measurable, intracranial CNS metastases (cohort 5). The phase 
2 primary endpoint was the proportion of patients with an objective response.
Safety and activity of brigatinib were analysed in all patients in both phases of
the trial who had received at least one dose of treatment. This trial is
registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, number NCT01449461.
FINDINGS: Between Sept 20, 2011, and July 8, 2014, we enrolled 137 patients (79
[58%] with ALK-rearranged NSCLC), all of whom were treated. Dose-limiting
toxicities observed during dose escalation included grade 3 increased alanine
aminotransferase (240 mg daily) and grade 4 dyspnoea (300 mg daily). We initially
chose a dose of 180 mg once daily as the recommended phase 2 dose; however, we
also assessed two additional regimens (90 mg once daily and 180 mg once daily
with a 7 day lead-in at 90 mg) in the phase 2 stage. four (100% [95% CI 40-100]) 
of four patients in cohort 1 had an objective response, 31 (74% [58-86]) of 42
did in cohort 2, none (of one) did in cohort 3, three (17% [4-41]) of 18 did in
cohort 4, and five (83% [36-100]) of six did in cohort 5. 51 (72% [60-82]) of 71 
patients with ALK-rearranged NSCLC with previous crizotinib treatment had an
objective response (44 [62% (50-73)] had a confirmed objective response). All
eight crizotinib-naive patients with ALK-rearranged NSCLC had a confirmed
objective response (100% [63-100]). Three (50% [95% CI 12-88]) of six patients in
cohort 5 had an intracranial response. The most common grade 3-4
treatment-emergent adverse events across all doses were increased lipase
concentration (12 [9%] of 137), dyspnoea (eight [6%]), and hypertension (seven
[5%]). Serious treatment-emergent adverse events (excluding neoplasm progression)
reported in at least 5% of all patients were dyspnoea (ten [7%]), pneumonia (nine
[7%]), and hypoxia (seven [5%]). 16 (12%) patients died during treatment or
within 31 days of the last dose of brigatinib, including eight patients who died 
from neoplasm progression.
INTERPRETATION: Brigatinib shows promising clinical activity and has an
acceptable safety profile in patients with crizotinib-treated and
crizotinib-naive ALK-rearranged NSCLC. These results support its further
development as a potential new treatment option for patients with advanced
ALK-rearranged NSCLC. A randomised phase 2 trial in patients with
crizotinib-resistant ALK-rearranged NSCLC is prospectively assessing the safety
and efficacy of two regimens assessed in the phase 2 portion of this trial (90 mg
once daily and 180 mg once daily with a 7 day lead-in at 90 mg).
FUNDING: ARIAD Pharmaceuticals.

Copyright Â© 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S1470-2045(16)30392-8 
PMID: 27836716  [PubMed - in process]


10. Lancet Oncol. 2016 Dec;17(12):1661-1671. doi: 10.1016/S1470-2045(16)30561-7. Epub
2016 Nov 4.

Erlotinib, cabozantinib, or erlotinib plus cabozantinib as second-line or
third-line treatment of patients with EGFR wild-type advanced non-small-cell lung
cancer (ECOG-ACRIN 1512): a randomised, controlled, open-label, multicentre,
phase 2 trial.

Neal JW(1), Dahlberg SE(2), Wakelee HA(3), Aisner SC(4), Bowden M(2), Huang Y(2),
Carbone DP(5), Gerstner GJ(6), Lerner RE(7), Rubin JL(8), Owonikoko TK(9), Stella
PJ(10), Steen PD(11), Khalid AA(12), Ramalingam SS(9); ECOG-ACRIN 1512
Investigators.

Author information: 
(1)Stanford Cancer Institute, Stanford, CA, USA. Electronic address:
jwneal@stanford.edu. (2)Dana Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA, USA.
(3)Stanford Cancer Institute, Stanford, CA, USA. (4)Rutgers Cancer Institute of
New Jersey, Newark, NJ, USA. (5)The Ohio State University Comprehensive Cancer
Center, Columbus, OH, USA. (6)Illinois CancerCare-Peoria, Peoria, IL, USA.
(7)Park Nicollet Clinic, Saint Louis Park, MN, USA. (8)Community Hospital of the 
Monterey Peninsula, Monterey, CA, USA. (9)The Winship Cancer Institute of Emory
University, Atlanta, GA, USA. (10)Saint Joseph Mercy Hospital, Ann Arbor, MI,
USA. (11)Roger Maris Cancer Center, Fargo, ND, USA. (12)Charleston Area Medical
Center, Charleston, WV, USA.

BACKGROUND: Erlotinib is approved for the treatment of all patients with advanced
non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC), but is most active in the treatment of EGFR
mutant NSCLC. Cabozantinib, a small molecule tyrosine kinase inhibitor, targets
MET, VEGFR, RET, ROS1, and AXL, which are implicated in lung cancer
tumorigenesis. We compared the efficacy of cabozantinib alone or in combination
with erlotinib versus erlotinib alone in patients with EGFR wild-type NSCLC.
METHODS: This three group, randomised, controlled, open-label, multicentre, phase
2 trial was done in 37 academic and community oncology practices in the USA.
Patients were eligible if they had received one or two previous treatments for
advanced non-squamous, EGFR wild-type, NSCLC. Patients were stratified by
performance status and line of therapy, and randomly assigned using permuted
blocks within strata to receive open-label oral daily dosing of erlotinib (150
mg), cabozantinib (60 mg), or erlotinib (150 mg) and cabozantinib (40 mg).
Imaging was done every 8 weeks. At the time of radiographic progression, there
was optional crossover for patients in either single-drug group to receive
combination treatment. The primary endpoint was to compare progression-free
survival in patients given erlotinib alone versus cabozantinib alone, and in
patients given erlotinib alone versus the combination of erlotinib plus
cabozantinib. We assessed the primary endpoint in the per-protocol population,
which was defined as all patients who were eligible, randomly assigned, and
received at least one dose of treatment. The safety analysis population included 
all patients who received study treatment irrespective of eligibility. This trial
is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, number NCT01708954.
FINDINGS: Between Feb 7, 2013, and July 1, 2014, we enrolled and randomly
assigned 42 patients to erlotinib treatment, 40 patients to cabozantinib
treatment, and 43 patients to erlotinib plus cabozantinib treatment, of whom 111 
(89%) in total were included in the primary analysis (erlotinib [n=38],
cabozantinib [n=38], erlotinib plus cabozantinib [n=35]). Compared with erlotinib
alone (median 1·8 months [95% CI 1·7-2·2]), progression-free survival was
significantly improved in the cabozantinib group (4·3 months [3·6-7·4]; hazard
ratio [HR] 0·39, 80% CI 0·27-0·55; one-sided p=0·0003) and in the erlotinib plus 
cabozantinib group (4·7 months [2·4-7·4]; HR 0·37, 0·25-0·53; one-sided
p=0·0003). Among participants included in the safety analysis of the erlotinib
(n=40), cabozantinib (n=40), and erlotinib plus cabozantinib (n=39) groups, the
most common grade 3 or 4 adverse events were diarrhoea (three [8%] cases in the
erlotinib group vs three [8%] in the cabozantinib group vs 11 [28%] in the
erlotinib plus cabozantinib group), hypertension (none vs ten [25%] vs one [3%]),
fatigue (five [13%] vs six [15%] vs six [15%]), oral mucositis (none vs four
[10%] vs one [3%]), and thromboembolic event (none vs three [8%] vs two [5%]).
One death due to respiratory failure occurred in the cabozantinib group, deemed
possibly related to either drug, and one death due to pneumonitis occurred in the
erlotinib plus cabozantinib group, deemed related to either drug or the
combination.
INTERPRETATION: Despite its small sample size, this trial showed that, in
patients with EGFR wild-type NSCLC, cabozantinib alone or combined with erlotinib
has clinically meaningful, superior efficacy to that of erlotinib alone, with
additional toxicity that was generally manageable. Cabozantinib-based regimens
are promising for further investigation in this patient population.
FUNDING: ECOG-ACRIN Cancer Research Group, National Cancer Institute of the
National Institutes of Health.

Copyright Â© 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S1470-2045(16)30561-7 
PMCID: PMC5154681 [Available on 2017-12-01]
PMID: 27825638  [PubMed - in process]


11. Lancet Respir Med. 2017 Jan;5(1):42-50. doi: 10.1016/S2213-2600(16)30322-8. Epub 
2016 Nov 4.

Vandetanib in patients with previously treated RET-rearranged advanced
non-small-cell lung cancer (LURET): an open-label, multicentre phase 2 trial.

Yoh K(1), Seto T(2), Satouchi M(3), Nishio M(4), Yamamoto N(5), Murakami H(6),
Nogami N(7), Matsumoto S(8), Kohno T(9), Tsuta K(10), Tsuchihara K(8), Ishii
G(11), Nomura S(12), Sato A(13), Ohtsu A(14), Ohe Y(5), Goto K(15).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Oncology, National Cancer Center Hospital East,
Kashiwa, Japan. Electronic address: kyoh@east.ncc.go.jp. (2)Department of
Thoracic Oncology, National Kyushu Cancer Center, Fukuoka, Japan. (3)Department
of Thoracic Oncology, Hyogo Cancer Center, Akashi, Japan. (4)Thoracic Oncology
Center, The Cancer Institute Hospital of Japanese Foundation for Cancer Research,
Tokyo, Japan. (5)Department of Thoracic Oncology, National Cancer Center
Hospital, Tokyo, Japan. (6)Division of Thoracic Oncology, Shizuoka Cancer Center,
Shizuoka, Japan. (7)Department of Thoracic oncology, Shikoku Cancer Center,
Matsuyama, Japan. (8)Division of Translational Research, Center for Research and 
Administration and Support, National Cancer Center, Kashiwa, Japan. (9)Division
of Genome Biology, National Cancer Center Research Institute, Tokyo, Japan.
(10)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Kansai Medical University,
Osaka, Japan. (11)Division of Pathology, Center for Research and Administration
and Support, National Cancer Center, Kashiwa, Japan. (12)Biostatistics Division, 
Center for Research and Administration and Support, National Cancer Center,
Kashiwa, Japan. (13)Office of Clinical Trial Support, National Cancer Center
Hospital East, Kashiwa, Japan. (14)Director, Exploratory Oncology Research and
Clinical Trial Center, Center for Research and Administration and Support,
National Cancer Center, Kashiwa, Japan. (15)Department of Thoracic Oncology,
National Cancer Center Hospital East, Kashiwa, Japan.

BACKGROUND: RET rearrangements are rare oncogenic alterations in non-small-cell
lung cancer (NSCLC). Vandetanib is a multitargeted tyrosine kinase inhibitor
exhibiting RET kinase activity. We aimed to assess the efficacy and safety of
vandetanib in patients with advanced RET-rearranged NSCLC.
METHODS: In this open-label, multicentre, phase 2 trial (LURET), patients with
advanced RET-rearranged NSCLC continuously received 300 mg of oral vandetanib
daily. RET-positive patients were screened using a nationwide genomic screening
network of about 200 participating institutions. Primary endpoint was the
independently assessed objective response in eligible patients. This study is
registered with UMIN-CTR, number UMIN000010095.
FINDINGS: Between Feb 7, 2013, and March 19, 2015, 1536 patients with EGFR
mutation-negative NSCLC were screened, of whom 34 were RET-positive (2%) and 19
were enrolled. Among 17 eligible patients included in primary analysis, nine (53%
[95% CI 28-77]) achieved an objective response, which met the primary endpoint.
In the intention-to-treat population of all 19 patients treated with vandetanib, 
nine (47% [95% CI 24-71]) achieved an objective response. At the data cutoff,
median progression-free survival was 4·7 months (95% CI 2·8-8·5). The most common
grade 3 or 4 adverse events were hypertension (11 [58%]), diarrhoea (two [11%]), 
rash (three [16%]), dry skin (one [5%]), and QT prolongation (two [11%]).
INTERPRETATION: Vandetanib showed clinical antitumour activity and a manageable
safety profile in patients with advanced RET-rearranged NSCLC. Our results define
RET rearrangement as a new molecular subgroup of NSCLC suitable for targeted
therapy.
FUNDING: The Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare of Japan and the Practical
Research for Innovation Cancer Control from the Japan Agency for Medical Research
and Development, AMED.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S2213-2600(16)30322-8 
PMID: 27825616  [PubMed - in process]


12. Ann Oncol. 2016 Nov 1. pii: mdw559. doi: 10.1093/annonc/mdw559. [Epub ahead of
print]

Vandetanib in pretreated patients with advanced non-small cell lung
cancer-harboring RET rearrangement: a phase II clinical trial.

Lee SH(1), Lee JK(2), Ahn MJ(2), Kim DW(3), Sun JM(2), Keam B(3), Kim TM(3), Heo 
DS(3), Ahn JS(2), Choi YL(4), Min HS(5), Jeon YK(5), Park K(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University School
of Medicine, Seoul; shlee119@skku.edu. (2)Department of Medicine, Samsung Medical
Center, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Seoul. (3)Department of
Internal Medicine, Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul. (4)Department of
Pathology, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine,
Seoul. (5)Department of Pathology, Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul,
Korea.

BACKGROUND: Chromosomal rearrangements involving RET, which are found in about 1%
of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), define a unique molecular subset. We
performed this study to examine the efficacy and safety of vandetanib 300 mg
daily in this patient population.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: This study was a multi-center, open-label, phase II
clinical trial. Patients were enrolled if they had metastatic or recurrent NSCLC 
with a RET rearrangement, which was confirmed by fluorescence in situ
hybridization, had progressive disease against platinum-based doublet
chemotherapy, and had a performance status of 0-2. The primary endpoint was the
objective response rate.
RESULTS: A total of 18 patients were enrolled in this study between July 2013 and
October 2015. Patients were aged 35-71 years; three had a performance status of
2, and the majority were a heavily pretreated population (≥ two different
previous chemotherapy regimens in 72% of the patients). Among the 17 evaluable
patients, three had a partial response (objective response rate = 18%) and eight 
had a stable disease (disease control rate = 65%). Among these patients, the
partial response or disease stabilization was durable for more than 6 months in
eight patients. Vandetanib also showed a progression-free survival of 4.5 months,
and an overall survival of 11.6 months during a median follow-up duration of 14
months. The safety profile was comparable with previous studies of vandetanib.
Most vandetanib-related adverse events were mild with prevalent hypertension and 
rash (in >70% of patients). Grade 3 toxicity included hypertension (n = 3), QT
prolongation (2), and elevation of aminotransferases (1), and as a consequence
the dose was reduced in four patients. There were no adverse events associated
with grade 4 or 5 toxicity.
CONCLUSION: Vandetanib is moderately active in pretreated patients with advanced 
NSCLC-harboring RET rearrangements.

© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the European
Society for Medical Oncology. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email:
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/annonc/mdw559 
PMID: 27803005  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


13. Clin Respir J. 2016 Sep 8. doi: 10.1111/crj.12550. [Epub ahead of print]

Central retinal artery occlusion, an early sign of crizotinib resistance in an
alk positive adenocarcinoma of lung: A rare case report.

Madabhavi I(1), Patel A(2), Anand A(2), Panchal H(2), Parikh S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical and Pediatric Oncology, GCRI, Ahmedabad, Gujarat, India.
irappamadabhavi@gmail.com. (2)Department of Medical and Pediatric Oncology, GCRI,
Ahmedabad, Gujarat, India.

About 4% of non-small-cell lung carcinomas involve an EML4-ALK tyrosine kinase
fusion gene and occur almost absolutely in carcinomas arising in non-smokers.
Crizotinib, the first inhibitor of anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK), ROS1 and
c-Met receptor kinase, has been used in the treatment of ALK-positive non-small
cell lung cancer. Side effects of crizotinib mostly consist of grade 1-2
gastrointestinal events (nausea, vomiting, diarrhea and constipation), grade 1-2 
edema and fatigue; grade 1 visual disorders, rare cases of elevated liver enzymes
and pneumonitis. We are presenting a case of adenocarcinoma of lung, who
progressed on first-line chemotherapy and received crizotinib as second line
therapy for 9 months. Patient has very good partial response to crizotinib and
had some side effects of crizotinib like nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, fatigue,
asthenia and anorexia, asymptomatic transaminitis in the first 2 to 3 weeks of
therapy and managed symptomatically. But after 9 months, he developed sudden
onset left sided vision loss. On fundoscopic examination he was found to have
"cherry red spot" and fundus flourescein angiography revealed central retinal
artery occlusion (CRAO). After 15 days of vision loss patient developed pleural
effusion, and pleural fluid cytology was positive for malignant cells. Visual
symptoms are very well known in the literature as side effects of crizotinib, but
CRAO is not yet been documented. As this patient is not having any prothrombotic 
state like diabetes, hypertension, atherosclerosis, hyperhomocysteinemia or any
genetic disorders except malignancy. Hypercoagulability disorders are known to be
commonly associated with a variety of cancer types including lung cancer. This
appears to be a sign of early crizotinib resistance in this patient because there
was no history of prior hypercoagulable state. To the best of our knowledge this 
is the first case report in the world literature, as CRAO presenting as a sign of
crizotinib resistance in an adenocarcinoma of lung patient who was on crizotinib.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/crj.12550 
PMID: 27606884  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


14. J Hematol Oncol. 2016 Oct 4;9(1):105.

Safety, pharmacokinetics, and antitumor properties of anlotinib, an oral
multi-target tyrosine kinase inhibitor, in patients with advanced refractory
solid tumors.

Sun Y(1), Niu W(2), Du F(3), Du C(1), Li S(1), Wang J(1), Li L(2), Wang F(2), Hao
Y(4), Li C(5), Chi Y(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Cancer Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical
Sciences and PUMC, Beijing, 100021, China. (2)The State Key Laboratory of Drug
Research, Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Shanghai, 201203, China. (3)The VIPII Gastrointestinal Cancer Division of Medical
Department, Peking University Cancer Hospital and Institute, Beijing, 100142,
China. (4)School of Public Health, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, China.
(5)The State Key Laboratory of Drug Research, Shanghai Institute of Materia
Medica, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, 201203, China. chli@simm.ac.cn.
(6)Department of Medical Oncology, Cancer Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical
Sciences and PUMC, Beijing, 100021, China. dryihebalichi@126.com.

BACKGROUND: Anlotinib is a novel multi-target tyrosine kinase inhibitor that is
designed to primarily inhibit VEGFR2/3, FGFR1-4, PDGFR α/β, c-Kit, and Ret. We
aimed to evaluate the safety, pharmacokinetics, and antitumor activity of
anlotinib in patients with advanced refractory solid tumors.
METHODS: Anlotinib (5-16 mg) was orally administered in patients with solid tumor
once a day on two schedules: (1) four consecutive weeks (4/0) or (2) 2-week
on/1-week off (2/1). Pharmacokinetic sampling was performed in all patients.
Twenty-one patients were further enrolled in an expanded cohort study on the
recommended dose and schedule. Preliminary tumor response was also assessed.
RESULTS: On the 4/0 schedule, dose-limiting toxicity (DLT) was grade 3
hypertension at 10 mg. On the 2/1 schedule, DLT was grade 3 hypertension and
grade 3 fatigue at 16 mg. Pharmacokinetic assessment indicated that anlotinib had
long elimination half-lives and significant accumulation during multiple oral
doses. The 2/1 schedule was selected, with 12 mg once daily as the maximum
tolerated dose for the expanding study. Twenty of the 21 patients (with colon
adenocarcinoma, non-small cell lung cancer, renal clear cell cancer, medullary
thyroid carcinoma, and soft tissue sarcoma) were assessable for antitumor
activity of anlotinib: 3 patients had partial response, 14 patients had stable
disease including 12 tumor burden shrinkage, and 3 had disease progression. The
main serious adverse effects were hypertension, triglyceride elevation, hand-foot
skin reaction, and lipase elevation.
CONCLUSIONS: At the dose of 12 mg once daily at the 2/1 schedule, anlotinib
displayed manageable toxicity, long circulation, and broad-spectrum antitumor
potential, justifying the conduct of further studies.

DOI: 10.1186/s13045-016-0332-8 
PMCID: PMC5051080
PMID: 27716285  [PubMed - in process]


15. J Chemother. 2017 Feb;29(1):38-41. doi: 10.1080/1120009X.2016.1219498. Epub 2016 
Aug 16.

First-line treatment of NSCLC with bevacizumab: real world data from an Italian
regional based survey.

Camerini A(1), Chella A(2), Mazzoni F(3), Puccetti C(1), Donati S(1), Lunghi
A(3), Petreni P(3), Tartarelli G(1), Serradori M(2), Di Costanzo F(3), Amoroso
D(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Medical Oncology , Versilia Hospital and Istituto Toscano Tumori , Lido di
Camaiore (LU) , Italy. (2)b Cardiac and Thoracic Department , Pneumo-Oncology Day
Hospital , Pisa , Italy. (3)c SC Medical Oncology , AOU Careggi , Firenze ,
Italy.

BACKGROUND: We aimed to explore the use of platinum plus bevacizumab in a real
world NSCLC population.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We retrospectively collected data from patients affected by
NS-NSCLC treated with platinum plus bevacizumab across Tuscany.
RESULTS: We evaluated 62 (median age: 63.5 [30-77] years) pts. All but one
presented with adenocarcinoma and the majority had ECOG PS of 0/1. 17.7%
presented with central lesion, 11.3% with brain metastasis, 38.7% with
hypertension and 4.8% with mild haemoptysis. We observed a median time to
progression (TTP) of 6.5 [2-37] and a median overall survival (OS) of 10.5 [2-39]
months. Overall response rate (ORR) was 59.6% with a disease control rate (DCR)
of 80.6%. Safety profile was acceptable. We observed five cardiovascular events
and two major bleedings with no toxic deaths.
CONCLUSION: Safety and efficacy real world data are consistent with those from
clinical trials even in a less selected population.

DOI: 10.1080/1120009X.2016.1219498 
PMID: 27687319  [PubMed - in process]


16. Contemp Oncol (Pozn). 2016;20(3):215-9. doi: 10.5114/wo.2016.61562. Epub 2016 Aug
4.

The inflammatory cytokine interleukin-23 is elevated in lung cancer, particularly
small cell type.

Cam C(1), Karagoz B(2), Muftuoglu T(3), Bigi O(2), Emirzeoglu L(2), Celik S(2),
Ozgun A(2), Tuncel T(2), Top C(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Kayseri Military Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey. 
(2)Department of Medical Oncology, GATA Haydarpasa Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, GATA Haydarpasa Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine, GATA Haydarpasa Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey.

AIM OF THE STUDY: Interleukin (IL)-17 and IL-23 play roles in inflammation and
autoimmunity. The function of the IL-17/IL-23 pathway has not been completely
evaluated in cancer patients. We aimed to investigate serum IL-17 and IL-23
levels and their relationship with clinicopathological and biochemical parameters
in lung cancer patients.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Forty-five lung cancer patients and 46 healthy volunteers
were included in the study. IL-17 and IL-23 measurements were made with the ELISA
method. The ages of patients (53-84 years) and healthy subjects (42-82 years)
were similar.
RESULTS: Serum IL-23 levels were higher in lung cancer patients than in healthy
subjects (491.27 ±1263.38 pg/ml vs. 240.51 ±233.18 pg/ml; p = 0.032). IL-23
values were higher in small cell lung cancer (SCLC) patients than in non-small
cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients (1325.30 ±2478.06 pg/ml vs. 229.15 ±103.22
pg/ml; p = 0.043). Serum IL-17 levels were lower in the patients, but the
difference was not statistically significant (135.94 ±52.36 pg/ml vs. 171.33
±133.51 pg/ml; p = 0.124). Presence of comorbid disease (diabetes mellitus,
hypertension or chronic obstructive lung disease) did not have any effect on the 
levels of IL-17 or IL-23. Erythrocyte sedimentation rate values were positively
correlated with cytokine levels, but serum albumin levels were negatively
correlated.
CONCLUSIONS: Serum IL-23 levels are elevated in lung cancer patients,
particularly those with SCLC. IL-17 and IL-23 values are correlated with
inflammatory markers in the patients.

DOI: 10.5114/wo.2016.61562 
PMCID: PMC5013683
PMID: 27647985  [PubMed]


17. Lung Cancer. 2016 Sep;99:131-6. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2016.07.003. Epub 2016 Jul
5.

A phase II study of bevacizumab with carboplatin-pemetrexed in non-squamous
non-small cell lung carcinoma patients with malignant pleural effusions: North
East Japan Study Group Trial NEJ013A.

Usui K(1), Sugawara S(2), Nishitsuji M(3), Fujita Y(4), Inoue A(5), Mouri A(6),
Watanabe H(7), Sakai H(8), Kinoshita I(9), Ohhara Y(10), Maemondo M(11), Kagamu
H(12), Hagiwara K(13), Kobayashi K(14); North East Japan Study Group.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Respirology, NTT Medical Center Tokyo, 5-9-22 Higashigotanda,
Shinagawa, Tokyo, Japan. Electronic address: usui@east.ntt.co.jp. (2)Department
of Pulmonary Medicine, Sendai Kousei Hospital, Japan. (3)Department of
Respiratory Medicine, Ishikawa Prefectural Central Hospital, Japan. (4)Department
of Respiratory Medicine, National Hospital Organization Asahikawa Medical Center,
Japan. (5)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Tohoku University Hospital, Japan. 
(6)Department of Pulmonology, National Hospital Organization Disaster Medical
Center, Japan. (7)Department of Respiratory medicine, Saka General Hospital,
Japan. (8)Department of Thoracic Oncology, Saitama Cancer Center, Japan.
(9)Department of Medical Oncology, Hokkaido University Graduate School of
Medicine, Japan. (10)Department of Medical Oncology, KKR Sapporo Medical Center, 
Japan. (11)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Miyagi Cancer Center, Japan.
(12)Department of Respiratory Medicine and Infectious Disease, Niigata University
Medical and Dental Hospital, Japan. (13)Department of Comprehensive Medicine 1,
Saitama Medical Center Jichi University, Japan. (14)Department of Respiratory
medicine, Saitama International Medical Center, Saitama Medical University,
Japan.

BACKGROUND: Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) plays a pivotal role in the
pathogenesis of malignant pleural effusion (MPE). Here, a multicenter phase II
trial to evaluate bevacizumab in non-squamous non-small cell lung carcinoma
patients with MPE was conducted.
METHODS: Patients having MPE with no prior treatment and performance status of
0-2 received carboplatin (area under the curve: AUC 6; up to 6 cycles) and
pemetrexed (500mg/m(2)) with bevacizumab (15mg/kg) every 3 weeks. The primary
endpoint was the control rate of MPE without pleurodesis at 8 weeks after
treatment. VEGF levels in plasma and MPE were measured by enzyme immunoassay.
RESULTS: Of 30 patients entered (median 66 years; 24 males; adenocarcinoma; 4
epidermal growth factor receptor: EGFR mutations), 28 patients (2 withdrawn
patients) were given a median of 4 cycles of carboplatin, and 68% of the patients
received maintenance pemetrexed with bevacizumab (median 8 cycles). At eight
weeks, MPE was controlled without pleurodesis in 93% of treated patients (95%
confidence interval: 77-99%). At the median follow-up time of 12.8 months, 78.6% 
of the cases required no pleurodesis. Response rate was 46%, and median
progression-free survival (PFS) and overall survival (OS) were 8.2 months and
18.6 months, respectively. Toxicities of grade ≥3 included neutropenia (28.6%),
thrombocytopenia (28.6%), proteinuria (3.6%), and hypertension (3.6%). Assessment
of VEGF levels before treatment indicated that patients with low VEGF
(<1000pg/ml) in MPE frequently needed pleurodesis (p=0.011), and that high VEGF
(≥100pg/ml) in plasma was indicative of poor prognosis in the context of PFS
(p=0.012).
CONCLUSION: The combination of bevacizumab with carboplatin and pemetrexed
demonstrated efficacy with acceptable toxicities in patients with MPE.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2016.07.003 
PMID: 27565928  [PubMed - in process]


18. J Ethnopharmacol. 2016 Dec 24;194:269-279. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2016.07.052. Epub
2016 Jul 19.

Total flavonoid aglycones extract in Radix scutellariae inhibits lung carcinoma
and lung metastasis by affecting cell cycle and DNA synthesis.

Wang Y(1), Cao HJ(2), Sun SJ(3), Dai JY(4), Fang JW(1), Li QH(1), Yan C(5), Mao
WW(6), Zhang YY(7).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Traditional Chinese Medicine and Systems Biology, Shanghai
University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Shanghai 201203, China. (2)North
China University of Science and Technology, TangShan 063000, HeBei, China.
(3)School of Pharmacy, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China;
Unimicro (Shanghai) Technologics Co., Ltd., Shanghai 201203, China. (4)Department
of Chemical Biology, College of Chemistry and Molecular Engineering, Peking
University, Beijing 100871, China. (5)School of Pharmacy, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, Shanghai 200240, China. (6)School of Pharmacy, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, Shanghai 200240, China. Electronic address: wwmao@sjtu.edu.cn.
(7)Center for Traditional Chinese Medicine and Systems Biology, Shanghai
University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Shanghai 201203, China. Electronic
address: dryyz@sina.com.

ETHNOPHARMACOLOGICAL RELEVANCE: Radix Scutellariae (Scutellaria baicalensis
Georgi, RS), a traditional herbal medicine commonly used to treat inflammation,
hypertension, cardiovascular disease, bacterial and viral infections, is reported
to treat lung cancer by supplements of modern medicine. The total flavonoid
aglycones extract (TFAE) from RS is the most important composition for the
pharmacodynamic effects. The present study was designed to evaluate the anti-lung
tumor effect of TFAE on A549 cells and A549 cell nude mice xenografts. The aim of
the study is to investigate the effect and mechanism of TFAE treating non-small
cell lung cancer both in vitro and in vivo.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The anti-tumor activity of TFAE in vitro was investigated 
using the MTT assay. The changes of cell invasion and migration were detected by 
Transwell assay and tube formation experiments were used to detect the
anti-angiogenic effect. The anti-tumor effects of TFAE in vivo were evaluated in 
A549 cell nude mice xenografts. The mechanism of TFAE was detected by flow
cytometry technology, western blot assay and immuno-histochemistry assay.
RESULTS: In vitro, TFAE inhibited the proliferation, invasion and migration of
A549 cells in a dose- and time-dependent manner. In vivo, TFAE by oral
administration at 100mg/kg for 30 days decreased the tumor volume and tumor
weight in A549 cell xenograft by 25.5% with no statistical significance (P<0.05) 
compared to the cis-platinum positive control group (30.0%). The cell cycle and
DNA synthesis experiment illustrated that TFAE could induce A549 cell cycle to
arreste in S phase and DNA synthesis in A549 cells be inhibited, while TFAE had
no influence on apoptosis of A549 cells. Western Blot assay demonstrated that the
treatment of TFAE could make Cyclin D1 decrease and p53 increase both in vitro
and in vivo.
CONCLUSION: TFAE displayed the inhibition effects of non-small cell lung cancer
both in vitro and in vivo and the underlying mechanism might be related to the
increased p53 protein expression and decreased Cyclin D1 expression, leading to
cell cycle arrested in S phase and the decrease of DNA synthesis.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jep.2016.07.052 
PMID: 27444692  [PubMed - in process]


19. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2016;903:29-53. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4899-7678-9_3.

Acquired Mitochondrial Abnormalities, Including Epigenetic Inhibition of
Superoxide Dismutase 2, in Pulmonary Hypertension and Cancer: Therapeutic
Implications.

Archer SL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Head Department of Medicine, Queen's University Program Medical Director KGH, 
HD, SMOL Etherington Hall, Room 3041 94 Stuart St., Kingston, Ontario, Canada,
K7L 3N6. stephen.archer@queensu.ca.

There is no cure for non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) or pulmonary arterial
hypertension (PAH). Therapies lack efficacy and/or are toxic, reflecting a
failure to target disease abnormalities that are distinct from processes vital to
normal cells. NSCLC and PAH share reversible mitochondrial-metabolic
abnormalities which may offer selective therapeutic targets. The following
mutually reinforcing, mitochondrial abnormalities favor proliferation, impair
apoptosis, and are relatively restricted to PAH and cancer cells: (1) Epigenetic 
silencing of superoxide dismutase-2 (SOD2) by methylation of CpG islands creates 
a pseudohypoxic redox environment that causes normoxic activation of hypoxia
inducible factor (HIF-1α). (2) HIF-1α increases expression of pyruvate
dehydrogenase kinase (PDK), which impairs oxidative metabolism and promotes a
glycolytic metabolic state. (3) Mitochondrial fragmentation, partially due to
mitofusin-2 downregulation, promotes proliferation. This review focuses on the
recent discovery that decreased expression of SOD2, a putative tumor-suppressor
gene and the major source of H2O2, results from hypermethylation of CpG islands. 
In cancer and PAH hypermethylation of a site in the enhancer region of intron 2
inhibits SOD2 transcription. In normal PASMC, SOD2 siRNA decreases H2O2 and
activates HIF-1α. In PAH, reduced SOD2 expression decreases H2O2, reduces the
cytosol and thereby activates HIF-1α. This causes a glycolytic shift in
metabolism and increases the proliferation/apoptosis ratio by downregulating
Kv1.5 channels, increasing cytosolic calcium, and inhibiting caspases. The DNA
methyltransferase inhibitor, 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine, which restores SOD2
expression, corrects the proliferation/apoptosis imbalance in PAH and cancer
cells. The specificity of PAH for lung vessels may relate to the selective
upregulation of DNA methyltransferases that mediate CpG methylation in PASMC (DNA
MT-1A and -3B). SOD2 augmentation inactivates HIF-1α in PAH PASMC and therapy
with the SOD mimetic, MnTBAP, regresses experimental PAH. In conclusion, cancer
and PAH share acquired mitochondrial abnormalities that increase proliferation
and inhibit apoptosis, suggesting new therapeutic targets.

DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4899-7678-9_3 
PMID: 27343087  [PubMed - in process]


20. Am J Health Syst Pharm. 2016 Jul 1;73(13):957-68. doi: 10.2146/ajhp150188. Epub
2016 May 23.

Ramucirumab: A vascular endothelial growth factor receptor-2 inhibitor with
activity in several malignancies.

Grabowski J(1), Glode A(2).

Author information: 
(1)University of Colorado Skaggs School of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences, 
University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, CO. (2)University of
Colorado Skaggs School of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of
Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, CO. ashley.glode@ucdenver.edu.

PURPOSE: The pharmacology, pharmacokinetics, safety, dosage and administration,
current and potential roles in therapy, and cost considerations of ramucirumab
are reviewed.
SUMMARY: Ramucirumab is a recombinant monoclonal antibody that selectively
inhibits vascular endothelial growth factor receptor-2. Ramucirumab has been
approved for the treatment of gastric cancer, non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC),
and metastatic colorectal cancer. Ramucirumab displays similar pharmacokinetics
in patients with gastric cancer, NSCLC, and metastatic colorectal cancer. The
most common adverse effects of any grade with ramucirumab monotherapy included
fatigue, decreased appetite, abdominal pain, hypertension, anemia, hemorrhage,
and diarrhea. For ramucirumab monotherapy in patients with gastric cancer,
ramucirumab 8 mg/kg should be administered by i.v. infusion every two weeks. For 
combination therapy, ramucirumab should be administered at the same dose with
weekly paclitaxel 80 mg/m(2) i.v. on days 1, 8, and 15 every 28 days. When
treating NSCLC, the recommended ramucirumab dose is 10 mg/kg i.v. with docetaxel 
75 mg/m(2) i.v. on day 1 every 21 days. For combination therapy with FOLFIRI
(fluorouracil, leucovorin, and irinotecan) for metastatic colorectal cancer,
ramucirumab 8 mg/kg should be administered by i.v. infusion every two weeks. The 
average wholesale prices of ramucirumab are $1224 and $6120 for the 100- and
500-mg single-dose vials, respectively.
CONCLUSION: Ramucirumab has demonstrated benefit in a variety of cancers,
supporting the role of antiangiogenic agents in the management of malignancies.
However, the clinical benefit in certain malignancies may be offset by the high
cost of ramucirumab and the duration of treatment.

Copyright © 2016 by the American Society of Health-System Pharmacists, Inc. All
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.2146/ajhp150188 
PMID: 27217518  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Ann Thorac Surg. 2016 Sep;102(3):917-24. doi: 10.1016/j.athoracsur.2016.03.032.
Epub 2016 May 19.

Comparison of Video-Assisted Thoracoscopic Surgery and Robotic Approaches for
Clinical Stage I and Stage II Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer Using The Society of
Thoracic Surgeons Database.

Louie BE(1), Wilson JL(2), Kim S(3), Cerfolio RJ(4), Park BJ(5), Farivar AS(6),
Vallières E(6), Aye RW(6), Burfeind WR Jr(7), Block MI(8).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Thoracic Surgery, Swedish Cancer Institute, Seattle, Washington.
Electronic address: brian.louie@swedish.org. (2)Division of Thoracic Surgery,
Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts. (3)Duke Clinical
Research Institute, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina.
(4)Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, University of Alabama at Birmingham,
Birmingham, Alabama. (5)Division of Thoracic Surgery, Memorial Sloan-Kettering
Cancer Center, New York, New York. (6)Division of Thoracic Surgery, Swedish
Cancer Institute, Seattle, Washington. (7)Division of Thoracic Surgery, St.
Luke's University Health Network, Bethlehem, Pennsylvania. (8)Division of
Thoracic Surgery, Memorial Healthcare System, Hollywood, Florida.

BACKGROUND: Data from selected centers show that robotic lobectomy is safe and
effective and has 30-day mortality comparable to that of video-assisted
thoracoscopic surgery (VATS). However, widespread adoption of robotic lobectomy
is controversial. We used The Society of Thoracic Surgeons General Thoracic
Surgery (STS-GTS) Database to evaluate quality metrics for these 2 minimally
invasive lobectomy techniques.
METHODS: A database query for primary clinical stage I or stage II non-small cell
lung cancer (NSCLC) at high-volume centers from 2009 to 2013 identified 1,220
robotic lobectomies and 12,378 VATS procedures. Quality metrics evaluated
included operative morbidity, 30-day mortality, and nodal upstaging, defined as
cN0 to pN1. Multivariable logistic regression was used to evaluate nodal
upstaging.
RESULTS: Patients undergoing robotic lobectomy were older, less active, and less 
likely to be an ever smoker and had higher body mass index (BMI) (all p < 0.05). 
They were also more likely to have coronary heart disease or hypertension (all p 
< 0.001) and to have had preoperative mediastinal staging (p < 0.0001). Robotic
lobectomy operative times were longer (median 186 versus 173 minutes; p < 0.001);
all other operative measurements were similar. All postoperative outcomes were
similar, including complications and 30-day mortality (robotic lobectomy, 0.6%
versus VATS, 0.8%; p = 0.4). Median length of stay was 4 days for both, but a
higher proportion of patients undergoing robotic lobectomy had hospital stays
less than 4 days (48% versus 39%; p < 0.001). Nodal upstaging overall was similar
(p = 0.6) but with trends favoring VATS in the cT1b group and robotic lobectomy
in the cT2a group.
CONCLUSIONS: Patients undergoing robotic lobectomy had more comorbidities and
robotic lobectomy operative times were longer, but quality outcome measures,
including complications, hospital stay, 30-day mortality, and nodal upstaging,
suggest that robotic lobectomy and VATS are equivalent.

Copyright © 2016 The Society of Thoracic Surgeons. Published by Elsevier Inc. All
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.athoracsur.2016.03.032 
PMID: 27209613  [PubMed - in process]


22. PLoS One. 2016 May 18;11(5):e0154293. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0154293.
eCollection 2016.

Pemetrexed/Carboplatin/Bevacizumab followed by Maintenance Pemetrexed/Bevacizumab
in Hispanic Patients with Non-Squamous Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer: Outcomes
according to Thymidylate Synthase Expression.

Cardona AF(1,)(2), Rojas L(2,)(3), Wills B(1,)(2), Arrieta O(4), Carranza
H(1,)(2), Vargas C(1,)(2), Otero J(1,)(2), Cuello M(5), Corrales L(6), Martín
C(7), Ortiz C(1), Franco S(1), Rosell R(8); CLICaP.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical and Translational Oncology Group, Thoracic Oncology Unit, Institute
of Oncology, Clínica del Country, Bogotá, Colombia. (2)Foundation for Clinical
and Applied Cancer Research (FICMAC), Bogotá, Colombia. (3)Clinical Oncology
Department, Centro Javeriano de Oncología, Hospital Universitario San Ignacio,
Bogotá, Colombia. (4)Thoracic Oncology Unit, Instituto Nacional de Cancerología
(INCan), México City, México. (5)Clinical Oncology Department, Hospital de
Clínicas-UdeLAR, Montevideo, Uruguay. (6)Clinical Oncology Department, Hospital
San Juan de Dios, San José, Costa Rica. (7)Thoracic Oncology Unit, Alexander
Fleming Institute, Buenos Aires, Argentina. (8)Medical Oncology Department,
Catalan Institute of Oncology, Hospital Germans Trias i Pujol, Badalona,
Barcelona, Spain.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the efficacy and safety of pemetrexed, carboplatin and
bevacizumab (PCB) followed by maintenance therapy with pemetrexed and bevacizumab
(PB) in chemotherapy-naïve patients with stage IV non-squamous non-small cell
lung cancer (NSCLC) through the influence of thymidylate synthase (TS) protein
and mRNA expression on several outcomes. The primary endpoints were the overall
response rate (ORR), progression-free survival (PFS) and overall survival (OS).
METHODS: A cohort of 144 patients were administered pemetrexed (500 mg/m2),
carboplatin (AUC, 5.0 mg/ml/min) and bevacizumab (7.5 mg/kg) intravenously every 
three weeks for up to four cycles. Maintenance PB was administered until disease 
progression or unacceptable toxicity.
RESULTS: One hundred forty-four Colombian patients with a median follow-up of
13.8 months and a median number of 6 maintenance cycles (range, 1-32) were
assessed. The ORR among the patients was 66% (95% CI, 47% to 79%). The median PFS
and (OS) rates were 7.9 months (95% CI, 5.9-10.0 months) and 21.4 months (95% CI,
18.3 to 24.4 months), respectively. We documented grade 3/4 hematologic
toxicities, including anemia (14%), neutropenia (8%), and thrombocytopenia (16%).
The identified grade 3/4 non-hematologic toxicities were proteinuria (2%), venous
thrombosis (4%), fatigue (11%), infection (6%), nephrotoxicity (2%), and sensory 
neuropathy (4%). No grade >3 hemorrhagic events or hypertension cases were
reported. OS was significantly higher in patients with the lowest TS mRNA levels 
[median, 29.6 months (95% CI, 26.2-32.9)] compared with those in patients with
higher levels [median, 9.3 months (95% CI, 6.6-12.0); p = 0.0001]. TS expression 
(mRNA levels or protein expression) did not influence the treatment response.
CONCLUSION: Overall, PCB followed by maintenance pemetrexed and bevacizumab was
effective and tolerable in Hispanic patients with non-squamous NSCLC. This
regimen was associated with acceptable toxicity and prolonged OS, particularly in
patients with low TS expression. We found a role for Ki67 and TS expression as
prognostic factors.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0154293 
PMCID: PMC4871516
PMID: 27191954  [PubMed - in process]


23. Onco Targets Ther. 2016 Apr 21;9:2421-8. doi: 10.2147/OTT.S96156. eCollection
2016.

Risk of adverse events with bevacizumab addition to therapy in advanced
non-small-cell lung cancer: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials.

Lai XX(1), Xu RA(1), Yu-Ping L(1), Yang H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, The First Affiliated Hospital of Wenzhou
Medical University, Wenzhou, Zhejiang, People's Republic of China.

BACKGROUND: Bevacizumab, a monoclonal antibody against vascular endothelial
growth factor ligand, has shown survival benefits in the treatment of many types 
of malignant tumors, including non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC). We conducted
this systematic review and meta-analysis to investigate the risk of the most
clinically relevant adverse events related to bevacizumab in advanced NSCLC.
METHODS: Databases from PubMed, Web of Science, and Cochrane Library up to August
2015, were searched to identify relevant studies. We included prospective
randomized controlled Phase II/III clinical trials that compared therapy with or 
without bevacizumab for advanced NSCLC. Summary relative risk (RR) and 95%
confidence intervals were calculated using random effects or fixed effects
according to the heterogeneity among included trials.
RESULTS: A total of 3,745 patients from nine clinical trials were included in the
meta-analysis. Summary RRs showed a statistically significant
bevacizumab-associated increased risk in three of the adverse outcomes studied:
proteinuria (RR =7.55), hypertension (RR =5.34), and hemorrhagic events (RR
=2.61). No statistically significant differences were found for gastrointestinal 
perforation (P=0.60), arterial and venous thromboembolic events (P=0.35 and
P=0.92, respectively), or fatal events (P=0.29).
CONCLUSION: The addition of bevacizumab to therapy in advanced NSCLC did
significantly increase the risk of proteinuria, hypertension, and hemorrhagic
events but not arterial/venous thromboembolic events, gastrointestinal
perforation, or fatal adverse events.

DOI: 10.2147/OTT.S96156 
PMCID: PMC4844428
PMID: 27143937  [PubMed]


24. Anticancer Res. 2016 May;36(5):2119-24.

Survival After Surgical Treatment of Lung Cancer Arising in the Population
Exposed to Illegal Dumping of Toxic Waste in the Land of Fires ('Terra dei
Fuochi') of Southern Italy.

Rocco G(1), Petitti T(2), Martucci N(3), Piccirillo MC(4), LA Rocca A(3), LA
Manna C(3), DE Luca G(3), Morabito A(5), Chirico A(6), Franco R(7), Accardo R(8),
Normanno N(9), Botti G(7), Lodato S(10), Ciliberto G(11), Pedicini T(11),
Giordano A(12).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Thoracic Surgery, Department of Thoracic Surgery and Oncology, G. 
Pascale Foundation, National Cancer Institute, IRCCS, Naples, Italy
g.rocco@istitutotumori.na.it. (2)Hygiene, Public Health an Statistics Research
Unit, University Campus Biomedico, Rome, Italy. (3)Division of Thoracic Surgery, 
Department of Thoracic Surgery and Oncology, G. Pascale Foundation, National
Cancer Institute, IRCCS, Naples, Italy. (4)Clinical Trials Unit, Department of
Experimental Oncology, G. Pascale Foundation, National Cancer Institute, IRCCS,
Naples, Italy. (5)Division of Medical Oncology, Department of Thoracic Surgery
and Oncology, G. Pascale Foundation, National Cancer Institute, IRCCS, Naples,
Italy. (6)Department of Psychology of Developmental and Socialization Processes, 
Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy Sbarro Institute for Cancer Research and
Molecular Medicine, Center for Biotechnology, College of Science and Technology, 
Temple University, Philadelphia, PA, U.S.A. (7)Division of Pathology, Department 
of Experimental Oncology, G. Pascale Foundation, National Cancer Institute,
IRCCS, Naples, Italy. (8)Division of Anesthesiology, Department of Experimental
Oncology, G. Pascale Foundation, National Cancer Institute, IRCCS, Naples, Italy.
(9)Division of Cell Biology, Department of Experimental Oncology, G. Pascale
Foundation, National Cancer Institute, IRCCS, Naples, Italy. (10)Strategic
Direction, G. Pascale Foundation, National Cancer Institute, IRCCS, Naples,
Italy. (11)Scientific Direction, G. Pascale Foundation, National Cancer
Institute, IRCCS, Naples, Italy. (12)Sbarro Institute for Cancer Research and
Molecular Medicine, Center for Biotechnology, College of Science and Technology, 
Temple University, Philadelphia, PA, U.S.A. Department of Medicine, Surgery &
Neuroscience, University of Siena, Siena, Italy.

AIM: Terra dei Fuochi (TdF), the so-called 'Land of Fires' in Southern Italy, is 
an agricultural territory characterized by illegal dumping of toxic waste known
to occur since the 1980s. It is unknown whether prognosis of patients developing 
cancer and living in that area may differ compared to those living in areas not
exposed to this specific type of pollution. We retrospectively analyzed the
5-year survival rates of patients originating from the TdF diagnosed with lung
cancer compared to patients from other areas.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Patients consecutively operated on for non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC) between November 2004 and April 2013 at the Division of Thoracic
Surgery of the National Cancer Institute of Naples were eligible. The study
outcome was overall survival (OS). In addition, the TdF and non-TdF groups were
compared through propensity score matching (PSM).
RESULTS: Overall, 439 patients with resectable NSCLC were operated on, 123 (28%) 
from the TdF and 316 (72%) from other referral centers of our catchment area.
There were 301 males and 138 females; the median age of the entire surgical
population was 65 years (range=25-83) years. Apart from a different prevalence of
hypertension and underweight patients, preoperative factors were evenly
distributed between the two groups. At univariate analysis, OS was not different 
between the TdF and non TdF group (median 72 and 68 months, respectively; p=0.75 
log-rank test). Multivariable analysis confirmed that living in the TdF area had 
no prognostic impact (hazard ratio=1.05; 95% confidence interval=0.70-1.57;
p=0.78) on OS. PSM confirmed no statistically significant difference of OS
(hazard ratio=1.01, 95% confidence interval=0.67-1.52; p=0.93).
CONCLUSION: Following surgery for lung cancer, TdF and non-TdF surgical
candidates had similar long-term survival. Originating from the TdF does not seem
to be associated with worse outcomes after surgical treatment of patients with
lung cancer.

Copyright© 2016 International Institute of Anticancer Research (Dr. John G.
Delinassios), All rights reserved.


PMID: 27127112  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Cancer Med. 2016 Jul;5(7):1381-7. doi: 10.1002/cam4.701. Epub 2016 Apr 25.

Retrospective analysis of bevacizumab-induced hypertension and clinical outcome
in patients with colorectal cancer and lung cancer.

Nakaya A(1), Kurata T(1), Yokoi T(1), Iwamoto S(2), Torii Y(1), Katashiba Y(1),
Ogata M(1), Hamada M(2), Kon M(2), Nomura S(1).

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, Kansai Medical University, Osaka,
Japan. (2)Department of Surgery, Kansai Medical University, Osaka, Japan.

Bevacizumab(Avastin(®) ), a humanized therapeutic monoclonal antibody that
targets vascular endothelial growth factor, is widely used in cancer treatment.
Patients who are treated with bevacizumab have an increased risk of developing
systemic hypertension. However, the relationship between bevacizumab-induced
hypertension and clinical outcome remains unclear. We aimed to evaluate the
effect of bevacizumab-induced hypertension in terms of prognosis in patients with
colorectal cancer and non-small cell lung cancer. The study included 632
patients, 317 patients with non-small cell lung cancer and 315 patients with
colorectal cancer. All patients were treated with bevacizumab in combination with
standard chemotherapy protocols, between April 2007 and December 2014. Blood
pressure was measured before each treatment cycle. In the patient group with
colorectal cancer, treated with bevacizumab, Grade 2-3 hypertension was present
in 27.6%. In hypertensive patients with colorectal cancer, median overall
survival was 42.6 months, compared with 20.6 months for normotensive patients in 
this group (P = 0.00071). In the patient group with non-small cell lung cancer,
treated with bevacizumab, Grade 2-3 hypertension was present in 20.5%. In
hypertensive patients with non-small cell lung cancer, median overall survival
was 43.0 months, compared with 26.3 months for normotensive patients in this
group (P = 0.00451). Patients who developed hypertension during treatment with
bevacizumab for colorectal cancer and non-small cell lung cancer had
significantly prolonged overall survival when compared with normotensive
patients. Bevacizumab-induced hypertension may represent a biomarker for clinical
benefit in cancer patients treated with bevacizumab.

© 2016 The Authors. Cancer Medicine published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/cam4.701 
PMCID: PMC4944863
PMID: 27109438  [PubMed - in process]


26. Expert Opin Drug Saf. 2016 Jun;15(6):837-51. doi: 10.1517/14740338.2016.1170116. 
Epub 2016 Apr 12.

Safety profiles of first-line therapies for metastatic non-squamous
non-small-cell lung cancer.

Losanno T(1), Gridelli C(2).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Experimental Medicine , University 'Sapienza' , Rome , Italy. 
(2)b Division of Medical Oncology , S.G. Moscati Hospital , Avellino , Italy.

INTRODUCTION: Lung cancer still represents the leading cause of death for cancer.
About the 70% of diagnosis are in advanced-stage. Non-small-cell lung cancer
(NSCLC) represents the 85% of all diagnosed lung cancers and non-squamous
histology represents the 40% of all NSCLC. First-line therapies increase
survival, control symptoms and improve quality of life, compared with best
supportive care. It is crucial to choose a treatment with a low impact on
patient's life considering the related toxicities.
AREAS COVERED: Adverse events (AEs) of first-line therapies for non-squamous
NSCLC are here reviewed and discussed, from evidences in clinical trials
conducting to drugs approval.
EXPERT OPINION: For advanced disease, palliation and preserving patients QoL are 
still the primary goal of treatment. Therefore, differing toxicity profiles are
often a deciding factor in first-line and also maintenance setting for
non-squamous NSCLC. Special attention is necessary to renal function and drugs'
nephrotoxicity. Moreover, it is to consider the specific AEs of drugs classes:
hypertension, bleeding, and proteinuria, for anti-VEGF therapy; skin toxicity,
diarrhea, interstitial lung disease for TKIs; vision disorders, and
hepatotoxicity for ALK-inhibitor. It is important to select patients for a
treatment on the basis of their comorbidities and the presence of risk factors.

DOI: 10.1517/14740338.2016.1170116 
PMID: 27007279  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. J Clin Oncol. 2016 May 1;34(13):1438-42. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2015.65.9599. Epub 2016
Mar 21.

Optimizing Treatment Risk and Benefit for Elderly Patients With Advanced
Non-Small-Cell Lung Cancer: The Right Treatment for the Right Patient.

Presley CJ(1), Gross CP(1), Lilenbaum RC(2).

Author information: 
(1)Yale Cancer Center, New Haven, CT. (2)Yale Cancer Center, New Haven, CT
rogerio.lilenbaum@yale.edu.

Comment on
    J Clin Oncol. 2016 May 1;34(13):1476-83.

The Oncology Grand Rounds series is designed to place original reports published 
in theJournal into clinical context. A case presentation is followed by a
description of diagnostic and management challenges, a review of the relevant
literature, and a summary of the authors' suggested management approaches. The
goal of this series is to help readers better understand how to apply the results
of key studies, including those published inJournal of Clinical Oncology, to
patients seen in their own clinical practice.A 78-year-old woman with a
40-pack-year smoking history has been referred for treatment of advanced
non-small-cell lung cancer. She presented with a persistent cough and worsening
dyspnea on exertion. A chest x-ray followed by a chest computed tomography scan
revealed a 3-cm right upper lobe mass along with a moderate-size pleural
effusion. Pleural fluid cytology was positive for adenocarcinoma. A brain
magnetic resonance imaging scan was negative. A reflex molecular profile,
includingKRAS,EGFR,ALK,BRAF,HER2,RET,MET, andROS, did not reveal an actionable
abnormality. Her past medical history includes diabetes, hypertension, and
osteopenia. Her medications include a β-blocker, angiotensin-converting enzyme
inhibitor, oral antidiabetic agent, calcium, and vitamin D. The laboratory
evaluation is notable for a hemoglobin of 10.8 g/dL and a creatinine clearance of
36 mL/min. The other laboratories are within normal limits. She is somewhat
limited by the shortness of breath but maintains an Eastern Cooperative Oncology 
Group performance status of 1. She is independent in all of her instrumental and 
basic activities of daily living and denies falls. She has been referred to
discuss treatment options.

© 2016 by American Society of Clinical Oncology.

DOI: 10.1200/JCO.2015.65.9599 
PMID: 27001591  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Asia Pac J Clin Oncol. 2016 Mar 17. doi: 10.1111/ajco.12477. [Epub ahead of
print]

Health state utilities in non-small cell lung cancer: An international study.

Nafees B(1), Lloyd AJ(1), Dewilde S(2), Rajan N(3), Lorenzo M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Patient Reported Outcomes, Oxford Outcomes Ltd, Oxford, UK. (2)SHE, Brussels, 
Belgium. (3)Oncology - Emerging Markets, Eli Lilly Australia Pty. Ltd, Australia.
(4)Global Health Outcomes - Oncology, Eli Lilly and Company Limited, Surrey, UK.

AIM: Quality of life weights (utilities) are an important input in economic
evaluation and evidence suggests that there can be important differences between 
countries. This study was designed to capture utilities for metastatic non-small 
cell lung cancer and common grade III/IV toxicities associated with treatment
from local populations in the United Kingdom, Australia, France, China, Taiwan,
and Korea. Toxicities included neutropenia, febrile neutropenia, fatigue,
diarrhea, nausea and vomiting, rash, bleeding, hypertension, and hair loss.
METHODS: Existing health state descriptions of non-small cell lung cancer were
adapted to represent descriptions of patients on first-line treatment.
Twenty-three states were translated and assessed in cognitive debrief content
validation interviews with oncologists in each country. Seventy-five respondents 
per country completed a time trade-off interview to evaluate the states.
Variation between countries for all states was explored with a Generalized
Estimating Equations model.
RESULTS: The mean utility for "stable disease and no side effects" (base state)
varied between 0.84 (United Kingdom) and 0.54 (Taiwan). The largest utility
decrements were found for febrile neutropenia (0.47) and neutropenia (0.35)
across all countries. Asian countries regarded bleeds as a severe toxicity
whereas non-Asian countries did not and valued diarrhea and fatigue as more
severe. Significant differences in utilities between countries emerged with the
Taiwanese population in particular rating states as significantly worse than
other countries.
CONCLUSION: This study improves our understanding of how utilities for the same
states can vary across countries. The study shows the importance of capturing
utilities that reflect the preferences of the local population.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/ajco.12477 
PMID: 26990789  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


29. J Nat Med. 2016 Jul;70(3):554-62. doi: 10.1007/s11418-016-0977-1. Epub 2016 Mar
14.

Efficiently prepared ephedrine alkaloids-free Ephedra Herb extract: a putative
marker and antiproliferative effects.

Oshima N(1,)(2), Yamashita T(3), Hyuga S(4), Hyuga M(1), Kamakura H(1), Yoshimura
M(5), Maruyama T(1), Hakamatsuka T(1), Amakura Y(5), Hanawa T(4), Goda Y(6).

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Health Sciences, 1-18-1 Kamiyoga, Setagaya-ku, Tokyo,
158-8501, Japan. (2)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, International
University of Health and Welfare, 2600-1, Kitakanemaru, Ohtawara city, Tochigi,
324-8501, Japan. (3)TOKIWA Phytochemical Co., Ltd., 158 Kinoko, Sakura-shi,
Chiba, 285-0801, Japan. (4)Department of Clinical Research, Oriental Medicine
Research Center of Kitasato University, 5-9-1 Shirokane, Minato-ku, Tokyo,
108-8642, Japan. (5)Department of Pharmacognosy, College of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Matsuyama University, 4-2 Bunkyo-cho, Matsuyama, Ehime, 790-8578,
Japan. (6)National Institute of Health Sciences, 1-18-1 Kamiyoga, Setagaya-ku,
Tokyo, 158-8501, Japan. goda@nihs.go.jp.

Ephedrine alkaloids (EAs) have been considered the main pharmacologically active 
substances in Ephedra Herb (, Mao; EH) since they were first identified by Prof. 
N. Nagai, and are known to induce palpitation, hypertension, insomnia, and
dysuria as side effects. Therefore, the administration of drugs containing EH to 
patients with cardiovascular-related diseases is severely contraindicated. While 
our previous studies suggest that some of the effects of EH may not be due to
EAs, considering their side effects would be expedient to develop a new EAs-free 
EH extract (EFE). Here, we established a preparation method for EFE and revealed 
its chemical composition, including the content of herbacetin, a flavonoid
aglycon present in EH and a potential putative marker for EFE quality control. In
addition, we showed the antiproliferative effects of EFE against the H1975
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cell line. EFE was prepared from EH extract
using the ion exchange resin SK-1B. LC/Orbitrap MS analysis revealed the removal 
of EAs, 6-methoxykynurenic acid, and 6-hydroxykynurenic acid from the original
extract. Quantitative analysis of herbacetin using LC/MS in acid-hydrolyzed EFE
showed that its content was 0.104 %. Although several alkaloidal constituents
were removed from EH extract, the antiproliferative effect of EFE against H1975
cells was comparable to that of EH extract. These results indicate that EFE
retained the anticancer effect of EH and demonstrated its potential for future
development as a new herbal medicine with reduced side effects.

DOI: 10.1007/s11418-016-0977-1 
PMCID: PMC4935757
PMID: 26976141  [PubMed - in process]


30. Eur J Cancer. 2016 May;58:30-7. doi: 10.1016/j.ejca.2016.01.013. Epub 2016 Feb
27.

Maintenance therapy with pemetrexed and bevacizumab versus pemetrexed monotherapy
after induction therapy with carboplatin, pemetrexed, and bevacizumab in patients
with advanced non-squamous non small cell lung cancer.

Karayama M(1), Inui N(2), Fujisawa T(3), Enomoto N(3), Nakamura Y(3), Kuroishi
S(4), Yokomura K(5), Koshimizu N(6), Sato M(7), Toyoshima M(8), Shirai T(9),
Masuda M(10), Yamada T(11), Imokawa S(12), Suda T(3).

Author information: 
(1)Second Division, Department of Internal Medicine, Hamamatsu University School 
of Medicine, 1-20-1 Handayama, Hamamatsu 431-3192, Japan; Department of Clinical 
Oncology, Hamamatsu University School of Medicine, 1-20-1 Handayama, Hamamatsu
431-3192, Japan. (2)Second Division, Department of Internal Medicine, Hamamatsu
University School of Medicine, 1-20-1 Handayama, Hamamatsu 431-3192, Japan;
Department of Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics, Hamamatsu University School
of Medicine, 1-20-1 Handayama, Hamamatsu 431-3192, Japan. Electronic address:
inui@hama-med.ac.jp. (3)Second Division, Department of Internal Medicine,
Hamamatsu University School of Medicine, 1-20-1 Handayama, Hamamatsu 431-3192,
Japan. (4)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Ensyu Hospital, 1-1-1 Chuou,
Hamamatsu 430-0929, Japan. (5)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Seirei
Mikatahara General Hospital, 3453 Mikatahara-cho, Hamamatsu 433-8558, Japan.
(6)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Fujieda Municipal General Hospital, 4-1-11
Surugadai, Fujieda 426-8677, Japan. (7)Department of Respiratory Medicine,
Japanese Red Cross Hamamatsu Hospital, 1088-1 Kobayashi, Hamamatsu 434-8533,
Japan. (8)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Hamamatsu Rosai Hospital, 25
Shougen-cho, Hamamatsu, Japan. (9)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Shizuoka
General Hospital, 4-27-1 Kita-ando, Shizuoka 420-0881, Japan. (10)Department of
Respiratory Medicine, Shizuoka City Shimizu Hospital, 1231 Miyakami, Shizuoka
424-8636, Japan. (11)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Shizuoka City Hospital, 
10-93 Ote-cho, Shizuoka 420-8630, Japan. (12)Department of Respiratory Medicine, 
Iwata City Hospital, 513-2 Ohkubo, Iwata 438-8550, Japan.

OBJECTIVES: Single agent maintenance therapy is widely accepted for advanced
non-squamous non small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). However, there is no consensus
on the initial and maintenance phase regimens, and the clinical benefit of adding
bevacizumab to cytotoxic drugs in the maintenance phase remains unclear.
METHODS: Chemotherapy-naïve patients with non-squamous NSCLC were randomly
assigned to maintenance therapy with pemetrexed and bevacizumab or pemetrexed
alone, after achieving disease control after four cycles of induction therapy
with carboplatin (area under the curve = 6), pemetrexed (500 mg/m(2)), and
bevacizumab (15 mg/kg). The primary end-point was 1-year progression-free
survival (PFS) rate.
RESULTS: One hundred ten patients were enrolled in the study, with 55 patients
assigned to the two groups. The mean 1-year PFS rate was 43.9% (95% confidence
interval [CI]: 29.6-59.2%) in the combination maintenance group and 35.2% (95%
CI: 22.1-51.0%) in the pemetrexed maintenance group, and the difference was not
significant (p = 0.433). Median PFS measured from enrolment was 11.5 months (95% 
CI: 7.1-19.0) in the combination maintenance group and 7.3 months (95% CI:
5.7-14.1, hazard ratio: 0.73, 95% CI: 0.44-1.19, log-rank p = 0.198) in the
pemetrexed maintenance group. Nasal haemorrhage, hypertension, and proteinuria
were significantly more frequent in the combination maintenance group, but they
were mild and tolerable.
CONCLUSION: Both maintenance therapy with pemetrexed alone and pemetrexed and
bevacizumab in combination were feasible in patients with non-squamous NSCLC who 
have achieved disease control after induction therapy with carboplatin,
pemetrexed, and bevacizumab. According to the selection design, differences in
the superiority between these maintenance therapies were not demonstrated.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejca.2016.01.013 
PMID: 26922170  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Lung Cancer. 2016 Mar;93:43-6. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2015.12.011. Epub 2015 Dec 
30.

Sorafenib treatment for patients with RET fusion-positive non-small cell lung
cancer.

Horiike A(1), Takeuchi K(2), Uenami T(1), Kawano Y(1), Tanimoto A(1), Kaburaki
K(1), Tambo Y(1), Kudo K(1), Yanagitani N(1), Ohyanagi F(1), Motoi N(3), Ishikawa
Y(3), Horai T(1), Nishio M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Medical Oncology, Cancer Institute Hospital, Japanese
Foundation for Cancer Research, 3-8-31 Ariake, Koto-ward, Tokyo 135-8550, Japan. 
(2)Pathology Project for Molecular Targets, Cancer Institute, Japanese Foundation
for Cancer Research, 3-8-31 Ariake, Koto-ward, Tokyo 135-8550, Japan. (3)Division
of Pathology, Cancer Institute, Japanese Foundation for Cancer Research, 3-8-31
Ariake, Koto-ward, Tokyo 135-8550, Japan. (4)Department of Thoracic Medical
Oncology, Cancer Institute Hospital, Japanese Foundation for Cancer Research,
3-8-31 Ariake, Koto-ward, Tokyo 135-8550, Japan. Electronic address:
mnishio@jfcr.or.jp.

BACKGROUND: RET fusions were recently identified in non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC) and are considered as a potential therapeutic target of NSCLC. Sorafenib,
a multi-kinase inhibitor, has potent anti-RET activity. We conducted a study to
evaluate the efficacy of sorafenib in a small number of patients with RET
fusion-positive NSCLC.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Eligible patients had advanced or recurrent NSCLC, were
more than 20 years old, had undergone treatment with one or more previous
chemotherapy regimens, had an Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group performance
status 0-2, had adequate organ function, and provided informed consent. The
presence of the RET fusion gene was confirmed by a split FISH assay. The patients
were treated twice daily with 400mg of sorafenib taken orally. The treatment was 
continued until either disease progression or unacceptable toxicity.
RESULTS: From March 2012 to April 2013, three patients were enrolled. The
responses to sorafenib included one patient with stable disease (SD) and two
patients with progressive disease (PD). One patient took sorafenib for twelve
months. The most common toxicities were palmar-plantar erythrodysesthesia
syndrome, hypertension, and diarrhea.
CONCLUSION: Since sorafenib did not show dramatic responses, we suggest testing
other RET inhibitors for the treatment of RET fusion-positive NSCLC. This study
was registered at UMIN as trial number 000007515.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2015.12.011 
PMID: 26898613  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Oncol Lett. 2016 Feb;11(2):1512-1516. Epub 2015 Dec 24.

Reversible posterior leukoencephalopathy syndrome following combinatorial
cisplatin and pemetrexed therapy for lung cancer in a normotensive patient: A
case report and literature review.

Xie C(1), Jones VT(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Brody School of Medicine, East Carolina
University, Vidant Medical Center, Greenville, NC 27834, USA.

Reversible posterior leukoencephalopathy syndrome (RPLS) is a rare neurological
syndrome of the brain, causing symptoms such as headaches, seizures, altered
mental status and visual disturbances. The condition is predominantly associated 
with hypertension, eclampsia, renal impairment, cytotoxic drugs,
immunosuppressive agents and molecular targeted agents, but the precise
underlying mechanism of RPLS is not fully understood. The present study describes
the case of a 65-year-old female patient with stage IIA non-small cell lung
cancer who received cisplatin/pemetrexed treatment at the Leo W. Jenkins Cancer
Center. Following 3 cycles of this therapy, the patient was referred to the
Emergency Department of Vidant Medical Center with an altered mental status,
subsequently presenting with epileptic seizures, a fever and a headache. A
neurological examination revealed generalized hyperreflexia and paraparesis, with
extensor posturing of the bilateral lower extremities. The lumbar puncture and
electroencephalography results were normal, but cranial computed tomography (CT) 
scans revealed attenuation abnormalities in the bilateral parietal region and the
left occipital lobe, with suspected metastasis. Cranial T2-weighted magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) indicated bilateral regions of increased signal intensity
in the occipital, temporal and periventricular white matter. The patient was
treated with anticonvulsants, steroids and antihypertensive drugs, recovered
gradually from the symptoms and regained full consciousness. However, the patient
reported residual weakness, presenting with an Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group
score of 3, reflective of an inability to independently perform daily activities 
and self-care. A brain MRI performed 10 days later demonstrated that the
subcortical edema had partially subsided. The patient was discharged on day 15
post-admission. A follow-up cranial CT examination 1 month later indicated a
partial resolution of the abnormalities. The present report reviews similar
associated cases, and also discusses the clinical features and mechanisms
underlying RPLS. Although it is typically reversible, RPLS is a serious and
potentially life-threatening adverse condition if left untreated. Early
recognition of this condition is crucial for the prompt control of the patient's 
blood pressure or withdrawal of cytotoxic drugs in order to reverse this
syndrome.

DOI: 10.3892/ol.2015.4059 
PMCID: PMC4734259
PMID: 26893771  [PubMed]


33. Clin Lung Cancer. 2016 Mar;17(2):128-32. doi: 10.1016/j.cllc.2015.12.006. Epub
2015 Dec 17.

Results of a Phase II Trial of Carboplatin, Pemetrexed, and Bevacizumab for the
Treatment of Never or Former/Light Smoking Patients With Stage IV Non-Small Cell 
Lung Cancer.

Weiss JM(1), Villaruz LC(2), O'Brien J(3), Ivanova A(3), Lee C(4), Olson JG(4),
Pollack G(5), Gorman R(6), Socinski MA(2), Stinchombe TE(4).

Author information: 
(1)Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina, Chapel
Hill, NC. Electronic address: Jared_Weiss@med.unc.edu. (2)University of
Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pittsburgh, PA. (3)Department of Biostatistics,
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC. (4)Lineberger
Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC.
(5)Cancer Care of Western North Carolina, Asheville, NC. (6)New Bern Cancer
Center, New Bern, NC.

INTRODUCTION: Bevacizumab- and pemetrexed-based therapies have demonstrated
activity in patients with non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and nonsquamous
histologic features. Patients with history of never or light smoking might derive
greater benefit from these therapies.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: The included patients had stage IIIB (malignant pleural
effusion) or IV NSCLC with nonsquamous histologic features, adequate organ
function, no contraindications to bevacizumab, and no previous cytotoxic therapy.
The patients had also never smoked or had smoked ≤ 10 pack years and had quit ≥ 1
year before enrollment. The patients had received 4 cycles of carboplatin (area
under the curve, 6), pemetrexed 500 mg/m(2), and bevacizumab 15 mg/kg. Patients
without disease progression initiated maintenance therapy with pemetrexed and
bevacizumab. A single-arm phase II trial with the primary endpoint of
progression-free survival (PFS) was performed. The secondary endpoints were the
objective response rate (ORR), overall survival (OS), and toxicity.
RESULTS: From March 2010 to November 2013, 38 eligible patients were enrolled and
treated in the trial. The most common histologic type was adenocarcinoma (97%).
Most of the patients were women (66%) and never smokers (63%). The median PFS was
12.6 months (95% confidence interval [CI], 8.0-23.9 months). The ORR and OS were 
47% (95% CI, 31%-64%) and 20.3 months (95% CI, 15.8-30.5 months). The grade 3 or 
4 toxicities occurring at rate of ≥ 10% were neutropenia (18%), anemia (16%),
fatigue (16%), hypertension (16%), and thrombocytopenia (11%).
CONCLUSION: The combination of the carboplatin, pemetrexed, and bevacizumab
demonstrated activity with acceptable toxicity in patients with a clinical
history of never or light smoking.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cllc.2015.12.006 
PMCID: PMC4844001
PMID: 26774201  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Anticancer Res. 2016 Jan;36(1):307-12.

Carboplatin plus Weekly Paclitaxel with Bevacizumab for First-line Treatment of
Non-small Cell Lung Cancer.

Kubota T(1), Okano Y(2), Sakai M(3), Takaoka M(3), Tsukuda T(3), Anabuki K(3),
Kawase S(3), Miyamoto S(3), Ohnishi H(3), Hatakeyama N(2), Machida H(2), Urata
T(4), Yamamoto A(5), Ogushi F(2), Yokoyama A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Respiratory Medicine, Kochi Medical School, Kochi
University, Kochi, Japan kubotat@kochi-u.ac.jp. (2)Department of Respiratory
Medicine, National Hospital Organization Kochi Hospital, Kochi, Japan.
(3)Department of Hematology and Respiratory Medicine, Kochi Medical School, Kochi
University, Kochi, Japan. (4)Division of Respiratory Medicine, Kochi Health
Sciences Center, Kochi, Japan. (5)Division of Respiratory Surgery, Chikamori
Hospital, Kochi, Japan.

AIM: The present study aimed to evaluate the effectiveness and safety of weekly
paclitaxel (PTX) combined with carboplatin (CBDCA) plus bevacizumab (BEV),
followed by maintenance BEV in patients with advanced NSCLC.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Patients with unresectable stage IIIB and IV NSCLC (n=43)
were treated with CBDCA (AUC 6, day 1), BEV (15 mg/kg, day 1), and PTX (70
mg/m(2), days 1, 8, 15) intravenously every 4 weeks, for 3 to 6 cycles, followed 
by maintenance BEV (15 mg/kg) every 3 weeks.
RESULTS: The objective response rate and disease control rate were 67.4% and
90.7%, respectively. The median progression-free survival was 7.6 months. The
median overall survival was 17.7 months. Common adverse events were tolerable
bone marrow suppression, fatigue, hypertension, and nasal bleeding.
CONCLUSION: Weekly administration of PTX combined with CBDCA plus BEV therapy was
effective, and well-tolerated by advanced NSCLC patients.

Copyright© 2016 International Institute of Anticancer Research (Dr. John G.
Delinassios), All rights reserved.


PMID: 26722058  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Am J Cancer Res. 2015 Sep 15;5(10):3270-5. eCollection 2015.

A multi-center phase II study of nintedanib as second-line therapy for patients
with advanced non-small-cell lung cancer in China.

Dai W(1), Luo B(2), Wu Z(3), Chen J(3), Feng G(3), Guan P(3).

Author information: 
(1)Fourth Ward of Medical Care Center, Hainan Provincial People's Hospital Haikou
570311, Hainan Province, China ; The First Xiangya Hospital of Central South
University, Central South University Changshai 410083, Hunan Province, China.
(2)The First Xiangya Hospital of Central South University, Central South
University Changshai 410083, Hunan Province, China. (3)Fourth Ward of Medical
Care Center, Hainan Provincial People's Hospital Haikou 570311, Hainan Province, 
China.

Comment in
    Am J Cancer Res. 2016;6(7):1547-8.

PURPOSE: This study examined the efficacy and safety of using nintedanib as
single-regimen in 2(nd)-line chemotherapy for Chinese patients with advanced
(beyond stage IIIB) non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC).
METHODS: Chinese patients were those with stage IIIB or IV NSCLC and had
unsuccessful 1(st)-line platinum based chemotherapy. Patients received two oral
intakes of 200 mg nintedanib everyday from day 1 to day 21, on every 4-week
cycle. Primary endpoint was progression-free survival (PFS). Secondary endpoints 
included overall survival (OS) and disease control rate.
RESULTS: There were 62 eligible patients enrolled in the study. Half of the
patients were male (n = 31, 50.0%). The median age was 64.2 years with youngest
age of 33 years and oldest age of 83 years. Median PFS was 3.9 months (95% CI,
2.7-6.4 months). Median OS was 6.7 months (95% CI, 4.8-10.1 months). No patients 
(0.0%) had complete response. Thirty-one patients (50.0%) had stable disease and 
23 patients (37.1%) had partial response. The most common severe adverse events
(AEs), graded as 3 or 4, were heart failure (n = 12, 19.4%), hypertension (n = 7,
11.8%) and diarrhea (n = 6, 9.8%).
CONCLUSION: NSCLC Patients in 2(nd)-line chemotherapy reached similar PFS, as
compared with other FDA-approved second-line regimens. Also, the toxicity of
nintedanib was well tolerated. Thus, nintedanib may be used as a standard regimen
for 2(nd)-line chemotherapy for patients with advanced NSCLC.


PMCID: PMC4656748
PMID: 26693077  [PubMed]


36. J Proteomics Bioinform. 2015 May;8(5):67-79.

Pulmonary Proteome and Protein Networks in Response to the Herbicide Paraquat in 
Rats.

Cho IK(1), Jeong M(2), You AS(2), Park KH(2), Li QX(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biosciences and Bioengineering, University of Hawaii
at Manoa, Honolulu, HI 96822, USA. (2)Department of Agro-Food Safety, National
Academy of Agricultural Science, Rural Development Administration, Chonbuk
565-851, Republic of Korea.

Paraquat (PQ) has been one of the most widely used herbicides in the world. PQ,
when ingested, is toxic to humans and may cause acute respiratory distress
syndrome. To investigate molecular perturbation in lung tissues caused by PQ,
Sprague Dawley male rats were fed with PQ at a dose of 25 mg/kg body weight for
20 times in four weeks. The effects of PQ on cellular processes and biological
pathways were investigated by analyzing proteome in the lung tissues in
comparison with the control. Among the detected proteins, 321 and 254 proteins
were over-represented and under-represented, respectively, in the PQ-exposed rat 
lung tissues in comparison with the no PQ control. All over- and
under-represented proteins were subjected to Ingenuity Pathway Analysis to create
25 biological networks and 38 pathways of interacting protein clusters.
Over-represented proteins were involved in the C-jun-amino-terminal kinase
pathway, caveolae-mediated endocytosis signaling,
cardiovascular-cancer-respiratory pathway, regulation of clathrin-mediated
endocytosis, non-small cell lung cancer signaling, pulmonary hypertension,
glutamate receptor, immune response and angiogenesis. Under-represented proteins 
occurred in the p53 signaling pathway, mitogen-activated protein kinase signaling
pathway, cartilage development and angiogenesis inhibition in the PQ-treated
lungs. The results suggest that PQ may generate reactive oxygen species, impair
the MAPK/p53 signaling pathway, activate angiogenesis and depress apoptosis in
the lungs.

DOI: 10.4172/jpb.1000354 
PMCID: PMC4629535
PMID: 26538867  [PubMed]


37. Oncologist. 2015 Nov;20(11):1320-5. doi: 10.1634/theoncologist.2015-0221. Epub
2015 Oct 7.

U.S. Food and Drug Administration Approval Summary: Ramucirumab for the Treatment
of Metastatic Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer Following Disease Progression On or
After Platinum-Based Chemotherapy.

Larkins E(1), Scepura B(2), Blumenthal GM(2), Bloomquist E(2), Tang S(2), Biable 
M(2), Kluetz P(2), Keegan P(2), Pazdur R(2).

Author information: 
(1)Office of Hematology and Oncology Products, Center for Drug Evaluation and
Research, U.S. Food and Drug Administration, Silver Spring, Maryland, USA
erin.larkins@fda.hhs.gov. (2)Office of Hematology and Oncology Products, Center
for Drug Evaluation and Research, U.S. Food and Drug Administration, Silver
Spring, Maryland, USA.

On December 12, 2014, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved
ramucirumab for use in combination with docetaxel for the treatment of patients
with metastatic non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) with disease progression on or
after platinum-based chemotherapy. Patients with epidermal growth factor receptor
or anaplastic lymphoma kinase genomic tumor aberrations should have disease
progression on FDA-approved therapy for these aberrations prior to receiving
ramucirumab. This approval was based on an improvement in overall survival (OS)
with an acceptable toxicity profile in a randomized, multicenter, double-blinded,
placebo-controlled trial of 1,253 patients with metastatic NSCLC previously
treated with a platinum-based combination therapy. Patients were randomized 1:1
to receive either ramucirumab in combination with docetaxel or placebo in
combination with docetaxel. The primary endpoint was OS. Patients who received
ramucirumab in combination with docetaxel had improved OS (hazard ratio [HR]:
0.86; 95% confidence interval [CI]: 0.75, 0.98). Median OS was 10.5 months on the
ramucirumab plus docetaxel arm versus 9.1 months on the placebo plus docetaxel
arm. The most frequent (≥ 30%) adverse reactions in ramucirumab-treated patients 
were fatigue, neutropenia, and diarrhea. The most frequent (≥ 5%) grade 3 and 4
adverse reactions in the ramucirumab arm were fatigue, neutropenia, febrile
neutropenia, leukopenia, and hypertension.IMPLICATIONS FOR PRACTICE: This report 
presents key information on the U.S. Food and Drug Administration approval of
ramucirumab, a monoclonal antibody targeting vascular endothelial growth factor
receptor-2, given in combination with docetaxel for the treatment of patients
with metastatic non-small cell lung cancer whose disease has progressed on or
after platinum-based chemotherapy. This report specifically addresses the issues 
of safety in patients with squamous cell tumors, effect of treatment in elderly
patients, and uncertainties regarding effects in patients with tumors harboring
epidermal growth factor receptor or anaplastic lymphoma kinase genomic tumor
aberrations.

©AlphaMed Press.

DOI: 10.1634/theoncologist.2015-0221 
PMCID: PMC4718430
PMID: 26446239  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Lung Cancer. 2015 Nov;90(2):267-73. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2015.08.003. Epub 2015
Aug 12.

Anti-angiogenic-specific adverse events in patients with non-small cell lung
cancer treated with nintedanib and docetaxel.

Reck M(1), Mellemgaard A(2), von Pawel J(3), Gottfried M(4), Bondarenko I(5),
Cheng Y(6), Zarogoulidis K(7), Luft A(8), Bennouna J(9), Barrueco J(10), Aboshady
H(10), Hocke J(11), Kaiser R(11), Douillard JY(9); LUME-Lung 1 Study Group.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Oncology, Lung Clinic Grosshansdorf, Airway Research
Center North (ARCN), Member of the German Center for Lung Research (DZL),
Grosshansdorf, Germany. Electronic address: Dr.martin.reck@web.de. (2)Department 
of Oncology, Herlev University Hospital, Herlev, Denmark. (3)Pneumology Clinic,
Asklepios Fachkliniken, Gauting, Germany. (4)Lung Cancer Unit, Meir Medical
Center, Kfar Saba, Israel. (5)Clinical Facility, Dnepropetrovsk Medical Academy, 
Clinical Hospital #4, Dnepropetrovsk, Ukraine. (6)Division of Thoracic Oncology, 
Jilin Province Cancer Hospital, Changchun, China. (7)Pulmonary
Department-Oncology Unit, General Hospital of Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki, Greece.
(8)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Leningrad Regional Clinical Hospital, St.
Petersburg, Russia. (9)Department of Medical Oncology, Centre René Gauducheau,
Nantes, France. (10)Boehringer Ingelheim Pharmaceuticals Inc., Ridgefield, CT,
USA. (11)Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma GmbH & Co. KG, Biberach, Germany.

OBJECTIVES: LUME-Lung 1 was a randomized, placebo-controlled, Phase III trial
investigating nintedanib+docetaxel versus placebo+docetaxel in patients with
advanced NSCLC progressing after first-line chemotherapy. Progression-free
survival was significantly improved with nintedanib+docetaxel in the overall
population and overall survival was significantly improved in the pre-specified
analysis of patients with adenocarcinoma. We evaluated the frequency of
characteristic adverse events (AEs) commonly seen with existing anti-angiogenic
agents.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The incidence and intensity of AEs were evaluated in all
patients who received at least one dose of study medication (N=1307) and for the 
two main histologies: adenocarcinoma (n=653) and squamous cell carcinoma (SCC;
n=553). AEs of special interest were analyzed by category, preferred term, and
worst CTCAE grade and included perforation, hypertension, bleeding,
thromboembolic events, and skin disorders.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSION: The incidence of patients with all-grade gastrointestinal
(GI) perforations was low and balanced between arms (0.5% in both) and across
histologies; the incidence of non-GI perforations was 1.2% with
nintedanib+docetaxel versus 0.2% with placebo+docetaxel. The incidence of some
events was higher with nintedanib+docetaxel versus placebo+docetaxel;
hypertension (3.5% vs 0.9%), rash (11.0% vs 8.1%), and cutaneous adverse
reactions (13.0% vs 10.7%). Rash and cutaneous adverse reactions were
predominantly Grade 1-2 with both treatments. The incidence of all-grade bleeding
was also slightly higher in nintedanib+docetaxel-treated patients (14.1% vs
11.6%) driven by between-treatment differences in the SCC subpopulation; most
events were Grade 1-2. The proportion of patients with a thromboembolic event was
low and comparable between arms for all grades (5.1% vs 4.6%) and Grade ≥3 (2.1% 
vs 3.1%). Safety evaluation of the LUME-Lung 1 study showed that the frequency of
AEs commonly associated with other anti-angiogenic agents was lower with
nintedanib+docetaxel. Survival benefits from addition of nintedanib to docetaxel 
in patients with adenocarcinoma after first-line therapy can be achieved
alongside a manageable safety profile.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2015.08.003 
PMID: 26415992  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Int J Clin Exp Med. 2015 Jul 15;8(7):11738-45. eCollection 2015.

Video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery for non-small-cell lung cancer in elderly
patients: a single-center, case-matched study.

Liu K(1), Zhao J(1), Zhang W(1), Tan J(1), Ma J(1), Pei Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Surgery, General Hospital of Beijing Military Command 5
Nanmencang, Dongcheng District, Beijing 100700, People's Republic of China.

The incidence of non-small-cell lung cancer among elderly patients has increased;
therefore, older patients are increasingly being considered for radical pulmonary
resection. However, data regarding the outcome of video-assisted thoracoscopic
surgery (VATS) in elderly patients are limited. The aim of this study was to
evaluate the safety and feasibility of VATS in elderly patients with
non-small-cell lung cancer. From January 2008 to January 2014, a total of 78
patients aged ≥ 70 years (elderly group) undergoing VATS for NSCLC were matched
with 78 patients < 70 years (young group) by demographics, tumor characteristics,
and details of surgical procedures. The elderly group was characterized by a
higher incidence of hypertension (P = 0.001) and diabetes mellitus (P = 0.014),
and ≥ 2 comorbidities (P = 0.009). Intraoperative variables, such as surgical
duration blood loss, and transfusion rate, were not notably different between the
groups. Postoperative 30-day mortality, 30-day complications, and 30-day major
complications were comparable between the groups. The 5-year overall survival
rates were 69% in the young group and 64% in the elderly group, respectively (P =
0.258). The 5-year disease-free survival rates were 65% in the young group and
60% in the elderly group, respectively (P = 0.327). Our results clearly
demonstrated that VATS for non-small-cell lung cancer could be safely and
efficacy performed in elderly patients; thus, advanced age itself should not be
regarded as a contraindication for VATS.


PMCID: PMC4565396
PMID: 26380013  [PubMed]


40. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol. 2015 Oct;76(4):835-41. doi:
10.1007/s00280-015-2867-8. Epub 2015 Sep 8.

EGFR-TKI rechallenge with bevacizumab in EGFR-mutant non-small cell lung cancer.

Otsuka K(1), Hata A(2), Takeshita J(1), Okuda C(1), Kaji R(1), Masago K(1),
Fujita S(1), Katakami N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Integrated Oncology, Institute of Biomedical Research and
Innovation, 2-2, Minatojima-minamimachi, Chuo-ku, Kobe, 650-0047, Japan.
(2)Division of Integrated Oncology, Institute of Biomedical Research and
Innovation, 2-2, Minatojima-minamimachi, Chuo-ku, Kobe, 650-0047, Japan.
a-hata@fbri.org.

BACKGROUND: Efficacies of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)-tyrosine kinase
inhibitor (TKI) rechallenge have been demonstrated in EGFR-mutant non-small cell 
lung cancer (NSCLC). However, their efficacies were only moderate. Some
preclinical studies suggested synergistic effects of bevacizumab to EGFR-TKI in
TKI-resistant models.
METHODS: We retrospectively evaluated clinical efficacy and safety of EGFR-TKI
rechallenge with bevacizumab. Rebiopsy was performed on all studied cases to
examine T790M-resistant mutation status.
RESULTS: Between January 2010 and June 2014, a total of 24 EGFR-mutant NSCLC
patients who had been previously treated with EGFR-TKIs (gefitinib, erlotinib,
and/or afatinib) received EGFR-TKI rechallenge with bevacizumab. Twenty-two (92
%) patients underwent erlotinib and two (8 %) gefitinib as rechallenge EGFR-TKIs 
in combination with bevacizumab. Three patients achieved partial response, and 18
had stable disease, resulting in the response rate (RR) of 13 % and disease
control rate (DCR) of 88 %, respectively. The median progression-free survival
(PFS) was 4.1 [95 % confidence interval (CI) 2.3-4.9] months, and the median
overall survival (OS) was 13.5 (95 % CI 9.7-27.4) months. The RR, DCR, median
PFS, and median OS for T790M-positive versus T790M-negative were 0 versus 18 % (p
= 0.530), 86 versus 88 % (p = 1.00), 3.3 versus 4.1 months (p = 0.048), and 15.1 
versus 13.5 months (p = 0.996), respectively. Severe adverse events (≥grade 3):
grade 3 of 1 (4 %) rash; grade 3 of 1 (4 %) paronychia; grade 3 of 1 (4 %)
hypertension; and grade 3 of 1 (4 %) anemia, were observed.
CONCLUSIONS: EGFR-TKI rechallenge with bevacizumab demonstrated higher DCR and
modestly longer PFS than historical data on EGFR-TKI rechallenge alone. Its
activity was notably higher in T790M-negative population.

DOI: 10.1007/s00280-015-2867-8 
PMID: 26349474  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Drug Des Devel Ther. 2015 Aug 18;9:4751-60. doi: 10.2147/DDDT.S87258. eCollection
2015.

Incidence and risk of hypertension with bevacizumab in non-small-cell lung cancer
patients: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials.

Chen J(1), Lu Y(2), Zheng Y(3).

Author information: 
(1)Intensive Care Unit, First Affiliated Hospital, College of Medicine, Zhejiang 
University, Hangzhou, People's Republic of China. (2)State Key Laboratory for
Diagnosis and Treatment of Infectious Diseases, First Affiliated Hospital,
College of Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, People's Republic of China.
(3)Research Center for Clinical Pharmacy, State Key Laboratory for Diagnosis and 
Treatment of Infectious Diseases, First Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang University,
Hangzhou, People's Republic of China.

AIM: A study was conducted to determine the overall risk and incidence of
hypertension with bevacizumab in non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Electronic databases such as the Embase, PubMed, and
Cochrane Library were searched for related trials. Statistical analyses were
conducted to calculate the overall incidence rates, odds ratios (ORs), and 95%
confidence intervals (CIs) by using either random-effect or fixed-effect models
depending on the heterogeneity.
RESULTS: A total of 3,155 subjects from nine studies were included. The overall
incidences of all-grade and high-grade hypertension in NSCLC patients were 19.55%
(95% CI 10.17%-34.3%) and 6.95% (95% CI 5.81%-8.30%). Bevacizumab use was
associated with a significantly increased risk in all-grade hypertension (OR
8.07, 95% CI 3.87-16.85; P=0.0002) and high-grade hypertension (OR 5.93, 95% CI
3.41-10.32; P<0.0001). No evidence of publication bias was determined for the ORs
of hypertension in our meta-analysis.
CONCLUSION: Bevacizumab is associated with a significantly increased risk of
hypertension development in NSCLC patients. Early monitoring and effective
management of hypertension might be important steps for the safe use of this
drug.

DOI: 10.2147/DDDT.S87258 
PMCID: PMC4547635
PMID: 26316712  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth. 2016 Jan;30(1):51-5. doi: 10.1053/j.jvca.2015.03.025.
Epub 2015 Mar 31.

The Use of Intraoperative Dexmedetomidine Is Not Associated With a Reduction in
Acute Kidney Injury After Lung Cancer Surgery.

Moon T(1), Tsai JY(1), Vachhani S(1), Peng SP(2), Feng L(2), Vaporciyan AA(3),
Cata JP(4).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of *Anesthesiology and Perioperative Medicine. (2)Biostatistics.
(3)Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, TX. (4)Departments of *Anesthesiology and Perioperative
Medicine; Outcomes Research Consortium, Cleveland, OH. Electronic address:
jcata@mdanderson.org.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate whether the use of intraoperative dexmedetomidine (DEX)
during lung cancer surgery may reduce the incidence of acute kidney injury (AKI).
DESIGN: A retrospective study.
SETTING: An academic hospital.
PARTICIPANTS: Data were collected from 1,207 adult patients who underwent
resection for non-small-cell lung cancer between January 2004 and December 2012.
INTERVENTIONS: None.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: All patients had a general balanced anesthetic
technique, and dexmedetomidine use was at the discretion of the anesthesiologist.
Data analysis was done utilizing the Wilcoxon rank sum tests and Chi-square tests
to compare continuous variables and categoric variables between the 2 groups,
respectively. Multivariate logistic analysis with backward selection was fitted
to find out factors for AKI incidence. Overall, 8.1% of the patients developed
AKI during their hospital stay. There were no statistically significant
differences in demographic, perioperative variables, and the incidence of AKI
between patients who did and did not receive DEX. A logistic regression model was
fitted to determine factors independently associated with AKI. Factors that were 
independently associated with AKI included body mass index, American Society of
Anesthesiologists 3-4, hypertension, smoking status, and thoracotomy procedure.
DISCUSSION: The authors hypothesized that DEX use would be associated with a
decreased incidence of AKI in thoracic surgery; however, they were unable to
prove this hypothesis. Their results did demonstrate that there are 5 factors
independently associated with AKI.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1053/j.jvca.2015.03.025 
PMID: 26260907  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Oncotarget. 2015 Jul 20;6(20):18206-23.

Are VEGFR-TKIs effective or safe for patients with advanced non-small cell lung
cancer?

Wang S(1), Yang Z(2), Wang Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Provincial Hospital Affiliated to Shandong
University, Jinan, Shandong, People's Republic of China. (2)Department of
Oncology, Provincial Hospital Affiliated to Shandong University, Jinan, Shandong,
People's Republic of China.

Vascular endothelial growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors
(VEGFR-TKIs) might be new therapeutic strategies for advanced non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC). Here a total of 12,520 patients from 23 randomized controlled
trials (RCTs) were enrolled to evaluate the efficacy and safety of VEGFR-TKIs
quantitatively in advanced NSCLC. Compared with non-VEGFR-TKIs, VEGFR-TKIs
regimen significantly improved progression-free survival (PFS) [hazard ratio
(HR): 0.839, 95% confidence interval (CI): 0.805-0.874, P < 0.001], objective
response rates (ORR) [relative risk (RR): 1.374, 95%CI: 1.193-1.583, P < 0.001]
and disease control rates (DCR) (RR: 1.113, 95%CI: 1.027-1.206, P =0.009), but
not overall survival (OS) (HR: 0.960, 95%CI: 0.921-1.002, P =0.060) for NSCLC
patients. The RR of all-grade neutropenia, thrombocytopenia, hypertension,
hemorrhage, fatigue, anorexia, stomatitis, diarrhea, rash, hand-foot skin
reaction (HFSR) were increased in patients received VEGFR-TKIs. As for high-grade
(≥3) adverse events (AEs), VEGFR-TKIs were associated with higher RR of
neutropenia, thrombocytopenia, hypertension, fatigue, stomatitis, diarrhea, rash 
and HFSR. This study demonstrates VEGFR-TKIs improve PFS, ORR and DCR, but not OS
in advanced NSCLC patients. VEGFR-TKIs induce more frequent and serious AEs
compared with control therapies.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.4524 
PMCID: PMC4627246
PMID: 26156021  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. PLoS One. 2015 Jul 6;10(7):e0132052. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0132052.
eCollection 2015.

The Topoisomerase 1 Inhibitor Austrobailignan-1 Isolated from Koelreuteria henryi
Induces a G2/M-Phase Arrest and Cell Death Independently of p53 in Non-Small Cell
Lung Cancer Cells.

Wu CC(1), Huang KF(2), Yang TY(3), Li YL(4), Wen CL(5), Hsu SL(4), Chen TH(6).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medicine, Chung Shan Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan, ROC;
Department of Medical Research, Chung-Shan Medical University Hospital, Taichung,
Taiwan, ROC. (2)Department of Applied Chemistry, Providence University, Taichung,
Taiwan, ROC. (3)Division of Chest Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine,
Taichung Veterans General Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan, ROC; Department of
Medicine, School of Medicine, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan, ROC.
(4)Department of Medical Research, Taichung Veterans General Hospital, Taichung, 
Taiwan, ROC. (5)Taiwan Seed Improvement and Propagation Station, Council of
Agriculture, Propagation Technology Section, Taichung, Taiwan, ROC. (6)Department
of Health and Nutrition, Chia Nan University of Pharmacy & Science, Tainan,
Taiwan, ROC.

Koelreuteria henryi Dummer, an endemic plant of Taiwan, has been used as a folk
medicine for the treatment of hepatitis, enteritis, cough, pharyngitis, allergy, 
hypertension, hyperlipidemia, and cancer. Austrobailignan-1, a natural lignan
derivative isolated from Koelreuteria henryi Dummer, has anti-oxidative and
anti-cancer properties. However, the effects of austrobailignan-1 on human cancer
cells have not been studied yet. Here, we showed that austrobailignan-1 inhibited
cell growth of human non-small cell lung cancer A549 and H1299 cell lines in both
dose- and time-dependent manners, the IC50 value (48 h) of austrobailignan-1 were
41 and 22 nM, respectively. Data from flow cytometric analysis indicated that
treatment with austrobailignan-1 for 24 h retarded the cell cycle at the G2/M
phase. The molecular event of austrobailignan-1-mediated G2/M phase arrest was
associated with the increase of p21Waf1/Cip1 and p27Kip1 expression, and decrease
of Cdc25C expression. Moreover, treatment with 100 nM austrobailignan-1 for 48 h 
resulted in a pronounced release of cytochrome c followed by the activation of
caspase-2, -3, and -9, and consequently induced apoptosis. These events were
accompanied by the increase of PUMA and Bax, and the decrease of Mcl-1 and Bcl-2.
Furthermore, our study also showed that austrobailignan-1 was a topoisomerase 1
inhibitor, as evidenced by a relaxation assay and induction of a DNA damage
response signaling pathway, including ATM, and Chk1, Chk2, γH2AX phosphorylated
activation. Overall, our results suggest that austrobailignan-1 is a novel DNA
damaging agent and displays a topoisomerase I inhibitory activity, causes DNA
strand breaks, and consequently induces DNA damage response signaling for cell
cycle G2/M arrest and apoptosis in a p53 independent manner.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0132052 
PMCID: PMC4492957
PMID: 26147394  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Clin Lung Cancer. 2015 Nov;16(6):e189-201. doi: 10.1016/j.cllc.2015.05.002. Epub 
2015 May 13.

Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme and Aldosterone Serum Levels as Prognostic and
Predictive Biomarkers for Cediranib in NCIC Clinical Trials Group Study BR.24.

Bar J(1), Ding K(2), Zhao H(3), Han L(2), Laurie SA(4), Seymour L(2), Addison
CL(5), Shepherd FA(6), Goss GD(4), Dimitroulakos J(5), Bradbury PA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Cancer Therapeutics the Ottawa Hospital Research Institute, Ottawa,
Ontario, Canada; Division of Medical Oncology, The Ottawa Hospital Cancer Center,
Ottawa, Ontario, Canada. Electronic address: bar.jair@gmail.com. (2)NCIC Clinical
Trials Group and Queen's University, Kingston, Ontario, Canada. (3)Centre for
Cancer Therapeutics the Ottawa Hospital Research Institute, Ottawa, Ontario,
Canada. (4)Division of Medical Oncology, The Ottawa Hospital Cancer Center,
Ottawa, Ontario, Canada. (5)Centre for Cancer Therapeutics the Ottawa Hospital
Research Institute, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada; Faculty of Medicine and the
Department of Biochemistry at the University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada. 
(6)University Health Network, Ontario Cancer Institute, Princess Margaret Cancer 
Centre, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Predictive biomarkers of benefit from angiogenesis inhibition are lacking. Serum 
angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) and aldosterone levels of non-small-cell lung
cancer patients treated with chemotherapy with or without cediranib were
evaluated. Low baseline ACE serum levels were prognostic of poor chemotherapy
outcome and predictive of benefit from cediranib. Aldosterone increase with use
of cediranib was correlated with better outcome. These results merit further
studies.BACKGROUND: Treatment-induced hypertension might correlate with
antiangiogenesis treatment efficacy. We evaluated the prognostic and predictive
significance of angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) and aldosterone serum levels,
regulators of blood pressure, in patients with advanced non-small-cell lung
cancer (NSCLC) enrolled in the NCIC Clinical Trials Group BR.24 trial. Results of
BR.24 demonstrated marginal efficacy of cediranib (an inhibitor of vascular
endothelial growth factor receptors) combination with carboplatin-paclitaxel.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: ACE and aldosterone were measured retrospectively using
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays at baseline and at time of treatment in serum 
samples of 226 and 176 of 296 enrolled patients, respectively. Cox regression was
performed to correlate biomarkers and patient characteristics with overall
survival (OS) and progression-free survival.
RESULTS: Patients who received placebo with high baseline ACE levels (> 115
ng/mL) had significantly better OS compared with patients with low ACE (hazard
ratio [HR], 0.49; 95% confidence interval [CI], 0.31-0.78; P = .002). Low ACE
levels (≤ 115 ng/mL) were predictive of OS benefit from cediranib (P = .05).
Aldosterone changes with treatment predicted differential OS between treatment
arms, with an increased trend to associate with longer OS (HR, 0.49; 95% CI,
0.23-1.06; P = .07) for patients who received cediranib, but shorter OS (HR,
1.90; 95% CI, 0.93-3.87; P = .08) for patients who received placebo (interaction 
P = .01).
CONCLUSION: Low baseline ACE levels were prognostic of poor OS and predictive of 
OS benefit from cediranib. An aldosterone level increase with treatment might
also be predictive of OS benefit from cediranib. These biomarkers should be
validated in additional antiangiogenic trials in NSCLC and other cancers.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cllc.2015.05.002 
PMID: 26081815  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Eur J Cancer. 2015 Aug;51(12):1511-28. doi: 10.1016/j.ejca.2015.04.026. Epub 2015
Jun 11.

Maintenance pazopanib versus placebo in Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer patients
non-progressive after first line chemotherapy: A double blind randomised phase
III study of the lung cancer group, EORTC 08092 (EudraCT: 2010-018566-23,
NCT01208064).

O'Brien ME(1), Gaafar R(2), Hasan B(3), Menis J(4), Cufer T(5), Popat S(6), Woll 
PJ(7), Surmont V(8), Georgoulias V(9), Montes A(10), Blackhall F(11), Hennig
I(12), Schmid-Bindert G(13), Baas P(14); EORTC-LCG.

Author information: 
(1)Royal Marsden Hospital, London and Sutton, United Kingdom. Electronic address:
mary.obrien@rmh.nhs.uk. (2)NCI, Cairo University, Egypt. Electronic address:
rabab.gaafar@gmail.com. (3)EORTC Headquarters, Brussels, Belgium. Electronic
address: Baktiar.hasan@eortc.be. (4)EORTC Headquarters, Brussels, Belgium.
Electronic address: Jessica.menis@eortc.be. (5)University Clinic Golnik, Golnik, 
Slovenia. Electronic address: tanja.cufer@klinika-golnik.si. (6)Royal Marsden
Hospital, London and Sutton, United Kingdom. Electronic address:
sanjay.popat@rmh.nhs.uk. (7)University of Sheffield, Sheffield, United Kingdom.
Electronic address: p.j.woll@sheffield.ac.uk. (8)Ghent University Hospital,
Belgium. Electronic address: veerle.surmont@uzgent.be. (9)University General
Hospital Heraklion, Greece. Electronic address: georgsec@med.uoc.gr. (10)Guy's
and St. Thomas' NHS - Guy's Hospital, London, United Kingdom. Electronic address:
ana.montes@gstt.nhs.uk. (11)The Christie Hospital NHS Foundation, Manchester,
United Kingdom. Electronic address: Fiona.Blackhall@christie.nhs.uk.
(12)Nottingham University Hospitals NHS Trust, Nottingham, United Kingdom.
Electronic address: ivo.hennig@nuh.nhs.uk. (13)Universitaetsmedizin Mannheim,
Mannheim, Germany. Electronic address: gerald.schmid-bindert@umm.de. (14)The
Netherlands Cancer Institute - Antoni Van LeeuweenhoekZiekenhuis, Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands. Electronic address: p.baas@nki.nl.

BACKGROUND: Switch maintenance is an effective strategy in the treatment of
advanced Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer (NSCLC). Pazopanib is an oral, multi-targeted
tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI). EORTC 08092 evaluated pazopanib given as
maintenance treatment following standard first line platinum-based chemotherapy
in patients with advanced NSCLC.
METHODS: Patients with non-progressive disease after 4-6 cycles of chemotherapy
were randomised to receive either pazopanib 800mg/day or matched placebo until
progression or unacceptable toxicity. The primary end-point was overall survival 
and secondary end-points were progression-free survival (PFS) and safety.
RESULTS: A total of 600 patients were planned to be randomised. The trial was
prematurely stopped following an early interim analysis, after 102 patients were 
randomised to pazopanib (n=50) or placebo (n=52). Median age was 64years in both 
arms. Median overall survival was 17.4 months for pazopanib and 12.3 months for
placebo (adjusted hazard ratio (HR) 0.72 [95% confidence interval (CI)
0.40-1.28]; p=0.257). Median PFS was 4.3 months versus 3.2 months (HR 0.67, [95% 
CI 0.43-1.03], p=0.068). PFS rates at 4 months were 56% and 45% respectively. The
majority of treatment-related adverse events (AEs) were grade 1-2. Grade 3-4 AEs 
(pazopanib versus placebo) were hypertension (38% versus 8%), neutropenia (8%
versus 0%), and elevated SGPT (6% versus 0%). Of the patients randomised to
pazopanib, 22% withdrew due to a treatment-related AE.
CONCLUSIONS: Switch maintenance with pazopanib following platinum-based
chemotherapy in advanced NSCLC patients had limited side-effects. This study was 
stopped due to lack of efficacy by stringent criteria for PFS at a futility
interim analysis.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejca.2015.04.026 
PMID: 26074395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Medicine (Baltimore). 2015 Jun;94(22):e887. doi: 10.1097/MD.0000000000000887.

Renin-Angiotensin system blockers may prolong survival of metastatic non-small
cell lung cancer patients receiving erlotinib.

Aydiner A(1), Ciftci R, Sen F.

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Medical Oncology, Istanbul University, Institute of
Oncology, Capa, Istanbul, Turkey (AA, RC, FS).

The aim of this study is to determine whether renin-angiotensin system blockers
(RASBs), which include angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (ACEIs) and
angiotensin-2 receptor 1 blockers (ARBs), improve the overall survival (OS) of
patients with metastatic non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC).The medical charts of
117 patients with metastatic NSCLC were retrospectively assessed. Thirty-seven
patients (RASB group) using RASBs during systemic treatment were compared with 80
controls (control group) who did not use RASBs following the diagnosis of NSCLC. 
The histological tumor subtype, performance status, age, sex, smoking status,
comorbidities, other medications, chemotherapeutics (CT), and erlotinib that were
received in any line of treatment were recorded. We compared the OS of the
patients in the RASB and control groups.The median (±SD) age of the patients was 
61 (±1) years and all patients were administered systemic treatment (CT or
erlotinib). The patients in RASB group were more likely to be smokers, have
hypertension and ischemic heart disease, and use erlotinib, thiazides,
beta-blockers, and calcium-channel blockers (P < 0.05 for all) compared with the 
control group. The median follow-up time was 18.9 months (range 1-102 months) for
the entire group. The median follow-up period was longer for RASB group than
control group (17 vs 11 months, P = 0.033). The most commonly prescribed RASB
agent was valsartan (n = 12/37). At the time of the analysis, 98 (83.7%) of all
patients had died. In the univariate analysis, the median OS was longer in the
RASB group compared with the control group (17 [±4.1] vs 12 [±1.4] months,
P = 0.016). Interestingly, further analyses revealed that RASBs significantly
improved OS only if used with erlotinib concurrently (34 [±13.8] vs 25 [±5]
months, P = 0.002) and the OS benefit was more attributable to ARBs because only 
4 patients received ACEI and erlotinib concurrently. However, the benefit of ARBs
on OS disappeared in the multivariate analysis.The use of ARBs during erlotinib
treatment may prolong OS of patients with metastatic NSCLC.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000000887 
PMCID: PMC4616356
PMID: 26039117  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Clin Lung Cancer. 2015 Nov;16(6):399-405. doi: 10.1016/j.cllc.2015.04.008. Epub
2015 Apr 30.

Treatment of Unfit Patients With Advanced Non-Small-Cell Lung Cancer: Definition 
Criteria According an Expert Panel.

De Marinis F(1), Bria E(2), Baas P(3), Tiseo M(4), Camerini A(5), Favaretto
AG(6), Gridelli C(7).

Author information: 
(1)Thoracic Oncology Division, European Institute of Oncology (IEO), Milan,
Italy. (2)Medical Oncology, University of Verona, Azienda Ospedaliera
Universitaria Integrata, Verona, Italy. Electronic address: emilio.bria@univr.it.
(3)Thoracic Oncology, The Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands. (4)Medical Oncology, University Hospital of Parma, Parma, Italy.
(5)Medical Oncology, Versilia Hospital and Istituto Toscano Tumori, Lido di
Camaiore, Italy. (6)Istituto Oncologico Veneto IRCCS, Padova, Italy. (7)"SG
Moscati" Hospital, Avellino, Italy.

The assessment of special categories of non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
patients requires a comprehensive analysis of all factors potentially influencing
the daily quality of life and the relative contribution of tumor-related symptoms
on the overall patient health status. While for elderly patients prospective
evidence and recommendations allow clinicians to better address their patients to
a shared treatment, a paucity of reliable data refers to treatment opportunities 
for these patients, termed frail or unfit, who are not considered eligible for
chemotherapy usually administered to adult patients. This consensus was inspired 
by the absence of clear criteria to define the category of unfit patients in the 
context of advanced NSCLC in order to share all the available tools for their
classification and evaluation and to support decisions for clinical practice on a
daily basis. After review of the literature and panelist consensus, a series of
items was identified as relevant: age, performance status, renal function, heart 
failure, previous cerebrovascular events, uncontrolled hypertension, neuropathy, 
hearing loss, symptomatic brain metastases, severe psychiatric disorders, and
absence of caregiver support. On the basis of these factors, a treatment
algorithm for clinical practice to categorize unfit NSCLC patient into 3 major
clinical scenarios was defined: (1) unfit for cisplatin-based chemotherapy, (2)
unfit for carboplatin-based chemotherapy, and (3) unfit for single-agent
chemotherapy.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cllc.2015.04.008 
PMID: 25989953  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth. 2015 Oct;29(5):1127-30. doi:
10.1053/j.jvca.2015.01.012. Epub 2015 Jan 8.

Preoperative Echocardiographic Parameters of Diastolic Dysfunction Did Not
Provide a Predictive Value for Postoperative Atrial Fibrillation in Lung and
Esophageal Cancer Surgery.

Ai D(1), Lasala J(1), Mehran JR(2), Xu G(3), Banchs J(4), Cata JP(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology and Perioperative Medicine. (2)Department of
Thoracic Surgery, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston,
Texas. (3)Department of Anesthesiology, Henan Cancer Hospital, Zhengzhou, China. 
(4)Department of Cardiology. (5)Department of Anesthesiology and Perioperative
Medicine; Outcomes Research Consortium, Cleveland, Ohio. Electronic address:
jcata@mdanderson.org.

Comment in
    J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth. 2015 Oct;29(5):1115-6.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the predictive value of preoperative transthoracic
echocardiography in the development of postoperative atrial fibrillation after
non-cardiac thoracic surgery.
DESIGN: This was a retrospective study.
SETTING: Academic hospital.
PARTICIPANTS: A total of 703 adult patients with non-small cell lung cancer.
INTERVENTIONS: None.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: Retrospective data of 177 non-cardiac thoracic
surgical oncologic patients undergoing lung or esophageal cancer surgery with
preoperative transthoracic echocardiograms (TTE) (within 30 days before surgery) 
were analyzed. The Wilcoxon rank sum test was used to evaluate the difference in 
continuous variables. Fisher's exact test or the chi-square test was used to
evaluate the association between two categoric variables. Logistic regression
models were used for multivariate analysis to include important and significant
covariates. Among the demographic and echocardiographic variables measured age,
systemic hypertension, e` septal, e` lateral and E/e` ratio were significantly
different between patients who would develop postoperative atrial fibrillation
(POAF) and those who did not. The logistic regression models only identify age as
a predictor factor of POAF.
CONCLUSIONS: These results were similar to those published elsewhere on POAF
incidence and risk factors. The preoperative echocardiographic variables in this 
study did not provide predictive value for POAF in non-cardiac thoracic surgery.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1053/j.jvca.2015.01.012 
PMID: 25976602  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. BMC Cancer. 2015 May 1;15:339. doi: 10.1186/s12885-015-1350-6.

Phase II study of axitinib with doublet chemotherapy in patients with advanced
squamous non-small-cell lung cancer.

Bondarenko IM(1), Ingrosso A(2), Bycott P(3), Kim S(4), Cebotaru CL(5).

Author information: 
(1)Oncology Department, Dnepropetrovsk Medical Academy, City Multiple-Discipline 
Clinical Hospital, No. 4 31 Blizhnaya Street, Dnepropetrovsk, 49102, Ukraine.
oncology@dsma.dp.ua. (2)Pfizer, Milan, Italy. antonella.ingrosso@pfizer.com.
(3)Pfizer Inc, San Diego, CA, USA. paul.bycott@pfizer.com. (4)Pfizer Inc, San
Diego, CA, USA. skim@mirnarx.com. (5)Prof. Dr. Ion Chiricută' Institute of
Oncology, Cluj-Napoca, Romania. cristinacebotaru@yahoo.com.

BACKGROUND: Axitinib is an orally active and potent tyrosine kinase inhibitor of 
vascular endothelial growth factor receptors 1, 2 and 3. This phase II study
assessed the efficacy and safety of axitinib combined with cisplatin/gemcitabine 
in chemotherapy-naïve patients with advanced/metastatic (stage IIIB/IV) squamous 
non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC).
METHODS: Axitinib (starting dose 5 mg twice daily [bid]; titrated up or down to
2-10 mg bid) was administered orally on a continuous schedule with cisplatin
(80 mg/m(2) intravenously [i.v.] every 3 weeks) and gemcitabine (1,250 mg/m(2)
i.v. on days 1 and 8 of each 3-week cycle), and was continued as monotherapy
after completion of six cycles (maximum) of chemotherapy. The primary study
endpoint was objective response rate, as defined by Response Evaluation Criteria 
in Solid Tumours.
RESULTS: Of the 38 patients treated, one (2.6%) patient achieved a complete
response and 14 (36.8%) patients had a partial response; nine (23.7%) patients
showed stable disease and three (7.9%) patients had disease progression. Median
progression-free survival was 6.2 months, and median overall survival was
14.2 months. The estimated probability of survival at 12 months and 24 months was
63.2% and 30.8%, respectively. The most frequent grade ≥3 toxicities were
neutropaenia and hypertension (13.2% each). Three (7.9%) patients experienced
haemoptysis, of which one case (2.6%) was fatal.
CONCLUSIONS: Treatment with the combination of axitinib and cisplatin/gemcitabine
demonstrated anti-tumour activity in patients with advanced/metastatic squamous
NSCLC and the fatal haemoptysis rate was low. However, without a reference arm
(cisplatin/gemcitabine alone), it is not conclusive whether the combination is
better than chemotherapy alone. This study was registered at ClinicalTrials.gov, 
registration # NCT00735904, on August 13, 2008.

DOI: 10.1186/s12885-015-1350-6 
PMCID: PMC4424571
PMID: 25929582  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol. 2015 Jun;75(6):1267-72. doi:
10.1007/s00280-015-2755-2. Epub 2015 Apr 30.

A phase II study of pemetrexed monotherapy in chemo-naïve Eastern Cooperative
Oncology Group performance status 2 patients with EGFR wild-type or unknown
advanced non-squamous non-small cell lung cancer (HANSHIN Oncology Group 002).

Hata A(1), Katakami N, Fujita S, Nanjo S, Takeshita J, Tanaka K, Kaneda T,
Nishiyama A, Nishimura T, Nakagawa A, Otsuka K, Morita S, Urata Y, Negoro S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Integrated Oncology, Institute of Biomedical Research and
Innovation, 2-2, Minatojima-minamimachi, Chuo-ku, Kobe, 650-0047, Japan,
a-hata@fbri.org.

PURPOSE: The aim of our study was to investigate the efficacy and safety of
pemetrexed monotherapy in chemo-naïve Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG)
performance status (PS) 2 patients with epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)
wild-type or unknown advanced non-squamous non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC).
METHODS: Pemetrexed was administered at 500 mg/m(2) triweekly until progression
with supplementations in chemo-naïve ECOG PS 2 patients with EGFR wild-type or
unknown advanced non-squamous NSCLC.
RESULTS: Between September 2009 and April 2013, twenty-eight patients were
enrolled. Median age was 75 (range 59-89). Nineteen (68 %) of 28 were ever
smoker, and 18 (64 %) had pulmonary emphysema. Sixteen (57 %) had comorbidities
such as hypertension, heart disease, and/or diabetes. In 26 eligible patients,
the overall response rate, disease control rate, median PFS, and median overall
survival were 11.5, 53.8 %, 3.0 [95 % confidence interval (CI) 1.9-5.7] months
and 9.5 (95 % CI 3.3-12.5) months, respectively. Median administered course
number was 3 (range 1-14). Median duration of PS maintenance ≤2 was 4.9 (95 % CI 
1.3-9.7) months. Common (≥10 %) grade 3/4 toxicities included 7 (27 %)
neutropenia, 7 (27 %) leukopenia, 4 (15 %) fatigue, and 3 (12 %)
thrombocytopenia. Febrile neutropenia and interstitial lung disease were not
observed. There were no treatment-related deaths.
CONCLUSION: Pemetrexed monotherapy demonstrated moderate efficacy and good safety
in chemo-naïve PS 2 patients with EGFR wild-type or unknown non-squamous NSCLC.
It can be a therapeutic option in "frail" PS 2 non-squamous NSCLC patients
without the indication of combination regimens, if the patient is EGFR wild-type.

DOI: 10.1007/s00280-015-2755-2 
PMID: 25925001  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Target Oncol. 2015 Jun;10(2):303-10. doi: 10.1007/s11523-015-0367-8.

Nintedanib: A Review of Its Use as Second-Line Treatment in Adults with Advanced 
Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer of Adenocarcinoma Histology.

Dhillon S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Springer, Private Bag 65901, Mairangi Bay 0754, Auckland, New Zealand,
demail@springer.com.

Nintedanib (Vargatef®) is a triple angiokinase inhibitor that potently blocks the
proangiogenic pathways mediated by vascular endothelial growth factor receptors, 
platelet-derived growth factor receptors and fibroblast growth factor receptors. 
In the EU, nintedanib in combination with docetaxel is indicated for adults with 
locally advanced, metastatic or locally recurrent non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC) of adenocarcinoma tumour histology after first-line chemotherapy.
Nintedanib in combination with docetaxel relative to placebo plus docetaxel
significantly prolonged progression-free survival (PFS), but did not increase
overall survival (OS), in the overall population of patients with advanced NSCLC 
in the phase III LUME-Lung 1 study. Notably, the subgroup of patients with
adenocarcinoma histology experienced a significant improvement in both PFS and OS
with nintedanib plus docetaxel, with a greater benefit seen in patients with
rapidly progressing disease. Nintedanib is the first antiangiogenic agent to have
shown a survival benefit in the second-line treatment of these patients.
Health-related quality of life (HR-QOL) was not adversely affected with the
addition of nintedanib to docetaxel in the overall population or in the
adenocarcinoma subgroup. Nintedanib combination therapy had a generally
manageable tolerability profile. Adverse events typically associated with
antiangiogenic agents (e.g. bleeding and hypertension) were not greatly increased
with nintedanib plus docetaxel relative to placebo plus docetaxel. To conclude,
nintedanib in combination with docetaxel is an effective treatment option for
patients with advanced NSCLC of adenocarcinoma histology after first-line
chemotherapy.

DOI: 10.1007/s11523-015-0367-8 
PMID: 25894578  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Eur J Clin Pharmacol. 2015 May;71(5):541-7. doi: 10.1007/s00228-015-1831-1. Epub 
2015 Mar 11.

Meta-analysis of the risks of hypertension and QTc prolongation in patients with 
advanced non-small cell lung cancer who were receiving vandetanib.

Liu Y(1), Liu Y, Fan ZW, Li J, Xu GG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Chinese PLA Air Force General Hospital,
Beijing, 100142, China.

BACKGROUND: A meta-analysis of published data was conducted to investigate the
overall risks of hypertension and QTc prolongation in patients with advanced
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) who were receiving vandetanib.
METHODS: A computerized search through electronic databases, including PubMed and
Embase (until Dec 2014), was performed to obtain eligible randomized controlled
trials (RCTs) that compared hypertension and/or QTc prolongation profile of
vandetanib alone or plus chemotherapy with control groups (placebo, single
targeted therapy, chemotherapy, or a combination of them) in patients with
advanced NSCLC. The outcome measures were the overall risks of hypertension and
QTc prolongation. Relative risk (RR) and 95% confidence interval (CI) were
calculated and pooled using a random effects model.
RESULTS: A total of nine RCTs, which involved 4813 patients, were enrolled in the
present study. A significant increase in risk was observed for all-grade
hypertension (RR 5.58; 95% CI 4.16 to 7.48; P < 0.00001) and grade ≥3
hypertension (RR 4.79; 95% CI 2.31 to 9.93; P < 0.0001) in advanced NSCLC
patients who were receiving vandetanib compared with the controls. Moreover,
vandetanib significantly prolonged all-grade QTc interval (RR 7.90; 95% CI 4.03
to 15.50; P < 0.00001) and grade ≥3 QTc interval (RR 3.12; 95% CI 1.01 to 9.63;
P = 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Current evidence showed that significant risks in developing
hypertension and QTc prolongation exist in advanced NSCLC patients who were
receiving vandetanib. Thus, appropriate monitoring and management of these events
are recommended.

DOI: 10.1007/s00228-015-1831-1 
PMID: 25753291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Clin Cancer Res. 2015 Jun 15;21(12):2695-703. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-14-2797.
Epub 2015 Feb 27.

A Phase I First-in-Human Study of Enoticumab (REGN421), a Fully Human Delta-like 
Ligand 4 (Dll4) Monoclonal Antibody in Patients with Advanced Solid Tumors.

Chiorean EG(1), LoRusso P(2), Strother RM(3), Diamond JR(4), Younger A(3),
Messersmith WA(4), Adriaens L(5), Liu L(5), Kao RJ(5), DiCioccio AT(5), Kostic
A(5), Leek R(6), Harris A(6), Jimeno A(7).

Author information: 
(1)University of Washington, Seattle, Washington. Indiana University Melvin and
Bren Simon Cancer Center, Indianapolis, Indiana. gchiorea@uw.edu
antonio.jimeno@ucdenver.edu. (2)Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut.
(3)Indiana University Melvin and Bren Simon Cancer Center, Indianapolis, Indiana.
(4)University of Colorado School of Medicine, Denver, Colorado. (5)Regeneron
Pharmaceuticals Inc. Tarrytown, NY. (6)University of Oxford, Oxford, United
Kingdom. (7)University of Colorado School of Medicine, Denver, Colorado.
gchiorea@uw.edu antonio.jimeno@ucdenver.edu.

PURPOSE: Enoticumab (REGN421) is a fully human IgG1 monoclonal antibody that
binds human Dll4 and disrupts Notch-mediated signaling. The main objectives of
this trial were to determine the safety, dose-limiting toxicities (DLT),
pharmacokinetics (PK), and recommended phase II dose (RP2D) of enoticumab.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Enoticumab was administered intravenously, with dose
escalations from 0.25 to 4 mg/kg every 3 weeks (Q3W) and 0.75 to 3 mg/kg every 2 
weeks (Q2W).
RESULTS: Of 53 enrolled patients, 31 patients were treated Q3W and 22 patients
were treated Q2W. Two DLTs occurred: grade 3 nausea (0.5 mg/kg Q3W) and grade 3
abdominal pain (1 mg/kg Q2W). An MTD was not reached on either schedule. The most
frequent adverse events (AE) were fatigue, nausea, vomiting, hypertension,
headache, and anorexia. Six treatment-related serious AEs were reported in 4
patients: brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) increase (0.25 mg/kg Q3W, Gr1),
troponin I increase (4 mg/kg Q3W, Gr3), right ventricular dysfunction and
pulmonary hypertension (1.5 mg/kg Q2W, both Gr3), and left ventricular
dysfunction and pulmonary hypertension (3 mg/kg Q2W, both Gr3). Enoticumab was
characterized by nonlinear, target-mediated PK, and had a terminal half-life of 8
to 9 days. With multiple Q2W or Q3W dosing, accumulation was not observed.
Antitumor activity included two partial responses (non-small cell lung cancer
bronchoalveolar-type with a β-catenin mutation, and ovarian cancer) and 16
patients with stable disease (3> 6 months).
CONCLUSIONS: Enoticumab was tolerated, with RP2D of 4 mg/kg Q3W and 3 mg/kg Q2W
based on PK profile and clinical activity. Responses and SD were noted in ovarian
cancer and other solid tumors. Clin Cancer Res; 21(12); 2695-703. ©2015 AACR.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-14-2797 
PMID: 25724527  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Ann Oncol. 2015 May;26(5):894-901. doi: 10.1093/annonc/mdv072. Epub 2015 Feb 26.

A randomized phase II study of the MEK1/MEK2 inhibitor trametinib (GSK1120212)
compared with docetaxel in KRAS-mutant advanced non-small-cell lung cancer
(NSCLC)†.

Blumenschein GR Jr(1), Smit EF(2), Planchard D(3), Kim DW(4), Cadranel J(5), De
Pas T(6), Dunphy F(7), Udud K(8), Ahn MJ(9), Hanna NH(10), Kim JH(11), Mazieres
J(12), Kim SW(13), Baas P(14), Rappold E(15), Redhu S(15), Puski A(16), Wu
FS(15), Jänne PA(17).

Author information: 
(1)MD Anderson Cancer Center, The University of Texas, Houston, USA
gblumens@mdanderson.org. (2)Department of Pulmonary Diseases, Vrije Universiteit 
VU Medical Centre, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. (3)Medical Oncology Department,
Gustave Roussy (GR), Villejuif, France. (4)Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul
National University Hospital, Seoul, Republic of Korea. (5)Department of
Respiratory Medicine, Hôpital Tenon, Assistance Publique - Hôpitaux de Paris,
Paris, France. (6)European Institute of Oncology, Milan, Italy. (7)Duke
University Medical Center, Durham, USA. (8)Korányi National Institute of
Tuberculosis and Pulmonology, Budapest, Hungary. (9)Division of
Hematology-Oncology, Department of Medicine, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan
University School of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea. (10)IU Melvin and Bren
Simon Cancer Center, Indianapolis, USA. (11)Yonsei Cancer Center, Division of
Medical Oncology, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of
Korea. (12)Hopital Larrey CHU Toulouse, Toulouse, France. (13)Department of
Oncology, Asan Medical Center, University of Ulsan College of Medicine, Seoul,
Republic of Korea. (14)Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. 
(15)GlaxoSmithKline, Collegeville, USA. (16)GlaxoSmithKline Kft., Budapest,
Hungary. (17)Lowe Center for Thoracic Oncology, Belfer Institute for Applied
Cancer Science Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, USA.

BACKGROUND: KRAS mutations are detected in 25% of non-small-cell lung cancer
(NSCLC) and no targeted therapies are approved for this subset population.
Trametinib, a selective allosteric inhibitor of MEK1/MEK2, demonstrated
preclinical and clinical activity in KRAS-mutant NSCLC. We report a phase II
trial comparing trametinib with docetaxel in patients with advanced KRAS-mutant
NSCLC.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Eligible patients with histologically confirmed KRAS-mutant
NSCLC previously treated with one prior platinum-based chemotherapy were randomly
assigned in a ratio of 2 : 1 to trametinib (2 mg orally once daily) or docetaxel 
(75 mg/m(2) i.v. every 3 weeks). Crossover to the other arm after disease
progression was allowed. Primary end point was progression-free survival (PFS).
The study was prematurely terminated after the interim analysis of 92 PFS events,
which showed the comparison of trametinib versus docetaxel for PFS crossed the
futility boundary.
RESULTS: One hundred and twenty-nine patients with KRAS-mutant NSCLC were
randomized; of which, 86 patients received trametinib and 43 received docetaxel. 
Median PFS was 12 weeks in the trametinib arm and 11 weeks in the docetaxel arm
(hazard ratio [HR] 1.14; 95% CI 0.75-1.75; P = 0.5197). Median overall survival, 
while the data are immature, was 8 months in the trametinib arm and was not
reached in the docetaxel arm (HR 0.97; 95% CI 0.52-1.83; P = 0.934). There were
10 (12%) partial responses (PRs) in the trametinib arm and 5 (12%) PRs in the
docetaxel arm (P = 1.0000). The most frequent adverse events (AEs) in ≥20% of
trametinib patients were rash, diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, and fatigue. The most 
frequent grade 3 treatment-related AEs in the trametinib arm were hypertension,
rash, diarrhea, and asthenia.
CONCLUSION: Trametinib showed similar PFS and a response rate as docetaxel in
patients with previously treated KRAS-mutant-positive NSCLC.
CLINICALTRIALSGOV REGISTRATION NUMBER: NCT01362296.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the European
Society for Medical Oncology. All rights reserved. For permissions, please email:
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/annonc/mdv072 
PMCID: PMC4855243
PMID: 25722381  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. J Thorac Oncol. 2015 Mar;10(3):486-91. doi: 10.1097/JTO.0000000000000434.

Phase II trial of gefitinib in combination with bevacizumab as first-line therapy
for advanced non-small cell lung cancer with activating EGFR gene mutations: the 
Okayama Lung Cancer Study Group Trial 1001.

Ichihara E(1), Hotta K, Nogami N, Kuyama S, Kishino D, Fujii M, Kozuki T, Tabata 
M, Harada D, Chikamori K, Aoe K, Ueoka H, Hosokawa S, Bessho A, Hisamoto-Sato A, 
Kubo T, Oze I, Takigawa N, Tanimoto M, Kiura K.

Author information: 
(1)*Department of Respiratory Medicine, Okayama University Hospital, Okayama,
Japan; †Department of Hematology/Oncology, Vanderbilt Vanderbilt University
Medical Center, Nashville, TN; ‡Department of Respiratory Medicine, NHO Shikoku
Cancer Center, Matsuyama, Japan; §Department of Respiratory Medicine, NHO Iwakuni
Clinical Center, Iwakuni, Japan; ‖Department of Medical Oncology, NHO
Yamaguchi-Ube Medical Center, Ube, Japan; ¶Department of Respiratory Internal
Medicine, Japanese Red Cross Kobe Hospital, Kobe, Japan; #Division of Clinical
Oncology, Sumitomo Besshi Hospital, Niihama, Japan; **Department of Clinical
Research, NHO Yamaguchi-Ube Medical Center, Ube, Japan; ††Department of
Respiratory Medicine, Japanese Red Cross Okayama Hospital, Okayama, Japan;
‡‡Division of Epidemiology and Prevention, Aichi Cancer Center Research
Institute, Nagoya, Japan; and §§Department of General Internal Medicine 4,
Kawasaki Medical School, Okayama, Japan.

Comment in
    J Thorac Oncol. 2015 Aug;10(8):e79.
    J Thorac Oncol. 2015 Aug;10(8):e78-9.

PURPOSE: Whether bevacizumab enhances the effect of the epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR) inhibitor gefitinib on EGFR mutant non-small cell lung cancers
(NSCLCs) remains unknown. We conducted a phase II trial to investigate the
efficacy and safety of gefitinib when combined with bevacizumab as first-line
therapy in patients with advanced NSCLC harboring EGFR gene mutations.
METHODS: In this trial, 42 patients with a performance status of 0 to 2 received 
gefitinib (250 mg/d) and bevacizumab (15 mg/kg, every 3 weeks). The primary end
point of this study was the 1-year progression-free survival (PFS) rate. We
assumed that a 1-year PFS rate of 55% would indicate potential usefulness and
that a 1-year PFS rate of 40% would constitute the lower limit of interest.
RESULTS: Forty-two patients were enrolled in the study with a median age of 73
(range 42-86) years. Activating EGFR gene mutations included exon 19 deletion
(57%) and L858R point mutations in exon 21 (38%). The objective response rate was
73.8% and included two complete responses. The 1-year PFS rate and median PFS
time were 56.7% (95% confidence interval [CI] 39.9-70.5) and 14.4 months (95% CI 
10.1-19.2), respectively. The median PFS differed significantly between EGFR exon
19 deletion and the L858R point mutation (18.0 versus 9.4 months, respectively; p
= 0.006). The median overall survival had not yet been reached. Severe adverse
events included grade 3 skin rash (15%), hypertension (17%), aspartate
transaminase/alanine aminotransferase elevation (17%), proteinuria (7%),
intracranial hemorrhage (2%), and grade 4 perforation of the digestive tract
(2%). There were no treatment-related deaths.
CONCLUSION: Gefitinib in combination with bevacizumab as first-line therapy seems
to be a favorable and well-tolerated treatment for patients with advanced NSCLC
with activating EGFR gene mutations, especially those with EGFR exon 19 deletion 
mutations, although the primary end point was not met because the lower limit of 
the CI was less than 40%.

DOI: 10.1097/JTO.0000000000000434 
PMID: 25695221  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2015;16(2):647-52.

Screening for patients with non-small cell lung cancer who could survive long
term chemotherapy.

Wu XY(1), Huang XE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemotherapy, the Affiliated Jiangsu Cancer Hospital of Nanjing 
Medical University and Jiangsu Institute of Cancer Research, Nanjing, China
E-mail : huangxinen06@163.com.

BACKGROUND: Lung cancer was one of the most common cancers in both men and women 
all over the world. In this study, we aimed to clarify who could survive after
long term chemotherapy in patients with advanced non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC).
METHODS: We enrolled 186 patients with stage IV NSCLC after long term
chemotherapy from Jun 2006 to Nov 2014 diagnosed in Jiangsu Cancer Hospital.
Multiple variables like age, gender, smoking, histology of adenocarcinoma and
squamous-cell cancer, number of metastatic sites, metastatic sites (e.g. lung,
brain, bone, liver and pleura), hemoglobin, lymphocyte rate (LYR), Change of LYR 
during multiple therapies, hypertension, diabetes, chronic bronchitis, treatments
(e.g.radiotherapy and targeted therapy) were selected. For consideration of
factors influencing survival and response for patients with advanced NSCLC,
logistic regression analysis and Cox regression analysis were used in an attempt 
to develop a screening module for patients with elevated survival after long term
chemotherapy become possible.
RESULTS: Of the total of 186 patients enrolled, 69 survived less than 1 year
(short-term group), 45 one to two years, and 72 longer than 3 years (long-term
group). For logistic regression analysis, the short-term group was taken as
control group and the long-term group as the case group. We found that age,
histology of adenocarcinoma, metastatic site (e.g. lung and liver), treatments
(e.g. targeted therapy and radiotherapy), LYR, a decreasing tendency of LYR and
chronic bronchitis were individually associated with overall survival by Cox
regression analysis. A multivariable Cox regression model showed that metastatic 
site (e.g. lung and liver), histology of adenocarcinoma, treatments (e.g.
targeted therapy and radiotherapy) and chronic bronchitis were associated with
overall survival. Thus metastatic site (e.g. lung and liver) and chronic
bronchitis may be important risk factors for patients with advanced NSCLC.
Gender, metastatic site (e.g. lung and liver), LYR and the decreasing tendency of
LYR were significantly associated with long-term survival in the
individual-variable logistic regression model (P<0.05). On multivariate logistic 
regression analysis, gender, metastatic site (e.g. lung and liver) and the
decreasing tendency of LYR associated with long-term survival.
CONCLUSIONS: In conclusion, female patients with stage IV adenocarcinoma of NSCLC
who had decreasing tendency of LYR during the course therapy and had accepted
multiple therapies e.g. more than third-line chemotherapy, radiotherapy and/or
targeted therapy might be expected to live longer.


PMID: 25684501  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Med Oncol. 2015 Feb;32(2):473. doi: 10.1007/s12032-014-0473-y. Epub 2015 Jan 21.

Efficacy and safety of chemotherapy or tyrosine kinase inhibitors combined with
bevacizumab versus chemotherapy or tyrosine kinase inhibitors alone in the
treatment of non-small cell lung cancer: a systematic review and meta-analysis.

Sun L(1), Ma JT, Zhang SL, Zou HW, Han CB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Shengjing Hospital of China Medical University,
Shenyang, 110022, People's Republic of China.

The meta-analysis evaluated the efficacy and safety of chemotherapy or tyrosine
kinase inhibitors combined with bevacizumab versus chemotherapy or tyrosine
kinase inhibitors alone in the treatment of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC).
The PubMed/MEDLINE, Ovid, Web of Science, CNKI, and the Cochrane Library database
were searched for eligible randomized controlled trials comparing the combination
of chemotherapy or epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors
(EGFR-TKIs) with bevacizumab to chemotherapy or EGFR-TKI alone. Main outcome
measures were overall survival (OS), progression-free survival (PFS), objective
response rate (ORR), and adverse effects. The pooled data were analyzed by STATA 
12.0 and expressed as hazard ratio (HR) or risk ratio (RR), with their
corresponding 95 % confidence intervals (95 % CI). Nine eligible trials
comprising 3,547 patients (1,779 for bevacizumab and 1,768 for controls) were
included in the study. Chemotherapy or TKIs in combination with bevacizumab
significantly prolonged PFS (HRpfs 0.72, 95 % CIpfs 0.66-0.79, P pfs < 0.001) and
OS (HRos 0.90, 95 % CIos 0.82-0.99, P os = 0.029) as first-line treatment for
NSCLC compared with chemotherapy or TKIs alone. Bevacizumab combination regimens 
significantly prolonged PFS (HR 0.62, 95 % CI 0.52-0.74, P < 0.001) as
second-line treatment; however, no benefit regarding OS was observed with the
addition of bevacizumab (HR 0.94, 95 % CI 0.78-1.12, P = 0.479). The bevacizumab 
group showed increased ORR in both first- and second-line treatments. The
high-dose bevacizumab subgroup in combination with chemotherapy showed a
statistically significant improvement in OS, PFS, and ORR (HRos 0.89, 95 % CIos
0.80-0.99, P os 0.037; HRpfs 0.71, 95 % CIpfs 0.64-0.79, P pfs < 0.01, RRorr
1.85, 95 % CIorr 1.59-2.15, P orr < 0.001, respectively); however, the low-dose
bevacizumab subgroup did not show enhanced OS (HRos 0.91, 95 % CIos 0.77-1.07, P 
os = 0.263), and a moderate improvement of PFS and ORR (HRpfs 0.85, 95 % CIpfs
0.72-1.00, P pfs = 0.049; RRorr 1.60, 95 % CIorr 1.28-2.0, P orr < 0.001).
Erlotinib in combination with bevacizumab significantly prolonged PFS (HR 0.60,
P < 0.001, 95 % CI 0.51-0.71) and increased ORR (RR 1.21, 95 % CI 0.98-1.49,
P = 0.067) compared with erlotinib alone. A higher incidence of grade ≥3 adverse 
events such as proteinuria, hypertension, and hemorrhage was observed in the
bevacizumab combination group than in the control group without bevacizumab (P
all < 0.05). The addition of bevacizumab to chemotherapy or erlotinib can
significantly improve PFS and ORR both in first- and second-line treatments of
advanced NSCLC, with an acceptable risk of bleeding events, hypertension,
proteinuria, and rash. Combination therapy with bevacizumab and chemotherapy is
beneficial regarding OS; however, whether bevacizumab plus erlotinib can prolong 
OS need further validation.

DOI: 10.1007/s12032-014-0473-y 
PMID: 25603953  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Oncol Res Treat. 2014;37(12):710-8. doi: 10.1159/000369546. Epub 2014 Nov 21.

Antiangiogenic agents combined with chemotherapy in the first-line treatment of
advanced non-small-cell lung cancer: overall and histology subgroup-specific
meta-analysis.

Zhang L(1), Cao F, Wang Y, Wang S, Zhong D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Tianjin Medical University General Hospital, Tianjin, 
China.

AIM: This study investigated the overall and histology subtype-specific results
of antiangiogenic agents combined with chemotherapy versus chemotherapy alone for
the first-line treatment of advanced non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC).
METHODS: Literature retrieval, trial selection, data collection, and statistical 
analysis were performed according to the Cochrane Handbook. The outcome measures 
were tumor response rate, progression-free survival (PFS), overall survival (OS),
and adverse effects.
RESULTS: 13 randomized controlled trials comprising 5,451 patients were included.
The meta-analysis showed a higher response rate (risk ratio (RR) 0.63, 95%
confidence interval (CI) 0.53-0.74) and a significantly prolonged PFS (hazard
ratio (HR) 0.75, 95% CI 0.66-0.85) and OS (HR 0.92, 95% CI 0.86-0.98) in the
groups combining antiangiogenic agents with chemotherapy versus the chemotherapy 
alone groups. In the histology subgroup analysis, treatment with antiangiogenic
agents plus chemotherapy significantly improved the RR, PFS, and OS as compared
with the chemotherapy groups in patients with nonsquamous NSCLC, but not in those
with squamous NSCLC. The risk of grade 3/4 thrombocytopenia, hypertension,
bleeding, proteinuria, rash, diarrhea, fatigue, headache, anorexia, and febrile
neutropenia was significantly increased in the antiangiogenic agent combination
groups as compared with the chemotherapy groups.
CONCLUSION: The use of antiangiogenic agents in addition to chemotherapy is a
valid option for the first-line treatment of advanced NSCLC. The benefit is
restricted to patients with nonsquamous-cell tumors.

© 2014 S. Karger AG, Freiburg.

DOI: 10.1159/000369546 
PMID: 25531716  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Mol Cancer Ther. 2015 Feb;14(2):461-9. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-14-0431. Epub
2014 Dec 10.

A multicenter phase I study of pazopanib in combination with paclitaxel in
first-line treatment of patients with advanced solid tumors.

Kendra KL(1), Plummer R(2), Salgia R(3), O'Brien ME(4), Paul EM(5), Suttle AB(5),
Compton N(6), Xu CF(6), Ottesen LH(6), Villalona-Calero MA(7).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Oncology and Comprehensive Cancer Center, The Ohio State
University, Columbus, Ohio, United States. Kari.Kendra@osumc.edu. (2)Sir Bobby
Robson Cancer Trials Research Centre, Northern Centre for Cancer Care, Freeman
Hospital, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom. (3)University of Chicago, Chicago,
Illinois. (4)Department of Medicine, Royal Marsden NHS Foundation Trust, Sutton, 
Surrey, United Kingdom. (5)Oncology Research and Development, GlaxoSmithKline,
Research Triangle Park, North Carolina. (6)Oncology Research and Development,
GlaxoSmithKline, Uxbridge, United Kingdom. (7)Division of Medical Oncology and
Comprehensive Cancer Center, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, United
States.

This study was designed to evaluate the safety, pharmacokinetics, and clinical
activity of pazopanib combined with paclitaxel to determine the recommended phase
II dose in the first-line setting in patients with advanced solid tumors.
Patients were enrolled in a 3+3 dose-escalation design to determine the maximum
tolerated regimen (MTR) of once daily pazopanib plus paclitaxel administered
every 3 weeks at four dose levels (DL1-4). Safety, pharmacokinetics,
pharmacogenetics, and disease assessments were performed. Twenty-eight patients
received treatment. One patient at DL1 had dose-limiting toxicity (DLT) of
elevated hepatic enzymes. After pazopanib discontinuation, liver enzyme
concentrations remained high until a concurrent medication, simvastatin, was
discontinued. This patient had the defective CYP2C8*3*3 genotype. At DL2, 1
patient had DLT of elevated hepatic enzymes with rash and 1 patient had DLT of
rash. The MTR was paclitaxel 150 mg/m(2) plus pazopanib 800 mg. The most common
toxicities were alopecia, fatigue, hypertension, nausea, diarrhea, dysgeusia,
neutropenia, myalgia, hair color changes, and peripheral neuropathy.
Coadministration of pazopanib and paclitaxel resulted in a 38% increase in
systemic exposure to paclitaxel, relative to administration of paclitaxel alone, 
at the MTR. Of the 28 patients treated with the combination, 10 achieved a
partial response and 10 achieved stable disease of ≥12 weeks. Pazopanib 800 mg
daily plus paclitaxel 150 mg/m(2) every 3 weeks was the recommended phase II
dose, with a manageable safety profile, and with clinical activity in both
melanoma and non-small cell lung cancer that suggest further evaluation of this
combination is warranted.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-14-0431 
PMID: 25504632  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Int J Cancer. 2015 Jul 15;137(2):409-19. doi: 10.1002/ijc.29377. Epub 2014 Dec
12.

Safety profile of combined therapy inhibiting EFGR and VEGF pathways in patients 
with advanced non-small-cell lung cancer: A meta-analysis of 15 phase II/III
randomized trials.

Ma W(1), Xu M(2), Liu Y(3), Liu H(4), Huang J(2), Zhu Y(2), Ji LJ(5), Qi
X(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou University,
Zhengzhou, China. (2)Department of Gastroenterology, Tongji Hospital, Tongji
University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China. (3)Department of Oncology, The
First Affiliated Hospital with Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, China.
(4)Department of Medical Sciences, Biology and Biomedical Sciences, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA. (5)Department of Rehabilitation, The Second People's 
Hospital of Huai'an, Huai'an, China.

The efficacy of combined vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and epidermal 
growth factor receptor (EGFR) inhibition in patients with advanced non-small-cell
lung cancer (NSCLC) was well studied. However, few studies focused on the risk
and adverse events (AEs) of combined targeted therapy. The aim of this
meta-analysis was to evaluate the safety profile of combined targeted therapy
against EFGR and VEGF in patients with advanced NSCLC. A comprehensive literature
search in MEDLINE, EMBASE, Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials
(CENTRAL), ASCO Abstracts and ESMO Abstracts was conducted. Eligible studies were
randomized clinical trials (RCTs) that compared safety profile of combined
therapy inhibiting EFGR and VEGF pathways with control groups (placebo, single
EGFR or VEGF inhibition therapy, chemotherapy or a combination of them) in
patients with advanced NSCLC. The endpoints included treatment discontinuation,
treatment-related deaths and AEs. The search identified 15 RCTs involving 6,919
patients. The outcomes showed that three of four pairwise comparisons detected
more discontinuation due to AEs in combined targeted therapy, with odds ratio
(OR) compared with the control groups ranged from 1.97 to 2.29. Treatment with
combined inhibition therapy was associated with several all-grade and grade 3 or 
4 AEs (e.g. rash, diarrhea and hypertension). Also, there was a significantly
higher incidence of treatment-related deaths in combined inhibition using
vandetanib versus single EGFR inhibition therapy (OR = 1.97, 95% CI 1.19-3.28).
In conclusion, combined inhibition therapy against EGFR and VEGF in patients with
advanced NSCLC was associated with increased toxicity. Increased AEs hinder
patient compliance and reduce their quality of life, leading to dose reduction or
discontinuation.

© 2014 UICC.

DOI: 10.1002/ijc.29377 
PMID: 25471638  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Cancer. 2015 Mar 15;121(6):883-92. doi: 10.1002/cncr.29132. Epub 2014 Nov 6.

Phase 2, randomized, open-label study of ramucirumab in combination with
first-line pemetrexed and platinum chemotherapy in patients with nonsquamous,
advanced/metastatic non-small cell lung cancer.

Doebele RC(1), Spigel D, Tehfe M, Thomas S, Reck M, Verma S, Eakle J, Bustin F,
Goldschmidt J Jr, Cao D, Alexandris E, Yurasov S, Camidge DR, Bonomi P.

Author information: 
(1)University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, Colorado.

BACKGROUND: Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)-mediated angiogenesis plays
an important role in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Ramucirumab is a human
immunoglobulin G1 monoclonal antibody that inhibits VEGF receptor 2. This phase 2
study investigated ramucirumab in combination with first-line pemetrexed and
platinum chemotherapy in advanced/metastatic NSCLC.
METHODS: Eligible stage IV nonsquamous NSCLC patients with no prior chemotherapy 
for metastatic disease were randomized 1:1 to pemetrexed and carboplatin (or
cisplatin) or ramucirumab (10 mg/kg) plus pemetrexed and carboplatin (or
cisplatin) once every 3 weeks. Treatment was given for 4 to 6 cycles, and this
was followed by a maintenance phase with pemetrexed or ramucirumab and
pemetrexed. The primary endpoint was progression-free survival (PFS) with a
sample size of sufficient power to detect an increase from 7 to 10.4 months.
RESULTS: From October 2010 to October 2011, 140 patients were randomized
(pemetrexed-platinum arm, 71; ramucirumab-pemetrexed-platinum arm, 69), and most 
baseline characteristics were similar for the 2 treatment arms. The median PFS
was 5.6 months for the pemetrexed-platinum arm and 7.2 months for the
ramucirumab-pemetrexed-platinum arm (hazard ratio, 0.75; P = .132). The objective
response rates were 38.0% and 49.3% for the pemetrexed-platinum and
ramucirumab-pemetrexed-platinum arms, respectively (P = .180). The disease
control rate was 70.4% for the pemetrexed-platinum arm and 85.5% for the
ramucirumab-pemetrexed-platinum arm (P = .032). The grade 3 or higher adverse
events occurring in 10% or more of patients were thrombocytopenia, neutropenia,
fatigue, anemia, nausea, back pain, and hypertension.
CONCLUSIONS: The primary endpoint of significant prolongation of PFS was not met;
however, ramucirumab showed evidence of clinical activity in combination with
pemetrexed and platinum in nonsquamous NSCLC patients. The addition of
ramucirumab to pemetrexed and platinum did not result in new or unexpected safety
findings.

© 2014 American Cancer Society.

DOI: 10.1002/cncr.29132 
PMID: 25377507  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Drugs. 2014 Oct;74(16):1891-925. doi: 10.1007/s40265-014-0302-9.

Bevacizumab: a review of its use in advanced cancer.

Keating GM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Springer, Private Bag 65901, Mairangi Bay, 0754, Auckland, New Zealand,
demail@springer.com.

The humanized monoclonal antibody bevacizumab (Avastin(®)) has been available in 
the EU since 2005. Results of phase III trials demonstrate that adding
intravenous bevacizumab to antineoplastic agents improves progression-free
survival and/or overall survival in patients with advanced cancer, including when
used as first- or second-line therapy in metastatic colorectal cancer, as
first-line therapy in advanced nonsquamous non-small cell lung cancer, as
first-line therapy in metastatic renal cell carcinoma, as first-line therapy in
metastatic breast cancer, and as first-line therapy in epithelial ovarian,
fallopian tube or primary peritoneal cancer or in recurrent, platinum-sensitive
or platinum-resistant disease. Results of these studies are supported by the
findings of routine oncology practice studies conducted in real-world settings.
The tolerability profile of bevacizumab is well defined and adverse events
associated with its use (e.g. hypertension, proteinuria, haemorrhage, wound
healing complications, arterial thromboembolism, gastrointestinal perforation)
are generally manageable. In conclusion, bevacizumab remains an important option 
for use in patients with advanced cancer.

DOI: 10.1007/s40265-014-0302-9 
PMID: 25315029  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Int J Clin Oncol. 2015 Aug;20(4):659-67. doi: 10.1007/s10147-014-0755-6. Epub
2014 Oct 11.

Phase II study of carboplatin, docetaxel and bevacizumab for chemotherapy-naïve
patients with advanced non-squamous non-small cell lung cancer.

Takiguchi Y(1), Iwasawa S, Minato K, Miura Y, Gemma A, Noro R, Yoshimori K,
Shingyoji M, Hino M, Ando M, Okamoto H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba University,
1-8-1, Inohana, Chuo-ku, Chiba, 260-8670, Japan, takiguchi@faculty.chiba-u.jp.

PURPOSE: To evaluate a 3-drug combination of carboplatin, docetaxel and
bevacizumab as a front-line chemotherapy for patients with advanced non-squamous 
non-small cell carcinoma (NSCLC), a single arm phase II study was conducted.
METHODS: Patients with stage IIIB/IV or postoperative recurrent non-squamous
NSCLC were treated with carboplatin (targeted area under the curve of 6 mg h/L), 
docetaxel (60 mg/m(2)), and bevacizumab (15 mg/kg) on day 1, repeated every 3
weeks for 4 to 6 cycles, followed by maintenance with bevacizumab every 3 weeks
until disease progression or occurrence of predefined toxicity. The planned
patient number was 40, and the primary endpoint was progression free survival
(PFS) as assessed by independent reviewers.
RESULTS: One patient refused the treatment after enrollment; thus, 39 patients
were treated and analyzed. The 3-drug therapy was delivered for a median of 4
cycles, and 54 % of the patients proceeded to the maintenance therapy for a
median of 4 cycles. The overall response rate was 74.4 % (29/39), with a 95 %
confidence interval (CI) of 60.0 to 88.7 %. The median PFS and overall survival
(OS) were 6.2 months (95 % CI, 4.8-8.5 months) and 22.4 months (95 % CI,
11.3-26.2 months), respectively. Toxicities of grade 3 or higher included
neutropenia in 71.8 %, febrile neutropenia in 23.1 %, and hypertension in 38.5 % 
of the patients, but they were transient and manageable.
CONCLUSION: The primary endpoint was met. The regimen yielded promising results
with an excellent overall response rate, PFS, and OS for chemotherapy-naïve
patients with advanced non-squamous NSCLC. Further studies are warranted.

DOI: 10.1007/s10147-014-0755-6 
PMID: 25301566  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Lung Cancer. 2014 Nov;86(2):288-90. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2014.08.011. Epub 2014
Aug 26.

A single-arm phase II trial of pazopanib in patients with advanced non-small cell
lung cancer with non-squamous histology with disease progression on bevacizumab
containing therapy.

Weiss JM(1), Villaruz LC(1), Socinski MA(1), Ivanova A(1), Grilley-Olson J(1),
Dhruva N(1), Stinchcombe TE(2).

Author information: 
(1)University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, 170 Manning Drive, Physician's
Office Building 3rd Floor, Chapel Hill, NC 27599-7305, United States.
(2)University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, 170 Manning Drive, Physician's
Office Building 3rd Floor, Chapel Hill, NC 27599-7305, United States. Electronic 
address: Thomas_stinchcombe@med.unc.edu.

OBJECTIVES: Platinum-based chemotherapy with bevacizumab is a standard therapy
for patients with stage IIIB/IV non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) with
non-squamous (NS) histology. Mechanisms of resistance to bevacizumab include
increased VEGF signaling or activation of VEGF receptors. Pazopanib is a
multi-targeted VEGF receptor tyrosine kinase with single agent activity in NSCLC.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Stage IIIB/IV patients with adequate organ function, who
progressed on a bevacizumab containing therapy were eligible if it had been ≤8
weeks since the last bevacizumab treatment. The primary end-point was disease
control rate (DCR), defined as partial or complete response, or stable disease
for ≥12 weeks. Patients were assessed radiographically every 2 cycles (6 weeks). 
A Simon 2-stage design was used, and if in the first stage ≤4 of 17 patients
experienced disease control the trial was to have been stopped for futility. An
unplanned analysis was performed after 15 patients were evaluable secondary to
slow accrual.
RESULTS: Between December 2010 and November 2013, 15 patients were treated on
trial. The median age was 61 years (range 39-74), and all patients had stage IV
disease. Of the 15 patients, 4 discontinued therapy prior to cycle 2 evaluation
due to adverse events (n=3) and medical illness (n=1), 5 patients had progressive
disease, 4 patients had stable disease for <12 weeks, and 2 patients had stable
disease for ≥12 weeks. No responses were observed. The DCR observed was 13%
(2/15), and the trial did not meet the criteria to proceed to the second stage.
Episodes of grade 3 treatment related toxicities observed included: increased ALT
(n=2), increased AST (n=1), anorexia (n=3), fatigue (n=3), hypertension (n=1),
infection (n=1), mucositis (n=2), nausea (n=3), pericardial effusion (n=1), and
vomiting (n=1).
CONCLUSION: Pazopanib has limited activity in NSCLC-NS in patients who have
experienced disease progression on bevacizumab.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2014.08.011 
PMCID: PMC4836183
PMID: 25201721  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Lancet Oncol. 2014 Oct;15(11):1236-44. doi: 10.1016/S1470-2045(14)70381-X. Epub
2014 Aug 27.

Erlotinib alone or with bevacizumab as first-line therapy in patients with
advanced non-squamous non-small-cell lung cancer harbouring EGFR mutations
(JO25567): an open-label, randomised, multicentre, phase 2 study.

Seto T(1), Kato T(2), Nishio M(3), Goto K(4), Atagi S(5), Hosomi Y(6), Yamamoto
N(7), Hida T(8), Maemondo M(9), Nakagawa K(10), Nagase S(11), Okamoto I(12),
Yamanaka T(13), Tajima K(14), Harada R(14), Fukuoka M(15), Yamamoto N(16).

Author information: 
(1)National Kyushu Cancer Center, Fukuoka, Japan. (2)Kanagawa Cardiovascular and 
Respiratory Center, Kanagawa, Japan. (3)The Cancer Institute Hospital of the
Japanese Foundation for Cancer Research, Tokyo, Japan. (4)National Cancer Center 
Hospital East, Chiba, Japan. (5)Kinki-chuo Chest Medical Center, Osaka, Japan.
(6)Tokyo Metropolitan Cancer and Infectious Diseases Center Komagome Hospital,
Tokyo, Japan. (7)National Cancer Center Hospital, Tokyo, Japan. (8)Aichi Cancer
Center, Aichi, Japan. (9)Miyagi Cancer Center, Miyagi, Japan. (10)Kinki
University Faculty of Medicine, Osaka, Japan. (11)Tokyo Medical University
Hospital, Tokyo, Japan. (12)Kyushu University Hospital, Fukuoka, Japan.
(13)National Cancer Center, Chiba, Japan. (14)Chugai Pharmaceutical Co Ltd,
Tokyo, Japan. (15)Izumi Municipal Hospital, Osaka, Japan. (16)Wakayama Medical
University, Wakayama, Japan. Electronic address: nbyamamo@wakayama-med.ac.jp.

Erratum in
    Lancet Oncol. 2014 Oct;15(11):e475.

Comment in
    Lancet Oncol. 2014 Oct;15(11):1184-5.

BACKGROUND: With use of EGFR tyrosine-kinase inhibitor monotherapy for patients
with activating EGFR mutation-positive non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC), median
progression-free survival has been extended to about 12 months. Nevertheless, new
strategies are needed to further extend progression-free survival and overall
survival with acceptable toxicity and tolerability for this population. We aimed 
to compare the efficacy and safety of the combination of erlotinib and
bevacizumab compared with erlotinib alone in patients with non-squamous NSCLC
with activating EGFR mutation-positive disease.
METHODS: In this open-label, randomised, multicentre, phase 2 study, patients
from 30 centres across Japan with stage IIIB/IV or recurrent non-squamous NSCLC
with activating EGFR mutations, Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group performance
status 0 or 1, and no previous chemotherapy for advanced disease received
erlotinib 150 mg/day plus bevacizumab 15 mg/kg every 3 weeks or erlotinib 150
mg/day monotherapy as a first-line therapy until disease progression or
unacceptable toxicity. The primary endpoint was progression-free survival, as
determined by an independent review committee. Randomisation was done with a
dynamic allocation method, and the analysis used a modified intention-to-treat
approach, including all patients who received at least one dose of study
treatment and had tumour assessment at least once after randomisation. This study
is registered with the Japan Pharmaceutical Information Center, number
JapicCTI-111390.
FINDINGS: Between Feb 21, 2011, and March 5, 2012, 154 patients were enrolled. 77
were randomly assigned to receive erlotinib and bevacizumab and 77 to erlotinib
alone, of whom 75 patients in the erlotinib plus bevacizumab group and 77 in the 
erlotinib alone group were included in the efficacy analyses. Median
progression-free survival was 16·0 months (95% CI 13·9-18·1) with erlotinib plus 
bevacizumab and 9·7 months (5·7-11·1) with erlotinib alone (hazard ratio 0·54,
95% CI 0·36-0·79; log-rank test p=0·0015). The most common grade 3 or worse
adverse events were rash (19 [25%] patients in the erlotinib plus bevacizumab
group vs 15 [19%] patients in the erlotinib alone group), hypertension (45 [60%] 
vs eight [10%]), and proteinuria (six [8%] vs none). Serious adverse events
occurred at a similar frequency in both groups (18 [24%] patients in the
erlotinib plus bevacizumab group and 19 [25%] patients in the erlotinib alone
group).
INTERPRETATION: Erlotinib plus bevacizumab combination could be a new first-line 
regimen in EGFR mutation-positive NSCLC. Further investigation of the regimen is 
warranted.
FUNDING: Chugai Pharmaceutical Co Ltd.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S1470-2045(14)70381-X 
PMID: 25175099  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. J Thorac Oncol. 2014 Aug;9(8):1146-53. doi: 10.1097/JTO.0000000000000217.

NCCTG N0821 (Alliance): a phase II first-line study of pemetrexed, carboplatin,
and bevacizumab in elderly patients with advanced nonsquamous non-small-cell lung
cancer with good performance status.

Dy GK(1), Molina JR, Qi Y, Ansari R, Thomas S, Ross HJ, Soori G, Anderson D,
Aubry MC, Meyers J, Adjei AA, Mandrekar S, Adjei AA.

Author information: 
(1)*Roswell Park Cancer Institute, Buffalo, NY; †Mayo Clinic Rochester, MN 55905;
‡Michiana Hematology Oncology, South Bend, IN; §Illinois CancerCare, Ottawa, IL; 
‖Mayo Clinic Scottsdale, AZ; ¶Missouri Valley Cancer Consortium, Omaha, NE; and
#Metro-Minnesota Community Clinical Oncology Program, St. Louis Park, MN.

BACKGROUND: We hypothesized that the combination of bevacizumab, carboplatin, and
pemetrexed will be an effective first-line regimen in fit, elderly patients with 
nonsquamous non-small-cell lung cancer.
METHODS: Treatment-naïve, stage IIIB/IV nonsquamous non-small-cell lung cancer
patients more than 70 years old with good performance status (Eastern Cooperative
Oncology Group performance status 0-1) and adequate organ function were eligible.
Carboplatin area under the curve 6, pemetrexed 500 mg/m, and bevacizumab 15 mg/kg
were administered on day 1 of each 21-day cycle (up to six cycles) followed by
maintenance pemetrexed and bevacizumab. The primary end point of 6-month
progression-free survival rate of at least 70% was assessed using a one-stage
binomial design. Quality of life (QOL) questionnaires were administered.
Polymorphisms in genes encoding relevant proteins (drug targets, transport, and
metabolism proteins) were correlated with treatment outcome.
RESULTS: Fifty-seven eligible patients were enrolled. Median age was 74.5 years. 
Median treatment cycles received was 6. The most common grade 3 or higher
non-hematologic adverse events were fatigue (26%) and hypertension (11%); 16% had
grade 4 neutropenia and 6.5% had grade 4 thrombocytopenia. Three patients
experienced grade 3/4 hemorrhagic events (one pulmonary, two gastrointestinal).
Primary end point of PFS6 was 60% (95% confidence interval [CI]: 45.9-73%).
Median PFS was 7.0 months (95% CI: 5.9-10.1), median overall survival was 13.7
months (95% CI: 9.4-16.8). Polymorphic KDR and VEGFA variants correlated with
survival and toxicity, respectively. There was no significant change in overall
QOL scores over time.
CONCLUSION: This regimen is feasible and did not decrease the QOL in this study
population. However, it did not meet the primary efficacy end point.

DOI: 10.1097/JTO.0000000000000217 
PMCID: PMC4145612
PMID: 25157767  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Lung Cancer. 2014 Oct;86(1):67-72. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2014.07.019. Epub 2014 
Aug 2.

Clinical genotyping and efficacy outcomes: exploratory biomarker data from the
phase II ABIGAIL study of first-line bevacizumab plus chemotherapy in
non-squamous non-small-cell lung cancer.

Pallaud C(1), Reck M(2), Juhasz E(3), Szima B(4), Yu CJ(5), Burdaeva O(6), Orlov 
S(7), Hilton M(1), Archer V(8), Mok T(9).

Author information: 
(1)F. Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd, Grenzacherstrasse 124, 4070 Basel, Switzerland.
(2)Department of Thoracic Oncology, LungClinic Grosshansdorf, Member of the
German Center for Lung Research (DZL), Wöhrendamm 80, 22927 Grosshansdorf,
Germany. (3)Országos Korányi TBC és Pulmonológiai Intézet, Pihenő str 1, 1121
Budapest, Hungary. (4)Markusovszky Teaching Hospital, Markusovszky u. 5, 9700
Szombathely, Hungary. (5)National Taiwan University Hospital, No. 1, Changde St.,
Zhongzheng Dist., Taipei City 10048, Taiwan. (6)Arkhangelsk Clinical Oncology
Dispensary, Obvodny kanal Avenue 145, building 1, Arkhangelsk, Arkhangelsk
region, 163045 Russia. (7)St Petersburg State Medical University, St Petersburg, 
Russia. (8)Roche Products Ltd, Shire Park, 1 Falcon Way, Welwyn Garden City,
Hertfordshire AL7 1TW, UK. (9)Department of Clinical Oncology, State Key
Laboratory of South China, Hong Kong Cancer Institute, The Chinese University of 
Hong Kong, Shatin, New Territories, Hong Kong. Electronic address:
tony@clo.cuhk.edu.hk.

OBJECTIVES: ABIGAIL, a phase II, randomized, open-label, multicenter study
evaluated the correlation between biomarkers and best overall response (BOR) to
bevacizumab with chemotherapy in patients with advanced or recurrent
non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Exploratory analyses of vascular endothelial 
growth factor (VEGF) clinical genotyping data are presented.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A total of 303 patients with NSCLC were randomized to
receive bevacizumab 7.5mg/kg or 15mg/kg until progression or unacceptable
toxicity (plus six cycles of chemotherapy). Patients provided blood samples for
biomarker analysis. Exploratory analyses were conducted to assess whether genetic
variants in VEGF-A or VEGFR-1/-2 act as efficacy or safety biomarkers. Single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were determined using individual genotyping
assays. DNA analysis for 12 SNPs across three genes is reported: VEGF-A (five
SNPs), VEGFR-1 (three SNPs), and VEGFR-2 (four SNPs).
RESULTS VEGF-A: c.+405/c.-634 (CG), VEGF-A: c.-460 >C; c-1498 >C (CT), and
VEGF-A: c.-2578 C>A were associated with >50% higher odds of responding to
treatment. VEGFR-1: rs9554316 (GT) was associated with >30% higher risk of
progression and >40% higher risk of death.
VEGF-A: c.+936 C>T was associated with higher incidence of hypertension.
CONCLUSIONS: Four genetic variants of VEGF-A and VEGFR-1 were associated with
bevacizumab treatment outcome. Three variants in VEGF-A were associated with
increased BOR, one variant in VEGFR-1 was associated with worse progression-free 
survival/overall survival. These associations were not statistically significant 
after correction for multiple testing. No genetic variant was associated with
significantly higher risk of hypertension. Replication in additional studies may 
provide insight into the use of these variants to predict response to
bevacizumab.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2014.07.019 
PMID: 25154982  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2014;15(14):5691-6.

Efficacy and safety of sorafenib for advanced non-small cell lung cancer: a
meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials.

Wang WL(1), Tang ZH, Xie TT, Xiao BK, Zhang XY, Guo DH, Wang DX, Pei F, Si HY,
Zhu M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Care, Chinese PLA General Hospital, Beijing,
China E-mail : wwl100@sohu.com.

BACKGROUND: Many clinical trials have been conducted to evaluate sorafenib for
the treatment of advanced NSCLC, but the results for efficacy have been
inconsistent. The aim of this study was to evaluate the efficacy and safety of
sorafenib in patients with advanced NSCLC in more detail by meta-analysis.
METHODS: This meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials (RCTs) was performed 
after searching PubMed, EMBASE, ASCO Abstracts, ESMO Abstracts, and the
proceedings of major conferences for relevant clinical trials. Two reviewers
independently assessed the quality of the trials. Outcomes analysis were disease 
control rate (DCR), progression- free survival (PFS), overall survival (OS) with 
95% confidence intervals (CI) and major toxicity. Subgroup analysis was conducted
according to sorafenib monotherapy, in combination with chemotherapy or EGFR-TKI 
to investigate the preferred therapy strategy.
RESULTS: Results reported from 6 RCTs involving 2,748 patients were included in
the analysis. Compared to sorafenib-free group, SBT was not associated with
higher DCR (RR 1.31 (0.96-1.79), p=0.09), PFS (HR 0.82 (0.66-1.02), p=0.07) and
OS (HR 1.01 (0.92-1.12), p=0.77). In terms of subgroup results, sorafenib
monotherapy was associated with significant superior DCR and longer PFS, but
failed to show advantage with regard to OS. Grade 3 or greater sorafenib-related 
adverse events included fatigue, hypertension, diarrhea, oral mucositis, rash and
HFSR.
CONCLUSIONS: SBT was revealed to yield no improvement in DCR, PFS and OS.
However, sorafenib as monotherapy showed some activity in NSCLC. Further
evaluation may be considered in subsets of patients who may benefit from this
treatment. Sorafenib combined inhibition therapy should be limited unless the
choice of platinum-doublet regimen, administration sequence or identification of 
predictive biomarkers are considered to receive better anti-tumor activity and
prevention of resistance mechanisms.


PMID: 25081687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Cancer Biomark. 2014;14(4):259-65. doi: 10.3233/CBM-140404.

Adverse cardiovascular events predict survival benefit in non-small lung cancer
patients treated with bevacizumab.

Koyama N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary Medicine, Clinical Department of Internal Medicine,
Jichi Medical University Saitama Medical Center, Saitama, Japan Department of
Respiratory Medicine, Saitama Medical University International Medical Center,
Saitama, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Bevacizumab is a monoclonal antibody against vascular endothelial
growth factor (VEGF) that provides a survival benefit to patients with non-small 
cell lung cancer (NSCLC). However, the treatment is sometimes accompanied by
life-threatening bleeding events, and studies have not yet identified factors
that can predict outcomes for NSCLC patients receiving bevacizumab.
METHODS: To identify prognostic factors for patients with NSCLC who are
undergoing bevacizumab therapy, this study retrospectively investigated 34
consecutive patients with NSCLC treated with bevacizumab-containing chemotherapy.
RESULTS: Adverse cardiovascular events, including hypertension and bleeding
events, during bevacizumab therapy were observed in 18 patients (53%).
Kaplan-Meier survival analyses and log-rank tests revealed that median overall
survival was significantly better in patients who experienced adverse
cardiovascular events than those who did not (442 versus 304 days; P=0.012). In
the multivariate Cox proportional hazard model, the onset of adverse
cardiovascular events was independently associated with a better overall
survival.
CONCLUSIONS: The onset of adverse cardiovascular events during bevacizumab
therapy may be a favorable prognostic factor for patients with NSCLC. The results
of this retrospective study warrant further large-scale prospective trials.

DOI: 10.3233/CBM-140404 
PMID: 24934369  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Lancet. 2014 Aug 23;384(9944):665-73. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(14)60845-X. Epub
2014 Jun 2.

Ramucirumab plus docetaxel versus placebo plus docetaxel for second-line
treatment of stage IV non-small-cell lung cancer after disease progression on
platinum-based therapy (REVEL): a multicentre, double-blind, randomised phase 3
trial.

Garon EB(1), Ciuleanu TE(2), Arrieta O(3), Prabhash K(4), Syrigos KN(5), Goksel
T(6), Park K(7), Gorbunova V(8), Kowalyszyn RD(9), Pikiel J(10), Czyzewicz G(11),
Orlov SV(12), Lewanski CR(13), Thomas M(14), Bidoli P(15), Dakhil S(16), Gans
S(17), Kim JH(18), Grigorescu A(19), Karaseva N(20), Reck M(21), Cappuzzo F(22), 
Alexandris E(23), Sashegyi A(24), Yurasov S(23), Pérol M(25).

Author information: 
(1)David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA/Translational Research in Oncology-US 
Network, Los Angeles, CA, USA. Electronic address: egaron@mednet.ucla.edu.
(2)Institute of Oncology Ion Chiricuta and University of Medicine and Pharmacy
Iuliu Hatieganu, Cluj-Napoca, Romania. (3)Instituto Nacional de Cancerologia
(INCAN), Mexico City, Mexico. (4)Tata Memorial Centre, Mumbai, India. (5)Oncology
Unit GPP, Sotiria General Hospital, Athens School of Medicine, Athens, Greece.
(6)Ege University School of Medicine, Izmir, Turkey. (7)Department of Medicine,
Division of Hematology-Oncology, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University 
School of Medicine, Seoul, South Korea. (8)Department of Chemotherapy, N N
Blokhin Cancer Research Center, Moscow, Russia. (9)Centro de Investigaciones
Clínicas, Clínica Viedma, Argentina. (10)Wojewódzkie Centrum Onkologii, Gdansk,
Poland. (11)Chemotherapy Department, John Paul II Hospital, Krakow, Poland.
(12)Pavlov State Medical University, St Petersburg, Russia. (13)Charing Cross
Hospital, London, UK. (14)Internistische Onkologie der Thoraxtumoren,
Thoraxklinik im Universitätsklinikum Heidelberg, Translational Lung Research
Center Heidelberg (TLRC-H), German Center for Lung Research (DZL), Heidelberg,
Germany. (15)Medical Oncology, San Gerardo Hospital, Monza, Italy. (16)Cancer
Center of Kansas, Wichita, KS, USA. (17)St Jansdal Hospital, Herderwijk,
Netherlands. (18)Yonsei Cancer Center, Yonsei University Health System, Seoul,
South Korea. (19)Department of Medical Oncology, Institute of Oncology,
Bucharest, Romania. (20)City Clinical Oncology Dispensary, St Petersburg, Russia.
(21)LungenClinic Grosshansdorf, German Center for Lung Research (DZL),
Grosshansdorf, Germany. (22)Istituto Toscano Tumori, Livorno, Italy. (23)ImClone 
Systems, Eli Lilly, Bridgewater, NJ, USA. (24)Eli Lilly, Indianapolis, IN, USA.
(25)Léon-Bérard Cancer Centre, Lyon, France.

Comment in
    Lancet. 2014 Aug 23;384(9944):640-2.

BACKGROUND: Ramucirumab is a human IgG1 monoclonal antibody that targets the
extracellular domain of VEGFR-2. We aimed to assess efficacy and safety of
treatment with docetaxel plus ramucirumab or placebo as second-line treatment for
patients with stage IV non-small-cell-lung cancer (NSCLC) after platinum-based
therapy.
METHODS: In this multicentre, double-blind, randomised phase 3 trial (REVEL), we 
enrolled patients with squamous or non-squamous NSCLC who had progressed during
or after a first-line platinum-based chemotherapy regimen. Patients were randomly
allocated (1:1) with a centralised, interactive voice-response system (stratified
by sex, region, performance status, and previous maintenance therapy [yes vs no])
to receive docetaxel 75 mg/m(2) and either ramucirumab (10 mg/kg) or placebo on
day 1 of a 21 day cycle until disease progression, unacceptable toxicity,
withdrawal, or death. The primary endpoint was overall survival in all patients
allocated to treatment. We assessed adverse events according to treatment
received. This study is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, number NCT01168973.
FINDINGS: Between Dec 3, 2010, and Jan 24, 2013, we screened 1825 patients, of
whom 1253 patients were randomly allocated to treatment. Median overall survival 
was 10·5 months (IQR 5·1-21·2) for 628 patients allocated ramucirumab plus
docetaxel and 9·1 months (4·2-18·0) for 625 patients who received placebo plus
docetaxel (hazard ratio 0·86, 95% CI 0·75-0·98; p=0·023). Median progression-free
survival was 4·5 months (IQR 2·3-8·3) for the ramucirumab group compared with 3·0
months (1·4-6·9) for the control group (0·76, 0·68-0·86; p<0·0001). We noted
treatment-emergent adverse events in 613 (98%) of 627 patients in the ramucirumab
safety population and 594 (95%) of 618 patients in the control safety population.
The most common grade 3 or worse adverse events were neutropenia (306 patients
[49%] in the ramucirumab group vs 246 [40%] in the control group), febrile
neutropenia (100 [16%] vs 62 [10%]), fatigue (88 [14%] vs 65 [10%]), leucopenia
(86 [14%] vs 77 [12%]), and hypertension (35 [6%] vs 13 [2%]). The numbers of
deaths from adverse events (31 [5%] vs 35 [6%]) and grade 3 or worse pulmonary
haemorrhage (eight [1%] vs eight [1%]) did not differ between groups. Toxicities 
were manageable with appropriate dose reductions and supportive care.
INTERPRETATION: Ramucirumab plus docetaxel improves survival as second-line
treatment of patients with stage IV NSCLC.
FUNDING: Eli Lilly.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(14)60845-X 
PMID: 24933332  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. J Nutr Health Aging. 2014 May;18(5):520-3. doi: 10.1007/s12603-014-0031-5.

Representation of older patients in clinical trials for drug approval in Japan.

Asahina Y(1), Sugano H, Sugiyama E, Uyama Y.

Author information: 
(1)Yasuko Asahina, Office of New Drug II, Pharmaceuticals and Medical Devices
Agency (PMDA), Shin-Kasumigaseki Building, 3-3-2 Kasumigaseki Chiyodaku Tokyo
100-0013 Japan, Phone: 3-3506-9451, Fax: 3-3506-9453, E-mail address:
asahina-yasuko@pmda.go.jp.

To examine how target patients seen in clinical practice are represented in
clinical trials for approved drugs in Japan, we compared the age distribution of 
older patients enrolled in confirmatory clinical trials for regulatory approval
with that of the estimated actual patient population. Drugs for 6 chronic
conditions common among older patients (diabetes mellitus, hypertension,
rheumatoid arthritis, non-small cell lung cancer, depression and Alzheimer's
disease) launched by 2012 in Japan were selected. The disparity in age
distribution between patients in trials and patients seen in clinical practice
varied depending on the disease, but older patients, especially those aged 75 or 
older, were generally underrepresented in clinical trials for regulatory approval
in Japan. Under-representation of older patients in hypertension trials was
particularly marked compared to other conditions, despite the similarity in age
distribution of patients seen in clinical practice. One factor causing this
disparity may be an upper age limit in clinical trial protocols. More effort is
needed to properly characterize the benefits and risks of drugs for older
patients. This should include the active enrollment of older patients in clinical
trials, the establishment of better assessment tools such as pharmacometric
approaches, and the appropriate planning and conducting of post-marketing surveys
and studies.

DOI: 10.1007/s12603-014-0031-5 
PMID: 24886739  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. BMC Cancer. 2014 Apr 25;14:290. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-14-290.

Randomized phase II study of pemetrexed/cisplatin with or without axitinib for
non-squamous non-small-cell lung cancer.

Belani CP(1), Yamamoto N, Bondarenko IM, Poltoratskiy A, Novello S, Tang J,
Bycott P, Niethammer AG, Ingrosso A, Kim S, Scagliotti GV.

Author information: 
(1)Penn State Milton S, Hershey Medical Center, Penn State Hershey Cancer
Institute, Hershey, PA, USA. cbelani@hmc.psu.edu.

BACKGROUND: The efficacy and safety of axitinib, a potent and selective
second-generation inhibitor of vascular endothelial growth factor receptors 1, 2,
and 3 in combination with pemetrexed and cisplatin was evaluated in patients with
advanced non-squamous non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC).
METHODS: Overall, 170 patients were randomly assigned to receive axitinib at a
starting dose of 5-mg twice daily continuously plus pemetrexed 500 mg/m(2) and
cisplatin 75 mg/m(2) on day 1 of up to six 21-day cycles (arm I); axitinib on
days 2 through 19 of each cycle plus pemetrexed/cisplatin (arm II); or
pemetrexed/cisplatin alone (arm III). The primary endpoint was progression-free
survival (PFS).
RESULTS: Median PFS was 8.0, 7.9, and 7.1 months in arms I, II, and III,
respectively (hazard ratio: arms I vs. III, 0.89 [P = 0.36] and arms II vs. III, 
1.02 [P = 0.54]). Median overall survival was 17.0 months (arm I), 14.7 months
(arm II), and 15.9 months (arm III). Objective response rates (ORRs) for
axitinib-containing arms were 45.5% (arm I) and 39.7% (arm II) compared with
26.3% for pemetrexed/cisplatin alone (arm III). Gastrointestinal disorders and
fatigue were frequently reported across all treatment arms. The most common
all-causality grade ≥3 adverse events were hypertension in axitinib-containing
arms (20% and 17%, arms I and II, respectively) and fatigue with
pemetrexed/cisplatin alone (16%).
CONCLUSION: Axitinib in combination with pemetrexed/cisplatin was generally well 
tolerated. Axitinib combinations resulted in non-significant differences in PFS
and numerically higher ORR compared with chemotherapy alone in advanced NSCLC.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov: NCT00768755 (October 7, 2008).

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2407-14-290 
PMCID: PMC4017965
PMID: 24766732  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Heart Lung Circ. 2014 Jul;23(7):661-6. doi: 10.1016/j.hlc.2013.12.013. Epub 2014 
Jan 24.

Association between serum angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 level with
postoperative morbidity and mortality after major pulmonary resection in
non-small cell lung cancer patients.

Li X(1), Zhou C(1), Hu W(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, The Second Xiangya Hospital, Central
South University, Changsha, Hunan, P.R. China 410011. (2)Department of
Cardiothoracic Surgery, The Second Xiangya Hospital, Central South University,
Changsha, Hunan, P.R. China 410011. Electronic address: huwenppk@163.com.

BACKGROUND: To explore the association between serum angiotensin-converting
enzyme 2 (ACE2) levels and postoperative morbidity and mortality after major
pulmonary resection in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients.
METHODS: Preoperative and postoperative serum ACE2 levels in 320 NSCLC patients
who underwent major pulmonary resection were measured. The serum ACE2 levels on
postoperative day 1 were divided into quartile categories.
RESULTS: After adjustment for age, sex, body mass index, current smoking status, 
forced expiratory volume in 1 second, coronary heart disease, hypertension,
diabetes mellitus, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, and tumour clinical
stages, the risk of developing postoperative morbidities was significantly higher
in the lowest serum ACE2 level quartile than in the highest quartile (hazard
ratio, 2.12; 95% CI, 1.57-6.23; p=0.008). NSCLC patients with a serum ACE2 level 
≤3.21 ng/mL had significantly higher rates of pneumonia, pleural effusion, atrial
fibrillation as well as higher in-hospital mortality after major pulmonary
resection, compared with those with a serum ACE2 level >3.21 ng/mL.
CONCLUSIONS: The serum ACE2 level one day post surgery is an independent risk
factor for postoperative morbidities after major pulmonary resection in NSCLC
patients. Thus, it could be used as a prognostic factor for postoperative
morbidities after major pulmonary resection in NSCLC patients.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.hlc.2013.12.013 
PMID: 24636159  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Eur J Cancer. 2014 Mar;50(4):706-12. doi: 10.1016/j.ejca.2013.11.032. Epub 2013
Dec 17.

Randomised, double-blind trial of carboplatin and paclitaxel with daily oral
cediranib or placebo in patients with advanced non-small cell lung cancer: NCIC
Clinical Trials Group study BR29.

Laurie SA(1), Solomon BJ(2), Seymour L(2), Ellis PM(2), Goss GD(2), Shepherd
FA(2), Boyer MJ(2), Arnold AM(2), Clingan P(2), Laberge F(2), Fenton D(2), Hirsh 
V(2), Zukin M(2), Stockler MR(2), Lee CW(2), Chen EX(2), Montenegro A(2), Ding
K(2), Bradbury PA(2).

Author information: 
(1)The NCIC Clinical Trials Group, Kingston, Ontario, Canada; The Australasian
Lung Cancer Trials Group and the NHMRC Clinical Trials Centre, University of
Sydney, New South Wales, Australia. Electronic address: slaurie@toh.on.ca. (2)The
NCIC Clinical Trials Group, Kingston, Ontario, Canada; The Australasian Lung
Cancer Trials Group and the NHMRC Clinical Trials Centre, University of Sydney,
New South Wales, Australia.

INTRODUCTION: This randomised double-blind placebo-controlled study evaluated the
addition of cediranib, an inhibitor of vascular endothelial growth factor
receptors 1-3, to standard carboplatin/paclitaxel chemotherapy in advanced
non-small cell lung cancer.
METHODS: Eligible patients received paclitaxel (200mg/m(2)) and carboplatin (area
under the concentration time curve 6) intravenously every 3 weeks. Daily oral
cediranib/placebo 20mg was commenced day 1 of cycle 1 and continued as
monotherapy after completion of 4-6 cycles of chemotherapy. The primary end-point
of the study was overall survival (OS). The trial would continue to full accrual 
if an interim analysis (IA) for progression-free survival (PFS), performed after 
170 events of progression or death in the first 260 randomised patients, revealed
a hazard ratio (HR) for PFS of ⩽ 0.70.
RESULTS: The trial was halted for futility at the IA (HR for PFS 0.89, 95%
confidence interval [CI] 0.66-1.20, p = 0.45). A final analysis was performed on 
all 306 enrolled patients. The addition of cediranib increased response rate
([RR] 52% versus 34%, p = 0.001) but did not significantly improve PFS (HR 0.91, 
95% CI 0.71-1.18, p = 0.49) or OS (HR 0.94, 95% CI 0.69-1.30, p=0.72). Cediranib 
patients had more grade 3 hypertension, diarrhoea and anorexia.
CONCLUSIONS: The addition of cediranib 20mg daily to carboplatin/paclitaxel
chemotherapy increased RR and toxicity, but not survival.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejca.2013.11.032 
PMID: 24360368  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Ann Oncol. 2014 Jan;25(1):132-8. doi: 10.1093/annonc/mdt489.

Randomised phase II study of axitinib or bevacizumab combined with
paclitaxel/carboplatin as first-line therapy for patients with advanced
non-small-cell lung cancer.

Twelves C(1), Chmielowska E, Havel L, Popat S, Swieboda-Sadlej A, Sawrycki P,
Bycott P, Ingrosso A, Kim S, Williams JA, Chen C, Olszanski AJ, de Besi P,
Schiller JH.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research UK Clinical Centre, St James's University Hospital, Leeds, UK.

BACKGROUND: Efficacy and safety of first-line axitinib/paclitaxel/carboplatin
versus bevacizumab/paclitaxel/carboplatin in advanced non-squamous non-small-cell
lung cancer (NSCLC) was evaluated.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Patients with stage IIIB/IV disease stratified by adjuvant 
therapy and gender were randomised 1 : 1 to axitinib (5 mg twice daily) or
bevacizumab [15 mg/kg every 3 weeks (Q3W)], both with paclitaxel (200 mg/m(2)
Q3W)/carboplatin (AUC 6 mg min/ml Q3W).
RESULTS: The trial was discontinued after preliminary analysis. Median
progression-free survival (primary end point) for axitinib (N = 58) and
bevacizumab (N = 60), respectively, was 5.7 and 6.1 months [hazard ratio (HR)
1.09, 95% confidence interval (CI) 0.68-1.76; one-sided stratified P = 0.64];
median overall survival was 10.6 and 13.3 months (HR 1.12, 95% CI 0.74-1.69;
one-sided stratified P = 0.70). Objective response rates (95% CI) were 29.3%
(18.1-42.7) and 43.3% (30.6-56.8), respectively; risk ratio 0.676 (95% CI
0.41-1.11; one-sided stratified P = 0.94). The most common grade 3/4 adverse
events included neutropenia (28% versus 20%), fatigue (14% versus 7%), and
hypertension (14% versus 5%). Patient-reported outcomes based on the EORTC
QLQ-C30 were similar between arms.
CONCLUSIONS: In patients with advanced non-squamous NSCLC,
axitinib/paclitaxel/carboplatin did not improve efficacy versus
bevacizumab/paclitaxel/carboplatin, and was less well tolerated.

DOI: 10.1093/annonc/mdt489 
PMID: 24356624  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Br J Cancer. 2014 Feb 4;110(3):602-8. doi: 10.1038/bjc.2013.735. Epub 2013 Nov
28.

A phase II multicentre study of ziv-aflibercept in combination with cisplatin and
pemetrexed in patients with previously untreated advanced/metastatic non-squamous
non-small cell lung cancer.

Chen H(1), Modiano MR(2), Neal JW(3), Brahmer JR(4), Rigas JR(5), Jotte RM(6),
Leighl NB(7), Riess JW(3), Kuo CJ(3), Liu L(8), Gao B(8), Dicioccio AT(8), Adjei 
AA(1), Wakelee HA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Roswell Park Cancer Institute, Elm & Carlton Streets, 
Buffalo, NY 14263, USA. (2)Arizona Oncology/Arizona Clinical Research Center,
1620W. St Mary's Rd, Tucson, AZ 85745, USA. (3)Department of Medicine, Stanford
University School of Medicine and Cancer Institute, 875 Blake Wilbur Dr,
Stanford, CA 94305, USA. (4)Department of Oncology, The Sidney Kimmel
Comprehensive Cancer Center at Johns Hopkins, Bunting/Blaustein CRB, 1650 Orleans
St., G94, Baltimore, MD 21231, USA. (5)Department of Medicine, Norris Cotton
Cancer Center, Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth, 1 Medical Center Drive,
Lebanon, NH 03756, USA. (6)Rocky Mountain Cancer Centers, 1800 Williams Street,
Suite 200, Denver, CO 80218, USA. (7)Department of Medicine, Princess Margaret
Hospital and University of Toronto, 610 University Avenue, Toronto, ON M5G 2M9,
Canada. (8)Regeneron Pharmaceuticals, Inc., 777 Old Saw Mill River Road,
Tarrytown, NY 10591, USA.

BACKGROUND: This study evaluated the efficacy and safety of ziv-aflibercept in
combination with cisplatin and pemetrexed in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC).
METHODS: This single arm, multicentre phase II trial enrolled patients with
previously untreated, locally advanced or metastatic non-squamous NSCLC. Patients
received intravenous ziv-aflibercept 6 mg kg(-1), pemetrexed 500 mg m(-2), and
cisplatin 75 mg m(-2), every 21 days for up to six cycles. Maintenance
administration of ziv-aflibercept was to continue until disease progression,
intolerable toxicity or other cause for withdrawal. The co-primary end points
were objective response rate (ORR) and progression-free survival (PFS). Planned
sample size was 72 patients.
RESULTS: The study was closed prematurely because of three confirmed and two
suspected cases of reversible posterior leukoencephalopathy syndrome (RPLS). A
total of 42 patients were enrolled. Median age was 61.5 years; 55% were male, 86%
Caucasian and 50% had Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group performance status (ECOG
PS)=0. A median of four cycles of ziv-aflibercept was administered. The most
common treatment-emergent adverse events (TEAEs) of any grade were nausea (69%)
and fatigue (67%), with hypertension (36%) as the most common grade 3/4 TEAE. Of 
the 38 evaluable patients, ORR was 26% and median PFS was 5 months.
CONCLUSION: Cases of RPLS had been observed in other studies in the
ziv-aflibercept clinical development programme but the rate observed in this
study was higher than previously observed. This might be related to declining
renal function and/or hypertension. Although ORR and PFS were in accordance with 
most historical first-line NSCLC studies, this combination of
ziv-aflibercept/cisplatin/pemetrexed will not be further explored in NSCLC.

DOI: 10.1038/bjc.2013.735 
PMCID: PMC3915116
PMID: 24292447  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2013;14(10):5699-703.

Clinical observation of whole brain radiotherapy concomitant with targeted
therapy for brain metastasis in non-small cell lung cancer patients with
chemotherapy failure.

Cai Y(1), Wang JY, Liu H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Shanghai Pulmonary Hospital, Tongji
University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China E-mail : huiliu127@163.com.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the clinical effects of whole brain radiotherapy
concomitant with targeted therapy for brain metastasis in non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC) patients with chemotherapy failure.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Of the 157 NSCLC patients with chemotherapy failure
followed by brain metastasis admitted in our hospital from January 2009 to August
2012, the combination group (65 cases) were treated with EGFR-TKI combined with
whole brain radiotherapy while the radiotherapy group (92 cases) were given whole
brain radiotherapy only. Short-term effects were evaluated based on the increased
MRI in brain 1 month after whole brain radiotherapy. Intracranial hypertension
responses, hematological toxicity reactions and clinical effects of both groups
were observed.
RESULTS: There were more adverse reactions in the combination group than in
radiotherapy group, but no significant differences were observed between the two 
groups in response rate (RR) and disease control rate (DCR) (P>0.05). Medium
progression free survival (PFS), medium overall survival (OS) and 1-year survival
rate in combination group were 6.0 months, 10.6 months and 42.3%, while in the
radiotherapy group they were 3.4 months, 7.7 months and 28.0%, respectively,
which indicated that there were significant differences in PFS and OS between the
two groups (P<0.05). Additionally, RPA grading of each factor in the combination 
group was a risk factor closely related with survival, with medium PFS in EGFR
and KRAS mutation patients being 8.2 months and 11.2 months, and OS being 3.6
months and 6.3 months, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: Whole brain radiotherapy concomitant with target therapy is
favorable for adverse reaction tolerance and clinical effects, being superior in 
treating brain metastasis in NSCLC patients with chemotherapy failure and thus
deserves to be widely applied in the clinic.


PMID: 24289565  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Lung Cancer. 2013 Oct;82(1):103-8. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2013.07.008. Epub 2013 
Aug 5.

Phase II study of oral S-1 plus cisplatin with bevacizumab for advanced
non-squamous non-small cell lung cancer.

Kaira K(1), Tomizawa Y, Yoshino R, Miura Y, Yoshii A, Iwasaki Y, Koga Y, Ono A,
Hisada T, Minato K, Sato K, Kazama T, Ishihara S, Kohyama K, Fueki N, Saito R,
Sunaga N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Molecular Science, Gunma University Graduate School
of Medicine, Showa-machi, Maebashi, Gunma 371-8511, Japan. Electronic address:
kkaira1970@yahoo.co.jp.

BACKGROUND: We conducted a phase II study to evaluate the efficacy and safety of 
S-1 plus cisplatin with bevacizumab followed by maintenance bevacizumab in
patients with advanced non-squamous non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC).
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Chemotherapy-naïve patients received S-1 plus cisplatin
with bevacizumab. S-1 (80 mg/m(2)) was administered orally twice daily for 14
days, cisplatin (60 mg/m(2)) on day 1, and bevacizumab (15 mg/kg) on day 1 and
every 3 weeks for 4-6 cycles. Patients with an objective response or stable
disease received maintenance bevacizumab every 3 weeks until disease progression.
RESULTS: Thirty patients were enrolled in this study. The median number of
chemotherapy was four (range, 1-6 cycles), and the median number of bevacizumab
alone was three (range, 1-31 cycles). The grade 3/4 toxicities were neutropaenia 
(23%), thrombocytopaenia (10%), febrile neutropaenia (3%), hypertension (17%),
pneumonia (7%), and bowel perforation (3%). The objective response rate was 71%
(95% CI, 55-88%) for a disease control rate of 100%. The median progression-free 
and overall survival times were 7.0 months and 20.0 months, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: S-1 plus cisplatin with bevacizumab is an active and well-tolerated 
regimen in patients with chemotherapy-naïve non-squamous NSCLC.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2013.07.008 
PMID: 23927884  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Br J Cancer. 2013 Aug 6;109(3):538-44. doi: 10.1038/bjc.2013.374. Epub 2013 Jul
16.

Phase 1 study of lenvatinib combined with carboplatin and paclitaxel in patients 
with non-small-cell lung cancer.

Nishio M(1), Horai T, Horiike A, Nokihara H, Yamamoto N, Takahashi T, Murakami H,
Yamamoto N, Koizumi F, Nishio K, Yusa W, Koyama N, Tamura T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Medical Oncology, Cancer Institute Hospital of Japanese
Foundation for Cancer Research, Koto-ku, Japan. mnishio@jfcr.or.jp

BACKGROUND: This dose-finding study evaluated lenvatinib, an oral multitargeted
receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor, in combination with carboplatin/paclitaxel in
chemotherapy-naïve non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Patients received lenvatinib twice daily (BID) with
carboplatin (area under the curve 6 mg ml(-1) min(-1), day 1)/paclitaxel
(200 mg m(-2), day 1) every 3 weeks. The initial dose of lenvatinib was 6 mg BID.
The primary end point was maximum tolerated dose (MTD) of lenvatinib. At the MTD,
the cohort was expanded by 16 patients. Safety, pharmacokinetics,
pharmacodynamics, and antitumor effects were evaluated.
RESULTS: Twenty-eight patients were treated. At 6 mg BID, dose-limiting
toxicities (DLTs) included febrile neutropenia/gingival infection (n=2). No DLTs 
occurred with 4 mg BID, the recommended MTD for the expansion. Common grade 3/4
toxicities included neutropenia, leukopenia, hypertension, and thrombocytopenia. 
The combination had no significant impact on individual drug pharmacokinetics.
Response rate and median progression-free survival were 68% and 9.0 months,
respectively, with 4 mg BID. In the plasma biomarker analysis, stromal
cell-derived factor 1α, stem cell factor, and granulocyte colony-stimulating
factor correlated with antitumor activity.
CONCLUSION: The MTD for lenvatinib with carboplatin/paclitaxel is 4 mg BID in
advanced NSCLC patients. This regimen demonstrated manageable tolerability and
encouraging antitumor activity.

DOI: 10.1038/bjc.2013.374 
PMCID: PMC3738144
PMID: 23860537  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Onco Targets Ther. 2013 Jul 1;6:803-9. doi: 10.2147/OTT.S45906. Print 2013.

Comparative study analyzing survival and safety of
bevacizumab/carboplatin/paclitaxel and cisplatin/pemetrexed in chemotherapy-naïve
patients with advanced non-squamous bronchogenic carcinoma not harboring EGFR
mutation.

Kader YA(1), Le Chevalier T, El-Nahas T, Sakr A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Oncology, Cairo University, Cairo, Egypt.

PURPOSE: The majority of Egyptian patients with lung cancer present at a late
stage of the disease. Bevacizumab/carboplatin/paclitaxel, as well as cisplatin
plus pemetrexed, are both standard regimens for advanced non-squamous
bronchogenic cancer. This study compares both regimens, in terms of efficacy and 
toxicity profile, in Egyptian patients.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: This is a randomized Phase II study comparing toxicity
profile and survival in 41 chemotherapy-naïve patients with stage IIIB or IV
non-squamous NSCLC, with an ECOG performance status of 0 to 2. The epidermal
growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutation detection was performed prior to treatment
of all patients. Patients in the first group received: bevacizumab 7.5 mg/m(2) on
Day 1 and Day 15; carboplatin area under the curve-5 on Day 1; and paclitaxel 60 
mg/m(2) on Day 1, Day 8, and Day 15 every 4 weeks. In the second group, patients 
received cisplatin 75 mg/m(2) and pemetrexed 500 mg/m(2) every 3 weeks.
RESULTS: The combination of bevacizumab/carboplatin/paclitaxel demonstrated
higher Grade III-IV toxicity than cisplatin/pemetrexed regarding sensory/motor
neuropathy (P = 0.06), DVT (P = 0.23), proteinuria (P = 0.23), and hypertension
(P = 0.11), as well as Grade II alopecia (P = 0.001); however, no significant
difference in toxicities between both arms was recorded regarding nausea and
vomiting (P = 0.66), hematological toxicity, febrile neutropenia (P = 1) and
fatigue (P = 0.66). Progression-free survival was similar for both treatment arms
with a median of 6 months (P = 0.978). Overall median survival was comparable in 
both arms, 16.07 months versus 16.01 months (P = 0.89).
CONCLUSION: Bevacizumab/carboplatin/paclitaxel and cisplatin/pemetrexed provided 
meaningful and comparable efficacy in advanced non-squamous bronchogenic
carcinoma not harboring EGFR mutation. No significant difference in toxicity was 
observed between both treatment arms, apart from
bevacizumab/carboplatin/paclitaxel-related risks as DVT, hypertension,
proteinuria, sensory/motor neuropathy, and alopecia.

DOI: 10.2147/OTT.S45906 
PMCID: PMC3702548
PMID: 23836994  [PubMed]


82. J Clin Oncol. 2013 Aug 20;31(24):2983-90. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2012.48.5201. Epub
2013 Jul 8.

Maintenance therapy for advanced lung cancer: who, what, and when?

Gerber DE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Harold C. Simmons Cancer Center, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas, TX, USA.

Comment on
    J Clin Oncol. 2013 Aug 20;31(24):3004-11.

A 60-year-old woman with hypertension, dyslipidemia, and 35-pack-year smoking
history is referred for treatment of advanced non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC).
She initially presented after a transient ischemic attack, when a chest
radiograph demonstrated a right lung mass. Computed tomography (CT) of the chest 
revealed a 5-cm right upper lobe mass, without mediastinal adenopathy, and a 6-cm
cystic mass in the spleen. Additional imaging showed no brain metastasis.
Endobronchial ulstrasound-guided core biopsies of the lung mass and ipsilateral
mediastinal nodes confirmed a poorly differentiated non-small-cell carcinoma.
Immunohistochemical stains were positive for napsin A and thyroid transcription
factor 1, suggestive of adenocarcinoma (Fig 1). Molecular analysis identified a
KRAS G12C mutation. A positron emission tomography (PET) -CT scan demonstrated
[(18)F]fluorodeoxyglucose uptake in the right upper lobe mass and splenic lesion 
(Fig 2A). CT-guided fine-needle aspiration of the splenic lesion was performed
and revealed metastatic carcinoma, consistent with the lung primary. Treatment
with carboplatin plus pemetrexed was initiated, without bevacizumab because of
the recent transient ischemic attack; carboplatin was selected over cisplatin
because of similar concerns. The patient received two cycles of chemotherapy
without complications, and repeat imaging showed decrease in size of the lung
mass and splenic lesion (Figs 2B and 2C). After four cycles of chemotherapy, a
chest CT showed ongoing response (Fig 2D). Her Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group
performance status remained 0.

DOI: 10.1200/JCO.2012.48.5201 
PMID: 23835703  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Intern Med. 2013;52(10):1111-4. Epub 2013 May 15.

Drug-induced thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura successfully treated with
recombinant human soluble thrombomodulin.

Nishijima Y(1), Hirata H, Himeno A, Kida H, Matsumoto M, Takahashi R, Otani Y,
Inoue K, Nagatomo I, Takeda Y, Kijima T, Tachibana I, Fujimura Y, Kumanogoh A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Allergy and Rheumatic Diseases, Osaka
University Graduate School of Medicine, Japan.

A 61-year-old woman with recurrent non-small cell lung cancer presented with
thrombocytopenia, microangiopathic hemolytic anemia, neurological abnormalities, 
renal failure and a fever that appeared during chemotherapy with gemcitabine and 
bevacizumab. She was diagnosed with drug-induced thrombotic thrombocytopenic
purpura (TTP). After the discontinuation of chemotherapy, the administration of
recombinant human soluble thrombomodulin and fresh-frozen plasma rapidly
ameliorated the TTP. Hypertension preceded the onset of TTP and required the
administration of quadruple therapy on admission. However, after three months,
the hypertension was controllable without anti-hypertensive drugs. Twelve months 
later, the ninth course of vinorelbine was administered safely, preventing the
patient's lung cancer from progressing.


PMID: 23676600  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Oncologist. 2013;18(4):408-14. doi: 10.1634/theoncologist.2012-0351. Epub 2013
Apr 10.

Toxicity of bevacizumab in combination with chemotherapy in older patients.

Mohile SG(1), Hardt M, Tew W, Owusu C, Klepin H, Gross C, Gajra A, Lichtman SM,
Feng T, Togawa K, Ramani R, Katheria V, Hansen K, Hurria A; Cancer and Aging
Research Group.

Author information: 
(1)University of Rochester Medical Center, Wilmot Cancer Center, Rochester, New
York, USA.

BACKGROUND: Bevacizumab leads to improved survival for patients with metastatic
colorectal cancer (CRC) or non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) when added to
chemotherapy. Little is known about factors associated with receipt of
bevacizumab, or whether bevacizamab is associated with increased toxicity when
added to chemotherapy.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We conducted a prospective study of patients aged ≥65
years, which evaluated the association between geriatric assessment (GA) metrics 
and chemotherapy toxicity. We examined differences in characteristics and
outcomes of patients with CRC and NSCLC cancers who received bevacizumab with
chemotherapy versus chemotherapy alone.
RESULTS: From a total of 207 patients, 27 (13%) received bevacizumab plus
chemotherapy and 180 (87%) received chemotherapy alone. Groups were similar in
sociodemographic and cancer characteristics. There were no baseline differences
in GA domains except that patients with heart disease were less likely to receive
bevacizumab (4% vs. 26%, p = .01). Seventy-eight percent of patients who had
bevacizumab had grade 3-5 toxicity compared to only 57% who received chemotherapy
alone (p = .06). Patients receiving bevacizumab were more likely to develop grade
3 hypertension than those who received chemotherapy alone (15% vs. 2%, p < .01). 
In multivariable analysis, factors associated with grade 3 or more toxicity
included: bevacizumab (OR: 2.86, p = .04), CRC (OR: 2.54, p < .01), and baseline 
anemia (OR: 2.58, p = .03).
CONCLUSION: Heart disease was more common in those who did not receive
bevacizumab. Older patients who receive bevacizumab with chemotherapy have a
higher odds of developing a grade 3-5 toxicity compared with those who receive
chemotherapy alone.

DOI: 10.1634/theoncologist.2012-0351 
PMCID: PMC3639527
PMID: 23576485  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Zhong Nan Da Xue Xue Bao Yi Xue Ban. 2013 Feb;38(2):138-41. doi:
10.3969/j.issn.1672-7347.2013.02.005.

[Impact of diabetes mellitus on clinicopathological factors and relation with
radiation pneumonitis in 332 patients with lung cancer].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhou H(1), Cao K, Cao P, Jiang W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Third Xiangya Hospital, Central South University,
Changsha, China.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the relation between diabetes mellitus and
clinicopathological factors and the incidence of radiation pneumonitis in
patients with non-small cell lung cancer.
METHODS: The data of 332 patients with non-small cell lung cancer, who were
admitted to the Department of Oncology of Third Xiangya Hospital of Central South
University between January 2007 and August 2009, were collected retrospectively. 
The patients were divided into a diabetes mellitus (DM) group (n=45) and a
non-diabetes mellitus (NDM) group (n=287). The clinicopathological factors were
compared between the two groups. The patients who received radiotherapy were
further divided into a diabetes mellitus (DMR) group (n=33) and a non-diabetes
mellitus group (NDMR) group(n=287), and the incidence of radiation pneumonitis
was compared.
RESULTS: A total of 45 patients (13.55%)developed diabetes mellitus. There was
significant difference in the body-weight, age and hypertension (P<0.05), while
no significant difference in the pathologic factors, such as tumor pathological
type, degree of differentiation, and classification of malignant tumors (TNM)
stage between the two groups(P>0.05). No significant difference in the
irradiation area was found between the DM group and the NDM group(P>0.05). The
incidence of radiation pneumonitis in the DMR group was 42.42%(14 out of 33),
while 21.31%(39 out of 183) in the NDMR group, with significant difference in the
incidence of radiation pneumonitis between the DMR group and the NDMR
group(P<0.05). The risk value in the DMR group was 2.721 folds (95%CI,
1.253-5.910) that in the NDMR group in patients with non-small cell lung cancer
companied with diabetes mellitus.
CONCLUSION: Diabetes mellitus is the risk factor of radiation pneumonitis for
patients with nonsmall cell lung cancer who receive radiotherapy.

DOI: 10.3969/j.issn.1672-7347.2013.02.005 
PMID: 23456072  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. PLoS One. 2013;8(2):e55637. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0055637. Epub 2013 Feb 8.

Overall survival benefits for combining targeted therapy as second-line treatment
for advanced non-small-cell-lung cancer: a meta-analysis of published data.

Qi WX(1), Wang Q, Jiang YL, Sun YJ, Tang LN, He AN, Min DL, Lin F, Shen Z, Yao Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, the Sixth People's Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, Shanghai, China.

BACKGROUND: Combining targeted therapy has been extensively investigated in
previously treated advanced non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC), but it is still
unclear whether combining targeted therapy might offer any benefits against
standard monotherapy with erlotinib. We thus performed a meta-analysis of
randomized controlled trials to compare the efficacy and safety of combining
targeted therapy versus erlotinib alone as second-line treatment for advanced
NSCLC.
METHODS: Several databases were searched, including Pubmed, Embase and Cochrane
databases. The endpoints were overall survival (OS), progression-free survival
(PFS), overall response rate (ORR) and grade 3 or 4 adverse event (AEs). The
pooled hazard ratio (HR) or odds ratio (OR), and 95% confidence intervals (CI)
were calculated employing fixed- or random-effects models depending on the
heterogeneity of the included trials.
RESULTS: Eight eligible trials involved 2417 patients were ultimately identified.
The intention to treatment (ITT) analysis demonstrated that combining targeted
therapy significantly improved OS (HR 0.90, 95% CI: 0.82-0.99, p = 0.024), PFS
(HR 0.83, 95% CI: 0.72-0.97, p = 0.018), and ORR (OR 1.35, 95% CI 1.01-1.80,
P = 0.04). Sub-group analysis based on phases of trials, EGFR-status and KRAS
status also showed that there was a tendency to improve PFS and OS in combining
targeted therapy, except that PFS for patients with EGFR-mutation or wild type
KRAS favored erlotinib monotherapy. Additionally, more incidence of grade 3 or 4 
rash, fatigue and hypertension were observed in combining targeted therapy.
CONCLUSIONS: With the available evidence, combining targeted therapy seems
superior over erlotinib monotherapy as second-line treatment for advanced NSCLC. 
More studies are still needed to identify patients who will most likely benefit
from the appropriate combining targeted therapy.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0055637 
PMCID: PMC3568141
PMID: 23409011  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Ann Oncol. 2013 May;24(5):1312-9. doi: 10.1093/annonc/mds616. Epub 2013 Jan 8.

Improved survival outcomes with the incidental use of beta-blockers among
patients with non-small-cell lung cancer treated with definitive radiation
therapy.

Wang HM(1), Liao ZX, Komaki R, Welsh JW, O'Reilly MS, Chang JY, Zhuang Y, Levy
LB, Lu C, Gomez DR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

BACKGROUND: Preclinical studies have shown that norepinephrine can directly
stimulate tumor cell migration and that this effect is mediated by the
beta-adrenergic receptor.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We retrospectively reviewed 722 patients with
non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) who received definitive radiotherapy (RT). A
Cox proportional hazard model was utilized to determine the association between
beta-blocker intake and locoregional progression-free survival (LRPFS), distant
metastasis-free survival (DMFS), disease-free survival (DFS), and overall
survival (OS).
RESULTS: In univariate analysis, patients taking beta-blockers (n = 155) had
improved DMFS (P < 0.01), DFS (P < 0.01), and OS (P = 0.01), but not LRPFS (P =
0.33) compared with patients not taking beta-blockers (n = 567). In multivariate 
analysis, beta-blocker intake was associated with a significantly better DMFS
[hazard ratio (HR), 0.67; P = 0.01], DFS (HR, 0.74; P = 0.02), and OS (HR, 0.78; 
P = 0.02) with adjustment for age, Karnofsky performance score, stage, histology 
type, concurrent chemotherapy, radiation dose, gross tumor volume, hypertension, 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and the use of aspirin. There was no
association of beta-blocker use with LRPFS (HR = 0.91, P = 0.63).
CONCLUSION: Beta-blocker use is associated with improved DMFS, DFS, and OS in
this large cohort of NSCLC patients. Future prospective trials can validate these
retrospective findings and determine whether the length and timing of
beta-blocker use influence survival outcomes.

DOI: 10.1093/annonc/mds616 
PMCID: PMC3629895
PMID: 23300016  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Case Rep Oncol. 2012 Sep;5(3):644-50. doi: 10.1159/000345956. Epub 2012 Dec 6.

Gastroesphageal variceal hemorrhage induced by metastatic liver tumor of lung
cancer.

Honda T(1), Kobayashi H, Saiki M, Sogami Y, Miyashita Y, Inase N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Yamanashi Prefectural Central Hospital,
Kofu, Japan.

Gastroesophageal variceal hemorrhage is a lethal complication of portal
hypertension. Liver cirrhosis is often the principal cause of the portal
hypertensive state. Malignant tumors coexist with portal hypertension in some
cases. Non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is likely to become metastatic. Liver
is a frequent site of cancer metastasis, but diffuse hepatic sinusoidal
metastasis is uncommon as a metastatic form of NSCLC. This report describes a
patient with gastroesophageal variceal hemorrhage owing to a metastatic liver
tumor of NSCLC. The patient, a male smoker with stage IV NSCLC, was free of any
hepatitis viral infection and had no alcohol addiction. Liver dysfunction and
liver disease had never been pointed out in his medical history. His tumor
harbored an L858R epidermal growth factor receptor mutation. Gefitinib was
initiated but had to be ceased because of interstitial lung disease. Sequential
steroid therapy was effective and bevacizumab-containing chemotherapy was
commenced. Both chemotherapy regimens produced favorable effects against the
metastatic liver tumor, eliciting atrophic change regardless of the
chemotherapy-free interval. One day the patient was admitted to our hospital
because of black stool and hypotension. Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy revealed
a beaded appearance of the gastroesophageal varix with bloody gastric contents.
The portal hypertension might have been caused by changes in portal vein
hemodynamics induced by the conformational changes underlying the favorable
response of the liver tumor to molecular targeted chemotherapy and notable
regression.

DOI: 10.1159/000345956 
PMCID: PMC3531950
PMID: 23275780  [PubMed]


89. J Clin Oncol. 2013 Feb 1;31(4):475-81. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2012.44.1170. Epub 2012
Dec 26.

Influence of comorbidity on racial differences in receipt of surgery among US
veterans with early-stage non-small-cell lung cancer.

Williams CD(1), Stechuchak KM, Zullig LL, Provenzale D, Kelley MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Durham VA Medical Center, Durham, NC 27705, USA. Christina.Williams4@va.gov

PURPOSE: It is unclear why racial differences exist in the frequency of surgery
for lung cancer treatment. Comorbidity is an important consideration in selection
of patients for lung cancer treatment, including surgery. To assess whether
comorbidity contributes to the observed racial differences, we evaluated racial
differences in the prevalence of comorbidity and their impact on receipt of
surgery.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: A total of 1,314 patients (1,135 white, 179 black) in the
Veterans Health Administration diagnosed with early-stage non-small-cell lung
cancer in 2007 were included. The effect of comorbidity on surgery was determined
by using generalized linear models with a logit link accounting for patient
clustering within Veterans Administration Medical Centers.
RESULTS: Compared with whites, blacks had greater prevalence of hypertension,
liver disease, renal disease, illicit drug abuse, and poor performance status,
but lower prevalence of respiratory disease. The impact of most individual
comorbidities on receipt of surgery was similar between blacks and whites, and
comorbidity did not influence the race-surgery association in a multivariable
analysis. The proportion of blacks not receiving surgery as well as refusing
surgery was greater than that among whites.
CONCLUSION: Blacks had a greater prevalence of several comorbid conditions and
poor performance status; however, the overall comorbidity score did not differ by
race. In general, the effect of comorbidity on receipt of surgery was similar in 
blacks and whites. Racial differences in comorbidity do not fully explain why
blacks undergo lung cancer surgery less often than whites.

DOI: 10.1200/JCO.2012.44.1170 
PMCID: PMC3731921
PMID: 23269988  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Interact Cardiovasc Thorac Surg. 2013 Mar;16(3):270-4. doi: 10.1093/icvts/ivs489.
Epub 2012 Dec 5.

The impact of cardiovascular comorbidities on the outcome of surgery for
non-small-cell lung cancer.

Takenaka T(1), Katsura M, Shikada Y, Tsukamoto S, Takeo S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Clinical Research Institute, National Hospital
Organization, Kyushu Medical Center, Fukuoka, Japan.
ttake@surg2.med.kyushu-u.ac.jp

Comment in
    Interact Cardiovasc Thorac Surg. 2013 Mar;16(3):274.

OBJECTIVE: The presence of cardiovascular comorbidity in non-small-cell lung
cancer (NSCLC) patients increases with age. Therefore, the influence of
cardiovascular comorbidity in NSCLC patients on their short- or long-term
prognosis remains controversial. This study evaluated the possible risk factors
related to the short-term and long-term survivals in NSCLC patients with
cardiovascular comorbidity.
METHODS: One thousand one hundred and sixty-two consecutive patients with NSCLC
who had undergone a surgical resection between 1984 and 2010 were enrolled in
this study. A total of 360 (31%) patients with cardiovascular comorbidities were 
analysed to identify the risk factors for postoperative complications and
prognostic factors.
RESULTS: The patients with cardiovascular comorbidity included 301 with
hypertension, 28 with coronary artery disease, 35 with peripheral vascular
disease, 23 with arrhythmia and 11 with abdominal aortic aneurysm. Eighty-three
patients exhibited more than one type of comorbidity. The postoperative
cardiovascular morbidity rates were 3.6% in the cardiovascular comorbidity
patients and 3.3% among patients without cardiovascular comorbidity (P = 0.73).
No correlation was observed between preoperative cardiovascular comorbidity and
postoperative pulmonary complications (P = 0.52). The operative mortality rates
were 1.0% for the cardiovascular comorbidity patients and 0.8% for the other
patients (P = 0.51). No difference in the postoperative outcomes was observed
between the patients with and without cardiovascular comorbidity. The 5-year
survival rates were 62.5% in comparison with 65.4% among patients without
cardiovascular comorbidity (P = 0.48).
CONCLUSIONS: Patients with cardiovascular comorbidity were not found to be at
increased risk of mortality and morbidity following surgery for NSCLC. In
addition, cardiovascular comorbidity did not influence the long-term outcomes of 
patients after a pulmonary resection for NSCLC.

DOI: 10.1093/icvts/ivs489 
PMCID: PMC3568808
PMID: 23223675  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Ann Oncol. 2013 Jan;24(1):20-30. doi: 10.1093/annonc/mds590. Epub 2012 Nov 23.

Systematic review and meta-analysis of randomised, phase II/III trials adding
bevacizumab to platinum-based chemotherapy as first-line treatment in patients
with advanced non-small-cell lung cancer.

Soria JC(1), Mauguen A, Reck M, Sandler AB, Saijo N, Johnson DH, Burcoveanu D,
Fukuoka M, Besse B, Pignon JP; meta-analysis of bevacizumab in advanced NSCLC
collaborative group.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Institut Gustave Roussy, INSERM unit 981 and Paris
University XI, Villejuif, France.

Erratum in
    Ann Oncol. 2013 Apr;24(4):1133.

Comment in
    Ann Oncol. 2013 Jan;24(1):6-9.

BACKGROUND: Previous studies have demonstrated the efficacy and safety of
bevacizumab in the treatment of non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC).
METHODS: Summary data from randomised trials comparing first-line bevacizumab
plus platinum-based chemotherapy with chemotherapy alone for inoperable locally
advanced, recurrent or metastatic NSCLC were meta-analysed. Pooled hazard ratios 
(HRs) for overall survival (OS) and progression-free survival (PFS), and pooled
odds ratio (OR) for adverse events were calculated. The chi-squared tests
evaluated interactions between treatment effects, and prognostic factors and
patient characteristics.
RESULTS: Data of 2194 patients (1313 bevacizumab; 881 controls) from four phase
II and III trials: AVF-0757g, JO19907,ECOG 4599 and AVAiL, were analysed.
Compared with chemotherapy alone, bevacizumab significantly prolonged OS(HR 0.90;
95% confidence interval [CI] 0.81, 0.99; P=0.03), and PFS (0.72; 95% CI 0.66,
0.79; P<0.001). Bevacizumab showed a significantly greater effect on OS in
patients with adenocarcinoma versus other histologies (P=0.03), and patients with
body weight loss ≤5% versus >5% (P=0.04). Bevacizumab significantly increased the
risk of grade ≥3 proteinuria, hypertension,haemorrhagic events, neutropenia, and 
febrile neutropenia [corrected].
CONCLUSIONS: Bevacizumab significantly prolonged OS and PFS when added to
first-line platinum-based chemotherapy in patients with advanced NSCLC; no
unexpected toxicity was evident.

DOI: 10.1093/annonc/mds590 
PMID: 23180113  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol. 2013 Feb;71(2):457-61. doi:
10.1007/s00280-012-2026-4. Epub 2012 Nov 21.

Bevacizumab plus chemotherapy for advanced non-squamous non-small-cell lung
cancer with malignant pleural effusion.

Kitamura K(1), Kubota K, Ando M, Takahashi S, Nishijima N, Sugano T, Toyokawa M, 
Miwa K, Kosaihira S, Noro R, Minegishi Y, Seike M, Yoshimura A, Gemma A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary Medicine, Infection and Oncology, Department of Internal
Medicine, Nippon Medical School, 1-1-5 Sendagi, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8603, Japan.

PURPOSE: The presence of malignant pleural effusion (MPE) indicates a poorer
prognosis for patients with non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and impairs their 
quality of life. Because vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) is the key
mediator MPE production, we evaluated the efficacy and safety of chemotherapy
plus bevacizumab, an anti-VEGF antibody, in non-squamous NSCLC patients with MPE,
especially regarding the control of pleural effusions.
METHODS: From November 1, 2009 to September 30, 2011, medical charts of 13
consecutive patients with MPE who received bevacizumab plus chemotherapy as the
initial or secondary treatment were retrospectively analyzed.
RESULTS: Of the 13 patients, 6 did not undergo pleurodesis, 3 were unsuccessfully
treated by pleurodesis, 2 had encapsulated pleural effusion, and 2 had no
re-expansion of the lung. Twelve patients (92.3 %) achieved MPE control lasting
>8 weeks following bevacizumab plus chemotherapy. Five of 10 patients with
measurable lesions had confirmed partial responses. Of 3 patients without
measurable lesions, one had confirmed CR. Median progression-free survival time
without re-accumulation of MPE was 312 days. Grade 3 or 4 neutropenia,
thrombocytopenia, hypertension, or proteinuria was observed in 2, 2, 1, or 1
patient, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first study to report that bevacizumab plus chemotherapy
is highly effective for the management of MPE in non-squamous NSCLC patients.
Prospective clinical trials are warranted to investigate the efficacy of
bevacizumab for MPE.

DOI: 10.1007/s00280-012-2026-4 
PMID: 23178954  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Clin Oncol (R Coll Radiol). 2013 Jan;25(1):e7-e15. doi:
10.1016/j.clon.2012.09.005. Epub 2012 Nov 21.

Chemotherapy plus Vandetanib or chemotherapy alone in advanced non-small cell
lung cancer: a meta-analysis of four randomised controlled trials.

Xiao YY(1), Zhan P, Yuan DM, Liu HB, Lv TF, Shi Y, Song Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, Jinling Hospital,
Nanjing University School of Medicine, Nanjing, China.

AIMS: Most patients with advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) require
systemic chemotherapy. Vandetanib, targeting epidermal growth factor receptor and
vascular endothelial growth factor receptor signalling in NSCLC, has recently
been evaluated in combination chemotherapy in advanced NSCLC. However, the
advantage of chemotherapy plus vandetanib over chemotherapy alone in advanced
NSCLC remains largely unknown. A meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials
was carried out to compare the efficacy and toxicity of chemotherapy plus
vandetanib with chemotherapy alone in advanced NSCLC.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The PubMed database, American Society of Clinical
Oncology, European Society for Medical Oncology and the Cochrane Library and
references of published trials were searched. Two reviewers independently
assessed the quality of the trials. Data were extracted and the overall response 
rate, pooled progression-free survival, overall survival with 95% confidence
intervals and main toxicity were analysed.
RESULTS: Four randomised controlled trials involving 2160 patients with advanced 
NSCLC were ultimately analysed. Compared with chemotherapy alone, chemotherapy
plus vandetanib significantly increased the overall response rate (relative
risk = 1.96, 95% confidence interval = 1.53--2.52) and progression-free survival 
(hazard ratio = 0.79, 95% confidence interval = 0.71-0.87), but there was no
significant difference in overall survival (hazard ratio = 0.91, 95% confidence
interval = 0.79-1.03). Patients who received chemotherapy plus vandetanib had
more rash, diarrhoea, hypertension and QTc prolongation (odds ratio = 2.32, 95%
confidence interval = 1.93-2.79; odds ratio = 1.64, 95% confidence
interval = 1.37-1.97; odds ratio = 4.08, 95% confidence interval = 2.51-6.01,
odds ratio = 17.77, 95% confidence interval = 3.54-61.66, respectively), and less
nausea and vomiting (odds ratio = 0.70, 95% confidence interval = 0.58-0.85; odds
ratio = 0.69, 95% confidence interval = 0.55-0.86, respectively). The incidences 
of haemorrhage, fatigue and cough were comparable between the two groups.
CONCLUSIONS: Although similar in overall survival, chemotherapy plus vandetanib
showed particular advantages over chemotherapy alone in terms of progression-free
survival and overall response rate. The toxicity was comparable between the two
groups. Therefore, chemotherapy plus vandetanib might be a safe and valid
therapeutic option for advanced NSCLC patients.

Copyright © 2012 The Royal College of Radiologists. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clon.2012.09.005 
PMID: 23177099  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Anticancer Res. 2012 Nov;32(11):4629-38.

Utility of hypertension as a surrogate marker for efficacy of antiangiogenic
therapy in NSCLC.

Evans T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania, 2 Perelman Center West, 3400 Civic
Center Blvd, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. Tracey.Evans@uphs.upenn.edu

A plateau has been reached in the efficacy of cytotoxic chemotherapy for
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), highlighting the need for novel treatments
for this poor-prognosis malignancy. Antiangiogenic agents, including the approved
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)-targeted monoclonal antibody,
bevacizumab, as well as a number of investigational tyrosine kinase inhibitors
(TKIs) that simultaneously target multiple angiogenic pathways, have demonstrated
activity in patients with NSCLC. However, unlike the epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR) TKIs erlotinib and gefitinib, for which the presence of
EGFR-activating mutations are now known to predict response, no validated markers
currently exist for the efficacy of antiangiogenic agents. Hypertension has been 
associated with antiangiogenic therapy and has also been evaluated as a surrogate
marker for efficacy with this class of agents, although analyses, to date, have
yielded conflicting results. This review provides a summary of currently
available, clinically relevant data on the incidence of hypertension with
VEGF-targeted antibodies and multitargeted antiangiogenic TKIs in advanced NSCLC 
and discusses the potential predictive role of hypertension on antiangiogenic
therapy in such patients.


PMID: 23155225  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Med Oncol. 2012 Dec;29(5):3202-6. doi: 10.1007/s12032-012-0318-5. Epub 2012 Nov
2.

Bevacizumab-containing chemotherapy for non-small cell lung cancer patients: a
population-based observational study by the Ibaraki thoracic integrative
(POSITIVE) research group.

Nakamura H(1), Satoh H, Kaburagi T, Nishimura Y, Shinohara Y, Inagaki M, Endo T, 
Saito T, Hayashihara K, Hizawa N, Kurishima K, Nawa T, Kagohashi K, Kishi K,
Ishikawa H, Ichimura H, Hashimoto T, Sato Y, Sakai M, Kamiyama K, Matsumura T,
Unoura K, Furukawa K.

Author information: 
(1)Ibaraki Medical Center Hospital, Tokyo Medical University, Ami, Japan.

To evaluate the efficacy and safety of bevacizumab-containing chemotherapy for
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), we performed a population-based observational
study. The efficacy and safety of bevacizumab-containing chemotherapy for NSCLC
patients were evaluated at 14 sites (17 hospital departments) in a prefecture of 
Japan between December 2009 and August 2011. Complete data sets were obtained
from 159 patients with NSCLC. The median age was 66 years, and 34.0 % of the
patients were 70 years or older. The overall response rate to bevacizumab therapy
was 41.6 %, and the disease control rate was 78.5 %. In 88 patients who received 
bevacizumab-containing chemotherapy as first-line therapy, the response and
disease control rates were 55.0 and 78.9 %, respectively. The incidence of
clinically significant (grade 3 or more) adverse events was generally low:
proteinuria occurred in 2 (1.3 %) patients, hypertension in 2 (1.3 %), hemoptysis
in 1 (0.6 %), and interstitial pneumonia in 1 (0.6 %). The time to treatment
failure (TTF) in the 159 patients was 169 days, and the median overall survival
(OS) was 580 days. In patients who received bevacizumab-containing chemotherapy
as first-line therapy, the TTF and OS were 152 and 520 days, respectively. The
difference in TTF between patients who received bevacizumab-containing
chemotherapy as first-line therapy and those who received it as second-line or
later-line therapy was not significant (p = 0.4971). With regard to first-line
therapy, the difference in TTF between patients treated with carboplatin +
pemetrexed + bevacizumab and those treated with carboplatin + paclitaxel +
bevacizumab was not significant (p = 0.9435). We deduced that
bevacizumab-containing chemotherapy is effective against NSCLC and also tolerable
in clinical practice.

DOI: 10.1007/s12032-012-0318-5 
PMID: 23117478  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Am J Clin Oncol. 2014 Apr;37(2):140-3. doi: 10.1097/COC.0b013e31826b9e12.

Phase II study of biweekly carboplatin, gemcitabine, and bevacizumab as
first-line treatment in patients with stage IIIB/IV NSCLC.

Dudek AZ(1), Kumar P, H Thaw SS, Cao Q, Pawloski P, Larson T.

Author information: 
(1)*University of Minnesota Masonic Cancer Center, Minneapolis ‡Hubert H.
Humphrey Cancer Center-North Memorial Health Care, Robbinsdale, MN †Department of
Medicine, University of North Dakota, Fargo, ND.

BACKGROUND: This study was initiated to assess the safety and efficacy of
biweekly carboplatin and gemcitabine with bevacizumab in treatment-naive patients
with advanced and metastatic non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC).
PATIENTS AND METHODS: An open-label, nonrandomized phase II clinical trial was
conducted. Treatment consisted of a biweekly cycle of gemcitabine, carboplatin,
and bevacizumab for a maximum of 6 cycles. If no disease progression or
intolerable side effects were observed, maintenance therapy with bevacizumab was 
continued until disease progressed. Progression-free survival, overall survival
(OS), objective response rate, and the safety and tolerability of the therapy
were assessed.
RESULTS: Treatment was administered to 35 patients with stage IIIB/IV NSCLC.
Median age of the patients was 64.5 years, with 58% being male. Median number of 
cycles of treatment was 6 (range, 4 to 28 cycles); median number of days of
treatment was 117 days (range, 43 to 451 d). Sixty-six percent of patients
experienced grade ≥3 toxicities. Hypertension (19%) was the most common adverse
event. Pulmonary hemorrhage (3%) and pulmonary abscess (3%) were the causes of
treatment-related deaths. There were 48% patients with partial response, 23% with
stable disease, and 29% with progressive disease. Median progression-free
survival was 2.6 months [95% confidence interval (CI), 1.6-3.4], and median OS
was 13.4 months (95% CI, 8.4-24). The 2-year OS rate was 30% (95% CI, 12%-51%).
CONCLUSIONS: Biweekly therapy with combination of carboplatin, gemcitabine, and
bevacizumab in advanced inoperable NSCLC provided limited benefit and was
associated with excessive toxicity. Further testing of this regimen is not
recommended.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: Clinical Trials.gov Identifier: NCT00400803.

DOI: 10.1097/COC.0b013e31826b9e12 
PMID: 23111363  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. P T. 2012 Aug;37(8):471-7.

2012 american society of clinical oncology and american society of hypertension: 
27th annual scientific meeting and exposition.

Alexander W.

Selected ASCO topics include drugs for melanoma, gastrointestinal tumors,
non-small-cell lung cancer, and advanced breast cancer. ASH presentations cover
ambulatory blood pressure in type-2 diabetes, triple therapy in obese patients,
the effect of body mass on cardiovascular outcomes, and a novel glucagon-like
peptide agonist for diabetes.


PMCID: PMC3474429
PMID: 23091340  [PubMed]


98. BMC Cancer. 2012 Oct 3;12:449. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-12-449.

A Phase II study of pulse dose imatinib mesylate and weekly paclitaxel in
patients aged 70 and over with advanced non-small cell lung cancer.

Bauman JE(1), Eaton KD, Wallace SG, Carr LL, Lee SJ, Jones DV, Arias-Pulido H,
Cerilli LA, Martins RG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Hematology/Oncology and
Biostatistics, University of New Mexico Cancer Center, Albuquerque, New Mexico,
USA. baumanje@upmc.edu

BACKGROUND: In non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), interstitial hypertension is a
barrier to chemotherapy delivery, and is mediated by platelet derived growth
factor receptor (PDGFR). Antagonizing PDGFR with imatinib may improve
intra-tumoral delivery of paclitaxel, increasing response rate (RR).
METHODS: This single-stage, open-label phase II study evaluated pulse dose
imatinib and weekly paclitaxel in elderly patients with advanced NSCLC. Eligible 
patients were aged ≥ 70 with untreated, stage IIIB-IV NSCLC and ECOG performance 
status 0-2. Primary endpoint was RR. Secondary endpoints included median
progression free and overall survival (PFS, OS) and correlatives of PDGFR pathway
activation. Baseline Charlson Comorbidity Index (CCI) and Vulnerable Elder
Survey-13 (VES-13) were correlated with outcomes.
RESULTS: Thirty-four patients with median age 75 enrolled. Eleven of 29 (38%)
were frail by VES-13 score. Overall RR was 11/34 (32%; 95% CI 17%-51%), meeting
the primary endpoint. Median PFS and OS were 3.6 and 7.3 months, respectively.
High tumoral PDGF-B expression predicted inferior PFS. Frail patients by VES-13
had significantly worse median PFS (3.2 vs. 4.5 months; p=0.02) and OS (4.8 vs.
12 months; p=0.02) than non-frail.
CONCLUSIONS: The combination of imatinib and paclitaxel had encouraging activity 
as measured by the primary endpoint of RR. However, PFS and OS were typical for
elderly patients treated with single agent chemotherapy and the regimen is not
recommended for further study. Adjunct imatinib did not overcome the established 
association of tumoral PDGF-B expression with inferior PFS. VES-13 was a powerful
predictor of poor survival outcomes. Frailty should be further studied as a
predictor of non-benefit from chemotherapy.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov NCT01011075.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2407-12-449 
PMCID: PMC3517479
PMID: 23033932  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Br J Cancer. 2012 Oct 9;107(8):1277-85. doi: 10.1038/bjc.2012.406. Epub 2012 Sep 
18.

Phase I trial of axitinib combined with platinum doublets in patients with
advanced non-small cell lung cancer and other solid tumours.

Kozloff MF(1), Martin LP, Krzakowski M, Samuel TA, Rado TA, Arriola E, De Castro 
Carpeño J, Herbst RS, Tarazi J, Kim S, Rosbrook B, Tortorici M, Olszanski AJ,
Cohen RB.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Oncology/Hematology, Ingalls Hospital, Harvey, IL, USA.
mfkozloff@aol.com

BACKGROUND: This phase I dose-finding trial evaluated safety, efficacy and
pharmacokinetics of axitinib, a potent and selective second-generation inhibitor 
of vascular endothelial growth factor receptors, combined with platinum doublets 
in patients with advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and other solid
tumours.
METHODS: In all, 49 patients received axitinib 5 mg twice daily (b.i.d.) with
paclitaxel/carboplatin or gemcitabine/cisplatin in 3-week cycles. Following
determination of the maximum tolerated dose, a squamous cell NSCLC expansion
cohort was enroled and received axitinib 5 mg b.i.d. with paclitaxel/carboplatin.
RESULTS: Two patients experienced dose-limiting toxicities: febrile neutropenia
(n=1) in the paclitaxel/carboplatin cohort and fatigue (n=1) in the
gemcitabine/cisplatin cohort. Common nonhaematologic treatment-related adverse
events were hypertension (36.7%), diarrhoea (34.7%) and fatigue (28.6%). No grade
≥3 haemoptysis occurred among 12 patients with squamous cell NSCLC. The objective
response rate was 37.0% for patients receiving axitinib/paclitaxel/carboplatin
(n=27) and 23.8% for patients receiving axitinib/gemcitabine/cisplatin (n=21).
Pharmacokinetics of axitinib and chemotherapeutic agents were similar when
administered alone or in combination.
CONCLUSION: Axitinib 5 mg b.i.d. may be combined with standard
paclitaxel/carboplatin or gemcitabine/cisplatin regimens without evidence of
overt drug-drug interactions. Both combinations demonstrated clinical efficacy
and were well tolerated.

DOI: 10.1038/bjc.2012.406 
PMCID: PMC3494447
PMID: 22990652  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. J Clin Oncol. 2012 Oct 10;30(29):3640-7. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2012.42.6932. Epub 2012
Sep 10.

Aflibercept and Docetaxel versus Docetaxel alone after platinum failure in
patients with advanced or metastatic non-small-cell lung cancer: a randomized,
controlled phase III trial.

Ramlau R(1), Gorbunova V, Ciuleanu TE, Novello S, Ozguroglu M, Goksel T, Baldotto
C, Bennouna J, Shepherd FA, Le-Guennec S, Rey A, Miller V, Thatcher N, Scagliotti
G.

Author information: 
(1)Wielkopolskie Centrum Pulmonologii i Torakochirurgii, Poznań University of
Medical Sciences, Augustyna Szamarzewskiego 62, 61-001 Poznań, Poland.
rramlau@onet.eu

PURPOSE: To compare the efficacy of aflibercept (ziv-aflibercept), a recombinant 
human fusion protein targeting the vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)
pathway, with or without docetaxel in platinum-pretreated patients with advanced 
or metastatic nonsquamous non-small-cell lung cancer.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: In this international, double-blind, placebo-controlled
phase III trial, 913 patients were randomly assigned to (ziv-)aflibercept 6 mg/kg
intravenous (IV; n = 456) or IV placebo (n = 457), both administered every 3
weeks and in combination with docetaxel 75 mg/m(2). The primary end point was
overall survival (OS). Other efficacy outcomes, safety, and immunogenicity were
also assessed.
RESULTS: Patient characteristics were balanced between arms; 12.3% of patients
had received prior bevacizumab. (Ziv-)Aflibercept did not improve OS (hazard
ratio [HR], 1.01; 95% CI, 0.87 to 1.17; stratified log-rank P = .90). The median 
OS was 10.1 months (95% CI, 9.2 to 11.6 months) for (ziv-)aflibercept and 10.4
months (95% CI, 9.2 to 11.9 months) for placebo. In exploratory analyses, median 
progression-free survival was 5.2 months (95% CI, 4.4 to 5.6 months) for
(ziv-)aflibercept versus 4.1 months (95% CI, 3.5 to 4.3 months) for placebo (HR, 
0.82; 95% CI, 0.72 to 0.94; P = .0035); overall response rate was 23.3% of
evaluable patients (95% CI, 19.1% to 27.4%) in the (ziv-)aflibercept arm versus
8.9% (95% CI, 6.1% to 11.6%; P < .001) in the placebo arm. Grade ≥ 3 adverse
events occurring more frequently in the (ziv-)aflibercept arm versus the placebo 
arm were neutropenia (28.0% v 21.1%, respectively), fatigue (11.1% v 4.2%,
respectively), stomatitis (8.8% v 0.7%, respectively), and hypertension (7.3% v
0.9%, respectively).
CONCLUSION: The addition of (ziv-)aflibercept to standard docetaxel therapy did
not improve OS. In exploratory analyses, secondary efficacy end points did seem
to be improved in the (ziv-)aflibercept arm. The study regimen was associated
with increased toxicities, consistent with known anti-VEGF and
chemotherapy-induced events.

DOI: 10.1200/JCO.2012.42.6932 
PMID: 22965962  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Br J Clin Pharmacol. 2013 Apr;75(4):919-30. doi:
10.1111/j.1365-2125.2012.04417.x.

Incidence and risk of hypertension with vandetanib in cancer patients: a
systematic review and meta-analysis of clinical trials.

Qi WX(1), Shen Z, Lin F, Sun YJ, Min DL, Tang LN, He AN, Yao Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, the Sixth People's Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, no. 600, Yishan Road, Shanghai, 200233, China.

AIM: To perform a systematic review and meta-analysis of published clinical
trials to determine incidence rate and overall risk of hypertension with
vandetanib in cancer patients.
METHODS: A comprehensive literature search for studies published up to March 2012
was performed. Summary incidence rates, relative risk (RR), and 95% confidence
intervals (CI) were calculated employing fixed- or random-effects models
depending on the heterogeneity of the included trials.
RESULTS: A total of 11 trials with 3154 patients were included for the
meta-analysis. The summary incidences of all-grade and high-grade hypertension in
patients with cancer were 24.2% [95% confidence interval (CI), 18.1-30.2%] and
6.4% (95% CI, 3.3-9.5%), respectively. Subgroup analysis demonstrated that the
pooled incidences of all-grade and high-grade hypertension were 21.8% [95% CI,
15-30.5%] and 7.6% (95% CI, 2.8-18.8%), respectively, among non-small-cell lung
cancer (NSCLC) patients, and 32.1% (95% CI: 27.3-37.3%) and 8.8% (5.9%-12.9%),
respectively, among MTC patients, and 15.4 (95% CI: 3.2-33.7%) and 3.4% (95% CI: 
1%-11.1%) respectively, among non-MTC/NSCLC tumors patients. Furthermore,
vandetanib was associated with a significant increased risk of all-grade
hypertension (RR 5.1, 95% CI: 3.76-6.92, P = 0.000) and high-grade hypertension
(RR 8.06, 95% CI: 3.41-19.04, P = 0.000) in comparison with controls.
CONCLUSIONS: There is a significant risk of developing hypertension in cancer
patients receiving vandetanib. Appropriate monitoring and treatment is strongly
recommended to prevent cardiovascular complications.

© 2012 The Authors. British Journal of Clinical Pharmacology © 2012 The British
Pharmacological Society.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2125.2012.04417.x 
PMCID: PMC3612709
PMID: 22882307  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. J Clin Oncol. 2012 Sep 1;30(25):3084-92. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2011.39.7646. Epub 2012
Jul 30.

Phase III, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial of
gemcitabine/cisplatin alone or with sorafenib for the first-line treatment of
advanced, nonsquamous non-small-cell lung cancer.

Paz-Ares LG(1), Biesma B, Heigener D, von Pawel J, Eisen T, Bennouna J, Zhang L, 
Liao M, Sun Y, Gans S, Syrigos K, Le Marie E, Gottfried M, Vansteenkiste J,
Alberola V, Strauss UP, Montegriffo E, Ong TJ, Santoro A; NSCLC [non–small-cell
lung cancer] Research Experience Utilizing Sorafenib (NExUS) Investigators Study 
Group.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Oncology Department, Hospital Universitario Virgen del Rocío,
Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas de Sevilla, Avenida Manuel Siurot s/n,
Seville, Spain 41013. lpazares@hotmail.com

PURPOSE: This trial evaluated the efficacy and safety of sorafenib plus
gemcitabine/cisplatin in chemotherapy-naive patients with unresectable stage IIIB
to IV nonsquamous non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC).
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Between February 2007 and March 2009, 904 patients were
randomly assigned to daily sorafenib (400 mg twice a day) or matching placebo
plus gemcitabine (1,250 mg/m(2) per day on days 1 and 8) and cisplatin (75
mg/m(2) on day 1) for up to six 21-day cycles. Because of safety findings from
the Evaluation of Sorafenib, Carboplatin and Paclitaxel Efficacy in NSCLC
(ESCAPE) trial, patients with squamous cell histology were withdrawn from the
trial in February 2008 and excluded from analysis. The primary end point was
overall survival (OS), and secondary end points included progression-free
survival (PFS) and time-to-progression (TTP).
RESULTS: The primary analysis population consisted of 772 patients (sorafenib,
385; placebo, 387); the two groups had similar demographic and baseline
characteristics. Median OS was similar in the sorafenib and placebo groups (12.4 
v 12.5 months; hazard ratio [HR], 0.98; P = .401). By investigator assessment,
sorafenib improved median PFS (6.0 v 5.5 months; HR, 0.83; P = .008) and TTP (6.1
v 5.5 months; HR, 0.73; P < .001). Grade 3 to 4 drug-related adverse events more 
than two-fold higher in the sorafenib group included hand-foot skin reaction
(8.6% v 0.3%), fatigue (7.3% v 3.6%), rash (5.7% v 0.5%), and hypertension (4.2% 
v 1.8%). No unexpected toxicities were observed.
CONCLUSION: This study did not meet its primary end point of improved OS when
sorafenib was added to first-line gemcitabine/cisplatin in patients with advanced
nonsquamous NSCLC. Identification of predictive biomarkers is warranted in future
trials of sorafenib.

DOI: 10.1200/JCO.2011.39.7646 
PMID: 22851564  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Zhongguo Yi Xue Ke Xue Yuan Xue Bao. 2012 Apr;34(2):153-8. doi:
10.3881/j.issn.1000-503X.2012.02.010.

[Clinical and pathological analyses of bevacizumab-induced renal impairment in
four patients].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhao J(1), Li H, Zhang L, Zhong W, Li LY, Wen YB, Wang MZ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nephrology, PUMC Hospital,CAMS and PUMC, Beijing, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the clinical and pathological characteristics of
bevacizumab-induced renal impairment.
METHOD: The clinical and pathological data of 4 patients with bevacizumab-induced
renal impairment in Peking Union Medical College Hospital was retrospectively
analyzed.
RESULTS: There were 2 men and 2 women aged (56.5±11.5) years. Before bevacizumab 
treatment, three non-small cell lung cancer patients (75%) had normal renal
function and only one pancreatic cancer patient (25%) had mild renal impairment. 
After 2-14 cycles of bevacizumab treatment, the most common clinical
manifestation of bevacizumab-induced renal injury was proteinuria (>3.5 g/d)
(n=4, 100%). Other clinical symptoms included microscopic hematuria (n=2, 50%),
malignant hypertension (n=1, 25%), elevated serum creatinine level as accompanied
with acute renal failure (n=1, 25%), and anuria (n=1, 25%). Thrombotic
microangiopathy was the main pathological type (n=2, 50%), whereas other
pathological types included membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis (n=1, 25%)
and benign arteriolar nephrosclerosis (n=1, 25%). After the detection of renal
impairment, bevacizumab therapy was stopped in all 4 cases (100%). Hemodialysis
was performed in the patient with acute renal failure. The prognosis was
relatively good. The renal function and proteinuria was completely recovered in
one patient (25%), whereas the other three patients (75%) presented with
persistent alleviated proteinuria but normal renal function.
CONCLUSIONS: Bevacizumab may cause renal injury via complex mechanisms.
Therefore, urine protein excretion and renal function should be closely monitored
during bevacizumab treatment to identify any renal injury. The prognosis is
relatively good after discontinuation of bevacizumab.

DOI: 10.3881/j.issn.1000-503X.2012.02.010 
PMID: 22776601  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. BMJ Case Rep. 2012 Jun 25;2012. pii: bcr0220125889. doi:
10.1136/bcr.02.2012.5889.

Lung cancer mimicking massive pulmonary embolism.

Kaier TE(1), Madani Y.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiology Department, Imperial College NHS Trust, London, UK.
thomas@kaier.co.at

Pulmonary embolism (PE) is a common finding in patients with underlying
malignancy and is the commonest cause of acute cor pulmonale. A 65-year-old woman
with a background of non-small-cell lung cancer presented to the emergency
department with nausea and vomiting after starting erlotinib; she was pyrexial
and had raised C-reactive protein. Despite aggressive fluid resuscitation and
antibiotics the patient remained tachycardic, hypotensive, profoundly hypoxic and
had a persistent raised jugular venous pulse. Massive PE was therefore suspected.
A bedside echocardiogram demonstrated a dilated right ventricle and evidence of
pulmonary hypertension. A CT pulmonary angiogram excluded a PE but revealed
progression of the right hilar tumour causing complete obstruction of the right
upper and middle lobe pulmonary arteries. This case highlights an important
differential diagnosis when assessing patients with an underlying intrathoracic
tumour with findings suggestive of PE and the importance of obtaining further
imaging before considering thrombolysis.

DOI: 10.1136/bcr.02.2012.5889 
PMCID: PMC4543115
PMID: 22736782  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Eur J Clin Pharmacol. 2013 Feb;69(2):151-9. doi: 10.1007/s00228-012-1333-3. Epub 
2012 Jun 24.

Chemotherapy plus multitargeted antiangiogenic tyrosine kinase inhibitors or
chemotherapy alone in advanced NSCLC: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled
trials.

Xiao YY(1), Zhan P, Yuan DM, Liu HB, Lv TF, Song Y, Shi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory and Critical care Medicine, Jinling Hospital,
Nanjing University School of Medicine, 305 East Zhongshan Road, Nanjing 210002,
China.

BACKGROUND: Most patients with advanced non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
require systemic chemotherapy. Chemotherapy plus multitargeted antiangiogenic
tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKI; e.g., sorafenib, sunitinib, cediranib,
vandetanib, BIBF 1120, pazopanib, axitinib) has recently been evaluated in
patients with NSCLC. However, the advantage of this therapy over chemotherapy
alone in patients with advanced NSCLC remains largely unknown.
METHODS: A meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials (RCTs) was performed to 
compare the efficacy and toxicity of chemotherapy plus multitargeted
antiangiogenic TKI with chemotherapy alone in patients with advanced NSCLC.
PubMed, the ASCO and ESMO databases, and the Cochrane Library were searched for
references to published articles. Two reviewers independently assessed the
quality of the trials. Data were extracted, and overall response rate (ORR),
pooled progression-free survival (PFS), overall survival (OS) with 95 %
confidence intervals (CI), and major toxicities/adverse effects were analyzed.
RESULTS: Six RCTs involving 3,337 patients with advanced NSCLC were ultimately
analyzed. Compared to chemotherapy alone, chemotherapy plus multitargeted
antiangiogenic TKI significantly increased the ORR [relative risk (RR) 1.71, 95 %
CI  1.43-2.05] and PFS [hazard ratio (HR)  0.83, 95 % CI 0.76-0.90], but not OS
(HR 0.93, 95 % CI 0.83-1.03). Patients who received chemotherapy plus
multitargeted antiangiogenic TKI exhibited more rash, diarrhea and hypertension
(OR 2.78, 95 % CI  2.37-3.26; OR 1.92, 95 % CI 1.65-2.24; OR  2.90, 95 %
CI 2.19-3.84, respectively) and less nausea and vomiting (OR 0.71, 95 %
CI 0.60-0.83; OR 0.75, 95 % CI 0.61-0.92, respectively). The incidence of
hemorrhage, fatigue, cough, constipation, anorexia, and alopecia were comparable 
between the two groups.
CONCLUSIONS: Therapy consisting of chemotherapy plus multitargeted antiangiogenic
TKI was found to have specific advantages over chemotherapy alone in terms of PFS
and ORR. The toxicity was comparable between the two therapies. Therefore,
chemotherapy plus multitargeted antiangiogenic TKI may be a safe and valid
therapeutic option for patients with advanced NSCLC.

DOI: 10.1007/s00228-012-1333-3 
PMID: 22729611  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Med Hypotheses. 2012 Sep;79(3):313-4. doi: 10.1016/j.mehy.2012.05.019. Epub 2012 
Jun 2.

Itraconazole: its possible role in inhibiting angiogenesis in rheumatoid
arthritis.

Sheikh A(1), Naqvi SH, Naqvi SH, Sheikh K.

Author information: 
(1)Dow Medical College, Dow University of Health Sciences, Karachi, Pakistan.
asfandyarsheikh@gmail.com

Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a chronic, inflammatory, autoimmune disorder
involving mainly synovial joints. It can progress to a severely debilitating form
with pulmonary, renal and cardiovascular involvement. Currently,
disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs (DMARDs) remain the gold standard
pharmacological therapy for RA (along with nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
and corticosteroids). However, DMARDs are more or less ineffective in the late
phase of the disease and adverse effects often limit their use. Studies show that
serum levels of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) remain elevated
throughout the course of RA. In experimental models, the administration of
pro-angiogenic cytokines, such as VEGF or FGF, has been shown to increase the
severity of the disease. Therefore, anti-angiogenic drugs such as bevacizumab
(which is already being used as an anti-tumor agent) may play a significant role 
in longstanding RA. However, adverse effects such as hypertension,
gastro-intestinal perforation and the high cost of bevacizumab are major
concerns. A recent study suggests that itraconazole, an antifungal drug, has a
role in selectively inhibiting angiogenesis and growth of tumor in non-small cell
lung cancer. Hence, this drug may be beneficial in the treatment of RA,
especially in the later phase when other modalities have failed, or as an
adjuvant. To test our hypothesis, we propose a randomized, double-blinded trial
in patients with longstanding RA. The control group receives the standard DMARD
therapy plus placebo, while the case group receives itraconazole in addition to
DMARD therapy. Serum and synovial VEGF levels, in both the control group and the 
case group, are compared and their correlation with the symptoms is judged. If
the VEGF levels are lower and/or the symptoms are less severe in the case group, 
our hypothesis will be confirmed. Multi-institutional efforts are needed to
confirm this hypothesis, as it is relatively new and trial data is limited.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mehy.2012.05.019 
PMID: 22658359  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Expert Opin Pharmacother. 2012 Jul;13(10):1389-96. doi:
10.1517/14656566.2012.693165. Epub 2012 May 25.

First-line bevacizumab, cisplatin and vinorelbine plus maintenance bevacizumab in
advanced non-squamous non-small cell lung cancer chemo-naïve patients.

Leon L(1), Vázquez S, Gracia JM, Casal J, Lazaro M, Firvida JL, Amenedo M,
Santome L, Macia S.

Author information: 
(1)Complexo Hospitalario Universitario de Santiago, Medical Oncology Department, 
Travesía da Choupana, s/n, 15706 Santiago de Compostela, Spain.
luis.leon.mateos@sergas.es

OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to evaluate efficacy and safety of
first-line treatment with bevacizumab, cisplatin and vinorelbine and bevacizumab 
maintenance in non-squamous, non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC).
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: Forty-nine patients with stage IIIB plus pleural
effusion or stage IV NSCLC were included in a Phase II clinical trial. Treatment 
consisted of 3-week cycles of bevacizumab (15 mg/kg on day 1), cisplatin (80
mg/m(2) on day 1) and vinorelbine (25 mg/m(2) on days 1 and 8). After 6 cycles,
non-progressing patients received bevacizumab maintenance therapy. The primary
end point was progression-free survival (PFS), calculated using the Kaplan-Meier 
method.
RESULTS: Thirteen (29%) of 45 evaluable patients presented a partial response.
PFS and overall survival were 6.0 months (95% confidence interval (CI) 4.5 - 7.5)
and 14.7 months (95% CI 8.4 - 21), respectively. Fourteen patients (28%)
experienced grade 3 - 4 neutropenia and 7 (14%) experienced febrile neutropenia
during the combination treatment. During the maintenance phase, the most frequent
grade 3 - 4 adverse event was hypertension. Neither grade 3 - 4 thrombocytopenia 
nor toxic death was observed.
CONCLUSIONS: The studied regimen achieved a similar efficacy to other regimens
containing platinum doublets. The data provide further evidence that bevacizumab 
may be used in combination with multiple standard platinum-based doublets in this
setting.

DOI: 10.1517/14656566.2012.693165 
PMID: 22630129  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2012 Oct;42(4):653-8. doi: 10.1093/ejcts/ezs135. Epub
2012 Apr 19.

A propensity-matched comparison of survival after lung resection in patients with
a high versus low body mass index.

Attaran S(1), McShane J, Whittle I, Poullis M, Shackcloth M.

Author information: 
(1)Thoracic Department, Liverpool Heart and Chest Hospital, Liverpool, UK.
saina.attaran@kcl.ac.uk

OBJECTIVES: An inverse relationship between body mass index (BMI) and the risk of
lung cancer has been reported in several studies. In this study, we aimed to
assess whether BMI can affect survival after lung resection for cancer.
METHODS: We reviewed patient data for a 10-year period; 337 patients with BMI ≥
30 who underwent lung resection for non-small cell lung cancer were identified.
This group of patients was matched at a ratio of 1:1 to a group with BMI <30 and 
with similar characteristics such as sex, age, lung function test, history of
smoking, diabetes, peripheral vascular disease, stroke, myocardial infarction,
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), procedure type, histology and stage
of tumour. We also used the Kaplan-Meier survival curves before and after
matching for the above mentioned patient characteristics.
RESULTS: Before adjusting for the preoperative and operative characteristics,
despite more history of diabetes, hypertension and renal impairment in patients
with BMI ≥ 30 compared to those with BMI <30 (BMI = 18.5-30 and < 8.5), the
survival rate was found to be significantly higher when analysed univariately (P 
= 0.02). This difference remained significant after adjusting for all the
characteristics, suggesting a significantly higher survival rate in the group
with BMI ≥ 30 (P = 0.04).
CONCLUSIONS: Unlike in breast cancer, a high BMI in lung cancer patients after
resection has protective effects. This may be due to the better nutritional
status of the patient, a less aggressive cancer type that has not resulted in
weight loss at the time of presentation or it may be due to certain hormones
released from the adipose tissue. BMI can be a predictor of outcome after lung
resection in cancer patients.

DOI: 10.1093/ejcts/ezs135 
PMID: 22518036  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. J Clin Oncol. 2012 Apr 1;30(10):1114-21. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2011.36.1709. Epub 2012
Feb 27.

Vandetanib Versus placebo in patients with advanced non-small-cell lung cancer
after prior therapy with an epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase
inhibitor: a randomized, double-blind phase III trial (ZEPHYR).

Lee JS(1), Hirsh V, Park K, Qin S, Blajman CR, Perng RP, Chen YM, Emerson L,
Langmuir P, Manegold C.

Author information: 
(1)National Cancer Center, Goyang, South Korea. jslee@ncc.re.kr

PURPOSE: Vandetanib is a once-daily oral inhibitor of vascular endothelial growth
factor receptor, epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), and RET signaling. This
placebo-controlled trial assessed whether vandetanib conferred an overall
survival benefit in patients with advanced non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
after prior treatment with an EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor and one or two
chemotherapy regimens.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Eligible patients were randomly assigned 2:1 to receive
vandetanib 300 mg/d or placebo until disease progression or unacceptable
toxicity. The primary objective was to compare the outcomes between the two arms 
with respect to overall survival.
RESULTS: Overall, 924 patients received vandetanib (n = 617) or placebo (n =
307). No significant increase in overall survival was detected in the vandetanib 
cohort compared with placebo (hazard ratio = 0.95; 95.2% CI, 0.81 to 1.11; P =
.527); median overall survival was 8.5 months versus 7.8 months for vandetanib
and placebo patients, respectively. Statistically significant advantages favoring
vandetanib were observed for progression-free survival (hazard ratio = 0.63; P < 
.001) and objective response rate (2.6% v 0.7%; P = .028). Postprogression
therapy was balanced across the cohorts in both number and type. Adverse events
were generally consistent with previous NSCLC studies of vandetanib 300 mg;
common events occurring with a greater frequency in the vandetanib arm versus
placebo included diarrhea (46% v 11%), rash (42% v 11%), and hypertension (26% v 
3%).
CONCLUSION: The study did not demonstrate an overall survival benefit for
vandetanib versus placebo. There was a higher incidence of some adverse events
with vandetanib.

DOI: 10.1200/JCO.2011.36.1709 
PMID: 22370318  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Lung Cancer. 2012 Jul;77(1):104-9. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2012.01.014. Epub 2012 
Feb 24.

Pemetrexed, oxaliplatin and bevacizumab as first-line treatment in patients with 
stage IV non-small cell lung cancer.

Mir O(1), Boudou-Rouquette P, Giroux J, Chapron J, Alexandre J, Gibault L, Ropert
S, Coriat R, Durand JP, Burgel PR, Dusser D, Goldwasser F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Cochin Teaching Hospital, AP-HP, Université
Paris Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Paris, France. olivier.mir@cch.aphp.fr

BACKGROUND: Oxaliplatin has less haematological toxicity than cisplatin and
carboplatin. The combination of pemetrexed, oxaliplatin and bevacizumab appeared 
well tolerated and active as second- or third-line treatment in a previous phase 
II study. Its role as first-line therapy remains to define.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: From August 2008 to May 2011, consecutive chemo-naïve
patients with stage IV non-squamous non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) received
pemetrexed 500mg/m(2), oxaliplatin 100mg/m(2) and bevacizumab 7.5mg/kg every 3
weeks for 6 cycles, in the outpatient setting. Maintenance therapy including
pemetrexed and bevacizumab was given to patients with non-progressive disease.
The primary evaluation criterion was safety. Secondary evaluation criteria were
response rate, progression-free survival (PFS) and overall survival (OS).
RESULTS: Thirty-eight patients (50% males, median age: 55 years, range 38-76)
received a total of 199 cycles (median per patient: 6, range 2-6), plus 98 cycles
of maintenance therapy. Twenty patients (52.6%) had a PS of 2, and 6 (15.8%) had 
brain metastases. The most frequent toxicities were hypertension (all grades:
42.1%) and peripheral neuropathy (grade 2-3: 21.1%). Haematological toxicities
included grade 4 neutropenia, grade 3 anaemia and thrombopenia (5.3% each).
Neither febrile neutropenia nor arterial thrombo-embolic event occurred. The
objective response rate was 55.3% (95%CI: 39.5-71.1). The median PFS and OS were 
6.2 (95%CI: 5.4-9.0) and 14.6 (95%CI: 9.8-19.5) months, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: In this single centre experience, the combination of pemetrexed,
oxaliplatin and bevacizumab was well tolerated and had promising activity as
first-line therapy in unselected patients with stage IV non-squamous NSCLC.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2012.01.014 
PMID: 22364783  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Clin Lung Cancer. 2012 Mar;13(2):96-106. doi: 10.1016/j.cllc.2011.08.006. Epub
2011 Nov 6.

Safety profile and tolerability of antiangiogenic agents in non-small-cell lung
cancer.

Gadgeel SM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Karmanos Cancer Institute, Wayne State University, Detroit, MI 48201, USA.
gadgeels@karmanos.org

Recent advances in understanding the importance of angiogenesis to tumor growth
and distant metastasis has driven the development of antiangiogenic therapies for
the treatment of non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC). The anti-vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF) monoclonal antibody, bevacizumab, is the only US
Food and Drug Administration-approved antiangiogenic agent for advanced NSCLC.
Accumulated safety data with bevacizumab in NSCLC shows that patients are at risk
for hemorrhage, venous thromboembolism, hypertension, and proteinuria.
Investigational agents that target VEGF via a different mechanism (such as
aflibercept [VEGF Trap]) or simultaneously inhibit multiple molecular pathways
involved in angiogenesis (ie, multitargeted tyrosine kinase inhibitors [TKIs])
and vascular disrupting agents (VDAs) that target existing tumor vasculature are 
in various stages of clinical development for NSCLC, and safety profiles are
emerging for these classes of agents. This review describes the molecular
rationale for targeting angiogenic pathways in anticancer therapy and summarizes 
safety and tolerability data from clinical trials of bevacizumab or aflibercept
in combination with chemotherapy and the investigational TKIs and VDAs in
patients who have advanced NSCLC.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cllc.2011.08.006 
PMID: 22056889  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Ann Oncol. 2017 Feb 7. doi: 10.1093/annonc/mdx008. [Epub ahead of print]

Pembrolizumab as first-line therapy for patients with PD-L1-positive advanced
non-small cell lung cancer: a phase 1 trial.

Hui R, Garon EB(1), Goldman JW(1), Leighl NB(2), Hellmann MD(3), Patnaik A(1),
Gandhi L(2), Eder JP(3), Ahn MJ(4), Horn L(5), Felip E(6), Carcereny E(7),
Rangwala R(8), Lubiniecki GM(8), Zhang J(8), Emancipator K(8), Roach C(9), Rizvi 
NA.

Author information: 
(1)Hematology/Oncology, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Santa Monica,
CA, USA. (2)Dept.of Medicine, Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, Toronto, ON,
Canada. (3)Hematology/Oncology, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center and Weill 
Cornell Medical College, New York, NY, USA. (4)Oncology and Hematology Clinical
Research, South Texas Accelerated Research Therapeutics, San Antonio, TX, USA.
(5)Hematology/Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA, USA. (6)Medical
Oncology, Vall d'Hebron University Hospital, Vall d'Hebron Institute of Oncology 
(VHIO), Barcelona, Spain. (7)Medical Oncology, Catalan Institute of Oncology
Badalona, Badalona, Spain. (8)Medical Oncology, Merck & Co., Inc., Kenilworth,
NJ, USA. (9)Companion Diagnostics, Dako, an Agilent Technologies Company,
Carpinteria, CA, USA.

DOI: 10.1093/annonc/mdx008 
PMID: 28168303  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. Ann Pathol. 2017 Feb 2. pii: S0242-6498(16)30176-6. doi:
10.1016/j.annpat.2016.12.009. [Epub ahead of print]

[Efficacy of PD-1/PD-L1 immune checkpoint inhibitors and PD-L1 testing in
thoracic cancers].

[Article in French]

Duruisseaux M(1), Rouquette I(2), Adam J(3), Cortot A(4), Cazes A(5), Gibault
L(6), Damotte D(7), Lantuejoul S(8).

Author information: 
(1)Unité d'oncologie thoracique, clinique de pneumologie, centre hospitalier
universitaire Grenoble-Alpes, 38043 Grenoble, France. (2)Service d'anatomie et
cytologie pathologiques, pôle IUC oncopole CHU, institut universitaire du cancer 
de Toulouse-oncopole, 31100 Toulouse, France. (3)Département de biologie et
pathologie médicales, Gustave-Roussy, 94800 Villejuif, France. (4)Service de
pneumologie et oncologie thoracique, CHRU de Lille, University Lille,
Siric-OncoLille, 59000 Lille, France. (5)Département de pathologie, hôpital
Bichat, HUPNVS, Assistance publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, 75018 Paris, France.
(6)Service d'anatomie pathologique, hôpital européen Georges-Pompidou, 75015
Paris, France. (7)Service de pathologie, hôpital Cochin, AP-HP, université
Paris-Descartes, 75014 Paris, France. (8)Département de biopathologie, MESOPATH, 
centre de lutte contre le cancer Léon-Bérard, 28, rue Laennec, 69008 Lyon,
France. Electronic address: sylvie.lantuejoul@lyon.unicancer.fr.

Tumoral immune environment is a major component of cancer. Its composition and
its organization represent a reproducible characteristic of tumors and a
validated prognostic factor. In non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), cytotoxic T
CD8+ lymphocyte density, associated with a Th1 environment and tertiary lymphoid 
structures impacts survival. Tumor cell-immune cell interaction is targeted by
PD1/PD-L1 inhibitors. In advanced NSCLC, PD1/PD-L1 inhibitors are more effective 
than second-line chemotherapy. Pembrolizumab outperforms first-line chemotherapy 
in NSCLC strongly positive for PD-L1. PD1/PD-L1 inhibitors are currently tested
in mesothelioma and thymic tumors. PD-L1 expression evaluated with
immunochemistry is the most studied predictive biomarker of PD1/PD-L1 inhibitor
efficacy. Tumor and immune cell expression of PD-L1 is still difficult to
evaluate because of intra-tumoral heterogeneity and expression modulation by the 
microenvironment. Four commercial diagnostic antibodies are in development, with 
differences concerning recognized epitopes, methodology of evaluation of
PD-L1 expression, positivity threshold, kit and platforms used. Clinical trials
in NSCLC have shown that patients with tumors strongly positive for PD-L1 derived
the best clinical benefit with PD1/PD-L1 inhibitors whereas clinical benefit is
less common in tumors negative for PD-L1. PD-L1 expression is not a perfect
biomarker since some PD-L1 negative NSCLC respond to PD1/PD-L1 inhibitors and
some PD-L1 positive NSCLC do not. PD-L1 testing is likely to be implemented in
daily practice for selection of advanced NSCLC that will be treated with
pembrolizumab, underscoring the relevance of ongoing harmonization studies of the
use of the different antibodies available for PD-L1 testing.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.annpat.2016.12.009 
PMID: 28162296  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


3. Expert Rev Anticancer Ther. 2017 Jan 27. doi: 10.1080/14737140.2017.1286986.
[Epub ahead of print]

A new frontier for targeted therapy in NSCLC: clinical efficacy of pembrolizumab 
in the inhibition of programmed cell death 1 (PD-1).

Addeo R(1).

Author information: 
(1)a U.O.C. Oncologia, ASL NA2 NORD , Frattamaggiore , ITALY.

Non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is the main pathological type among lung
cancers, and it is often diagnosed at an advanced stage of the disease when it is
no longer amenable to curative treatments. During recent decades, the survival
rate for lung cancer patients has improved significantly in only those whose
tumours harbour a driver mutation. Immune checkpoint inhibition is a promising
therapeutic strategy for lung cancer. The Keynote 024 is randomized, open-label, 
international, phase III study to evaluate the efficacy of pembrolizumab, an
antibody directed to programmed death 1 (PD-1),an immune checkpoint inhibitor,
compared with platinum-based chemotherapy in patients with previously untreated
advanced NSCLC and PD-L1 expression in at least 50% of the tumour cells.
Pembrolizumab treatment achieved statistically significant clinical benefits in
terms of progression free survival, overall survival and objective responses. The
high quality of data and the novelty of the information obtained created the
conditions for a new standard of care driven by the expression of PD-L1.

DOI: 10.1080/14737140.2017.1286986 
PMID: 28129007  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


4. Expert Rev Anticancer Ther. 2017 Jan 27. doi: 10.1080/14737140.2017.1288103.
[Epub ahead of print]

Beyond platinum treatment for NSCLC: what does the future hold?

Santarpia M(1), Karachaliou N(2), Rosell R(3,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)a Medical Oncology Unit, Department of Human Pathology "G. Barresi" ,
University of Messina , Messina , Italy. (2)b Dr Rosell Oncology Institute ,
University Hospital Sagrat Cor , Barcelona , Spain. (3)c Cancer Biology &
Precision Medicine Program , Catalan Institute of Oncology, Hospital Germans
Trias i Pujol , Badalona, Barcelona , Spain. (4)d Germans Trias i Pujol Health
Sciences Institute and Hospital , Campus Can Ruti, Badalona, Barcelona , Spain.

For the majority of patients without oncogene-driven non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC), first-line platinum-based chemotherapy represented until recently the
standard treatment approach. The recent understanding of the interactions between
immune system and tumor growth has prompted the development of a new class of
immunotherapeutic agents, the immune checkpoint inhibitors, specifically directed
against the pathways exploited by tumor cells to suppress and evade the immune
system. Immune checkpoint blockade (ICB) has demonstrated significant anti-tumor 
activity, with durable clinical responses and manageable toxicities. The
identification and validation of predictive biomarkers for ICB remains crucial
for the selection of patients, especially in the first-line setting. Novel
synergistic combinations are currently being tested to further improve the
therapeutic efficacy of these agents.

DOI: 10.1080/14737140.2017.1288103 
PMID: 28129003  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


5. Clin Transl Med. 2017 Dec;6(1):7. doi: 10.1186/s40169-017-0136-7. Epub 2017 Jan
20.

Precision medicine in immune checkpoint blockade therapy for non-small cell lung 
cancer.

Liu X(1), Cho WC(2).

Author information: 
(1)Human Stem Cell Institute, General Hospital, Ningxia Medical University,
Yinchuan, 750004, Ningxia, China. liuxiaoming@nxmu.edu.cn. (2)Department of
Clinical Oncology, Queen Elizabeth Hospital, Kowloon, Hong Kong. chocs@ha.org.hk.

Immune checkpoint blockade therapy by targeting the programmed death protein
1/programmed death ligand 1 (PD-L1) axis using antibodies has yielded promising
clinical responses in patients with non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). However, 
owing to the dynamic expression of PD-L1, degree of mutational/neoantigen load,
intratumoral heterogeneity, infiltrated immune cells of tumor microenvironment of
NSCLC, the response rates to these agents are limited, despite several companion 
diagnostic assays by detecting PD-L1 in tumor cells have been introduced into
clinical practice. Therefore, in this era of precision medicine, there is an
urgent need for predictive biomarkers to identify NSCLC patients likely to
benefit from this novel therapy.

DOI: 10.1186/s40169-017-0136-7 
PMCID: PMC5250626
PMID: 28108884  [PubMed - in process]


6. Clin Cancer Res. 2017 Jan 10. pii: clincanres.2375.2016. doi:
10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-16-2375. [Epub ahead of print]

Agreement between Programmed Cell Death Ligand-1 Diagnostic Assays across
Multiple Protein Expression Cut-Offs in Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer.

Ratcliffe MJ(1), Sharpe A(2), Midha A(3), Barker C(3), Scott M(4), Scorer P(3),
Al-Masri H(5), Rebelatto M(6), Walker J(7).

Author information: 
(1)Personalised Healthcare and Biomarkers, AstraZeneca
Marianne.Ratcliffe@astrazeneca.com. (2)Personalised Health Care and Biomarker,
AstraZeneca Pharmaceuticals. (3)Personalised Healthcare and Biomarkers,
AstraZeneca. (4)Imaging, Translational Sciences, AstraZeneca. (5)Hematogenix.
(6)Pathology, MedImmune, LLC. (7)Cancer and Infection Bioscience, AstraZeneca.

PURPOSE: agents:Immunotherapies targeting programmed cell death-1 (PD-1) and
programmed cell death ligand-1 (PD-L1) demonstrate encouraging antitumor activity
and manageable tolerability in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), especially in 
patients with high tumor PD-L1 expression, as detected by companion or
complementary diagnostic assays developed for individual agents. A laboratory is 
unlikely to use multiple assay platforms. Furthermore, commercially available
diagnostic assays are not standardized and different assay methods could lead to 
inappropriate treatment selection. This study establishes the extent of
concordance between three validated, commercially available PD-L1
immunohistochemistry diagnostic assays for NSCLC patients (Ventana SP263
[durvalumab], Dako 22C3 [pembrolizumab], and Dako 28-8 [nivolumab]).
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Five-hundred formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded archival
NSCLC samples were obtained from commercial sources. Stained slides were read in 
batches on an assay-by-assay basis by a single pathologist trained in all
methods, in a Clinical Laboratory Improvements Amendments program-certified
laboratory. An additional pathologist performed an independent review of 200
stained samples for each assay.
RESULTS: PD-L1 expression was evaluable with all assays in 493 samples. The three
assays showed similar patterns of tumor membrane staining, with high correlation 
between percentage PD-L1 staining. An overall percentage agreement of >90% was
achieved between assays at multiple expression cut-offs, including 1%, 10%, 25%, 
and 50% tumor membrane staining.
CONCLUSIONS: This study builds optimism that harmonization between assays may be 
possible, and that the three assays studied could potentially be used
interchangeably to identify patients most likely to respond to anti-PD-1/PD-L1
immunotherapies, provided the appropriate clinically defined algorithm and agent 
are always linked.

Copyright ©2017, American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-16-2375 
PMID: 28073845  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


7. Expert Opin Biol Ther. 2017 Jan 18:1-8. doi: 10.1080/14712598.2017.1280454. [Epub
ahead of print]

PD-1 checkpoint blockade alone or combined PD-1 and CTLA-4 blockade as
immunotherapy for lung cancer?

Tanvetyanon T(1), Gray JE(1), Antonia SJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Thoracic Oncology Department , H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research
Institute , Tampa , FL , USA.

INTRODUCTION: Signaling through T-cell surface, an immune checkpoint protein such
as PD-1 or CTLA-4 helps dampen or terminate unwanted immune responses. Blocking a
single immune checkpoint or multiple checkpoints simultaneously can generate
anti-tumor activity against a variety of cancers including lung cancer. Area
covered: This review highlights the results of recent clinical studies of single 
or combination checkpoint inhibitor immunotherapy in non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC) or small cell lung cancer (SCLC). The authors discuss pembrolizumab and
pembrolizumab plus ipilimumab, durvalumab and durvalumab plus tremelimumab,
nivolumab and nivolumab plus ipilimumab for NSCLC as well as nivolumab and
nivolumab plus ipilimumab for SCLC. Expert opinion: Available data suggest that, 
in both metastatic NSCLC and SCLC, combined PD-1 and CTLA-4 blockade may produce 
a higher tumor response rate than PD-1 blockade alone. Nevertheless, combination 
therapy is associated with an increased toxicity. Several larger-scale studies
are currently ongoing. For checkpoint inhibitor immunotherapy in SCLC and NSCLC, 
combination therapy is associated with a higher incidence of toxicities than
single therapy; however, it appears to help increase tumor response rate. The
increased response rate, if confirmed in larger scale studies, will likely make
combination therapy another useful therapeutic approach for lung cancer.

DOI: 10.1080/14712598.2017.1280454 
PMID: 28064556  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


8. Bull Cancer. 2016 Nov;103 Suppl 1:S138-S143. doi: 10.1016/S0007-4551(16)30371-X.

Les inhibiteurs des points de contrôle immunitaire dans le cancer bronchique non 
à petites cellules de stade avancé.

[Article in French]

Fabre E(1), Pécuchet N(2), Cadranel J(3).

Author information: 
(1)INSERM UMR-S1147, université Sorbonne-Paris-Cité, Paris, France; Service
d'oncologie médicale, hôpital européen Georges-Pompidou (HEGP), Assistance
publique-hôpitaux de Paris, Paris, France. Electronic address:
elizabeth.fabre@aphp.fr. (2)INSERM UMR-S1147, université Sorbonne-Paris-Cité,
Paris, France; Service d'oncologie médicale, hôpital européen Georges-Pompidou
(HEGP), Assistance publique-hôpitaux de Paris, Paris, France. (3)Service de
pneumologie, hôpital Tenon, Assistance publique-hôpitaux de Paris, France; GRC
04, Theranoscan, université Pierre-et-Marie-Curie, Paris 6, France.

IMMUNE CHECKPOINT INHIBITORS IN ADVANCED NON-SMALL CELL LUNG CANCER:
T-cell-directed strategies represent currently a major advance in the treatment
of advanced non-small-cell lung cancer, regarding their efficacy and tolerance.
Nivolumab and pembrolizumab, two monoclonal antibodies targeting programmed cell 
death protein 1 (PD-1) have shown their efficacy in phase III studies. Several
other drugs are developed and the benefit of association is being evaluated. In
this article, we propose to summarize the clinical development of immune
checkpoint inhibitors in patients with advanced non-small cell lung cancer.

© 2016 Société Française du Cancer. Publié par Elsevier Masson SAS. Tous droits
réservés.

DOI: 10.1016/S0007-4551(16)30371-X 
PMID: 28057177  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Onco Targets Ther. 2016 Dec 16;10:21-30. doi: 10.2147/OTT.S90459. eCollection
2017.

Potential role of immunotherapy in advanced non-small-cell lung cancer.

de Mello RA(1), Veloso AF(2), Esrom Catarina P(2), Nadine S(3), Antoniou G(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences and Medicine, University of Algarve, Faro;
Faculty of Medicine, University of Porto, Porto, Portugal; Research Center,
Cearense School of Oncology, Instituto do Câncer do Ceará. (2)Oncology &
Hematology League, School of Medicine, State University of Ceará (UECE),
Fortaleza, Brazil. (3)Instituto de Ciências Biomédicas Abel Salazar (ICBAS),
University of Porto, Porto, Portugal. (4)Department of Medical Oncology, The
Royal Marsden NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK.

Immuno checkpoint inhibitors have ushered in a new era with respect to the
treatment of advanced non-small-cell lung cancer. Many patients are not suitable 
for treatment with epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors
(eg, gefitinib, erlotinib, and afatinib) or with anaplastic lymphoma kinase
inhibitors (eg, crizotinib and ceritinib). As a result, anti-PD-1/PD-L1 and
CTLA-4 inhibitors may play a novel role in the improvement of outcomes in a
metastatic setting. The regulation of immune surveillance, immunoediting, and
immunoescape mechanisms may play an interesting role in this regard either alone 
or in combination with current drugs. Here, we discuss advances in immunotherapy 
for the treatment of metastatic non-small-cell lung cancer as well as future
perspectives within this framework.

DOI: 10.2147/OTT.S90459 
PMCID: PMC5179204
PMID: 28031719  [PubMed]


10. Ann Oncol. 2016 Dec 19. pii: mdw640. doi: 10.1093/annonc/mdw640. [Epub ahead of
print]

Antibody-Mediated Thyroid Dysfunction During T-cell Checkpoint Blockade in
Patients with Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer.

Osorio JC(1), Ni A(2), Chaft JE(1,)(3), Pollina R(3), Kasler MK(3), Stephens
D(3), Rodriguez C(3), Cambridge L(3), Rizvi H(3), Wolchok JD(1,)(3,)(4,)(5),
Merghoub T(1,)(3,)(4,)(5), Rudin CM(1,)(3), Fish S(1,)(3), Hellmann
MD(6,)(3,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)1. Department of Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, USA. (2)2.
Department of Biostatistics, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York,
USA. (3)3. Department of Medicine, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New
York, USA. (4)4. Parker Institute for Cancer Immunotherapy at Memorial Sloan
Kettering. New York, USA. (5)5. Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, New York,
USA. (6)1. Department of Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, USA
hellmanm@mskcc.org.

BACKGROUND: PD-1 blockade therapies have demonstrated durable responses and
prolonged survival in a variety of malignancies. Treatment is generally well
tolerated, although immune-related adverse events (irAEs) can occur. Autoimmune
thyroid dysfunction is among the most common irAE, but an assessment of the
clinical, mechanistic, and immunologic features have not been previously
described.
PATIENT AND METHODS: Patients with advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
treated with pembrolizumab at Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center (N=51) as
part of KEYNOTE-001 (NCT01295827) were included. Thyroid function test and
anti-thyroid antibodies were assessed prospectively at each study visit,
beginning before the first treatment. Frequency of development of thyroid
dysfunction, association with anti-thyroid antibodies, clinical course, and
relationship with progression free survival (PFS) and overall survival (OS) to
treatment with pembrolizumab were evaluated.
RESULTS: Of 51 patients treated, 3 were hypothyroid and 48 were not at baseline. 
Ten of 48 (21%, 95% CI: 10% to 35%) patients developed thyroid dysfunction
requiring thyroid replacement. Anti-thyroid antibodies were present in 8 of 10
patients who developed thyroid dysfunction, compared to 3 of 38 who did not (80% 
vs 8%, P<0.0001). Thyroid dysfunction occurred early (median: 42 days) in the
pembrolizumab course, and a majority (6/10) experienced brief, transient
hyperthyroidism preceding the onset of hypothyroidism; no persistent
hyperthyroidism occurred. Both hyperthyroidism and hypothyroidism were largely
asymptomatic. Overall survival with pembrolizumab was significantly longer in
subjects that developed thyroid dysfunction (HR, 0.29; 95% CI: 0.09 to 0.94; P=
0.04).
CONCLUSION: Thyroid dysfunction during pembrolizumab treatment for NSCLC is
common and is characterized by early-onset, frequently preceded by transient
hyperthyroidism, closely associated with antithyroid antibodies, and may be
associated with improved outcomes. The presence of antibody-mediated toxicity in 
T cell directed therapy suggests an under-recognized impact of PD-1 biology in
modulating humoral immunity.

© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the European
Society for Medical Oncology. All rights reserved. For permissions, please email:
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/annonc/mdw640 
PMID: 27998967  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


11. Recenti Prog Med. 2016 Dec;107(12):634-640. doi: 10.1701/2502.26230.

[Nivolumab in second-line treatment of squamous non-small cell lung cancer.]

[Article in Italian]

De Marinis F(1), Passaro A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Divisione di Oncologia Toracica, Istituto Europeo di Oncologia, Milano.

The treatment of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is changing dramatically in
the last period, considering both non-squamous and squamous disease. In the last 
five years, the identification of different molecular predictive biomarker (e.g.,
EGFR, ALK e ROS1) and the utilize of new chemotherapy agents associated or not
with antiangiogenics agents (e.g., bevacizumab and nintedanib), allowed the
improvement of survival and related responses to these treatments. However, these
advances, did not allow an improvement of the same endpoints in the management of
NSCLC with squamous cell histology (SCC), where until very recently, docetaxel in
monotherapy remained as a corner stone treatment for the second line, although
associated with an unfavorable toxicity profile. In recent years, the improvement
knowledge of mechanisms of immune response in patients suffering from solid
tumors, and especially lung cancer, allowed the identification of different
anti-PD1 and anti-PDL1 monoclonal antibodies (e.g., atezolizumab, avelumab,
nivolumab, pembrolizumab) able to improved survival and response when used in
second-line setting. In this review, we report the evidences of nivolumab in
NSCLC with squamous histology, through the discussion of data related to phase I,
II and III published and searchable via Medline/PubMed.

DOI: 10.1701/2502.26230 
PMID: 27997006  [PubMed - in process]


12. Case Rep Oncol. 2016 Nov 7;9(3):691-697.

Autoimmune Hemolytic Anemia as a Complication of Nivolumab Therapy.

Palla AR(1), Kennedy D(2), Mosharraf H(1), Doll D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology and Oncology, Department of Medicine, Ellis Fischel
Cancer Center, University of Missouri Columbia, Columbia, MO, USA. (2)Division of
Internal Medicine, Department of Medicine, University of Missouri Columbia,
Columbia, MO, USA.

Recently, immunotherapeutic drugs, including PD-1 inhibitors (nivolumab,
pembrolizumab), PD-L1 inhibitors (atezolizumab, avelumab), and CTLA4 inhibitors
(ipiliumumab), have emerged as important additions to the armamentarium against
certain malignancies and have been incorporated into therapeutic protocols for
first-, second-, or third-line agents for these metastatic cancers. Immune
checkpoint inhibitor nivolumab is currently FDA approved for the treatment of
patients with metastatic malignant melanoma [Redman et al.: BMC Med 2016;14: 20],
metastatic non-small cell lung cancer [Guibert and Mazières: Expert Opin Biol
Ther 2015;15: 1789-1797], metastatic renal cell cancer [Farolfi et al.: Expert
Opin Drug Metab Toxicol 2016;12: 1089-1096], and relapsed or refractory classic
Hodgkin's lymphoma [Villasboas and Ansell: Expert Rev Anticancer Ther 2016;16:
5-12]. Given the current and increasing indications for these drugs, it is
essential for all physicians to become well versed with their common adverse
effects and to be observant for other less documented clinical conditions that
could be unmasked with the use of such medications. A definite association
between autoimmune hemolytic anemia and the immune checkpoint inhibitor nivolumab
has not been clearly documented, although a few cases have been reported recently
[Kong et al.: Melanoma Res 2016;26: 202-204; Schwab et al.: Case Rep Oncol
2016;9: 373-378; Tardy et al.: Hematol Oncol 2016, DOI: 10.1002/hon.2338]. We
report a case of fatal autoimmune hemolytic anemia refractory to steroids in a
patient treated with nivolumab for metastatic lung cancer, and reflect on the
other reported cases of autoimmune hemolytic anemia after the use of nivolumab.

DOI: 10.1159/000452296 
PMCID: PMC5126613
PMID: 27920704  [PubMed]


13. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am. 2017 Feb;31(1):131-141. doi:
10.1016/j.hoc.2016.08.004.

Immunotherapy in Lung Cancer.

Du L(1), Herbst RS(2), Morgensztern D(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Oncology, Washington University School of Medicine, 660 South
Euclid Avenue, Box 8056, St Louis, MO 63110, USA. (2)Thoracic Oncology Research
Program, Yale Comprehensive Cancer Center, Yale School of Medicine, 333 Cedar
Street, WWW221, New Haven, CT 06520-8028, USA. (3)Division of Oncology,
Washington University School of Medicine, 660 South Euclid Avenue, Box 8056, St
Louis, MO 63110, USA. Electronic address: dmorgens@dom.wustl.edu.

The treatment of patients with good performance status and advanced stage
non-small cell lung cancer has been based on the use of first-line platinum-based
doublet and second-line docetaxel. Immunotherapy represents a new therapeutic
approach with the potential for prolonged benefit. Although the vaccines studied 
have not shown benefit in patients with non-small cell lung cancer, immune
checkpoint inhibitors against the PD-1/PD-L1 axis showed increased overall
survival compared with docetaxel in randomized clinical trials, which led to the 
approval of nivolumab and pembrolizumab. Because only a minority of patients
benefit from this class of drugs, there has been an intense search for
biomarkers.

Copyright Â© 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.hoc.2016.08.004 
PMID: 27912829  [PubMed - in process]


14. Front Oncol. 2016 Nov 14;6:239. eCollection 2016.

Recent Advances in Immunotherapy in Metastatic NSCLC.

Bansal P(1), Osman D(1), Gan GN(2), Simon GR(3), Boumber Y(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Hematology/Oncology, University
of New Mexico Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of New Mexico School of
Medicine, Albuquerque, NM, USA; Hematology/Oncology Fellowship Program,
University of New Mexico Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of New Mexico
School of Medicine, Albuquerque, NM, USA. (2)Department of Internal Medicine,
Division of Hematology/Oncology, University of New Mexico Comprehensive Cancer
Center, University of New Mexico School of Medicine, Albuquerque, NM, USA;
Section of Radiation Oncology, University of New Mexico Comprehensive Cancer
Center, Albuquerque, NM, USA. (3)Department of Thoracic and Head/Neck Medical
Oncology, Division of Cancer Medicine, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center , Houston, TX , USA. (4)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of
Hematology/Oncology, University of New Mexico Comprehensive Cancer Center,
University of New Mexico School of Medicine, Albuquerque, NM, USA; Molecular
Therapeutics Program, Department of Hematology/Oncology, Fox Chase Cancer Center,
Philadelphia, PA, USA.

Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is one of most common malignancies and the
leading cause of cancer deaths worldwide. Despite advances in targeted therapies,
majority of NSCLC patients do not have targetable genomic alterations.
Nevertheless, recent discovery that NSCLC is an immunogenic tumor type, and
several breakthroughs in immunotherapies have led to rapid expansion of this new 
treatment modality in NSCLC with recent FDA approvals of programed death
receptor-1 inhibitors, such as nivolumab and pembrolizumab. Here, we review
promising immunotherapeutic approaches in metastatic NSCLC, including checkpoint 
inhibitors, agents with other mechanisms of action, and immunotherapy
combinations with other drugs. With advent of immunotherapy, therapeutic options 
in metastatic NSCLC are rapidly expanding with the hope to further expand life
expectancy in metastatic lung cancer.

DOI: 10.3389/fonc.2016.00239 
PMCID: PMC5107578
PMID: 27896216  [PubMed - in process]


15. J Immunother Cancer. 2016 Nov 15;4:83. eCollection 2016.

PD1/PD-L1 inhibition as a potential radiosensitizer in head and neck squamous
cell carcinoma: a case report.

Nagasaka M(1), Zaki M(2), Kim H(2), Raza SN(3), Yoo G(3), Lin HS(3), Sukari A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Barbara Ann Karmanos Cancer Institute, Wayne State
University School of Medicine, Detroit, MI USA. (2)Division of Radiation
Oncology, Department of Oncology, Barbara Ann Karmanos Cancer Center, Wayne State
University School of Medicine, Detroit, MI USA. (3)Department of
Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Barbara Ann Karmanos Cancer Institute,
Wayne State University School of Medicine, Detroit, MI USA.

BACKGROUND: Immunotherapy targeting the checkpoint PD1 (programmed cell death
protein 1) or PDL1 (programmed death ligand 1) has led to advances in the
treatment of melanoma and non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). The use of such
therapies has also been introduced into the treatment of other malignancies,
including head and neck cancer. The combined effects of checkpoint inhibitors and
anti-PD1(L1) antibodies and radiation therapy have not yet been sufficiently
investigated.
CASE PRESENTATION: We report a case of locally relapsed non-resectable oral
cavity squamous cell carcinoma, with excellent local control after pembrolizumab 
(MK3475) followed by radiotherapy.
CONCLUSION: T cell activation induced by checkpoint inhibition may dramatically
improve tumor response to radiation. More data are needed to identify the
toxicity and efficacy of sequential or concurrent checkpoint inhibitors and
radiotherapy.

DOI: 10.1186/s40425-016-0187-0 
PMCID: PMC5109767
PMID: 27895920  [PubMed - in process]


16. Immunotherapy. 2016 Dec;8(12):1383-1391. doi: 10.2217/imt-2016-0075. Epub 2016
Nov 28.

Evaluation of efficacy and safety of different pembrolizumab dose/schedules in
treatment of non-small-cell lung cancer and melanoma: a systematic review.

Abdel-Rahman O(1).

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Oncology Department, Faculty of Medicine, Ain Shams University,
Cairo, Egypt.

AIM: Pembrolizumab is a fully humanized anti-PD-1 agent currently approved for
the treatment of advanced melanoma and pretreated non-small-cell lung cancer
(NSCLC).
OBJECTIVE: To assess the efficacy and safety of different dose schedules of
pembrolizumab in the treatment of patients with advanced NSCLC and melanoma.
Search method: MEDLINE database has been searched. Reference lists of original
studies and review articles were checked for other related articles.
SELECTION CRITERIA: Prospective clinical trials reporting the outcomes of more
than one dose schedule of pembrolizumab in the treatment of advanced NSCLC and
melanoma.
DATA COLLECTION & ANALYSIS: The review author extracted information on the
outcomes of the study for this review, and presented the results.
MAIN RESULTS: Four trials with 3425 patients were included in this systematic
review. Pooled analysis for the odds ratio of objective response rate comparing 2
versus 10 mg/kg every 3 weeks in advanced melanoma was 1.03 (95% CI: 0.71-1.49; p
= 0.89), while for advanced NSCLC, it was 0.97 (95% CI: 0.66-1.43; p = 0.87).
Moreover, odds ratio for selected side effects between the two doses was as
follows: rash: 0.83 (95 CI: 0.58-1.18; p = 0.29); vitiligo: 1.27 (95% CI:
0.62-2.61; p = 0.52); diarrhea: 0.94 (95% CI: 0.63-1.42; p = 0.79);
hypothyroidism: 0.97 (95% CI: 0.63-1.50; p = 0.90); hepatitis/elevated
transaminases: 1.86 (95% CI: 0.91-3.79; p = 0.09); nephritis: 0.88 (95% CI:
0.32-2.44; p = 0.80); pneumonitis: 1.17 (95% CI: 0.62-2.23; p = 0.63).

DOI: 10.2217/imt-2016-0075 
PMID: 27892744  [PubMed - in process]


17. CPT Pharmacometrics Syst Pharmacol. 2017 Jan;6(1):49-57. doi: 10.1002/psp4.12139.
Epub 2016 Nov 14.

Model-Based Characterization of the Pharmacokinetics of Pembrolizumab: A
Humanized Anti-PD-1 Monoclonal Antibody in Advanced Solid Tumors.

Ahamadi M(1), Freshwater T(1), Prohn M(2), Li CH(1), de Alwis DP(1), de Greef
R(3), Elassaiss-Schaap J(4), Kondic A(1), Stone JA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Merck & Co., Inc, Kenilworth, New Jersey, USA. (2)Former employee of Merck,
currently employed at qPharmetra, Nijmegen, The Netherlands. (3)Former employee
of Merck, currently employed at Quantitative Solutions, a Certara company, Oss,
The Netherlands. (4)Former employee of Merck, currently employed at PD-Value,
Houton, The Netherlands.

Pembrolizumab, a potent antibody against programmed death 1 (PD-1) receptor, has 
shown robust antitumor activity and manageable safety in patients with advanced
solid tumors. Its pharmacokinetic (PK) properties were analyzed with population
PK modeling using pooled data from the KEYNOTE-001, -002, and -006 studies of
patients with advanced melanoma, non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), and other
solid tumor types. Pembrolizumab clearance was low and the volume of distribution
small, as is typical for therapeutic antibodies. Identified effects of sex,
baseline Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group performance status, measures of renal
and hepatic function, tumor type and burden, and prior ipilimumab treatment on
pembrolizumab exposure were modest and lacked clinical significance. Furthermore,
simulations demonstrated the model has robust power to detect clinically relevant
covariate effects on clearance. These results support the use of the approved
pembrolizumab dose of 2 mg/kg every 3 weeks without dose adjustment in a variety 
of patient subpopulations.

© 2016 The Authors CPT: Pharmacometrics & Systems Pharmacology published by Wiley
Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of American Society for Clinical Pharmacology and
Therapeutics.

DOI: 10.1002/psp4.12139 
PMCID: PMC5270291
PMID: 27863186  [PubMed - in process]


18. Endocrinol Diabetes Metab Case Rep. 2016;2016. pii: 16-0108. Epub 2016 Nov 1.

Hyponatraemia secondary to nivolumab-induced primary adrenal failure.

Trainer H(1), Hulse P(2), Higham CE(1), Trainer P(1), Lorigan P(3).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Endocrinology. (2)Departments of Radiology. (3)Departments of
Medical Oncology , The Christie NHS Foundation Trust, University of Manchester,
Manchester Academic Health Science Centre, Manchester , UK.

Checkpoint inhibitors, such as ipilimumab and pembrolizumab, have transformed the
prognosis for patients with advanced malignant melanoma and squamous
non-small-cell lung cancer, and their use will only expand as experience is
gained in a variety of other malignancies, for instance, renal and lymphoma. As
the use of checkpoint inhibitors increases, so too will the incidence of their
unique side effects, termed immune-related adverse events (irAEs), which can
affect dermatological, gastrointestinal, hepatic, endocrine and other systems.
Nivolumab is a monoclonal antibody that blocks the human programmed death
receptor-1 ligand (PD-L1) found on many cancer cells and is licensed for the
treatment of advanced malignant melanoma. We describe the first case of
nivolumab-induced adrenalitis resulting in primary adrenal failure presenting
with hyponatraemia in a 43-year-old man with malignant melanoma. The case
highlights the potentially life-threatening complications of checkpoint
inhibitors and the need for patient education and awareness of irAEs among the
wider clinical community because such side effects require prompt recognition and
treatment.LEARNING POINTS: Nivolumab can cause primary adrenal insufficiency.Not 
all cases of hyponatraemia in patients with malignancy are due to SIADH.Any
patient on a checkpoint inhibitor becoming unwell should have serum cortisol
urgently measured and if in doubt hydrocortisone therapy should be
initiated.Although hyponatraemia can occur in patients with ACTH deficiency, the 
possibility of primary adrenal failure should also be considered and investigated
by measurement of renin, aldosterone and ACTH.Patients receiving checkpoint
inhibitors require education on the potential risks of hypocortisolaemia.PET
imaging demonstrated bilateral increased activity consistent with an autoimmune
adrenalitis.

DOI: 10.1530/EDM-16-0108 
PMCID: PMC5097140
PMID: 27857838  [PubMed - in process]


19. Expert Rev Anticancer Ther. 2017 Jan;17(1):47-59. Epub 2016 Nov 23.

Anti-PD-1/PD-L1 antibodies in non-small cell lung cancer: the era of
immunotherapy.

Valecha GK(1), Vennepureddy A(2), Ibrahim U(2), Safa F(1), Samra B(3), Atallah
JP(2).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Medicine , Staten Island University Hospital , Staten Island ,
NY , USA. (2)b Department of Hematology-Oncology , Staten Island University
Hospital , Staten Island , NY , USA. (3)c Department of Hematology-Oncology ,
SUNY Downstate Medical Center , Brooklyn , NY , USA.

INTRODUCTION: Advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) has been conventionally
treated with cytotoxic chemotherapy with short-lived responses and significant
toxicities. Monoclonal antibodies to programmed death-1 receptor (PD-1) and
programmed death ligand 1 (PD-L1) have shown tremendous promise in the treatment 
of advanced NSCLC in various clinical trials. Areas covered: In this article, we 
will review the outcomes of various trials of anti-PD-1/anti-PD-L1 antibodies in 
the treatment of NSCLC. We will also discuss their mechanism of action and
toxicities. Expert commentary: Anti-PD-1/PD-L1 antibodies offer several
advantages including significant antitumor activity, induction of long lasting
responses, and favorable safety profile. Several trials are now being conducted
to evaluate their efficacy as first line agents as well as in combination with
other agents. More research is also needed to identify other biomarkers, in
addition to PD-L1 expression, that could more reliably predict response to these 
drugs, and aid in better patient selection.

DOI: 10.1080/14737140.2017.1259574 
PMID: 27841044  [PubMed - in process]


20. Hum Vaccin Immunother. 2016 Nov 10:0. [Epub ahead of print]

Targeted Therapies for the Treatment of Non-Small-Cell Lung Cancer: Monoclonal
Antibodies and Biological Inhibitors.

Silva AP(1), Coelho PV(1), Anazetti M(1,)(2), Simioni PU(1,)(3,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Biomedical Science , Faculty of Americana , Av. Joaquim Boer, 
733, 13477-360 Americana , SP , Brazil. (2)b Department of Health Science ,
Faculty DeVry Metrocamp , R. Dr. Sales de Oliveira, 1661, 13035-500 , Campinas , 
SP , Brazil. (3)c Department of Genetics , Evolution and Bioagents, Institute of 
Biology, University of Campinas (UNICAMP) , 13083-970 , Campinas , SP , Brazil.
(4)d Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology , Institute of Biosciences,
Universidade Estadual Paulista, UNESP , Av. 24 A,1515, 13506-900 - Rio Claro , SP
, Brazil.

The usual treatments for patients with non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC), such
as advanced lung adenocarcinoma, are unspecific and aggressive, and include lung 
resection, radiotherapy and chemotherapy. Recently, treatment with monoclonal
antibodies and biological inhibitors has emerged as an effective alternative,
generating effective results with few side effects. In recent years, several
clinical trials using monoclonal antibodies presented potential benefits to
NSCLC, and four of them are already approved for the treatment of NSCLC, such as 
cetuximab, bevacizumab, nivolumab and pembrolizumab. Also, biological inhibitors 
are attractive tolls for biological applications. Among the approved inhibitors
are crizotinib, erlotinib, afatinib and gefitinib, and side effects are usually
mild to intense. Nevertheless, biological molecule treatments are under
development, and several new monoclonal antibodies and biological inhibitors are 
in trial to treat NSCLC. Also under trial study are as follows: anti-epidermal
growth factor receptor (EGFR) antibodies (nimotuzumab and ficlatuzumab), anti-IGF
1 receptor (IGF-1R) monoclonal antibody (figitumumab), anti-NR-LU-10 monoclonal
antibody (nofetumomab) as well as antibodies directly affecting the cytotoxic
T-lymphocyte-associated antigen 4 (CTLA-4) molecule (ipilimumab and
tremelimumab), to receptor activator of nuclear factor-kappa B ligand (RANKL)
(denosumab) or to polymerase enzyme (veliparib and olaparib). Among new
inhibitors under investigation are poly-ADP ribose polymerase (PARP) inhibitors
(veliparib and olaparib) and phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) inhibitor
(buparlisib). However, the success of immunotherapies still requires extensive
research and additional controlled trials to evaluate the long-term benefits and 
side effects.

DOI: 10.1080/21645515.2016.1249551 
PMID: 27831000  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


21. Transl Lung Cancer Res. 2016 Oct;5(5):538-542.

Pembrolizumab as first-line treatment for non-small cell lung cancer-a game
changer?

Dempke WC(1), Fenchel K(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Kyowa Kirin Pharmaceutical Development Ltd.,
Galashiels, UK;; Department of Haematology and Oncology, University Hospital of
Grosshadern, University of Munich, Munich, Germany. (2)Department of Medical,
Medical School Hamburg (MSH), Hamburg, Germany.

DOI: 10.21037/tlcr.2016.10.01 
PMCID: PMC5099520
PMID: 27826536  [PubMed - in process]


22. Cancer Discov. 2016 Dec;6(12):OF4. Epub 2016 Nov 1.

Durable Responses Achieved with AM0010.

[No authors listed]

In a phase Ib trial, a combination of the experimental immunotherapy AM0010, a
PEGylated form of the recombinant human cytokine IL10, and the anti-PD-1
checkpoint inhibitor pembrolizumab was well tolerated and effective at
controlling tumors in some patients with advanced renal cell carcinoma, non-small
cell lung cancer, and melanoma.

©2016 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/2159-8290.CD-NB2016-125 
PMID: 27803020  [PubMed - in process]


23. Recenti Prog Med. 2016 Oct;107(10):510-514. doi: 10.1701/2454.25700.

[The evolution of the treatment of advanced NSCLC.]

[Article in Italian]

Morabito A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Oncologia Medica Toraco-Polmonare, IRCCS Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori,
Fondazione Pascale, Napoli.

The therapeutic scenario of patients with advanced non-small-cell lung cancer
(NSCLC) has dramatically changed in recent years, thanks to the improvement in
the knowledge of the biology of NSCLC, the discovery of targetable oncogenic
drivers, and the availability of new effective drugs also for non oncogenic
addicted patients, defined "wild-type" (WT). NSCLC has been the first epithelial 
neoplasm treated with a targeted first-line therapy in patients harbouring EGFR
activating mutations or ALK rearrangements, and new targeted-based agents
directed versus other molecular alterations are currently in development. The
recognition of the importance of histology for the definition of a first-line
therapy of WT tumors has led to the adoption of different regimens for patients
with squamous and non-squamous histology. In particular, in case of WT NSCLC with
non-squamous histology, the use of platinum-based combinations including
pemetrexed or bevacizumab became the standard treatment and the maintenance
therapy with pemetrexed a further opportunity for selected patients. Recently,
new active drugs with different mechanisms of action, including angiogenesis
inhibitors, such as nintedanib or ramucirumab, and immune checkpoint inhibitors, 
such as nivolumab, pembrolizumab and atezolizumab, have shown relevant overall
survival improvement in pretreated patients, modifying the landscape also of the 
second line treatment that became more rich and complex. The improvement and the 
application of novel technologies of molecular analysis and the identification of
predictive biomarkers for new agents and in particular for immunotherapy will
allow a more comprehensive molecular profiling of NSCLC and a better
customization of treatments.

DOI: 10.1701/2454.25700 
PMID: 27782226  [PubMed - in process]


24. Pharmacotherapy. 2016 Nov;36(11):e183-e188. doi: 10.1002/phar.1839. Epub 2016 Oct
26.

A Rare Case of Pembrolizumab-Induced Uveitis in a Patient with Metastatic
Melanoma.

Hanna KS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Hematology/Oncology Clinical Pharmacist, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota.

Pembrolizumab, a programmed cell death protein 1 (PD-1) inhibitor, is a humanized
monoclonal antibody used in the treatment of metastatic or unresectable melanoma 
and advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). We hereby report a case of
pembrolizumab-induced uveitis to increase practitioner awareness. A 78-year-old
woman presented with onset of panuveitis after initiation of pembrolizumab
therapy for metastatic melanoma. The patient received three cycles of therapy
every 21 days, during which her symptoms progressively worsened. She was treated 
with topical and systemic corticosteroids, and further pembrolizumab was
discontinued despite a good response to therapy. Pembrolizumab has been
associated with rapid onset of ocular inflammation and uveitis. PD-1 inhibitors
mediate a T-cell response against cancer cells; however, autoimmune complications
have been reported. Incidence of pembrolizumab-induced uveitis is reported to be 
< 1%. To date, three cases have been reported since its Food and Drug
Administration approval in September 2014. Uveitis, if left untreated, may lead
to permanent vision loss and ocular damage. Cases of immune-mediated uveitis have
been reported with cancer immunotherapies. Oncologists and ophthalmologists
should be aware of this complication. With the increasing targeted
pharmaceuticals in oncology, effective management of adverse events is necessary 
to ensure patient safety and optimal outcomes.

© 2016 Pharmacotherapy Publications, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/phar.1839 
PMID: 27716999  [PubMed - in process]


25. J Immunother Cancer. 2016 Oct 18;4:60. eCollection 2016.

Safety and efficacy of anti-PD-1 in patients with baseline cardiac, renal, or
hepatic dysfunction.

Kanz BA(1), Pollack MH(1), Johnpulle R(2), Puzanov I(3), Horn L(2), Morgans A(2),
Sosman JA(2), Rapisuwon S(4), Conry RM(5), Eroglu Z(6), Johnson DB(2).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pharmaceutical Services, Vanderbilt Ingram Cancer Center, 2220 
Pierce Avenue, Nashville, TN 37232 USA. (2)Departments of Medicine, Vanderbilt
Ingram Cancer Center, 777 PRB, 2220 Pierce Ave., Nashville, TN 37232 USA.
(3)Department of Medicine, Roswell Park Cancer Institute, Elm @ Carlton Streets, 
Buffalo, NY 14263 USA. (4)Department of Oncology, Georgetown Lombardi Cancer
Center, 3970 Reservoir Road NW, Washington, DC 20007 USA. (5)Department of
Medicine, University of Alabama at Birmingham, 1824 6th Avenue S, Birmingham, AL 
35233 USA. (6)Department of Cutaneous Oncology, Moffitt Cancer Center, 12902 USF 
Magnolia Drive, Tampa, FL 33612 USA.

BACKGROUND: Anti-PD-1 therapy is increasingly used in various advanced
malignancies. Patients with baseline organ dysfunction are largely excluded from 
clinical trials. Therefore it is unclear whether anti-PD-1 therapy is safe or
effective in this setting. Further, these patients are often not candidates for
other anti-cancer therapies, highlighting their need for active treatment
options.
METHODS: We performed a retrospective analysis of patients from multiple centers 
with advanced solid tumors and baseline organ dysfunction who received anti-PD-1 
therapy. Organ dysfunction was defined as cardiac (left ventricular ejection
fraction ≤45 %), renal (creatinine ≥2 mg/dL or GFR ≤30 ml/min) or hepatic
dysfunction (evidence of cirrhosis on imaging or AST, ALT or bilirubin ≥3x ULN). 
We assessed change in organ dysfunction, immune related adverse events (irAEs),
response rate, progression free survival (PFS) and overall survival (OS).
RESULTS: We identified 27 patients eligible for inclusion with the following
diseases: renal cell carcinoma (n = 8), melanoma (10), non-small cell lung cancer
(3), small cell lung cancer (2) and urothelial bladder cancer (4). Baseline organ
dysfunction included renal dysfunction (n = 17), hepatic dysfunction (7), cardiac
dysfunction (11), including >1 organ dysfunction (8). Worsening organ dysfunction
requiring hospitalization or dose delays occurred in 8 patients (30 %) although
in most cases this was thought not-drug related and resolved with supportive
care. Grade 3 irAEs occurred in 2 pts (7 %; hepatitis and colitis). Thirteen of
27 patients had ongoing treatment benefit (objective response or stable disease) 
at data collection (48 %). Eleven patients had primary progressive disease
(41 %), 11 had stable disease (41 %), 4 had partial responses (15 %), and one had
a complete response (4 %). Overall, median PFS was 168 days. Median OS was not
reached.
CONCLUSIONS: In our experience, anti-PD-1 agents in this group of patients with
cardiac, hepatic or renal dysfunction were associated with tolerable irAEs and
infrequent manageable worsening of organ dysfunction. Further, objective
responses and prolonged PFS were observed in a number of patients. Thus, patients
with baseline organ dysfunction may be considered for anti-PD-1 therapy with
appropriate clinical monitoring.

DOI: 10.1186/s40425-016-0166-5 
PMCID: PMC5067899
PMID: 27777770  [PubMed - in process]


26. Curr Treat Options Oncol. 2016 Dec;17(12):59.

From 2000 to 2016: Which Second-Line Treatment in Advanced Non-Small Cell Lung
Cancer?

D'Argento E(1), Rossi S(2), Schinzari G(1), Strippoli A(1), Basso M(1), Cassano
A(1), Barone C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Catholic University of Sacred Heart, Largo A. 
Gemelli, 8, 00168, Rome, Italy. (2)Department of Medical Oncology, Humanitas
Clinical and Research Center, Via Manzoni, 56, 20089, Rozzano, MI, Italy.
sbrn.rossi85@gmail.com.

Erratum in
    Curr Treat Options Oncol. 2016 Dec;17 (12 ):65.

OPINION STATEMENT: New treatments-as immunotherapies and new antiangiogenic
agents-are now available in second-line setting for patients affected by EGFR
wild-type and ALK-negative non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Nintedanib,
ramucirumab, nivolumab and pembrolizumab have to be included in the therapeutic
sequences for patients affected by NSCLC, but no clear selection criteria are to 
date offered, except for patients with PD-L1 expression ≥50 %. Performance
status, smoking habits and comorbidities should be considered as clinical
criteria in order to select the appropriate treatment, but also tumour
characteristics as histotype, platinum resistance and rapid progression after a
first-line therapy should be taken into account. The aim of the present paper is 
to identify subgroups of patients eligible for different therapy sequences.

DOI: 10.1007/s11864-016-0437-x 
PMID: 27766545  [PubMed - in process]


27. J Thorac Oncol. 2017 Feb;12(2):403-407. doi: 10.1016/j.jtho.2016.10.007. Epub
2016 Oct 17.

Checkpoint Inhibitors in Metastatic EGFR-Mutated Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer-A
Meta-Analysis.

Lee CK(1), Man J(2), Lord S(3), Links M(2), Gebski V(4), Mok T(5), Yang JC(6).

Author information: 
(1)National Health and Medical Research Council Clinical Trials Centre, The
University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia; Cancer Care Centre, St. George Hospital,
Sydney, Australia. Electronic address: chee.lee@ctc.usyd.edu.au. (2)Cancer Care
Centre, St. George Hospital, Sydney, Australia. (3)National Health and Medical
Research Council Clinical Trials Centre, The University of Sydney, Sydney,
Australia; School of Medicine, The University of Norte Dame, Sydney, Australia.
(4)National Health and Medical Research Council Clinical Trials Centre, The
University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia. (5)Hong Kong Cancer Institute,
Department of Clinical Oncology, Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin,
People's Republic of China. (6)Graduate Institute of Oncology, National Taiwan
University and Department of Oncology, National Taiwan University Hospital,
Taipei City, Republic of China.

INTRODUCTION: We performed a meta-analysis to assess the role of immune
checkpoint inhibitors as second-line therapy in EGFR-mutant advanced NSCLC.
METHODS: Randomized trials comparing immune checkpoint inhibitors against
chemotherapy were identified. We retrieved the hazard ratio (HR) and 95%
confidence interval (CI) for overall survival (OS) of the intention-to-treat
population and EGFR mutation-defined subgroups. We used the fixed-effects inverse
variance-weighted method to pool estimates of treatment efficacy. Statistical
tests were two sided.
RESULTS: In the three included studies that compared immune checkpoint inhibitors
(nivolumab [n = 292], pembrolizumab [n = 691], and atezolizumab [n =144]) against
docetaxel (n = 776), immune checkpoint inhibitors significantly prolonged OS over
that with docetaxel overall (n = 1903, HR = 0.68, 95% CI: 0.61-0.77, p < 0.0001) 
and in the EGFR wild-type subgroup (n = 1362, HR = 0.66, 95% CI: 0.58-0.76, p <
0.0001) but not in the EGFR-mutant subgroup (n = 186, HR = 1.05, 95% CI:
0.70-1.55, p < 0.81; treatment-mutation interaction p = 0.03).
CONCLUSION: In EGFR-mutant advanced NSCLC, immune checkpoint inhibitors do not
improve OS over that with docetaxel. Mechanisms of acquired resistance to
first-line tyrosine kinase inhibitor therapy should be elucidated to guide
selection of second-line treatment for these patients.

Copyright © 2016 International Association for the Study of Lung Cancer.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jtho.2016.10.007 
PMID: 27765535  [PubMed - in process]


28. Lancet Oncol. 2016 Nov;17(11):1497-1508. doi: 10.1016/S1470-2045(16)30498-3. Epub
2016 Oct 10.

Carboplatin and pemetrexed with or without pembrolizumab for advanced,
non-squamous non-small-cell lung cancer: a randomised, phase 2 cohort of the
open-label KEYNOTE-021 study.

Langer CJ(1), Gadgeel SM(2), Borghaei H(3), Papadimitrakopoulou VA(4), Patnaik
A(5), Powell SF(6), Gentzler RD(7), Martins RG(8), Stevenson JP(9), Jalal SI(10),
Panwalkar A(11), Yang JC(12), Gubens M(13), Sequist LV(14), Awad MM(15), Fiore
J(16), Ge Y(16), Raftopoulos H(16), Gandhi L(17); KEYNOTE-021 investigators.

Author information: 
(1)Abramson Cancer Center of the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA,
USA. Electronic address: corey.langer@uphs.upenn.edu. (2)Karmanos Cancer
Institute and Wayne State University, Detroit, MI, USA. (3)Fox Chase Cancer
Center, Philadelphia, PA, USA. (4)The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, TX, USA. (5)South Texas Accelerated Research Therapeutics, San
Antonio, TX, USA. (6)Sanford Cancer Center, Sioux Falls, SD, USA. (7)University
of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, USA. (8)University of Washington and Seattle
Cancer Care Alliance, Seattle, WA, USA. (9)Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH, USA. 
(10)Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA. (11)Sanford
Roger Maris Cancer Center, Fargo, ND, USA. (12)National Taiwan University
Hospital and National Taiwan University Cancer Center, Taipei, Taiwan.
(13)University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(14)Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center and Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA, USA. (15)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA, USA. (16)Merck &
Co Inc, Kenilworth, NJ, USA. (17)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA, USA;
Laura and Isaac Perlmutter Cancer Center, NYU Langone Medical Center, New York,
NY, USA.

BACKGROUND: Limited evidence exists to show that adding a third agent to
platinum-doublet chemotherapy improves efficacy in the first-line advanced
non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) setting. The anti-PD-1 antibody pembrolizumab 
has shown efficacy as monotherapy in patients with advanced NSCLC and has a
non-overlapping toxicity profile with chemotherapy. We assessed whether the
addition of pembrolizumab to platinum-doublet chemotherapy improves efficacy in
patients with advanced non-squamous NSCLC.
METHODS: In this randomised, open-label, phase 2 cohort of a multicohort study
(KEYNOTE-021), patients were enrolled at 26 medical centres in the USA and
Taiwan. Patients with chemotherapy-naive, stage IIIB or IV, non-squamous NSCLC
without targetable EGFR or ALK genetic aberrations were randomly assigned (1:1)
in blocks of four stratified by PD-L1 tumour proportion score (<1% vs ≥1%) using 
an interactive voice-response system to 4 cycles of pembrolizumab 200 mg plus
carboplatin area under curve 5 mg/mL per min and pemetrexed 500 mg/m(2) every 3
weeks followed by pembrolizumab for 24 months and indefinite pemetrexed
maintenance therapy or to 4 cycles of carboplatin and pemetrexed alone followed
by indefinite pemetrexed maintenance therapy. The primary endpoint was the
proportion of patients who achieved an objective response, defined as the
percentage of patients with radiologically confirmed complete or partial response
according to Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors version 1.1 assessed by
masked, independent central review, in the intention-to-treat population, defined
as all patients who were allocated to study treatment. Significance threshold was
p<0·025 (one sided). Safety was assessed in the as-treated population, defined as
all patients who received at least one dose of the assigned study treatment. This
trial, which is closed for enrolment but continuing for follow-up, is registered 
with ClinicalTrials.gov, number NCT02039674.
FINDINGS: Between Nov 25, 2014, and Jan 25, 2016, 123 patients were enrolled; 60 
were randomly assigned to the pembrolizumab plus chemotherapy group and 63 to the
chemotherapy alone group. 33 (55%; 95% CI 42-68) of 60 patients in the
pembrolizumab plus chemotherapy group achieved an objective response compared
with 18 (29%; 18-41) of 63 patients in the chemotherapy alone group (estimated
treatment difference 26% [95% CI 9-42%]; p=0·0016). The incidence of grade 3 or
worse treatment-related adverse events was similar between groups (23 [39%] of 59
patients in the pembrolizumab plus chemotherapy group and 16 [26%] of 62 in the
chemotherapy alone group). The most common grade 3 or worse treatment-related
adverse events in the pembrolizumab plus chemotherapy group were anaemia (seven
[12%] of 59) and decreased neutrophil count (three [5%]); an additional six
events each occurred in two (3%) for acute kidney injury, decreased lymphocyte
count, fatigue, neutropenia, and sepsis, and thrombocytopenia. In the
chemotherapy alone group, the most common grade 3 or worse events were anaemia
(nine [15%] of 62) and decreased neutrophil count, pancytopenia, and
thrombocytopenia (two [3%] each). One (2%) of 59 patients in the pembrolizumab
plus chemotherapy group experienced treatment-related death because of sepsis
compared with two (3%) of 62 patients in the chemotherapy group: one because of
sepsis and one because of pancytopenia.
INTERPRETATION: Combination of pembrolizumab, carboplatin, and pemetrexed could
be an effective and tolerable first-line treatment option for patients with
advanced non-squamous NSCLC. This finding is being further explored in an ongoing
international, randomised, double-blind, phase 3 study.
FUNDING: Merck & Co.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S1470-2045(16)30498-3 
PMID: 27745820  [PubMed - in process]


29. J Immunother. 2016 Nov/Dec;39(9):367-372.

Analysis of the Abscopal Effect With Anti-PD1 Therapy in Patients With Metastatic
Solid Tumors.

Ribeiro Gomes J(1), Schmerling RA, Haddad CK, Racy DJ, Ferrigno R, Gil E,
Zanuncio P, Buzaid AC.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of *Medical Oncology †Radiology (Body Imaging) ‡Radiotherapy,
Antônio Ermírio de Moraes Oncology Center-Beneficência Portuguesa de São Paulo,
São Paulo, Brazil.

Abscopal effect is a rare phenomenon characterized by tumor regression of
untreated metastatic lesions after a local therapy (eg, radiotherapy). We studied
the probability of abscopal effect with radiotherapy associated with
anti-programmed death cell 1 (PD1) therapy after progression on anti-PD1. This
study is a retrospective analysis of patients treated with nivolumab or
pembrolizumab for melanoma, non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and renal cancer
at Antônio Ermírio de Moraes Oncology Center, Brazil. To be eligible for this
analysis, patients must have had unequivocal evidence of disease progression on
anti-PD1 therapy and subsequent radiotherapy for any tumor site while still
receiving anti-PD1. The abscopal effect was characterized as a response outside
the irradiated field after radiotherapy plus anti-PD1. Sixteen patients were
evaluated, including 12 metastatic melanoma, 2 metastatic NSCLC, and 2 metastatic
renal cell carcinoma. The median time to disease progression on anti-PD1 was 3
months. The radiotherapy field included lung, lymph nodes, and bones, with a
median total dose of 24 Gy (1-40 Gy), usually in 3 fractions (1-10 fractions).
Three patients with melanoma developed an abscopal effect at a rate of 18.7% (25%
among melanoma patients). Of note, one of them achieved a remarkable complete
response lasting >6 months. Three patients with melanoma obtained a significant
local response after radiotherapy, despite no response in distant metastases.
Eleven patients presented disease progression after radiotherapy. No increased
toxicity was observed. In conclusion, no patients with NSCLC or renal cancer
showed abscopal effect, but 25% of patients with melanoma showed regression of
nonirradiated lesions when anti-PD1 was continued after radiation to a tumor site
that had progressed on anti-PD1 monotherapy.

DOI: 10.1097/CJI.0000000000000141 
PMID: 27741091  [PubMed - in process]


30. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. 2016 Oct 14. doi: 10.1111/jdv.14011. [Epub ahead of
print]

Anti-PD1-induced psoriasis. A study of 21 patients.

Bonigen J(1), Raynaud-Donzel C(2), Hureaux J(3), Kramkimel N(4), Blom A(5), Jeudy
G(6), Breton AL(7), Hubiche T(8), Bedane C(9), Legoupil D(10), Pham-Ledard A(11),
Charles J(12), Pérol M(13), Gérard E(11), Combemale P(14), Bonnet D(5), Sigal
ML(1), Mahé E(15); Groupe de Recherche sur le Psoriasis; Groupe Cancérologie
Cutanée of the Société Française de Dermatologie; GEM Resopso; Apsoderm; CEDEF;
Groupe Français de Pneumo-Cancérologie.

Author information: 
(1)Service de Dermatologie, Hôpital Victor Dupouy, Argenteuil, France. (2)Service
de Pneumologie, Hôpital Victor Dupouy, Argenteuil, France. (3)Service de
Pneumologie, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire, Angers, France. (4)Service de
Dermatologie, Hôpital Cochin, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Paris,
France. (5)Service de Dermatologie Générale et Oncologique, Centre Hospitalier
Universitaire Ambroise Paré, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris,
Boulogne-Billancourt, France. (6)Service de Dermatologie, Centre Hospitalier
Universitaire François Mitterrand, Dijon, France. (7)Service de Dermatologie,
Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Lyon Sud, Lyon, France. (8)Unité de
Dermatologie Infectiologie, Centre Hospitalier Intercommunal de Fréjus /
Saint-Raphaël, Fréjus, France. (9)Service de Dermatologie, Centre Hospitalier
Universitaire de Limoges, Limoges, France. (10)Service de Dermatologie, Centre
Hospitalier Régional et Universitaire de Brest, Brest, France. (11)Service de
Dermatologie, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France.
(12)Service de Dermatologie, CHU Grenoble, Grenoble, France. (13)Département de
Cancérologie Médicale, Centre Léon Bérard, Lyon, France. (14)Unité
d'Onco-Dermatolgie, Centre Léon Bérard, Lyon, France. (15)Service de
Dermatologie, Hôpital Victor Dupouy, Argenteuil, France.
emmanuel.mahe@ch-argenteuil.fr.

Nivolumab (Opdivo(®) ), pembrolizumab (Keytruda(®) ), atezolizumab, and
pidilizumabab are anti-PD1 monoclonal antibodies. Nivolumab is licensed in
advanced melanoma and second-line therapy of advanced or metastatic non-small
cell lung cancer. When activated, the programmed cell death (PD)-1 is implicated 
in the inhibition of the immune system. Anti-PD1 removes this inhibition and
allows the immune system to control tumour cell progression.(1-4) Immune-mediated
toxicity of this treatment have been reported, either organ-specific toxicities -
i.e. pneumonia, colitis, hepatitis, hypophysitis, and thyroiditis - or skin
toxicities - i.e. vitiligo, photosensitivity, lichenoid eruption. Recently, cases
of anti-PD1-induced psoriasis have been reported. This article is protected by
copyright. All rights reserved.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1111/jdv.14011 
PMID: 27739129  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


31. Expert Opin Biol Ther. 2016 Dec;16(12):1541-1547. Epub 2016 Oct 26.

Ramucirumab for the treatment of advanced or metastatic non-small cell lung
cancer.

Takeda K(1), Daga H(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Medical Oncology , Osaka City General Hospital , Osaka ,
Japan.

INTRODUCTION: On 12 December 2014, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA)
approved ramucirumab for use in combination with docetaxel for the treatment of
patients with metastatic non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) with disease
progression on or after platinum-based chemotherapy. Areas covered: This review
discusses the best treatment strategy for ramucirumab, a vascular endothelial
growth factor receptor-2 inhibitor for patients with advanced NSCLC. Expert
opinion: The addition of ramucirumab to docetaxel in the treatment of patients
with metastatic NSCLC who have progressed on or after platinum-based chemotherapy
confers a 1.4-month improvement in overall survival, with an acceptable toxicity 
profile. The potential impact of the approval of the programmed death receptor-1 
(PD-1)-blocking antibody nivolumab or pembrolizumab on the use of ramucirumab
plus docetaxel in advanced NSCLC patient population is uncertain in clinical
practice. In order to improve overall outcomes for patients with advanced NSCLC, 
both ramucirumab plus docetaxel and the PD-1-blocking antibody should be used in 
any treatment line.

DOI: 10.1080/14712598.2016.1248397 
PMID: 27737562  [PubMed - in process]


32. N Engl J Med. 2016 Nov 10;375(19):1823-1833. Epub 2016 Oct 8.

Pembrolizumab versus Chemotherapy for PD-L1-Positive Non-Small-Cell Lung Cancer.

Reck M, Rodríguez-Abreu D, Robinson AG, Hui R, Csőszi T, Fülöp A, Gottfried M,
Peled N, Tafreshi A, Cuffe S, O'Brien M, Rao S, Hotta K, Leiby MA, Lubiniecki GM,
Shentu Y, Rangwala R, Brahmer JR; KEYNOTE-024 Investigators.

Collaborators: Kannourakis G, Steer C, Ganju V, O’Byrne K, Tafreshi A, Hui R,
Burghuber O, Germonpre P, Lambrechts M, Robinson A, Smylie M, Hirsh V, Gervais R,
Perol M, Bennouna J, Pouessel D, Reck M, Kopp G, Brossart P, Wehler TC,
Spaeth-Schwalbe E, Molnar L, Balint B, Papai-Szekely Z, Csoszi T, Fulop A, Soter 
S, Szalai Z, Tehenes S, O’Reilly S, Coate L, Cuffe S, Gottfried M, Peled N,
Wollner M, Bar Y, Ariad S, Merimsky O, Carteni G, Bidoli P, Gridelli C, Marchetti
P, Tiseo M, Chiara Garassino M, Bonanno L, Grossi F, De Marinis F, Ardizzoni A,
Horiike A, Satouchi M, Katakami N, Sekine A, Torii Y, Nakagawa K, Okamoto I,
Maemondo M, Umemura S, Nosaki K, Saka H, Aoe K, Hotta K, Sakai H, Sugawara S,
Takahashi T, Kishi K, Yamamoto N, de Langen J, Sullivan R, Garcia Campelo MG,
Vidal OJ, Bernabe Caro R, Rubio Viqueira B, Domine Gomez M, Rodriguez-Abreu D,
Felip E, Nicolson M, Lal R, Fennel DA, Potter V, Middleton G, O’Brien ME,
Ottensmeir C, Califano R, Gandhi J, Tahsildar HI, Guarino MJ, Patel R, Dragnev K,
Giaccone G, Rao S, Avery E, Sanborn R, Lawler WE, Konduri K, Robert F, Riess J,
Garon EB, Leal TB, Morgensztern D, Ahuja H, Vanderwalde AM, Reichert SE, Bun PA
Jr, Pirker R, Shih W.

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2016 Nov 10;375(19):1892-1893.

Background Pembrolizumab is a humanized monoclonal antibody against programmed
death 1 (PD-1) that has antitumor activity in advanced non-small-cell lung cancer
(NSCLC), with increased activity in tumors that express programmed death ligand 1
(PD-L1). Methods In this open-label, phase 3 trial, we randomly assigned 305
patients who had previously untreated advanced NSCLC with PD-L1 expression on at 
least 50% of tumor cells and no sensitizing mutation of the epidermal growth
factor receptor gene or translocation of the anaplastic lymphoma kinase gene to
receive either pembrolizumab (at a fixed dose of 200 mg every 3 weeks) or the
investigator's choice of platinum-based chemotherapy. Crossover from the
chemotherapy group to the pembrolizumab group was permitted in the event of
disease progression. The primary end point, progression-free survival, was
assessed by means of blinded, independent, central radiologic review. Secondary
end points were overall survival, objective response rate, and safety. Results
Median progression-free survival was 10.3 months (95% confidence interval [CI],
6.7 to not reached) in the pembrolizumab group versus 6.0 months (95% CI, 4.2 to 
6.2) in the chemotherapy group (hazard ratio for disease progression or death,
0.50; 95% CI, 0.37 to 0.68; P<0.001). The estimated rate of overall survival at 6
months was 80.2% in the pembrolizumab group versus 72.4% in the chemotherapy
group (hazard ratio for death, 0.60; 95% CI, 0.41 to 0.89; P=0.005). The response
rate was higher in the pembrolizumab group than in the chemotherapy group (44.8% 
vs. 27.8%), the median duration of response was longer (not reached [range, 1.9+ 
to 14.5+ months] vs. 6.3 months [range, 2.1+ to 12.6+]), and treatment-related
adverse events of any grade were less frequent (occurring in 73.4% vs. 90.0% of
patients), as were grade 3, 4, or 5 treatment-related adverse events (26.6% vs.
53.3%). Conclusions In patients with advanced NSCLC and PD-L1 expression on at
least 50% of tumor cells, pembrolizumab was associated with significantly longer 
progression-free and overall survival and with fewer adverse events than was
platinum-based chemotherapy. (Funded by Merck; KEYNOTE-024 ClinicalTrials.gov
number, NCT02142738 .).

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa1606774 
PMID: 27718847  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Onco Targets Ther. 2016 Sep 23;9:5855-5866. eCollection 2016.

Spotlight on pembrolizumab in non-small cell lung cancer: the evidence to date.

Vachhani P(1), Chen H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Roswell Park Cancer Institute, Buffalo, NY, USA.

Immunotherapy with immune checkpoint inhibitors has opened a new arena in cancer 
therapeutics. Pembrolizumab is a highly selective anti-programmed cell death
protein 1 (PD-1) antibody that has shown efficacy, leading to survival benefit
and durable responses, in some patients with non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). 
It has been approved by the US Food and Drug Administration for the treatment of 
patients with metastatic NSCLC, whose tumors express PD-1 ligand 1 (PD-L1), with 
disease progression on or after platinum-containing chemotherapy. Here, we
briefly discuss the PD-1/PD-L1 pathway and pembrolizumab before delving into the 
clinical trials that have led to its just-mentioned approval in NSCLC and ongoing
clinical trials. Finally, we discuss the use of biomarkers, primarily PD-L1, in
the context of pembrolizumab and NSCLC.

DOI: 10.2147/OTT.S97746 
PMCID: PMC5045223
PMID: 27713639  [PubMed - in process]


34. Oncotarget. 2016 Nov 8;7(45):73068-73079. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.12230.

The efficacy and safety of anti-PD-1/PD-L1 antibodies for treatment of advanced
or refractory cancers: a meta-analysis.

Zhang T(1,)(2), Xie J(3), Arai S(2,)(4), Wang L(5), Shi X(6), Shi N(7), Ma F(2), 
Chen S(2), Huang L(1), Yang L(1), Ma W(5), Zhang B(8), Han W(9), Xia J(10), Chen 
H(8), Zhang Y(1,)(5,)(11,)(12).

Author information: 
(1)Biotherapy Center, Cancer Center, The First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou
University, Zhengzhou, Henan, China. (2)Department of Hematology and Oncology,
Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston,
Massachusetts, United States. (3)School of Public Health, Xinxiang Medical
University, Xinxiang, Henan, China. (4)Department of Urology, Gunma University
Graduate School of Medicine, Showa-machi, Maebashi, Japan. (5)Department of
Oncology, the First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou,
Henan, China. (6)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, School of Public
Health, Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, Henan, China. (7)Comprehensive Cancer
Center, the Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, United States. (8)Department
of Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation, Affiliated Hospital to Academy of
Military Medical Science (307 Hospital, PLA), Beijing, China. (9)Molecular and
Immunological/Bio-therapeutic Department, Institute of Basic Medicine, Chinese
PLA General Hospital, Beijing China. (10)Biotherapy Center, Cancer Center, Sun
Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China. (11)Henan Key
Laboratory for Tumor Immunology and Biotherapy, Henan, China. (12)School of Life 
Sciences, Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, Henan, China.

PURPOSE: To systematically evaluate the overall efficacy and safety of current
anti-PD-1/PD-L1 antibodies for treatment of patients with advanced or refractory 
cancer.
RESULTS: Fifty-one trials including 6,800 patients were included. The overall
response rates for melanoma, non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), and renal cell
carcinoma (RCC) were 29% (95% CI: 1.53-2.41), 21% (95% CI: 17%-25%) and 21% (95% 
CI: 16%-27%) respectively. While the overall adverse effects rate for melanoma,
NSCLC, RCC were 16% (95% CI: 6%-28%), 11% (95% CI: 8%-14%) and 20% (95% CI:
11%-32%) respectively. Tumor PD-L1 expression and patient smoking status might
serve as biomarkers to predict response of anti-PD-1/PD-L1 antibody treatment.
Compared to tumors with negative PD-L1 expression, tumors with positive PD-L1
expression had a significantly higher clinical response rate (41.4% versus 26.5%)
with RR = 1.92 (95% CI: 1.53-2.41, P < 0.001). Smoker patients also showed a
significantly higher response rate (33.7%) than patients who never smoked (4.2%) 
with RR = 6.02 (95% CI: 1.22-29.75, P = 0.028). Nivolumab and Pembrolizumab were 
associated with significantly increased response rate (RR = 2.89, 95% CI:
2.46-3.40, P < 0.001), reduced death risk (HR= 0.53; 95% CI: 0.48-0.57; P <
0.001), and decreased adverse effect rate (RR = 0.49, 95% CI: 0.30-0.80, P =
0.004) compared with other therapies.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Clinical trials reporting response or safety of
anti-PD-1/PD-L1 antibodies for advanced or refractory cancer patients published
before January 31th 2016 were searched in PubMed and EMBASE database.
Meta-analyses using random effects models were used to calculate the overall
estimate.
CONCLUSIONS: Anti-PD-1/PD-L1 antibodies have high response rates and low adverse 
effect rates for advanced or refractory cancers.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.12230 
PMID: 27683031  [PubMed - in process]


35. J Clin Med. 2016 Sep 22;5(10). pii: E84. doi: 10.3390/jcm5100084.

Immunotherapy for Gastroesophageal Cancer.

Goode EF(1), Smyth EC(2).

Author information: 
(1)The Royal Marsden Hospital, NHS Foundation Trust, London SW3 6JJ, UK.
Emily.goode@rmh.nhs.uk. (2)The Royal Marsden Hospital, NHS Foundation Trust,
London SW3 6JJ, UK. Elizabeth.smyth@rmh.nhs.uk.

Survival for patients with advanced oesophageal and stomach cancer is poor;
together these cancers are responsible for more than a million deaths per year
globally. As chemotherapy and targeted therapies such as trastuzumab and
ramucirumab result in modest improvements in survival but not long-term cure for 
such patients, development of alternative treatment approaches is warranted.
Novel immunotherapy drugs such as checkpoint inhibitors have been paradigm
changing in melanoma, non-small cell lung cancer and urothelial cancers. In this 
review, we assess the early evidence for efficacy of immunotherapy in patients
with gastroesophageal cancer in addition to considering biomarkers associated
with response to these treatments. Early results of Anti- Programmed Cell Death
Protein-1 (anti-PD-1), anti-PD-L1 and anti-Cytotoxic T-lymphocyte assosciated
protein-4 (anti-CTLA4) trials are examined, and we conclude with a discussion on 
the future direction for immunotherapy for gastroesophageal cancer patients.

DOI: 10.3390/jcm5100084 
PMCID: PMC5086586
PMID: 27669318  [PubMed]


36. BMJ Case Rep. 2016 Sep 22;2016. pii: bcr2016216426. doi: 10.1136/bcr-2016-216426.

Safety and efficacy of pembrolizumab in a patient with advanced melanoma on
haemodialysis.

Chang R(1), Shirai K(2).

Author information: 
(1)Dartmouth-Hitchcock, Lebanon, New Hampshire, USA. (2)Department of Medicine,
Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical Center, Lebanon, New Hampshire, USA.

Patients with end-stage renal disease present with a distinct challenge in
oncology. Many anticancer drugs and their metabolites are excreted by the kidney,
but data to guide dose and schedule adjustments in renal dialysis are scant.
Pembrolizumab is an anti-programmed cell death protein 1 monoclonal antibody
proven to be effective in patients with metastatic melanoma. It has demonstrated 
promising results and was granted US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approval 
in September, 2014 for metastatic melanoma. It was additionally approved for
patients with metastatic non-small cell lung cancer by the FDA in October, 2015. 
We present the first case, to the best of our knowledge, of a patient with
metastatic melanoma successfully treated with pembrolizumab while on
haemodialysis.

2016 BMJ Publishing Group Ltd.

DOI: 10.1136/bcr-2016-216426 
PMID: 27659911  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


37. Expert Opin Biol Ther. 2016 Dec;16(12):1479-1489. Epub 2016 Sep 21.

Immunotherapy of non-small cell lung cancer: report from an international experts
panel meeting of the Italian association of thoracic oncology.

Gridelli C(1), Ascierto PA(2), Barberis MC(3), Felip E(4), Garon EB(5), O'brien
M(6), Senan S(7), Casaluce F(1), Sgambato A(1), Papadimitrakopoulou V(8), De
Marinis F(9).

Author information: 
(1)a Division of Medical Oncology , 'S. G. Moscati' Hospital , Avellino , Italy. 
(2)b Melanoma Unit, Cancer Immunotherapy and Innovative Therapy , Istituto
Nazionale Tumori Fondazione 'G. Pascale' , Napoli , Italy. (3)c Pathology ,
European Institute of Oncology , Milan , Italy. (4)d Lung Cancer Unit, Oncology
Department , Vall d'Hebron University Hospital , Barcelona , Spain. (5)e
Department of Hematology/Oncology , David Geffen School of Medicine at the
University of California , Los Angeles , CA , USA. (6)f Department of Medicine , 
Royal Marsden NHS Foundation Trust , London , UK. (7)g Department of Radiation
Oncology , VU University Medical Center , Amsterdam , The Netherlands. (8)h
Department of Thoracic/Head and Neck Medical Oncology , The University of Texas, 
M.D. Anderson Cancer Center , Houston , TX , USA. (9)i Thoracic Division, Medical
Oncology Department , European Institute of Oncology , Milan , Italy.

INTRODUCTION: The potential long term survival gain, related to immune
adaptability and memory, the potential activity across multiple tumour types
through targeting the immune system, and the opportunity for combinations offered
by the unique mechanism of actions and safety profile of these new agents, all
support the role of immunotherapy in the cancer treatment pathway or paradigm.
Areas covered: The authors discuss the recent advances in the understanding of
immunology and antitumor immune responses that have led to the development of new
immunotherapies, including monoclonal antibodies that inhibit immune checkpoint
pathways, such as Programmed Death-1 (PD-1) and Cytotoxic T-Lymphocyte-Associated
Antigen 4 (CTLA-4). Currently, two PD-1 inhibitors are available in clinical
practice for treatment of advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC): nivolumab 
and pembrolizumab. Expert opinion: Ongoing research will dictate future
strategies, including the potential incorporation of immunotherapy in stage
dependent treatment settings (early stage locally advanced disease and first line
therapy for metastatic disease). Immunotherapy combinations are promising
avenues, and careful selection of patients, doses of each agent and information
supporting strategies (i.e. concomitant or sequential) is still needed.

DOI: 10.1080/14712598.2016.1234602 
PMID: 27650132  [PubMed - in process]


38. Expert Rev Clin Pharmacol. 2016 Dec;9(12):1571-1581. Epub 2016 Sep 23.

Novel immunotherapy in the treatment of advanced non-small cell lung cancer.

Santabarbara G(1), Maione P(1), Rossi A(1), Palazzolo G(2), Gridelli C(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Division of Medical Oncology , Azienda Ospedaliera di Rilievo Nazionale e di
Alta Specialità San Giuseppe Moscati , Avellino , Italy. (2)b Division of Medical
Oncology , Azienda ULSS 15 Alta Padovana , Cittadella , Italy.

INTRODUCTION: Lung cancers remain the principal cause of death cancer-related
worldwide with a poor survival rate at five years from diagnosis. In patients
with NSCLC harboring specific genetic alterations the anti EGFR TKIs and the ALK 
TKIs have improved the response rate and the quality of life compared to standard
platinum-based chemotherapy. New approaches possibly applicable at the major of
patients are needed. Areas covered: The discovery that the immune system plays a 
fundamental role in the fight against cancer. The cancer cells use mechanisms
able to avoid the immune control has led to the development of drugs able to
overcome this escape route. The best known checkpoint pathways are the CTLA-4 and
PD-1/PD-L1; they suppress T-cell activity in different ways: CTLA-4 regulates
T-cell activity at an early stage whereas PD-1 regulates later effector T-cell
activity within tissue and tumors. The best characterized checkpoint inhibitors
in advanced NSCLC setting are ipilimumab and tremelimumab, (anti-CTLA-4
antibodies), nivolumab and pembrolizumab (anti-PD-1 antibodies), atezolizumab and
durvalumab (anti-PD-L1 antibodies). Nivolumab and pembrolizumab have received the
FDA and EMA approval for the treatment of NSCLC in second-line setting. Expert
commentary: The role played by tumor microenvironment may be the next area of
research to overcome the resistance at the checkpoint inhibitors as well as the
identification of biomarkers to better select patients. In addition checkpoint
inhibitors are investigate in combination with other agent involved in immune
control with promising results in solid tumors.

DOI: 10.1080/17512433.2016.1236681 
PMID: 27623999  [PubMed - in process]


39. Discov Med. 2016 Aug;22(119):55-65.

Immune checkpoint blockade in lung cancer.

Somasundaram A(1), Socinski MA(1), Villaruz LC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, University of Pittsburgh Cancer Institute,
Pittsburgh, PA 15232, USA.

Immunotherapy has revolutionized the therapeutic landscape of advanced lung
cancer. The adaptive immune system has developed a sophisticated method of tumor 
growth control, but T-cell activation is regulated by various checkpoints.
Blockade of the immune checkpoints with therapies targeting the PD-1 pathway,
such as nivolumab and pembrolizumab, has been validated as a therapeutic approach
in non-small cell lung cancer. Newer therapies and novel combinations are also
being evaluated, and the use of biomarkers in conjunction with these drugs is an 
area of active investigation. This review summarizes the current evidence for the
efficacy and safety of the above approaches in the treatment of lung cancer.


PMID: 27585231  [PubMed - in process]


40. Onco Targets Ther. 2016 Aug 16;9:5101-16. doi: 10.2147/OTT.S111209. eCollection
2016.

Immune checkpoint inhibitors: the new frontier in non-small-cell lung cancer
treatment.

El-Osta H(1), Shahid K(1), Mills GM(1), Peddi P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Hematology-Oncology, Louisiana State
University Health Sciences Center, Shreveport, LA, USA.

Lung cancer is the major cause for cancer-related death in the US. Although
advances in chemotherapy and targeted therapy have improved the outcome of
metastatic non-small-cell lung cancer, its prognosis remains dismal. A deeper
understanding of the complex interaction between the immune system and tumor
microenvironment has identified immune checkpoint inhibitors as new avenue of
immunotherapy. Rather than acting directly on the tumor, these therapies work by 
removing the inhibition exerted by tumor cell or other immune cells on the immune
system, promoting antitumoral immune response. To date, two programmed death-1
inhibitors, namely nivolumab and pembrolizumab, have received the US Food and
Drug Administration approval for the treatment of advanced non-small-cell lung
cancer that failed platinum-based chemotherapy. This manuscript provides a brief 
overview of the pathophysiology of cancer immune evasion, summarizes pertinent
data on completed and ongoing clinical trials involving checkpoint inhibitors,
discusses the different strategies to optimize their function, and outlines
various challenges that are faced in this promising yet evolving field.

DOI: 10.2147/OTT.S111209 
PMCID: PMC4993420
PMID: 27574451  [PubMed]


41. Ann Transl Med. 2016 Jul;4(14):272. doi: 10.21037/atm.2016.07.10.

Toxicity management of immunotherapy for patients with metastatic melanoma.

Linardou H(1), Gogas H(2).

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Medical Oncology, Metropolitan Hospital, Athens, Greece ; 
(2)First Department of Medicine, Laiko General Hospital, National and
Kapodistrian University of Athens School of Medicine, Athens, Greece.

Checkpoint inhibitors have revolutionized the treatment of patients with
metastatic melanoma offering improved responses and significant survival benefit.
These agents are now approved for the treatment of metastatic melanoma, squamous 
and non-squamous non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and kidney cancer, while they
are now being investigated in a range of other malignancies. In addition, another
anti-PD-L1 monoclonal antibody (atezolizumab) was recently approved for
urothelial cancer. Ipilimumab, an anti-cytotoxic T lymphocyte-associated antigen 
4 (CTLA-4) antibody and the anti-PD-1 agents nivolumab and pembrolizumab have
followed large clinical development programs, therefore, information regarding
their safety and toxicity profile is readily available. Unique toxicities have
been observed, which stem from and relate to the immune activation by these
agents and are thus termed as immune-related adverse events (irAEs). Clinicians
and patients should be aware of this different toxicity profile, so as to
promptly recognize, identify and manage symptoms related to irAEs. Indeed,
clinical experience has shown that these immune events, when they are early
recognized and timely managed, are mostly reversible otherwise they can evoke
severe or even life-threatening situations. Several recommendations and
guidelines have been developed for the management of irAEs and algorithms have
been published based primarily on our knowledge from the ipilimumab trials.

DOI: 10.21037/atm.2016.07.10 
PMCID: PMC4971373
PMID: 27563659  [PubMed]


42. Ann Transl Med. 2016 Jul;4(14):268. doi: 10.21037/atm.2016.06.24.

Immunotherapy in non-small cell lung cancer: the clinical impact of immune
response and targeting.

Mountzios G(1), Linardou H(2), Kosmidis P(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, University of Athens School of Medicine,
Athens, Greece ; (2)1 Oncology Department, Metropolitan Hospital, Piraeus, Greece
; (3)2 Oncology Department, Hygeia Hospital, Athens, Greece.

Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) remains the leading cause of cancer-related
death worldwide. In recent years, through a better understanding of the
interactions between the immune system and tumor cells (TC), immunotherapy has
emerged as a promising therapeutic strategy. Chemotherapy has long been reported 
to interfere with the immune response to the tumor and conversely, anti-tumor
immunity may add to those effects. Anti-tumor vaccines, such as MAGE-A3,
Tecetomide, TG4010, CIMAvax, tumor cell vaccines and dendritic cell (DC) vaccines
emerged as potent inducers of the immune response against the tumor. More
recently the approval of the anti-programmed cell death 1 (anti-PD-1) monoclonal 
antibodies nivolumab and pembrolizumab for previously treated advanced squamous
and non-squamous NSCLC, as well as other immune checkpoint inhibitors delivering 
promising results, has radically transformed the therapeutic landscape of NSCLC. 
Combination strategies now appear as the next step. Notwithstanding these
successes, immunotherapy still holds significant drawbacks and currently several 
improvements are needed before routine use in clinical practice, including
identification of robust biomarkers for optimal patient selection, as well as
defining the best way to evaluate response.

DOI: 10.21037/atm.2016.06.24 
PMCID: PMC4971380
PMID: 27563655  [PubMed]


43. Invest New Drugs. 2016 Dec;34(6):794-796. Epub 2016 Aug 25.

Adding checkpoint inhibitors to tyrosine kinase inhibitors targeting EGFR/ALK in 
non-small cell lung cancer: a new therapeutic strategy.

Tabchi S(1,)(2), Kourie HR(3,)(4), Kattan J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Hematology-oncology department, Faculty of medicine, Saint Joseph University, 
Beirut, Lebanon. (2)Medical Oncology department, Centre Hospitalier de
l'Université de Montréal, Montreal, QC, Canada. (3)Hematology-oncology
department, Faculty of medicine, Saint Joseph University, Beirut, Lebanon.
hampig.kourie@hotmail.com. (4)Oncology department, Jules Bordet Institute,
Université Libre de Bruxelles, Brussels, Belgium. hampig.kourie@hotmail.com.

After the massive approval of checkpoint inhibitors in the treatment of numerous 
malignancies and settings, checkpoint inhibitors-based combination therapies are 
emerging as a new therapeutic modality. Nivolumab and pembrolizumab (anti-PD1
agents) were recently approved as second-line treatment in NSCLC after
progression on platinum-doublets. In parallel, targeting EGFR/ALK in NSCLC using 
tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKI) demonstrated remarkable outcomes and was
approved as standard treatment, in patients with EGFR mutation or ALK
rearrangement. Combining TKI targeting EGFR/ALK with checkpoint inhibitors seems 
a promising therapeutic option and is being evaluated in different trials. We
aimed in this paper to elucidate the rationale behind this combination, to report
the premilinary results of ongoing trials evaluating this association and
finally, to discuss briefly the possible future indication of this treatment
modality.

DOI: 10.1007/s10637-016-0383-2 
PMID: 27562868  [PubMed - in process]


44. Rev Pneumol Clin. 2016 Oct;72(5):300-304. doi: 10.1016/j.pneumo.2016.05.004. Epub
2016 Aug 22.

[Prolonged response with paclitaxel after immunotherapy by pembrolizumab in lung 
cancer].

[Article in French]

Zapata E(1), Mennecier B(2), Leduc C(2), Chatron E(2), Quoix E(2).

Author information: 
(1)Service de pneumologie, nouvel hôpital Civil, hôpitaux universitaires de
Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France. Electronic address: zapataemilie@gmail.com.
(2)Service de pneumologie, nouvel hôpital Civil, hôpitaux universitaires de
Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France.

INTRODUCTION: Pembrolizumab, a humanized monoclonal antibody IgG4 anti-PD-1,
having offered promising results in patients suffering from non-small cell lung
cancer metastatic and heavily pretreated.
OBSERVATION: We report here the case of an unexpected good response after
pembrolizumab failure obtained with paclitaxel in a 68-year-old patient with
stage IV lung adenocarcinoma. Moreover, the response duration with paclitaxel was
more than fourteen months.
CONCLUSION: Our case suggests a mutual potentiation of chemotherapy and
immunotherapy, and raises the issue of the treatment sequence to favor.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pneumo.2016.05.004 
PMID: 27561974  [PubMed - in process]


45. Drugs. 2016 Sep;76(14):1321-36. doi: 10.1007/s40265-016-0628-6.

Second-Line Treatment of Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer: New Developments for Tumours
Not Harbouring Targetable Oncogenic Driver Mutations.

Barnfield PC(1,)(2), Ellis PM(3,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, McMaster University, Hamilton, ON, Canada. (2)Division
of Medical Oncology, Juravinski Cancer Centre, 699 Concession St, Hamilton, ON,
L8V 5C2, Canada. (3)Department of Oncology, McMaster University, Hamilton, ON,
Canada. ellisp@hhsc.ca. (4)Division of Medical Oncology, Juravinski Cancer
Centre, 699 Concession St, Hamilton, ON, L8V 5C2, Canada. ellisp@hhsc.ca.

Platinum-based doublet chemotherapy with or without bevacizumab is the standard
of care for the initial management of advanced and metastatic non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC) without a targetable molecular abnormality. However, the majority 
of patients with NSCLC will ultimately develop resistance to initial
platinum-based chemotherapy, and many remain candidates for subsequent lines of
therapy. Randomised trials over the past 10-15 years have established pemetrexed 
(non-squamous histology), docetaxel, erlotinib and gefitinib as approved
second-line agents in NSCLC without targetable driver mutations or
rearrangements. Trials comparing these agents with other chemotherapy, evaluating
the addition of an epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase
inhibitor (TKI) to chemotherapy or the addition of another targeted agent to
erlotinib or gefitinib have all failed to demonstrate an improvement in overall
survival for patients with NSCLC. In contrast, recent data comparing therapy with
novel monoclonal antibodies against programmed cell death 1 (PD-1) or PD ligand
(PD-L1) pathway versus standard chemotherapy following platinum failure have
demonstrated significant improvements in overall survival. Therapy with nivolumab
or pembrolizumab would now be considered standard second-line therapy in patients
without contraindication to immune checkpoint inhibitors. Atezolizumab also
appears promising in this setting.

DOI: 10.1007/s40265-016-0628-6 
PMID: 27557830  [PubMed - in process]


46. Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2016 Aug 23. [Epub ahead of print]

Development of a Companion Diagnostic for Pembrolizumab in Non-Small Cell Lung
Cancer Using Immunohistochemistry for Programmed Death Ligand-1.

Dolled-Filhart M, Roach C, Toland G, Stanforth D, Jansson M, Lubiniecki GM, Ponto
G, Emancipator K.

Context .- Programmed death ligand-1 (PD-L1) expression by tumors may enable them
to avoid immunosurveillance. Objective .- To develop a PD-L1 immunohistochemical 
assay using the 22C3 anti-PD-L1 murine monoclonal antibody on the Dako platform
as a possible companion diagnostic for pembrolizumab in patients with non-small
cell lung cancer. Design .- Tumor samples from 146 patients with non-small cell
lung cancer treated with pembrolizumab in KEYNOTE-001 and for whom response data 
were available were scored according to their staining intensity by a single
pathologist using 4 methods: percentage of tumor cells staining at any intensity 
(PS1), moderate/strong intensity (PS2), strong intensity (PS3), and H-score (PS1 
+ PS2 + PS3). The cutoff score for predicting response to pembrolizumab was
determined using receiver operating characteristic analysis. Progression-free and
overall survival were assessed in patients with measurable disease per Response
Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors, version 1.1 (n = 146). Results .- The 4
scoring methods assessed performed similarly; PS1 with a 50% cutoff score is the 
simplest and easiest method to implement in practice. Response to pembrolizumab
was observed in 19 of 44 patients (43%) with a PS1 score of 50% or higher and 8
of 102 patients (8%) with PS1 lower than 50% (odds ratio, 8.93). Median
progression-free and overall survival was 4.0 months and not yet reached,
respectively, for patients with a PS1 of 50% or higher, and 2.1 and 6.1 months,
respectively, for those with PS1 lower than 50%. Conclusion .- The PD-L1
immunohistochemical assay shows the potential for enrichment of trial populations
and as a companion diagnostic tool in non-small cell lung cancer.

DOI: 10.5858/arpa.2015-0542-OA 
PMID: 27552095  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


47. BMC Cancer. 2016 Aug 19;16:656. doi: 10.1186/s12885-016-2718-y.

Pembrolizumab-associated minimal change disease in a patient with malignant
pleural mesothelioma.

Bickel A(1), Koneth I(2), Enzler-Tschudy A(3), Neuweiler J(3), Flatz L(4), Früh
M(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology and Haematology, Cantonal Hospital St. Gallen,
Rorschacherstrasse 95, 9007, St. Gallen, Switzerland. angelika.bickel@kssg.ch.
(2)Division of Nephrology and Transplantation Medicine, Cantonal Hospital
St.Gallen, St. Gallen, Switzerland. (3)Institute of Pathology, Cantonal Hospital 
St. Gallen, St. Gallen, Switzerland. (4)Department of Dermatology, Cantonal
Hospital St. Gallen, St. Gallen, Switzerland. (5)Department of Oncology and
Haematology, Cantonal Hospital St. Gallen, Rorschacherstrasse 95, 9007, St.
Gallen, Switzerland.

BACKGROUND: Pembrolizumab is an anti- Programmed Death 1 (PD-1) antibody approved
in melanoma, non-small cell lung cancer and investigated in malignant pleural
mesothelioma. The most frequent immunotherapy related autoimmune reactions
include dermatitis, pneumonitis, colitis, hypophysitis, uveitis, hypothyreodism, 
hepatitis and interstitial nephritis.
CASE PRESENTATION: We describe a 62-year old patient diagnosed with malignant
pleural mesothelioma who experienced ten days after the second dose of third line
therapy with pembrolizumab sudden onset of generalized edema including legs and
eyelids and weight gain of 15 kg resulting from nephrotic syndrome and acute
renal failure. Pembrolizumab was discontinued and prednisone, diuretics and
angiotensin II receptor blocker were initiated with full recovery of symptoms and
renal function. Pembrolizumab-associated minimal change disease (MCD) was
confirmed by electron microscopy in the renal biopsy.
CONCLUSION: We are the first to describe pembrolizumab-related minimal change
disease (MCD). Physicians should be aware of this side effect in patients
presenting with edema and weight gain and initiate prompt renal function testing,
serum albumin and urinalysis followed by steroid treatment if
pembrolizumab-related MCD is suspected.

DOI: 10.1186/s12885-016-2718-y 
PMCID: PMC4992260
PMID: 27543082  [PubMed - in process]


48. JAMA Oncol. 2016 Dec 1;2(12):1607-1616. doi: 10.1001/jamaoncol.2016.2453.

Incidence of Programmed Cell Death 1 Inhibitor-Related Pneumonitis in Patients
With Advanced Cancer: A Systematic Review and Meta-analysis.

Nishino M(1), Giobbie-Hurder A(2), Hatabu H(1), Ramaiya NH(1), Hodi FS(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiology, Brigham and Women's Hospital and Dana-Farber Cancer
Institute, Boston, Massachusetts. (2)Department of Biostatistics and
Computational Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts.
(3)Department of Medical Oncology and Department of Medicine, Dana-Farber Cancer 
Institute and Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts.

Importance: Programmed cell death 1 (PD-1) inhibitor-related pneumonitis is a
rare but clinically serious and potentially life-threatening adverse event.
Little is known about its incidence across different tumor types and treatment
regimens.
Objective: To compare the incidence of PD-1 inhibitor-related pneumonitis among
different tumor types and therapeutic regimens.
Data Sources: A PubMed search through November 10, 2015, and a review of
references from relevant articles. For the PubMed search, the following keywords 
or corresponding Medical Subject Heading terms were used: nivolumab,
pembrolizumab, and PD-1 inhibitor.
Study Selection: Twenty-six original articles of PD-1 inhibitor trial results
were identified. Among them, 20 studies of melanoma, non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC), or renal cell carcinoma (RCC) were eligible for a meta-analysis.
Data Extraction and Synthesis: The data were extracted by 1 primary reviewer and 
then independently reviewed by 2 secondary reviewers following Preferred
Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses guidelines. Comparisons 
of the incidence were based on marginal, exact generalized linear models with
generalized estimating equations.
Main Outcomes and Measures: Incidence of all-grade and grade 3 or higher
pneumonitis and pneumonitis-related deaths.
Results: Twenty studies of single-tumor-type trials of PD-1 inhibitor (12
melanoma studies, 5 NSCLC studies, and 3 RCC studies) (a total of 4496 unique
patients) were included in the meta-analysis. The overall incidence of
pneumonitis during PD-1 inhibitor monotherapy was 2.7% (95% CI, 1.9%-3.6%) for
all-grade and 0.8% (95% CI, 0.4%-1.2%) for grade 3 or higher pneumonitis. The
incidence was higher in NSCLC for all-grade (4.1% vs 1.6%; P = .002) and grade 3 
or higher pneumonitis (1.8% vs 0.2%; P < .001) compared with melanoma. The
incidence in RCC was higher than in melanoma for all-grade pneumonitis (4.1% vs
1.6%; P < .001) but not for grade 3 or higher pneumonitis. Four
pneumonitis-related deaths were observed in patients with NSCLC in the
monotherapy group. Pneumonitis was more frequent during combination therapy than 
monotherapy for all-grade (6.6% vs 1.6%; P < .001) and grade 3 or higher
pneumonitis (1.5% vs 0.2%; P = .001) in melanoma, with 1 pneumonitis-related
death during combination therapy. Multivariable analyses demonstrated higher odds
of pneumonitis in NSCLC for all-grade (odds ratio [OR], 1.43; 95% CI, 1.08-1.89; 
P = .005) and grade 3 or higher pneumonitis (OR, 2.85; 95% CI, 1.60-5.08;
P < .001) and in RCC for all-grade pneumonitis (OR, 1.59; 95% CI, 1.32-1.92;
P < .001) compared with melanoma. The combination therapy had significantly
higher odds than monotherapy for all-grade (OR, 2.04; 95% CI, 1.69-2.50;
P < .001) and grade 3 or higher pneumonitis (OR, 2.86; 95% CI, 1.79- 4.35;
P < .001).
Conclusions and Relevance: The incidence of PD-1 inhibitor-related pneumonitis
was higher in NSCLC and RCC and during combination therapy. These findings
contribute to enhance awareness among clinicians and support further
investigations to meet the clinical needs.

DOI: 10.1001/jamaoncol.2016.2453 
PMID: 27540850  [PubMed - in process]


49. Oncologist. 2017 Jan;22(1):81-88. doi: 10.1634/theoncologist.2016-0189. Epub 2016
Aug 17.

Immune Checkpoint Inhibitors in Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer.

Herzberg B(1), Campo MJ(1), Gainor JF(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts,
USA. (2)Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA jgainor@partners.org.

Historically, lung cancer was long considered a poorly immunogenic malignancy. In
recent years, however, immune checkpoint inhibitors have emerged as promising
therapeutic agents in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). To date, the best
characterized and most therapeutically relevant immune checkpoints have been
cytotoxic T-lymphocyte-associated antigen 4 (CTLA-4) and the programmed cell
death protein-1 (PD-1) pathway. In early studies, PD-1/programmed cell death
ligand-1 (PD-L1) inhibitors demonstrated promising antitumor activity and durable
clinical responses in a subset of patients. Based on these encouraging results,
multiple different PD-1/PD-L1 inhibitors have entered clinical development, and
two agents (nivolumab and pembrolizumab) have gained regulatory approval in the
United States for the treatment of NSCLC. In several large, randomized studies,
PD-1/PD-L1 inhibitors have produced significant improvements in overall survival 
compared with single-agent docetaxel delivered in the second-line setting,
effectively establishing a new standard of care in NSCLC. In the present report, 
we provide an overview of the rationale for checkpoint inhibitors in lung cancer,
recent clinical trial data, and the need for predictive biomarkers.THE
ONCOLOGIST: 2017;22:81-88 IMPLICATIONS FOR PRACTICE: Strategies targeting
negative regulators (i.e., checkpoints) of the immune system have demonstrated
significant antitumor activity across a range of solid tumors. In non-small cell 
lung cancer (NSCLC), programmed cell death protein-1 (PD-1) pathway inhibitors
have entered routine clinical use because of the results from recent randomized
studies demonstrating superiority against single-agent chemotherapy in previously
treated patients. The present report provides an overview of immune checkpoint
inhibitors in lung cancer for the practicing clinician, focusing on the rationale
for immunotherapy, recent clinical trial data, and future directions.

© AlphaMed Press 2016.

DOI: 10.1634/theoncologist.2016-0189 
PMID: 27534574  [PubMed - in process]


50. Oncologist. 2017 Jan;22(1):70-80. doi: 10.1634/theoncologist.2016-0164. Epub 2016
Aug 17.

Monitoring and Management of Immune-Related Adverse Events Associated With
Programmed Cell Death Protein-1 Axis Inhibitors in Lung Cancer.

O'Kane GM(1), Labbé C(1), Doherty MK(1), Young K(1), Albaba H(1), Leighl NB(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology and Hematology, Princess Margaret Cancer
Centre, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. (2)Department of Medical
Oncology and Hematology, Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, University of Toronto, 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada Natasha.Leighl@uhn.ca.

Monoclonal antibodies targeting programmed cell death protein-1 (PD-1) represent 
a new treatment paradigm in non-small cell lung cancer. Three phase III trials
have demonstrated a survival benefit and improved tolerability of nivolumab and
pembrolizumab when compared with standard second-line chemotherapy. Nevertheless,
the adverse events associated with PD-1 inhibitors are unique; early recognition 
and treatment are essential. This review summarizes the required monitoring and
appropriate management of immune-related adverse events in lung cancer patients
receiving these agents.THE ONCOLOGIST: 2017;22:70-80 IMPLICATIONS FOR PRACTICE: :
The potential adverse events of immune checkpoint inhibitors differ from
conventional chemotherapy and can require a multidisciplinary approach. Continued
education is important for all physicians to ensure optimal care for patients.

© AlphaMed Press 2016.

DOI: 10.1634/theoncologist.2016-0164 
PMID: 27534573  [PubMed - in process]


51. J Immunother Cancer. 2016 Aug 16;4:50. doi: 10.1186/s40425-016-0152-y.
eCollection 2016.

Cardiotoxicity associated with CTLA4 and PD1 blocking immunotherapy.

Heinzerling L(1), Ott PA(2), Hodi FS(2), Husain AN(3), Tajmir-Riahi A(4), Tawbi
H(5), Pauschinger M(6), Gajewski TF(3), Lipson EJ(7), Luke JJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)University Hospital Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany ; Department of Dermatology,
University Hospital Erlangen, Ulmenweg 18, 91054 Erlangen, Germany. (2)Dana
Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA USA. (3)University of Chicago Comprehensive
Cancer Center and Pathology, Chicago, IL USA. (4)University Hospital Erlangen,
Erlangen, Germany. (5)University of Texas MD Anderson Center, Houston, TX USA.
(6)Paracelsus University Hospital Nuremberg, Nürnberg, Germany. (7)Sidney Kimmel 
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Baltimore, MD USA.

Immune-checkpoint blocking antibodies have demonstrated objective antitumor
responses in multiple tumor types including melanoma, non-small cell lung cancer 
(NSCLC), and renal cell cancer (RCC). In melanoma, an increase in overall
survival has been demonstrated with anti-CTLA-4 and PD-1 inhibition. However, a
plethora of immune-mediated adverse events has been reported with these agents.
Immune-mediated cardiotoxicity induced by checkpoint inhibitors has been reported
in single cases with variable presentation, including myocarditis and
pericarditis. Among six clinical cancer centers with substantial experience in
the administration of immune-checkpoint blocking antibodies, eight cases of
immune-related cardiotoxicity after ipilimumab and/or nivolumab/pembrolizumab
were identified. Diagnostic findings, treatment and follow-up are reported. A
large variety of cardiotoxic events with manifestations such as heart failure,
cardiomyopathy, heart block, myocardial fibrosis and myocarditis was documented. 
This is the largest case series to date describing cardiotoxicity of
immune-checkpoint blocking antibodies. Awareness, monitoring of patients with
pre-existing cardiac disorders and prompt evaluation by the treatment team is
essential. Treatment including application of steroids is critical for patient
safety.

DOI: 10.1186/s40425-016-0152-y 
PMCID: PMC4986340
PMID: 27532025  [PubMed]


52. J Immunother Cancer. 2016 Aug 16;4:48. doi: 10.1186/s40425-016-0153-x.
eCollection 2016.

PD-L1 biomarker testing for non-small cell lung cancer: truth or fiction?

Grigg C(1), Rizvi NA(1).

Author information: 
(1)NewYork-Presbyterian/Columbia University Medical Center, Hematology/Oncology, 
177 Fort Washington Avenue, 6GN-435, New York, NY 10032 USA.

Research in cancer immunology is currently accelerating following a series of
cancer immunotherapy breakthroughs during the last 5 years. Various monoclonal
antibodies which block the interaction between checkpoint molecules PD-1 on
immune cells and PD-L1 on cancer cells have been used to successfully treat
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), including some durable responses lasting
years. Two drugs, nivolumab and pembrolizumab, are now FDA approved for use in
certain patients who have failed or progressed on platinum-based or targeted
therapies while agents targeting PD-L1, atezolizumab and durvalumab, are
approaching the final stages of clinical testing. Despite impressive treatment
outcomes in a subset of patients who receive these immune therapies, many
patients with NSCLC fail to respond to anti-PD-1/PD-L1 and the identification of 
a biomarker to select these patients remains highly sought after. In this review,
we discuss the recent clinical trial results of pembrolizumab, nivolumab, and
atezolizumab for NSCLC, and the significance of companion diagnostic testing for 
tumor PD-L1 expression.

DOI: 10.1186/s40425-016-0153-x 
PMCID: PMC4986262
PMID: 27532023  [PubMed]


53. Curr Treat Options Oncol. 2016 Oct;17(10):54. doi: 10.1007/s11864-016-0429-x.

Adjuvant Therapy of Resected Non-small Cell Lung Cancer: can We Move Forward?

Buffoni L(1), Vavalà T(2), Novello S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology at San Luigi Hospital, University of Turin, Regione
Gonzole 10, 10043, Orbassano, Torino, Italy. (2)Department of Oncology, ASL CN1, 
Via C. Boggio, 12, 12100, Cuneo, Italy. tvavala@hotmail.it.

OPINION STATEMENT: Twenty years ago, an individual patient data meta-analysis of 
eight cisplatin-based adjuvant chemotherapy (AC) studies in completely resected
early stage non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) demonstrated a 13 % reduction of
the risk of death favoring chemotherapy that was of borderline statistical
significance (p = 0.08). This marginal benefit boosted a new generation of
randomized trials to evaluate the role of modern platinum-based regimens in
resectable stages of NSCLC and, although individual studies generated conflicting
results, overall they contributed to confirm the role of AC which is now
recommended for completely resected stage II and III NSCLC, mostly 4 cycles,
while subset analyses suggested a benefit in patients with large IB tumors.
Cisplatin-based therapy was the core regimen of those adjuvant clinical trials
and even if a substitution with other platinum-derived was also suggested, mainly
based on extrapolated data from studies in advanced disease, cisplatin was
confirmed to be slightly superior to carboplatin and is still the drug of choice 
in the adjuvant setting. Currently, any attempt to improve efficacy of
cisplatin-based chemotherapy through antiangiogenic drugs association or
pharmacogenomics approaches have failed, while results of additional studies are 
eagerly awaited. In the context of promising targeted therapies, even if several 
randomized trials in the advanced setting evaluated tyrosine kinase inhibitors
(TKis) versus platinum-based chemotherapy and showed impressive results, clinical
experience with TKIs in the adjuvant setting is still limited and most of the
trials have not required patients to be molecularly tested for the drug-specific 
molecular predictive factor. At the present time, the role of targeted agents as 
adjuvant approaches remains largely not investigated. Finally, with the negative 
experience of the use of vaccines in this setting, the integration of
immunotherapy (mainly immunocheckpoint inhibitors) in platinum-based schedules
has just started to be evaluated, representing a potential future clinical
option, but still far from clinical practice.

DOI: 10.1007/s11864-016-0429-x 
PMID: 27523606  [PubMed - in process]


54. J Thorac Dis. 2016 Jul;8(7):E535-7. doi: 10.21037/jtd.2016.06.32.

Dramatic response to anti-PD-1 therapy in a patient of squamous cell carcinoma of
thymus with multiple lung metastases.

Yang Y(1), Ding L(1), Wang P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Second Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang
University School of Medicine, Hangzhou 310009, China.

Immunotherapy directed at the programmed cell death-1 receptor (PD-1) or its
ligand PD-L1 has demonstrated efficacy in some malignancies, such as metastatic
melanoma and non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Compared with cytotoxic
chemotherapy, radiotherapy or molecular targeted agent, it is an innovative way
to treat malignancies with durable clinical responses and manageable adverse. We 
present a case of female patient with squamous cell carcinoma of thymus involving
multiple lung metastases, who was successfully treated with anti-PD-1 monoclonal 
antibody, pembrolizumab.

DOI: 10.21037/jtd.2016.06.32 
PMCID: PMC4958864
PMID: 27499991  [PubMed]


55. J Nucl Med. 2017 Jan;58(1):162-168. doi: 10.2967/jnumed.116.177857. Epub 2016 Aug
4.

Preclinical Pharmacokinetics and Biodistribution Studies of 89Zr-Labeled
Pembrolizumab.

England CG(1), Ehlerding EB(1), Hernandez R(1), Rekoske BT(2), Graves SA(1), Sun 
H(3), Liu G(2,)(4), McNeel DG(2,)(4), Barnhart TE(1), Cai W(5,)(3,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Physics, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison,
Wisconsin. (2)Department of Medicine, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison,
Wisconsin. (3)Department of Radiology, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, 
Wisconsin; and. (4)University of Wisconsin Carbone Cancer Center, Madison,
Wisconsin. (5)Department of Medical Physics, University of Wisconsin-Madison,
Madison, Wisconsin wcai@uwhealth.org.

Pembrolizumab is a humanized monoclonal antibody targeting programmed cell death 
protein 1 (PD-1) found on T and pro-B cells. Pembrolizumab prevents PD-1 ligation
by both PD-L1 and PD-L2, preventing the immune dysregulation that otherwise
occurs when T-cells encounter cells expressing these ligands. Clinically, PD-1
blockade elicits potent antitumor immune responses, and antibodies blocking PD-1 
ligation, including pembrolizumab, have recently received Food and Drug
Administration approval for the treatment of advanced melanoma, renal cell
cancer, and non-small cell lung cancer.METHODS: In this study, we evaluated the
pharmacokinetics, biodistribution, and dosimetry of pembrolizumab in vivo,
accomplished through radiolabeling with the positron emitter (89)Zr. PET imaging 
was used to evaluate the whole-body distribution of (89)Zr-deferoxamine
(Df)-pembrolizumab in two rodent models (mice and rats). Data obtained from PET
scans and biodistribution studies were extrapolated to humans to estimate the
dosimetry of the tracer. As a proof of concept, the biodistribution of
(89)Zr-Df-pembrolizumab was further investigated in a humanized murine model.
RESULTS: The tracer remained stable in blood circulation throughout the study and
accumulated the greatest in liver and spleen tissues. Both mice and rats showed
similar biodistribution and pharmacokinetics of (89)Zr-Df-pembrolizumab. In the
humanized mouse model, T-cell infiltration into the salivary and lacrimal glands 
could be successfully visualized.
CONCLUSION: These data will augment our understanding of the pharmacokinetics and
biodistribution of radiolabeled pembrolizumab in vivo, while providing detailed
dosimetry data that may lead to better dosing strategies in the future. These
findings further demonstrate the utility of noninvasive in vivo PET imaging to
dynamically track T-cell checkpoint receptor expression and localization in a
humanized mouse model.

© 2017 by the Society of Nuclear Medicine and Molecular Imaging.

DOI: 10.2967/jnumed.116.177857 
PMCID: PMC5209640 [Available on 2018-01-01]
PMID: 27493273  [PubMed - in process]


56. Expert Rev Anticancer Ther. 2016 Sep;16(9):903-10. doi:
10.1080/14737140.2016.1220836. Epub 2016 Aug 22.

The safety and efficacy of nivolumab in advanced (metastatic) non-small cell lung
cancer.

Tanvetyanon T(1), Creelan BC(1), Antonia SJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Thoracic Oncology Department , H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research
Institute , Tampa , FL , USA.

INTRODUCTION: Advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is a challenging
oncological problem. Following standard initial therapy, disease progression will
typically develop. Patients with relapsed or refractory disease are left with
limited treatment options. The advent of nivolumab, a monoclonal antibody against
Program Death-1 (PD-1), has substantially changed the outlook for such patients.
AREA COVERED: Nivolumab is the first checkpoint immunotherapeutic agent to gain
regulatory approval for NSCLC. By enabling host immune-mediated cytotoxic
activity against tumor cells, nivolumab induces a partial or complete tumor
response in 15-20% of patients, regardless of number of previous lines of
anti-cancer therapy. Nivolumab-related adverse effects are generally milder and
less frequent than those observed with conventional cytotoxic chemotherapy.
Although immune-related adverse events such as fatal pneumonitis have been
reported with nivolumab therapy, most adverse events are reversible with a prompt
immunosuppression. Studies investigating nivolumab in combination with other
agents are ongoing. Expert commentary: Nivolumab represents a significant
breakthrough in the treatment of advanced NSCLC. Its therapeutic role for NSCLC
may soon expand to include consolidation or maintenance setting. Furthermore,
several clinical trials investigating the combination of nivolumab with other
immunologic or non-immunologic treatments are ongoing and these will likely
result in additional roles of nivolumab in NSCLC.

DOI: 10.1080/14737140.2016.1220836 
PMID: 27488231  [PubMed - in process]


57. Curr Oncol Rep. 2016 Sep;18(9):59. doi: 10.1007/s11912-016-0544-7.

Immune Checkpoint Blockade: A New Era for Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer.

Califano R(1,)(2), Kerr K(3), Morgan RD(4), Lo Russo G(5), Garassino M(5),
Morgillo F(6), Rossi A(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, The Christie NHS Foundation Trust, Wilmslow
Road, Manchester, UK. raffaele.califano@christie.nhs.uk. (2)Department of Medical
Oncology, University Hospital of South Manchester NHS Foundation Trust,
Manchester, UK. raffaele.califano@christie.nhs.uk. (3)Department of Pathology,
Aberdeen University School of Medicine, Aberdeen Royal Infirmary, Aberdeen, UK.
(4)Department of Medical Oncology, The Christie NHS Foundation Trust, Wilmslow
Road, Manchester, UK. (5)Thoracic Oncology Unit, Medical Oncology Department,
Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori, Milan, Italy. (6)Division of
Medical Oncology, S.G. Moscati Hospital, Avellino, Italy.

Despite better understanding of it's molecular biology, non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC) remains a challenging disease to treat. Unfortunately, treatment
options are still very limited and prognosis for advanced disease is poor. Immune
surveillance plays a crucial role in a host's defence against tumour cells, and
this is particular relevant for lung cancer due to it's high somatic mutational
load, which increases the chances for the immune system to recognize cancer cells
as 'non-self'. Novel immunotherapies are emerging as an effective treatment for
this disease. In this review, we present the data on immune checkpoint inhibitors
for NSCLC, describing their mechanism of action, data efficacy from recent
clinical trials, and strategies to select patients more likely to benefit from
these agents.

DOI: 10.1007/s11912-016-0544-7 
PMID: 27484062  [PubMed - in process]


58. Rev Recent Clin Trials. 2016;11(4):297-305.

Clinical Trials Investigating Immune Checkpoint Inhibitors in Non-Small-Cell Lung
Cancer.

Giri A(1), Walia SS, Gajra A.

Author information: 
(1)Upstate University Hospital, Department of Medicine, 750 East Adams St,
Syracuse, NY 13210, USA.

INTRODUCTION: Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer (NSCLC) is an aggressive malignancy with
poor overall survival that accounts for up to 85% of lung cancer diagnoses. The
use of immunotherapy in the form of checkpoint inhibition, to enhance the immune 
system's ability to attack malignant cells, has been a promising addition to
treatment options in advanced NSCLC.
RESULTS: Such therapeutic agents aimed at the Programmed Death 1 (PD-1) receptor 
or Programmed Death Ligand 1 (PD-L1) have revealed promising results against many
types of cancer including NSCLC. Examples of these agents include nivolumab,
pembrolizumab, BMS-936559, atezolizumab, and MEDI4736, of which the first two are
approved by US FDA in the second line treatment of advanced NSCLC.
DISCUSSION: Impressive improvements in objective responses from PD-1 blockade
were found in both first line therapy as well as treatment after progression on
platinum based therapy. In addition, the safety profile is favorable with
significantly lower grade 3-4 adverse events compared to standard of care. The
optimal selection criteria and factors that show an increased response to therapy
are still being determined.


PMID: 27457350  [PubMed - in process]


59. Cureus. 2016 Jun 4;8(6):e631. doi: 10.7759/cureus.631.

Metastatic Hepatocellular Carcinoma Responsive to Pembrolizumab.

Truong P(1), Rahal A(2), Kallail KJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Center of Kansas, Wesley Medical Center. (2)Internal Medicine,
University of Kansas School of Medicine-Wichita.

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is an aggressive liver tumor that occurs with
chronic liver disease. Surgical resection is the mainstay of therapy for
localized disease whereas therapeutic options for advanced disease are limited.
The innovative blockade of immune checkpoints with targeted immunotherapies, such
as monoclonal antibodies against programmed death receptor 1 (PD-1), have shown
promise in the treatment of solid malignancies. The PD-1 inhibiting antibodies,
nivolumab and pembrolizumab prolonged overall survival in randomized trials in
metastatic melanoma and advanced non-small cell lung cancer. This is a report of 
a 75-year-old male patient with metastatic HCC who was initially treated with the
standard of therapy sorafenib. After failure of sorafenib therapy, pembrolizumab 
was started. There was a dramatic response to pembrolizumab with decrease in
tumor size and drop in alfa fetoprotein. To the best of our knowledge, this is
the first case report of metastatic HCC responsive to pembrolizumab after failure
of sorafenib.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.631 
PMCID: PMC4934853
PMID: 27433410  [PubMed]


60. BioDrugs. 2016 Oct;30(5):397-405.

Advances in the Treatment of Non-small Cell Lung Cancer: Focus on Nivolumab,
Pembrolizumab, and Atezolizumab.

Leventakos K(1), Mansfield AS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Mayo Clinic, 200 First Street SW, Rochester,
MN, 55905, USA. (2)Department of Medical Oncology, Mayo Clinic, 200 First Street 
SW, Rochester, MN, 55905, USA. Mansfield.Aaron@mayo.edu.

Immunotherapy is revolutionizing the treatment of non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC). Immune checkpoint inhibitors, including programmed cell death protein 1 
(PD-1) and programmed cell death ligand 1 (PD-L1) monoclonal antibodies, are
being introduced to routine clinical practice. This review summarizes clinical
trials of nivolumab, pembrolizumab, and atezolizumab in patients with NSCLC.
These agents have efficacy against NSCLC and a unique toxicity profile. The role 
of PD-L1 as a predictive biomarker is still unclear, partially because of the
nuances of PD-L1 testing. These novel therapies also challenge our existing
methodologies of radiologic assessment and efficacy analysis. This new era of
immunotherapy has ushered in as much hope for patients as questions from
physicians that need to be answered to clarify the optimal use of these agents.

DOI: 10.1007/s40259-016-0187-0 
PMID: 27411930  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Hum Vaccin Immunother. 2016 Nov;12(11):2777-2789. Epub 2016 Jul 11.

Pembrolizumab (Keytruda).

Kwok G(1), Yau TC(1), Chiu JW(1), Tse E(1), Kwong YL(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Medicine , Queen Mary Hospital , Hong Kong.

The programmed cell death protein 1 (PD1) is one of the checkpoints that
regulates the immune response. Ligation of PD1 with its ligands PDL1 and PDL2
results in transduction of negative signals to T-cells. PD1 expression is an
important mechanism contributing to the exhausted effector T-cell phenotype. The 
expression of PD1 on effector T-cells and PDL1 on neoplastic cells enables tumor 
cells to evade anti-tumor immunity. Blockade of PD1 is an important
immunotherapeutic strategy for cancers. Pembrolizumab (Keytruda) is a humanized
monoclonal anti-PD1 antibody that has been extensively investigated in numerous
malignancies. In melanoma refractory to targeted therapy, pembrolizumab induced
overall response rates (ORRs) of 21-34%. It was superior to another immune
checkpoint inhibitor ipilimumab (Yervoy) in stage III/IV unresectable melanoma.
In refractory non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), pembrolizumab induced ORRs of
19-25%. Based on these results, pembrolizumab was approved by the USA FDA for the
treatment of advanced melanoma and NSCLC. Tumor cell PDL1 expression may be a
valid response predictor. Molecular analysis also showed that tumors with high
gene mutation burdens, which might result in the formation of more tumor-related 
neo-antigens, had better responses to pembrolizumab. In malignancies including
lymphomas and other solid tumors, preliminary data showed that ORRs of around
20-50 % could be achieved. Adverse events occurred in up to 60% of patients, but 
grade 3/4 toxicities were observed in <10% of cases. Immune-related adverse
events including thyroid dysfunction, hepatitis and pneumonitis are more serious 
and may lead to cessation of treatment.

DOI: 10.1080/21645515.2016.1199310 
PMCID: PMC5137544 [Available on 2017-07-11]
PMID: 27398650  [PubMed - in process]


62. Ann Transl Med. 2016 Jun;4(11):215. doi: 10.21037/atm.2016.05.64.

The role of pembrolizumab in the treatment of advanced non-small cell lung
cancer.

Santabarbara G(1), Maione P(1), Rossi A(1), Palazzolo G(1), Gridelli C(1).

Author information: 
(1)1 Division of Medical Oncology, "S. G. Moscati" Hospital, Contrada Amoretta
83100, Avellino, Italy ; 2 Division of Medical Oncology, "ULSS 15 Cittadella",
via Casa di ricovero, 40 35013 Cittadella, Padova, Italy.

Lung cancer is the leading cause of death cancer related worldwide. The standard 
therapies have unmet medical needs both due to the limited activity and relevant 
toxicity of platinum-based chemotherapy and to the low frequency of specific
alterations required to use targeted therapies. Immune checkpoint inhibition due 
to restoring the immune system's capacity to eradicate tumors is undergoing in
extensive investigation in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) as a new treatment 
approach. Programmed cell death protein-1 (PD-1) and its ligand, programmed cell 
death-ligand 1 (PD-L1) have recently led to significantly and durable
improvements in the clinical outcome of several kind of tumors including lung
cancer. Pembrolizumab, approved by the U.S. FDA for the treatment of advanced
NSCLC progressed after other therapies and with expression of PD-L1, has
demonstrated durable response and prolonged overall survival (OS) especially in
patients with high PD-L1 expression. Further investigation are needed to improve 
treatment outcomes through combination of immunotherapy or combined with other
targeted therapies.

DOI: 10.21037/atm.2016.05.64 
PMCID: PMC4916358
PMID: 27386489  [PubMed]


63. Appl Immunohistochem Mol Morphol. 2016 Jul;24(6):392-7. doi:
10.1097/PAI.0000000000000408.

Development of a Companion Diagnostic PD-L1 Immunohistochemistry Assay for
Pembrolizumab Therapy in Non-Small-cell Lung Cancer.

Roach C(1), Zhang N, Corigliano E, Jansson M, Toland G, Ponto G, Dolled-Filhart
M, Emancipator K, Stanforth D, Kulangara K.

Author information: 
(1)*Dako North America Inc., an Agilent Technologies Company, Carpinteria, CA
†Merck & Co. Inc., Kenilworth, NJ.

A companion diagnostic assay was codeveloped by Dako for pembrolizumab
non-small-cell lung cancer clinical trials to detect PD-L1 expression by
immunohistochemistry (IHC). This automated IHC assay has been analytically
verified and validated using Dako's autostainer Link 48 and 22C3 mouse anti-PD-L1
monoclonal antibody to detect the PD-L1 expression in formalin-fixed
paraffin-embedded human tumor tissue specimens. The PD-L1 22C3 IHC assay was
optimized for high sensitivity and specificity. Repeatability and reproducibility
studies were conducted at Dako and at 3 Clinical Laboratory Improvement
Amendments certified laboratories during assay development. The studies included:
intersite and intrasite, interobserver and intraobserver, interinstrument,
interoperator, interday, and interlot, and intraday and intrarun. All precision
studies performed at Dako and external laboratories achieved >85% point-estimate 
agreements for all 3 agreement types (negative, positive, and overall). A
clinical cutoff (tumor proportion score ≥50%) of PD-L1 expression was determined 
and evaluated through a phase 1 clinical trial (KEYNOTE-001) for advanced
non-small-cell lung cancer patients treated with pembrolizumab. The treatment
effect of pembrolizumab in the 61 subjects who had a tumor PD-L1 of tumor
proportion score ≥50% was substantial, with an overall response rate of 41% (95% 
confidence interval, 28.6-54.3) as compared with 20.6% (95% confidence interval, 
15.5-26.5) observed in the 223 subjects irrespective of PD-L1 status. PD-L1 IHC
22C3 pharmDx is a sensitive, precise, and robust companion diagnostic assay,
which will facilitate safe and effective use for pembrolizumab in cancer
patients.

DOI: 10.1097/PAI.0000000000000408 
PMCID: PMC4957959
PMID: 27333219  [PubMed - in process]


64. Cancer Treat Rev. 2016 Jul;48:20-4. doi: 10.1016/j.ctrv.2016.06.002. Epub 2016
Jun 7.

Economic sustainability of anti-PD-1 agents nivolumab and pembrolizumab in cancer
patients: Recent insights and future challenges.

Tartari F(1), Santoni M(2), Burattini L(3), Mazzanti P(3), Onofri A(3), Berardi
R(3).

Author information: 
(1)School of Economics, University of Macerata, Macerata, Italy. (2)Medical
Oncology, Università Politecnica delle Marche, Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria 
Ospedali Riuniti Umberto I, GM Lancisi, G Salesi, Ancona, Italy. Electronic
address: mattymo@alice.it. (3)Medical Oncology, Università Politecnica delle
Marche, Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria Ospedali Riuniti Umberto I, GM Lancisi,
G Salesi, Ancona, Italy.

Anti-programmed death (PD)-1 agents pembrolizumab and nivolumab have recently
obtained enthusiastic results in terms of progression-free survival (PFS),
overall survival (OS) and tolerability in cancer patients. Despite these
promising data, the high cost of these agents needs careful consideration.
Indeed, the evaluation of cost-effectiveness analysis (CEA) and quality-adjusted 
life year (QALY), as well as different drug reimbursement modalities, will
represent fundamental tools in order to guarantee the economic sustainability of 
health system and the access to care for all cancer patients. In this review, we 
discussed the recent results obtained by immunotherapy in cancer patients and we 
evaluated the economic impact of recently approved nivolumab and pembrolizumab in
patients with advanced melanoma, non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and renal
cell carcinoma (RCC).

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ctrv.2016.06.002 
PMID: 27310708  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Lancet Oncol. 2016 Jul;17(7):976-83. doi: 10.1016/S1470-2045(16)30053-5. Epub
2016 Jun 3.

Pembrolizumab for patients with melanoma or non-small-cell lung cancer and
untreated brain metastases: early analysis of a non-randomised, open-label, phase
2 trial.

Goldberg SB(1), Gettinger SN(2), Mahajan A(2), Chiang AC(2), Herbst RS(2), Sznol 
M(2), Tsiouris AJ(3), Cohen J(2), Vortmeyer A(2), Jilaveanu L(2), Yu J(2), Hegde 
U(4), Speaker S(2), Madura M(2), Ralabate A(2), Rivera A(2), Rowen E(2), Gerrish 
H(2), Yao X(2), Chiang V(2), Kluger HM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Yale University School of Medicine and Yale Cancer Center, New Haven, CT, USA.
Electronic address: sarah.goldberg@yale.edu. (2)Yale University School of
Medicine and Yale Cancer Center, New Haven, CT, USA. (3)New York Presbyterian
Hospital, Weill Cornell Medical Center, New York, NY, USA. (4)University of
Connecticut Health Center, Farmington, CT, USA.

Comment in
    Ann Transl Med. 2016 Oct;4(Suppl 1):S9.

BACKGROUND: Immunotherapy targeting the PD-1 axis has activity in several tumour 
types. We aimed to establish the activity and safety of the PD-1 inhibitor
pembrolizumab in patients with untreated brain metastases from melanoma or
non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC).
METHODS: In this non-randomised, open-label, phase 2 trial, we enrolled patients 
aged 18 years or older with melanoma or NSCLC with untreated brain metastases
from the Yale Cancer Center. Patients had at least one untreated or progressive
brain metastasis between 5 and 20 mm in diameter without associated neurological 
symptoms or the need for corticosteroids. Patients with NSCLC had tumour tissue
positive for PD-L1 expression; this was not required for patients with melanoma. 
Patients were given 10 mg/kg pembrolizumab every 2 weeks until progression. The
primary endpoint was brain metastasis response assessed in all treated patients. 
The trial is ongoing and here we present an early analysis. The study is
registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, number NCT02085070.
FINDINGS: Between March 31, 2014, and May 31, 2015, we screened 52 patients with 
untreated or progressive brain metastases (18 with melanoma, 34 with NSCLC), and 
enrolled 36 (18 with melanoma, 18 with NSCLC). A brain metastasis response was
achieved in four (22%; 95% CI 7-48) of 18 patients with melanoma and six (33%;
14-59) of 18 patients with NSCLC. Responses were durable, with all but one
patient with NSCLC who responded showing an ongoing response at the time of data 
analysis on June 30, 2015. Treatment-related serious and grade 3-4 adverse events
were grade 3 elevated aminotransferases (n=1 [6%]) in the melanoma cohort, and
grade 3 colitis (n=1 [6%]), grade 3 pneumonitis (n=1 [6%]), grade 3 fatigue (n=1 
[6%]), grade 4 hyperkalemia (n=1 [6%]), and grade 2 acute kidney injury (n=1
[6%]) in the NSCLC cohort. Clinically significant neurological adverse events
included transient grade 3 cognitive dysfunction and grade 1-2 seizures (n=3
[17%]) in the melanoma cohort.
INTERPRETATION: Pembrolizumab shows activity in brain metastases in patients with
melanoma or NSCLC with an acceptable safety profile, which suggests that there
might be a role for systemic immunotherapy in patients with untreated or
progressive brain metastases.
FUNDING: Merck and the Yale Cancer Center.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S1470-2045(16)30053-5 
PMID: 27267608  [PubMed - in process]


66. Future Oncol. 2016 Aug;12(15):1805-22. doi: 10.2217/fon-2016-0086. Epub 2016 Jun 
8.

Immune checkpoint inhibitors as first-line and salvage therapy for advanced
non-small-cell lung cancer.

Decatris MP(1), O'Byrne KJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Gloucestershire Oncology Centre, Cheltenham General Hospital, Sandford Road,
Cheltenham GL53 7AN, UK. (2)Princess Alexandra Hospital & Queensland University
of Technology, Brisbane, Queensland 4102, Australia.

Advanced non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) has a poor prognosis with few
treatment options available for patients after failure of first-line therapy.
Nivolumab is the first immune checkpoint inhibitor targeting the PD-1 to be
approved in recurrent NSCLC with squamous and nonsquamous histology. More
recently, pembrolizumab has also been approved as salvage therapy in
PD-L1-positive recurrent NSCLC. The success of immunotherapy in malignant
melanoma, previously a disease with no effective treatment, has generated
optimism and expectation that some of the checkpoint inhibitors currently in
clinical development will soon become available as first-line therapy and hence
improve outcomes for the vast majority of patients with advanced NSCLC. This
article summarizes the progress accomplished in the field and discusses
controversies surrounding the use of immune checkpoint inhibitors.

DOI: 10.2217/fon-2016-0086 
PMID: 27267211  [PubMed - in process]


67. Clin Cancer Res. 2016 Aug 1;22(15):3713-7. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-15-2998.
Epub 2016 Jun 1.

Nivolumab and Pembrolizumab for Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer.

Morgensztern D(1), Herbst RS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Oncology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis,
Missouri. dmorgens@dom.wustl.edu. (2)Yale Comprehensive Cancer Center, Yale
School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut.

The outcomes for patients with previously treated advanced stage non-small lung
cancer (NSCLC) are very poor, with a modest benefit from chemotherapy over best
supportive care. Immunotherapy offers a novel approach for the treatment of these
patients, with two anti-programmed death 1 (PD-1) checkpoint inhibitors,
nivolumab and pembrolizumab, recently approved by the FDA based on large
randomized clinical trials showing increased overall survival compared with
standard second-line docetaxel. Although only a subset of patients benefit from
these drugs, the treatment is usually well tolerated and the responses are often 
durable, with an unprecedented number of survivors 3 years after starting the
therapy. The next steps should be the identification of reliable predictors for
benefit from immunotherapy with checkpoint inhibitors and the pursuit of
well-designed combination therapies. In this article, we review the rationale for
the use of checkpoint inhibitors in NSCLC, the data from phase I and randomized
clinical trials, and future directions. Clin Cancer Res; 22(15); 3713-7. ©2016
AACR.

©2016 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-15-2998 
PMID: 27252413  [PubMed - in process]


68. Gulf J Oncolog. 2016 May;1(21):84-8.

Novel agents in second-line therapy for EGFR wild-type Advanced Non-Small-Cell
Lung Cancer.

El Amarti L(1,)(2), Elghissassi I(1,)(2), Layachi M(1,)(2), Mrabti H(1,)(2),
Errihani H(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, National Institute of Oncology, Rabat,
Morocco. (2)Faculty of Medicine and Pharmacy, Mohammed V University, Souissi,
Rabat, Morocco.

Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer-related mortality worldwide owing to
its advanced-stage at the time of diagnosis. The majority of patients will
require a second-line therapy after progression during first-line treatment.
While treatment for NSCLC with EGFR mutation or EML4/ALK fusion, target therapy
is the favored second-line therapy if not already used in first-line therapy,
NSCLC with EGFR wild-type remains an unmet need and many oncologists favor
cytotoxic therapy. Recently, a better understanding of lung cancer biology, with 
a better selection of patients based on histology, molecular biology and the
identification of potential target antigens in the immune system have
significantly improved patient outcome. This article will provide an update on
different treatment options available for patients with EGFR wild-type advanced
NSCLC who relapse after first-line therapy, which includes essentially
ramucirumab, vandetanib, nivolumab, and pembrolizumab and considerations that may
allow clinicians to a better choice of agent for second-line therapy.


PMID: 27250896  [PubMed - in process]


69. J Hematol Oncol. 2016 May 27;9(1):47. doi: 10.1186/s13045-016-0277-y.

Current status and perspectives in translational biomarker research for
PD-1/PD-L1 immune checkpoint blockade therapy.

Ma W(1,)(2), Gilligan BM(1), Yuan J(3,)(4), Li T(5,)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology & Oncology, Department of Internal Medicine, University
of California Davis Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of California, Davis,
School of Medicine, 4501 X Street, Suite 3016, Sacramento, CA, 95817, USA.
(2)Former visiting medical student from School of Medicine, Peking University
Health Science Center, No. 38 Xueyuan Road, Beijing, 100191, China. (3)Immune
Monitoring Core, Ludwig Center for Cancer Immunotherapy, Memorial Sloan Kettering
Cancer Center, 1275 York Ave, Box 386, New York, NY10065, USA. (4)Present
address: Oncology Clinical Research, Merck Research Laboratories, Rahway,
NJ07065, USA. (5)Division of Hematology & Oncology, Department of Internal
Medicine, University of California Davis Comprehensive Cancer Center, University 
of California, Davis, School of Medicine, 4501 X Street, Suite 3016, Sacramento, 
CA, 95817, USA. thli@ucdavis.edu. (6)VA Northern California Health Care System,
10535 Hospital Way, Mather, CA, 95655, USA. thli@ucdavis.edu.

Modulating immune inhibitory pathways has been a major recent breakthrough in
cancer treatment. Checkpoint blockade antibodies targeting cytotoxic T-lymphocyte
antigen 4 (CTLA-4) and programed cell-death protein 1 (PD-1) have demonstrated
acceptable toxicity, promising clinical responses, durable disease control, and
improved survival in some patients with advanced melanoma, non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC), and other tumor types. About 20 % of advanced NSCLC patients and 
30 % of advanced melanoma patients experience tumor responses from checkpoint
blockade monotherapy, with better clinical responses seen with the combination of
anti-PD-1 and anti-CTLA-4 antibodies. Given the power of these new therapies, it 
is important to understand the complex and dynamic nature of host immune
responses and the regulation of additional molecules in the tumor
microenvironment and normal organs in response to the checkpoint blockade
therapies. In this era of precision oncology, there remains a largely unmet need 
to identify the patients who are most likely to benefit from immunotherapy, to
optimize the monitoring assays for tumor-specific immune responses, to develop
strategies to improve clinical efficacy, and to identify biomarkers so that
immune-related adverse events can be avoided. At this time, PD-L1
immunohistochemistry (IHC) staining using 22C3 antibody is the only FDA-approved 
companion diagnostic for patients with NSCLC-treated pembrolizumab, but more are 
expected to come to market. We here summarize the current knowledge, clinical
efficacy, potential immune biomarkers, and associated assays for immune
checkpoint blockade therapies in advanced solid tumors.

DOI: 10.1186/s13045-016-0277-y 
PMCID: PMC4884396
PMID: 27234522  [PubMed - in process]


70. Drugs. 2016 Jun;76(9):925-45. doi: 10.1007/s40265-016-0588-x.

Cancer Treatment with Anti-PD-1/PD-L1 Agents: Is PD-L1 Expression a Biomarker for
Patient Selection?

Festino L(1), Botti G(1), Lorigan P(2), Masucci GV(3), Hipp JD(4), Horak CE(4),
Melero I(5), Ascierto PA(6).

Author information: 
(1)Istituto Nazionale Tumori Fondazione "G. Pascale", Via Mariano Semmola, 80131,
Naples, Italy. (2)University of Manchester/The Christie NHS Foundation Trust,
Manchester, UK. (3)Department of Oncology-Pathology, Karolinska Institutet and
Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden. (4)Bristol-Myers Squibb, Princeton, NJ, USA. (5)CIMA
and CUN, University of Navarra, Pamplona, Spain. (6)Istituto Nazionale Tumori
Fondazione "G. Pascale", Via Mariano Semmola, 80131, Naples, Italy.
paolo.ascierto@gmail.com.

Strategies to help improve the efficacy of the immune system against cancer
represent an important innovation, with recent attention having focused on
anti-programmed death (PD)-1/PD-ligand 1 (L1) monoclonal antibodies. Clinical
trials have shown objective clinical activity of these agents (e.g., nivolumab,
pembrolizumab) in several malignancies, including melanoma, non-small-cell lung
cancer, bladder cancer, squamous head and neck cancer, renal cell cancer, ovarian
cancer, microsatellite-unstable colorectal cancer, and Hodgkin's
lymphoma. Expression of PD-L1 in the tumor microenvironment appears to be crucial
for therapeutic activity, and initial trials suggested positive PD-L1 tumor
expression was associated with higher response rates. However, subsequent
observations have questioned the prospect of using PD-L1 expression as a
biomarker for selecting patients for therapy, especially since many patients
considered PD-L1-negative experience a benefit from treatment. Importantly, there
is not yet a definitive test for determination of PD-L1 and a cut-off reference
for PD-L1-positive status has not been established. Immunohistochemistry with
different antibodies and different thresholds has been used to define PD-L1
positivity (1-50 %), with no clear superiority of one threshold over another for 
identifying which patients respond. Moreover, the type of cells on which PD-L1
expression is most relevant is not yet clear, with immune infiltrate cells and
tumor cells both being used. In conclusion, while PD-L1 expression is often a
predictive factor for treatment response, it must be complemented by other
biomarkers or histopathologic features, such as the composition and amount of
inflammatory cells in the tumor microenvironment and their functional status.
Multi-parameter quantitative or semi-quantitative algorithms may become useful
and reliable tools to guide patient selection.

DOI: 10.1007/s40265-016-0588-x 
PMID: 27229745  [PubMed - in process]


71. Clin J Oncol Nurs. 2016 Jun 1;20(3):319-26. doi: 10.1188/16.CJON.319-326.

Programmed Death-1 Inhibition in Cancer With a Focus on Non-Small Cell Lung
Cancer: Rationale, Nursing Implications, and Patient Management Strategies.

[No authors listed]

BACKGROUND: Programmed death-1 (PD-1) immune checkpoint inhibitors are novel
immuno-oncology agents. Unlike chemotherapy or targeted agents, which inhibit
tumor cell proliferation or induce tumor cell death, immune checkpoint inhibitors
are designed to stimulate a patient's own immune system to eliminate tumors. As a
result of their mechanism of action, PD-1 pathway inhibitors are associated with 
adverse events (AEs) with immunologic etiologies, termed immune-mediated AEs
(imAEs). These include skin and gastrointestinal AEs, and endocrine, hepatic,
renal, and respiratory AEs, including pneumonitis. Most imAEs can be effectively 
managed with treatment interruption/discontinuation and/or steroids or other
immunosuppressive agents. A specialist consult may be required in some cases, and
endocrine imAEs may require permanent hormone replacement therapy.
OBJECTIVES: This article provides an overview of PD-1 inhibitors, including the
potential mechanism of action, key clinical trial data, and strategies for
managing patients who may receive PD-1 inhibitors for the treatment of non-small 
cell lung cancer.
METHODS: Information in the article comes from PubMed literature searches and the
author's experience with these agents in clinical trials.
FINDINGS: Oncology clinicians must thoroughly assess baseline functioning and
symptoms and be vigilant for imAEs, which require prompt diagnosis and
management. A good understanding of the clinical profile of PD-1 pathway
inhibitors is instrumental in helping clinicians manage patients receiving these 
new therapies.

DOI: 10.1188/16.CJON.319-326 
PMID: 27206299  [PubMed - in process]


72. Immunotherapy. 2016 Jun;8(6):747-58. doi: 10.2217/imt-2016-0012.

Targeting PD-L1 for non-small-cell lung cancer.

Feld E(1), Horn L(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Vanderbilt-Ingram Cancer Center,
Department of Medicine, Division of Hematology/Oncology, TN, USA. (2)2220 Pierce 
Avenue, 777 Preston Research Building, Nashville, TN 37232, USA.

Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer-related death worldwide. For decades, 
cytotoxic chemotherapy has been the mainstay of treatment for the majority of
patients, yet median survival remains poor and side effects from chemotherapy are
not trivial. Immune checkpoint inhibitors, which exert antitumor effects by
inhibiting negative T-cell regulators, are changing the landscape of treatment
options for patients with non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC). The anti-PD-1
antibodies nivolumab and pembrolizumab are approved by the US FDA for treatment
of patients with NSCLC and other tumor types. Additional agents are in clinical
development. This review provides an update on the PD-1 and PD-L1 immune
checkpoint inhibitors currently being evaluated in NSCLC patients.

DOI: 10.2217/imt-2016-0012 
PMID: 27197542  [PubMed - in process]


73. Histopathology. 2016 Aug;69(2):177-86. doi: 10.1111/his.12996. Epub 2016 Jun 30.

PD-L1 testing for lung cancer in the UK: recognizing the challenges for
implementation.

Cree IA(1), Booton R(2), Cane P(3), Gosney J(4), Ibrahim M(5), Kerr K(6), Lal
R(7), Lewanski C(8), Navani N(9), Nicholson AG(10), Nicolson M(11), Summers
Y(12).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University Hospitals Coventry and Warwickshire NHS
Trust, Coventry, UK. (2)Respiratory and Allergy Research Group, Institute of
Inflammation & Repair, North West Lung Centre, University of Manchester,
University Hospital of South Manchester NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester, UK.
(3)Department of Histopathology, Guy's and St Thomas' NHS Foundation Trust,
London, UK. (4)Department of Pathology, Royal Liverpool and Broadgreen University
Hospitals NHS Trust, Liverpool, UK. (5)UK National External Quality Assessment
Service for Immunocytochemistry and In Situ Hybridisation, London, UK.
(6)Department of Pathology, Aberdeen Royal Infirmary/Aberdeen University Medical 
School, Aberdeen, UK. (7)Guy's and St Thomas' NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK.
(8)Oncology Department, Charing Cross Hospital, Imperial College Healthcare NHS
Trust, London, UK. (9)Lungs for Living Research Centre, UCL Respiratory,
University College London Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK. (10)Royal
Brompton and Harefield Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust and National Heart and Lung
Division, Imperial College, London, UK. (11)Department of Oncology, NHS Grampian,
Aberdeen Royal Infirmary, Aberdeen, UK. (12)The Christie Hospital NHS Foundation 
Trust, Manchester, UK.

Erratum in
    Histopathology. 2017 Jan;70(2):318.

A new approach to the management of non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) has
recently emerged that works by manipulating the immune checkpoint controlled by
programmed death receptor 1 (PD-1) and its ligand programmed death ligand 1
(PD-L1). Several drugs targeting PD-1 (pembrolizumab and nivolumab) or PD-L1
(atezolizumab, durvalumab, and avelumab) have been approved or are in the late
stages of development. Inevitably, the introduction of these drugs will put
pressure on healthcare systems, and there is a need to stratify patients to
identify those who are most likely to benefit from such treatment. There is
evidence that responsiveness to PD-1 inhibitors may be predicted by expression of
PD-L1 on neoplastic cells. Hence, there is considerable interest in using PD-L1
immunohistochemical staining to guide the use of PD-1-targeted treatments in
patients with NSCLC. This article reviews the current knowledge about PD-L1
testing, and identifies current research requirements. Key factors to consider
include the source and timing of sample collection, pre-analytical steps (sample 
tracking, fixation, tissue processing, sectioning, and tissue prioritization),
analytical decisions (choice of biomarker assay/kit and automated staining
platform, with verification of standardized assays or validation of
laboratory-devised techniques, internal and external quality assurance, and
audit), and reporting and interpretation of the results. This review addresses
the need for integration of PD-L1 immunohistochemistry with other tests as part
of locally agreed pathways and protocols. There remain areas of uncertainty, and 
guidance should be updated regularly as new information becomes available.

© 2016 The Authors. Histopathology published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/his.12996 
PMID: 27196116  [PubMed - in process]


74. Oncotarget. 2016 Aug 30;7(35):56233-56240. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.9316.

Expression of PD-1 on CD4+ T cells in peripheral blood associates with poor
clinical outcome in non-small cell lung cancer.

Zheng H(1), Liu X(1), Zhang J(1), Rice SJ(1), Wagman M(1), Kong Y(2), Zhu L(2),
Zhu J(1), Joshi M(1), Belani CP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Penn State Hershey Cancer Institute, Penn State College of Medicine, Hershey, 
PA, USA. (2)Institute of Infectious Diseases, Beijing Ditan Hospital, Capital
Medical University, Beijing Key Laboratory of Emerging Infectious Diseases,
Beijing, China.

Recent success of using agents inhibiting the major immune check point,
programmed cell death-1 (PD-1) pathway, offers a great promise for effective
cancer therapy. Two blocking antibodies for PD-1, nivolumab and pembrolizumab
have recently been approved for treating advanced recurrent non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC). Activation of PD-1 on T cells and PD-L1 on tumor cells or antigen
presenting cells leads to T cell exhaustion and ultimately tumor growth. In this 
study, we performed flow cytometry analysis of peripheral blood samples collected
from patients with advanced NSCLC at initial diagnosis. We report that surface
expression of PD-1 on CD4+ T cells has a prognostic value in NSCLC patients, as
high expression of PD-1 is associated with a shorter progression-free survival
and overall survival. Importantly, we also found that high PD-1 expression on
peripheral CD4+ T cells is associated with inferior clinical response in a subset
of patients who received anti-PD-L1 treatment, indicating a potential predictive 
value of this marker. This work highlights the potential of a non-invasive and
effective method to determine prognostic and predictive biomarkers for inhibiting
the PD-1 pathway in NSCLC patients.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.9316 
PMCID: PMC5302910
PMID: 27191652  [PubMed - in process]


75. Urologe A. 2016 May;55(5):621-6. doi: 10.1007/s00120-016-0107-4.

[Renaissance of immuno-oncology for urological tumors : Current status].

[Article in German]

Grimm MO(1), Winkler Y(2), Fetter I(2), Oppel-Heuchel H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Urologische Klinik und Poliklinik, Universitätsklinikum Jena, Lessingstraße 1,
07749, Jena, Deutschland. marc-oliver.grimm@med.uni-jena.de. (2)Urologische
Klinik und Poliklinik, Universitätsklinikum Jena, Lessingstraße 1, 07749, Jena,
Deutschland.

With the advent of immune checkpoint inhibitors, immunotherapy has gained new
importance in oncology. Current research is focused on the cytotoxic T‑lymphocyte
antigen 4 (CTLA4), programmed cell death 1 (PD-1) and programmed death ligand 1
(PD-L1) immune checkpoints. The CTLA4 antibody ipilimumab (melanoma) as well as
the PD-1 antibodies nivolumab (melanoma, non-small cell lung cancer and renal
cell carcinoma) and pembrolizumab (melanoma) are approved for the treatment of
metastatic disease in Europe. Immune checkpoint inhibitors (re)activate the
immune system against cancer cells and appear to be more effective than current
standards for many tumors. The toxicity profile is favorable but involves new
so-called immune-related side effects, which need to be recognized and treated in
time. Immune checkpoint inhibitors are also currently being tested in
uro-oncology in phase 3 trials relevant for approval status. Based on this it is 
to be expected that immune checkpoint inhibitors will become a new standard (as
monotherapy or as part of combination therapy) in the early lines of therapy in
the near future and replace the previous standard therapies, particularly for
metastasized renal cell carcinoma and urothelial cancer.

DOI: 10.1007/s00120-016-0107-4 
PMID: 27119960  [PubMed - in process]


76. Ann Oncol. 2016 Jul;27(7):1291-8. doi: 10.1093/annonc/mdw174. Epub 2016 Apr 26.

Systematic evaluation of pembrolizumab dosing in patients with advanced
non-small-cell lung cancer.

Chatterjee M(1), Turner DC(1), Felip E(2), Lena H(3), Cappuzzo F(4), Horn L(5),
Garon EB(6), Hui R(7), Arkenau HT(8), Gubens MA(9), Hellmann MD(10), Dong D(1),
Li C(1), Mayawala K(1), Freshwater T(1), Ahamadi M(1), Stone J(1), Lubiniecki
GM(11), Zhang J(12), Im E(11), De Alwis DP(1), Kondic AG(1), Fløtten Ø(13).

Author information: 
(1)Quantitative Pharmacology and Pharmacometrics, Merck & Co., Inc., Kenilworth, 
USA. (2)Thoracic Tumors Group, Vall d'Hebron University Hospital, Barcelona,
Spain. (3)Pneumonology Service, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Rennes, Rennes, 
France. (4)Department of Medical Oncology, Istituto Toscano Tumori, Ospedale
Civile, Livorno, Italy. (5)Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt Ingram Cancer
Center, Nashville, USA. (6)Department of Medicine, David Geffen School of
Medicine at the University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, USA.
(7)Department of Medical Oncology, Westmead Hospital and the University of
Sydney, Sydney, Australia. (8)Department of Medical Oncology, Sarah Cannon
Research Institute UK and University College London, London, UK. (9)Department of
Medicine, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco. (10)Department 
of Medicine, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center and Weill Cornell Medical
College, New York. (11)Oncology Clinical Research, Merck & Co., Inc., Kenilworth.
(12)Biostatistics and Research Design Sciences, Merck & Co., Inc., Kenilworth,
USA. (13)Department of Thoracic Medicine, Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, 
Norway oystein.flotten@helse-bergen.no.

BACKGROUND: In the phase I KEYNOTE-001 study, pembrolizumab demonstrated durable 
antitumor activity in patients with advanced non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC). 
We sought to characterize the relationship between pembrolizumab dose, exposure, 
and response to define an effective dose for these patients.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Patients received pembrolizumab 2 mg/kg every 3 weeks (Q3W)
(n = 55), 10 mg/kg Q3W (n = 238), or 10 mg/kg Q2W (n = 156). Response (RECIST
v1.1) was assessed every 9 weeks. The relationship between the estimated
pembrolizumab area under the concentration-time curve at steady state over 6
weeks (AUCss-6weeks) and the longitudinal change in tumor size (sum of longest
diameters) was analyzed by regression and non-linear mixed effects modeling. This
model was simultaneously fit to all tumor size data, then used to simulate
response rates, normalizing the trial data across dose for prognostic covariates 
(tumor PD-L1 expression and EGFR mutation status). The exposure-safety
relationship was assessed by logistic regression of pembrolizumab AUCss-6weeks
versus occurrence of adverse events (AEs) of interest based on their immune
etiology.
RESULTS: Overall response rates were 15% [95% confidence interval (CI) 7%-28%] at
2 mg/kg Q3W, 25% (18%-33%) at 10 mg/kg Q3W, and 21% (95% CI 14%-30%) at 10 mg/kg 
Q2W. Regression analyses of percentage change from baseline in tumor size versus 
AUCss-6weeks indicated a flat relationship (regression slope P > 0.05).
Simulations showed the exposure-response relationship to be similarly flat, thus 
indicating that the lowest evaluated dose of 2 mg/kg Q3W to likely be at or near 
the efficacy plateau. Exposure-safety analysis showed the AE incidence to be
similar among the clinically tested doses.
CONCLUSIONS: No significant exposure dependency on efficacy or safety was
identified for pembrolizumab across doses of 2-10 mg/kg. These results support
the use of a 2 mg/kg Q3W dosage in patients with previously treated, advanced
NSCLC.
CLINICALTRIALSGOV REGISTRY: NCT01295827.

© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the European
Society for Medical Oncology. All rights reserved. For permissions, please email:
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/annonc/mdw174 
PMID: 27117531  [PubMed - in process]


77. Am J Kidney Dis. 2016 Aug;68(2):287-91. doi: 10.1053/j.ajkd.2016.02.057. Epub
2016 Apr 22.

Association of Acute Interstitial Nephritis With Programmed Cell Death 1
Inhibitor Therapy in Lung Cancer Patients.

Shirali AC(1), Perazella MA(2), Gettinger S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Section of Nephrology, Department of Internal Medicine, Yale University School
of Medicine, New Haven, CT. Electronic address: anushree.shirali@yale.edu.
(2)Section of Nephrology, Department of Internal Medicine, Yale University School
of Medicine, New Haven, CT. (3)Section of Oncology, Department of Internal
Medicine, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT.

Immune checkpoint inhibitors that target the programmed death 1 (PD-1) signaling 
pathway have recently been approved for use in advanced pretreated non-small cell
lung cancer and melanoma. Clinical trial data suggest that these drugs may have
adverse effects on the kidney, but these effects have not been well described. We
present 6 cases of acute kidney injury in patients with lung cancer who received 
anti-PD-1 antibodies, with each case displaying evidence of acute interstitial
nephritis (AIN) on kidney biopsy. All patients were also treated with other drugs
(proton pump inhibitors and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs) linked to AIN, 
but in most cases, use of these drugs long preceded PD-1 inhibitor therapy. The
association of AIN with these drugs in our patients raises the possibility that
PD-1 inhibitor therapy may release suppression of T-cell immunity that normally
permits renal tolerance of drugs known to be associated with AIN.

Copyright © 2016 National Kidney Foundation, Inc. Published by Elsevier Inc. All 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1053/j.ajkd.2016.02.057 
PMID: 27113507  [PubMed - in process]


78. Recenti Prog Med. 2016 Apr;107(4):186-92. doi: 10.1701/2218.23930.

[Immunotherapy in non-small cell lung cancer: evolution of knowledge and clinical
advances].

[Article in Italian]

Pochesci A(1), Passaro A(2), Catania C(2), Noberasco C(2), Del Signore E(2),
Spitaleri G(2), De Marinis F(2).

Author information: 
(1)Divisione di Oncologia Toracica, Istituto Europeo di Oncologia, Milano -
Divisione di Oncologia Medica, Sapienza Università di Roma. (2)Divisione di
Oncologia Toracica, Istituto Europeo di Oncologia, Milano.

Lung cancer represent the leading cause of cancer related-death worldwide.
Although cytotoxic chemotherapy and targeted agents improved survival, the median
overall survival for patients with metastatic disease remains poor. Docetaxel is 
still the corner stone of the second-line treatment, although associated with an 
unfavourable safety profile. Recent advances in the understanding of cancer
immune escape system lead to the development of novel immunotherapies agent that 
can restore patient's immune response to cancer cells. Unlike vaccines, immune
checkpoints inhibitors have shown promising results in non-small cell lung cancer
patients. Especially, nivolumab and pembrolizumab, monoclonal antibodies against 
PD-1, provides as single agent therapy in chemotherapy refractory patients
objective response rates ranging from 15%-25%, the majority of which arose
quickly and were ongoing 1 year after starting treatment. Furthermore, the
toxicity profile differs from that of cytotoxic chemotherapy and is much better
tolerated. PD-L1 expression is a promising biomarker for selection and
stratification of patients, although its prognostic and predictive role remains
to be defined. Several trials are currently ongoing to define the role of immune 
checkpoint inhibitors in the treatment of patients with non-small cell lung
cancer, their combination with cytotoxic chemotherapy or targeted agents and the 
efficacy and safety of double blockage of PD-1/PD-L1 and CTLA4. We report a
review based on a MEDLINE/PubMed, searched for randomized phase II or III trials 
evaluating immune checkpoint inhibitors and NSCLC, considering the measured
outcomes as progression free survival (PFS), overall survival (OS), and the
overall response rate (ORR).

DOI: 10.1701/2218.23930 
PMID: 27093328  [PubMed - in process]


79. Clin Pharmacol Ther. 2016 Sep;100(3):212-4. doi: 10.1002/cpt.385. Epub 2016 Jun
3.

The clinical utility of PD-L1 testing in selecting non-small cell lung cancer
patients for PD1/PD-L1-directed therapy.

Villaruz LC(1), Socinski MA(1).

Author information: 
(1)University of Pittsburgh Cancer Institute, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA.

Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer mortality in the United States and
worldwide. Long thought to be nonimmunogenic, immunotherapy in lung cancer has
historically been met with disappointing results. Programmed death-1 (PD-1), and 
the PD-1 ligand, PD-L1, are immune checkpoint proteins that fine-tune the
antigen-specific T-cell response after stimulation of the T-cell receptor and are
crucial for self-tolerance. This pathway in particular is co-opted by tumors
through expression of PD-L1 on the tumor cell surface and within the tumor
microenvironment, allowing for direct suppression of antitumor cytolytic T-cell
activity by the tumor. Indeed, induction of the PD1/PD-L1 pathway represents an
adaptive immune resistance mechanism exerted by tumor cells in response to
endogenous antitumor activity. In 2015, the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA)
approved two immuno-oncology agents, the PD-1 inhibitors nivolumab and
pembrolizumab, for the treatment of previously treated advanced non-small cell
lung cancer (NSCLC). Coincident with the clinical trials that led to these
regulatory approvals has been the development of several immunohistochemistry
(IHC) tests of PD-L1 expression, which may serve to select patients who will
derive the most benefit from PD1- or PD-L1-directed therapy. The PD-L1 IHC assays
are distinct in their methods and interpretation, which poses a challenge to
clinicians selecting patients for these therapies.

© 2016 ASCPT.

DOI: 10.1002/cpt.385 
PMCID: PMC4982801
PMID: 27090296  [PubMed - in process]


80. Clin Adv Hematol Oncol. 2015 Dec;13(12):858-68.

Programmed death 1 immune checkpoint inhibitors.

Trivedi MS(1), Hoffner B(2), Winkelmann JL(1), Abbott ME(1), Hamid O(2), Carvajal
RD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Columbia University Medical Center, New York, New York. (2)The Angeles Clinic 
and Research Institute, Los Angeles, California.

Programmed death 1 (PD-1) is an immune checkpoint that provides inhibitory
signals to the immune system in order to modulate the activity of T cells in
peripheral tissues and maintain self-tolerance in the setting of infection and
inflammation. In cancer, the immune checkpoints are exploited so that the tumor
cells are able to evade the immune system. Immune checkpoint inhibitors are a
type of cancer immunotherapy that targets pathways such as PD-1 in order to
reinvigorate and enhance the immune response against tumor cells. The US Food and
Drug Administration (FDA) has approved 2 PD-1 inhibitors, nivolumab and
pembrolizumab, and several others are under investigation. Although PD-1
inhibitors have demonstrated activity in many different types of malignancies,
FDA approval has been granted only in melanoma and in non-small cell lung cancer 
(NSCLC). Identifying biomarkers that can predict response to PD-1 inhibitors is
critical to maximizing the benefit of these agents. Future directions for PD-1
inhibitors include investigation of combination therapies, use in malignancies
other than melanoma and NSCLC, and refinement of biomarkers.


PMID: 27058852  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Oncologist. 2016 May;21(5):643-50. doi: 10.1634/theoncologist.2015-0498. Epub
2016 Mar 29.

FDA Approval Summary: Pembrolizumab for the Treatment of Patients With Metastatic
Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer Whose Tumors Express Programmed Death-Ligand 1.

Sul J(1), Blumenthal GM(2), Jiang X(2), He K(2), Keegan P(2), Pazdur R(2).

Author information: 
(1)Office of Hematology and Oncology Products, Center for Drug Evaluation and
Research, U.S. Food and Drug Administration, Silver Spring, Maryland, USA
joohee.sul@fda.hhs.gov. (2)Office of Hematology and Oncology Products, Center for
Drug Evaluation and Research, U.S. Food and Drug Administration, Silver Spring,
Maryland, USA.

: On October 2, 2015, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) granted
accelerated approval for pembrolizumab, a breakthrough therapy-designated drug,
for the treatment of patients with metastatic non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) 
whose tumors express programmed death-ligand 1 (PD-L1), as determined by an
FDA-approved test, and who have disease progression on or after
platinum-containing chemotherapy or targeted therapy against anaplastic lymphoma 
kinase or epidermal growth factor receptor, if appropriate. This indication was
approved concurrently with the PD-L1 immunohistochemistry 22C3 pharmDx, a
companion diagnostic test for patient selection based on PD-L1 tumor expression. 
The accelerated approval was granted based on durable objective response rate
(ORR) and an acceptable toxicity profile demonstrated in a multicenter,
open-label trial enrolling 550 patients with metastatic NSCLC. The efficacy
population comprised 61 patients with tumors identified as strongly positive for 
PD-L1, and the confirmed ORR as determined by blinded independent central review 
was 41% (95% confidence interval: 28.6%, 54.3%); all were partial responses. At
the time of the analysis, responses were ongoing in 21 of 25 patients (84%), with
11 patients (44%) having response duration of ≥6 months. The most commonly
occurring (≥20%) adverse reactions included fatigue, decreased appetite, dyspnea,
and cough. The most frequent (≥2%) serious adverse drug reactions were pleural
effusion, pneumonia, dyspnea, pulmonary embolism, and pneumonitis.
Immune-mediated adverse reactions occurred in 13% of patients and included
pneumonitis, colitis, hypophysitis, and thyroid disorders. The accelerated
approval regulations describe approval of drugs and biologic products for serious
and life-threatening illnesses based on a surrogate endpoint likely to predict
clinical benefit. Under these regulations, a confirmatory trial or trials is
required to verify and describe the benefit of pembrolizumab for patients with
metastatic NSCLC.IMPLICATIONS FOR PRACTICE: This report presents key information 
on the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) accelerated approval of
pembrolizumab for the treatment of patients with metastatic non-small cell lung
cancer whose tumors express programmed death-ligand 1, as determined by an
FDA-approved test, and who have disease progression on or after
platinum-containing chemotherapy or targeted therapy against anaplastic lymphoma 
kinase or epidermal growth factor receptor, if appropriate. The report discusses 
the data supporting the approval decision, specifically highlighting the
incorporation of a companion diagnostic in the key study and the optimal dose of 
pembrolizumab.

©AlphaMed Press.

DOI: 10.1634/theoncologist.2015-0498 
PMCID: PMC4861368
PMID: 27026676  [PubMed - in process]


82. Future Oncol. 2016 May;12(9):1151-63. doi: 10.2217/fon.16.20. Epub 2016 Mar 29.

Immune checkpoint inhibitors in lung cancer: past, present and future.

Seetharamu N(1), Budman DR(1), Sullivan KM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Monter Cancer Center, Northwell Health, Lake Success, NY 11042, USA.

Inhibitory ligands on tumor cells and their corresponding receptors on T cells
are collectively called immune checkpoint molecules and have emerged as druggable
targets that harness endogenous immunity to fight cancer. Immune checkpoint
inhibitors targeting CTLA-4, PD-1 and PD-L1 have been developed for the treatment
of patients with non-small-cell lung cancer and other malignancies, with
impressive clinical activity, durable responses and a favorable toxicity profile.
This article reviews the development, current status and future directions for
some of these agents. The efficacy and safety data for drugs such as ipilimumab, 
nivolumab, pembrolizumab, atezolizumab and durvalumab are reviewed, along with
combination strategies and response evaluation criteria. The toxicity profiles
and predictive biomarkers of response are also discussed.

DOI: 10.2217/fon.16.20 
PMID: 27019997  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Invest New Drugs. 2016 Jun;34(3):347-54. doi: 10.1007/s10637-016-0347-6. Epub
2016 Mar 22.

Phase 1 study of pembrolizumab (MK-3475; anti-PD-1 monoclonal antibody) in
Japanese patients with advanced solid tumors.

Shimizu T(1), Seto T(2), Hirai F(2), Takenoyama M(2), Nosaki K(2), Tsurutani
J(3), Kaneda H(3), Iwasa T(3), Kawakami H(3), Noguchi K(4), Shimamoto T(4),
Nakagawa K(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Kindai University Faculty of Medicine, 377-2
Ohno-higashi, Osaka-sayama, Osaka, 589-8511, Japan. jcog9511@hotmail.co.jp.
(2)Department of Thoracic Oncology, National Kyushu Cancer Center, 3-1-1 Notame, 
Minami-ku, Fukuoka, 811-1395, Japan. (3)Department of Medical Oncology, Kindai
University Faculty of Medicine, 377-2 Ohno-higashi, Osaka-sayama, Osaka,
589-8511, Japan. (4)MSD K.K., Kitanomaru square, 1-13-12 Kudan-kita, Chiyoda-ku, 
Tokyo, 102-8667, Japan.

Background This phase I study evaluated the safety and tolerability,
pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics, immunogenicity, and antitumor activity of 
pembrolizumab in Japanese patients with advanced solid tumors. Methods Following 
an initial dose and a 28-day rest (cycle 1), pembrolizumab was administered as an
intravenous infusion at escalating doses (2 or 10 mg/kg) every 2 weeks (Q2W)
until disease progression or unacceptable toxicity. Adverse events (AEs) were
assessed using CTCAE v4.0, and tumor response was assessed using both RECIST v1.1
and immune-related response criteria (irRC). Full pharmacokinetic sampling was
performed during cycle 1. Results Three patients received pembrolizumab at
2.0 mg/kg and seven at 10 mg/kg. No dose-limiting toxicities were observed during
cycle 1. Eighty percent of patients experienced drug-related AEs (mostly grade 1 
or 2); the most common drug-related AEs were nausea, malaise, pyrexia, and
aspartate aminotransferase/alanine transaminase (AST/ALT) elevations (n = 2
each). No drug-related grade 4 or 5 AEs occurred. Immune-related AEs comprised
grade 3 ALT elevation (n = 1), grade 3 AST elevation (n = 1), grade 1 pneumonitis
(n = 1), and grade 1 thyroid-stimulating hormone elevation (n = 1). The safety
and pharmacokinetic profiles of Japanese patients were similar to those
previously reported for Caucasian patients. A partial tumor response was observed
in one patient with non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and in one patient with
melanoma. Conclusions Pembrolizumab at both 2 and 10 mg/kg Q2W was well tolerated
in Japanese patients with advanced solid tumors and showed encouraging anti-tumor
activity against melanoma and NSCLC.

DOI: 10.1007/s10637-016-0347-6 
PMCID: PMC4859860
PMID: 27000274  [PubMed - in process]


84. Immunotherapy. 2016;8(4):479-88. doi: 10.2217/imt-2015-0002.

The role of PD-L1 expression as a predictive biomarker in advanced non-small-cell
lung cancer: a network meta-analysis.

Aguiar PN Jr(1), Santoro IL(1), Tadokoro H(1), de Lima Lopes G(2,)(3), Filardi
BA(1), Oliveira P(4), Mountzios G(5), de Mello RA(6,)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Oncology, Federal University of São Paulo, São Paulo,
Brazil. (2)Oncoclínicas do Brasil group, São Paulo, Brazil. (3)Department of
Medical Oncology, Johns Hopkins University, Singapore. (4)Department of
Population Studies, Abel Salazar Biomedical Institute, University of Porto,
Porto, Portugal. (5)Department of Medical Oncology, University of Athens School
of Medicine, Athens, Greece. (6)Department of Biomedical Sciences & Medicine,
University of Algarve, Faro, Portugal. (7)Faculty of Medicine, University of
Porto, Porto, Portugal.

BACKGROUND: Tumor programmed death ligand one (PD-L1) expression has been studied
in several trials in non-small-cell lung cancer.
METHODS: We assessed the potential role of PD-L1 expression according to Cochrane
Collaboration's Guidelines.
RESULTS: 13 studies with 1979 patients were included. Among 915 PD-L1 negative
patients this rate was 13% (RR 2.08; 95% CI: 1.49-2.91; p < 0.01). The response
rate has increased concurrent to the PD-L1 expression (Pearson's correlation, r =
0.43). PD-L1 expression was also related to better 24-weeks progression-free rate
(RR 0.79; 95% CI: 0.71-0.89) and a trend toward better 1-year overall survival
rate (RR 0.96; 95% CI: 0.87-1.06).
CONCLUSION: Taking this data in account, PD-L1 overexpression could not be
currently considered a robust biomarker to tailor the immune checkpoint
inhibitors treatment.

DOI: 10.2217/imt-2015-0002 
PMID: 26973128  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Crit Rev Oncol Hematol. 2016 May;101:75-85. doi:
10.1016/j.critrevonc.2016.03.007. Epub 2016 Mar 6.

Correlation between PD-L1 expression and outcome of NSCLC patients treated with
anti-PD-1/PD-L1 agents: A meta-analysis.

Abdel-Rahman O(1).

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Oncology Department, Faculty of Medicine, Ain Shams University, Lotfy
Elsayed Street, 11331 Cairo, Egypt. Electronic address:
omar.abdelrhman@med.asu.edu.eg.

BACKGROUND: A meta analysis of the correlation between PD-L1 levels and outcomes 
of PD-1/PD-L1 inhibitors in advanced non small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) has been 
performed.
METHODS: Eligible studies included those evaluating PD-1/PD-L1 inhibitors in
advanced NSCLC and correlating the outcomes to PD-L1 levels.
RESULTS: The search strategy yielded 250 potentially relevant citations from
searched databases. After preclusion of ineligible studies, 12 studies were
included. Comparing PD-1/PD-L1 inhibitors to docetaxel in second line treatment, 
the pooled hazard ratio (HR) for progression free survival (PFS) and overall
survival (OS) was 0.75 (95% CI 0.62-0.90; p=0.002) and 0.61 (95% CI 0.50-75;
p=0.00001) respectively; while the pooled odds ratio (OR) for objective response 
rate (ORR) was 1.98 (95% CI 1.28-3.07; p=0.002) in the PD-L1>1% population.
Moreover, for PD-L1>1% patients versus PD-L1<1% patients treated with PD-1/PD-L1 
targeted agents, the OR of ORR was 2.18 (95% CI 1.45-3.29; p=0.0002); while for
PD-L1>5% patients versus PD-L1<5% patients, it was 2.66 (95% CI 1.74-4.07;
p<0.00001); and for PD-L1>10% versus PD-L1<10% patients, it was 3.38 (95% CI
2.23-5.13; p<0.00001); and for PD-L1>50% versus PD-L1<50% patients, it was 3.99
(95% CI 2.81-5.66; p<0.00001).
CONCLUSIONS: The current analysis of data indicates that the benefit from PD-1
inhibitors versus docetaxel in second line treatment of NSCLC is limited to the
PD-L1>1% subpopulation. Moreover, a possible dose effect relationship between the
intensity of PD-L1 staining and the potential benefit from PD-1/PD-L1 targeted
agents does exist with higher intensity associated with higher ORR.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.critrevonc.2016.03.007 
PMID: 26969107  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. J Natl Compr Canc Netw. 2016 Mar;14(3):255-64.

NCCN Guidelines Insights: Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer, Version 4.2016.

Ettinger DS(1), Wood DE(1), Akerley W(1), Bazhenova LA(1), Borghaei H(1), Camidge
DR(1), Cheney RT(1), Chirieac LR(1), D'Amico TA(1), Dilling TJ(1), Dobelbower
MC(1), Govindan R(1), Hennon M(1), Horn L(1), Jahan TM(1), Komaki R(1), Lackner
RP(1), Lanuti M(1), Lilenbaum R(1), Lin J(1), Loo BW Jr(1), Martins R(1),
Otterson GA(1), Patel JD(1), Pisters KM(1), Reckamp K(1), Riely GJ(1), Schild
SE(1), Shapiro TA(1), Sharma N(1), Stevenson J(1), Swanson SJ(1), Tauer K(1),
Yang SC(1), Gregory K(1), Hughes M(1).

Author information: 
(1)From The Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center at Johns Hopkins;
University of Washington/Seattle Cancer Care Alliance; Huntsman Cancer Institute 
at the University of Utah; UC San Diego Moores Cancer Center; Fox Chase Cancer
Center; University of Colorado Cancer Center; Roswell Park Cancer Institute;
Dana-Farber/Brigham and Women's Cancer Center; Duke Cancer Institute; Moffitt
Cancer Center; University of Alabama at Birmingham Comprehensive Cancer Center;
Siteman Cancer Center at Barnes-Jewish Hospital and Washington University School 
of Medicine; Vanderbilt-Ingram Cancer Center; UCSF Helen Diller Family
Comprehensive Cancer Center; The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center;
Fred & Pamela Buffett Cancer Center; Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer
Center; Yale Cancer Center/Smilow Cancer Hospital; University of Michigan
Comprehensive Cancer Center; Stanford Cancer Institute; The Ohio State University
Comprehensive Cancer Center-James Cancer Hospital and Solove Research Institute; 
Robert H. Lurie Comprehensive Cancer Center of Northwestern University; City of
Hope Comprehensive Cancer Center; Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center; Mayo
Clinic Cancer Center; Case Comprehensive Cancer Center/University Hospitals
Seidman Cancer Center and Cleveland Clinic Taussig Cancer Institute; St. Jude
Children's Research Hospital/The University of Tennessee Health Science Center;
and National Comprehensive Cancer Network.

These NCCN Guidelines Insights focus on recent updates in the 2016 NCCN
Guidelines for Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer (NSCLC; Versions 1-4). These NCCN
Guidelines Insights will discuss new immunotherapeutic agents, such as nivolumab 
and pembrolizumab, for patients with metastatic NSCLC. For the 2016 update, the
NCCN panel recommends immune checkpoint inhibitors as preferred agents (in the
absence of contraindications) for second-line and beyond (subsequent) therapy in 
patients with metastatic NSCLC (both squamous and nonsquamous histologies).
Nivolumab and pembrolizumab are preferred based on improved overall survival
rates, higher response rates, longer duration of response, and fewer adverse
events when compared with docetaxel therapy.

Copyright © 2016 by the National Comprehensive Cancer Network.


PMID: 26957612  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Target Oncol. 2016 Aug;11(4):553-6. doi: 10.1007/s11523-016-0426-9.

Severe Hyponatremia and Immune Nephritis Following an Initial Infusion of
Nivolumab.

Vandiver JW(1,)(2), Singer Z(3), Harshberger C(4).

Author information: 
(1)University of Wyoming School of Pharmacy, Health Sciences Center, Room 292,
1000 E. University Ave., Dept. 3375, Laramie, WY, 82071, USA. jvandive@uwyo.edu. 
(2)Swedish Family Medicine Residency Program, Littleton, CO, USA.
jvandive@uwyo.edu. (3)Swedish Family Medicine Residency Program, Littleton, CO,
USA. (4)University of Wyoming School of Pharmacy, Health Sciences Center, Room
292, 1000 E. University Ave., Dept. 3375, Laramie, WY, 82071, USA.

Anti-programmed cell death-1 (PD-1) antibodies pembrolizumab and nivolumab are
becoming increasingly important in the treatment of melanoma and non-small cell
lung cancer. These agents are known to induce many immune-related adverse events,
but rapid-onset nephritis and immune-related hyponatremia have not been described
to date. We describe the case of an adult patient who developed severe
hyponatremia and rapid-onset nephritis following the first infusion of nivolumab 
for metastatic melanoma.

DOI: 10.1007/s11523-016-0426-9 
PMID: 26940583  [PubMed - in process]


88. Immunotherapy. 2016;8(3):279-98. doi: 10.2217/imt.15.123. Epub 2016 Feb 9.

Immune checkpoint therapy for non-small-cell lung cancer: an update.

Xia B(1), Herbst RS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Yale Comprehensive Cancer Center, Yale School of Medicine, 333 Cedar Street
WWW221, New Haven, CT 06520, USA.

The role of immunotherapy in treatment of non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) has 
been gaining interest over the past few years. This has been driven primarily by 
promising results from trials evaluating antagonist antibodies that target
co-inhibitory immune checkpoints expressed on tumor cells and immune cells within
the tumor microenvironment. Immune checkpoints exist to dampen or terminate
immune activity to guard against autoimmunity and allow for self-tolerance.
However, tumors can take advantage of these immune checkpoint pathways to evade
destruction. Antibodies that block inhibitory checkpoints, such as anti-CTLA-4,
anti-PD1 and anti-PD-L1 antibodies have demonstrated delayed tumor growth and
increased survival. Novel therapies are now investigating combining checkpoint
inhibitors with chemotherapy, targeted therapy, radiation and vaccines to produce
synergistic antitumor activity.

DOI: 10.2217/imt.15.123 
PMID: 26860624  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Zhonghua Wei Chang Wai Ke Za Zhi. 2016 Feb;19(2):225-32.

[Progression of immunotherapy in gastric cancer].

[Article in Chinese]

Wei X, Xu R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center, State
Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Collaborative Innovation Center for
Cancer Medicine, Guangzhou 510060, China. xurh@sysucc.org.cn.

Gastric cancer is a malignant disease with high incidence and mortality. The
therapeutic methods for advanced gastric cancer, including chemotherapy and
targeted therapy are very limited. Immunotherapy is a new method for cancer
treatment. The immune checkpoint inhibitors developed for cancer treatment mainly
target the CTLA-4 and PD-1/PD-L pathways. There have already been several
inhibitors approved for the treatment of melanoma and non-small cell lung cancer 
by the FDA, including Ipilimumab (fully human antibody against CTLA-4),
Pembrolizumab (fully human antibody against PD-1) and Nivolumab (fully human
antibody against PD-1). There are also many on-going clinical trials
investigating the value of immune checkpoint inhibitors in treating various
malignancies, including advanced gastric cancer. In KEYNOTE-012 trial, for
advanced gastric and esophagogastric junction cancer anti-PD-1 therapy seemed to 
be safe and effective for advanced gastric cancer with PD-L1 positivity.
Moreover, studies of adoptive cell therapy and tumor vaccine in gastric cancer
are underway. Here the latest developments in immunotherapy for gastric cancer
will be illustrated.


PMID: 26831889  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Pharmacotherapy. 2016 Mar;36(3):317-34. doi: 10.1002/phar.1714.

PD-1 Pathway Inhibitors: Immuno-Oncology Agents for Restoring Antitumor Immune
Responses.

Medina PJ(1), Adams VR(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy: Clinical and Administrative Sciences, The University
of Oklahoma College of Pharmacy, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma. (2)Pharmacy Practice
and Science Department, University of Kentucky College of Pharmacy, Lexington,
Kentucky.

Immune checkpoint inhibitors are designed to restore a patient's own antitumor
immune response that has been suppressed during tumor development. The first
monoclonal antibodies against the immune checkpoint programmed death 1 (PD-1)
receptor, nivolumab and pembrolizumab, are now approved for clinical use. Both
agents are indicated for the treatment of advanced melanoma, as well as for the
treatment of metastatic non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Nivolumab is also
approved for the treatment of advanced renal cell carcinoma. In patients with
melanoma, these agents result in objective response rates of ~25-40%, with
durable responses lasting more than 2 years in some cases. Results from phase III
trials have shown improved survival with nivolumab versus standard-of-care
chemotherapy in both patients with advanced melanoma and those with advanced
NSCLC. In patients with advanced melanoma, both PD-1 inhibitors (nivolumab and
pembrolizumab) have shown improved survival versus ipilimumab. PD-1 inhibitors
are associated with adverse events that have immune etiologies, with grade
greater than 3 adverse events typically reported in 16% or less of patients.
However, most immune-mediated adverse events (including grade 3-4 adverse events)
can be managed by using published management algorithms without permanent
discontinuation of the agent. As nivolumab and pembrolizumab enter the clinic,
and with more PD-1 pathway agents in development for a range of tumor types, this
review aims to provide pharmacists with a basic understanding of the role of PD-1
in modulating the immune system and their use in the cancer treatment. The most
recent clinical efficacy and safety data are discussed, highlighting the response
characteristics distinctive to immune checkpoint inhibitors, along with
pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic data and cost considerations.

© 2016 The Authors. Pharmacotherapy published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on
behalf of Pharmacotherapy Publications, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/phar.1714 
PMCID: PMC5071694
PMID: 26822752  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Expert Opin Biol Ther. 2016;16(3):397-406. doi: 10.1517/14712598.2016.1145652.

Pembrolizumab for the treatment of non-small cell lung cancer.

Lim SH(1), Sun JM(1), Lee SH(1), Ahn JS(1), Park K(1), Ahn MJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Division of Hematology-Oncology, Department of Medicine, Samsung Medical
Center , Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine , Seoul , South Korea.

INTRODUCTION: Immune checkpoint inhibitors targeting programmed death protein 1
(PD-1) receptor and its ligand, PD-L1, have recently led to significant and
durable improvements in the clinical outcomes of some types of cancers including 
lung cancer.
AREAS COVERED: Pembrolizumab was approved by the US FDA for the treatment of
advanced or metastatic NSCLC whose disease has progressed after other treatments 
and with tumors that express PD-L1. In the phase I KEYNOTE-001 trial, the overall
response rate (ORR) was 19.4%, the median progression-free survival (PFS) and
overall survival (OS) were 3.7 months and 12.0 months for 495 unselected NSCLC
patients. Strong PD-L1 expression (≥ 50%) was associated with higher ORR, longer 
PFS, and longer OS. The phase II/III randomized KEYNOTE-010 trial demonstrated
that pembrolizumab improved OS versus docetaxel in patients with previously
treated NSCLC.
EXPERT OPINION: Pembrolizumab, demonstrated durable response and prolonged OS
especially in NSCLC patients with high expression of PD-1, thereby suggests a new
treatment paradigm. However, many issues remain to be explored, including the
identification of other robust biomarkers that can accurately predict the
immune-responsiveness of tumors. Along with the identification of predictive
biomarkers, further understanding of the tumor microenvironment is necessary to
improve treatment outcomes through combinations of immunotherapy or combined with
other targeted therapies.

DOI: 10.1517/14712598.2016.1145652 
PMID: 26800463  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Transl Lung Cancer Res. 2015 Dec;4(6):816-9. doi:
10.3978/j.issn.2218-6751.2015.05.06.

Shedding light on the molecular determinants of response to anti-PD-1 therapy.

Soo RA(1).

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Haematology-Oncology, National University Cancer Institute,
National University Health System, Singapore ; 2 Cancer Science Institute of
Singapore, National University of Singapore, Singapore ; 3 Department of Surgery,
University of Western Australia, Western Australia, Australia.

Immune checkpoint inhibition targeting the programmed death-1 (PD-1)/programmed
death-ligand 1 (PD-L1) axis has emerged as a very promising therapeutic avenue in
the treatment of patients with advanced stage non-small cell lung cancer but only
a subset of patients derives clinical benefit from PD-1/PD-L1 inhibitors. Studies
to date have reported patients with PDL-1 expressing tumors have a better outcome
than those with PDL-1 negative tumors but assays used to identify PD-L1 positive 
patients has been challenging. Through whole exome sequencing of tumors,
investigators have recently described mutational burden in non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC) was associated with response to pembrolizumab. In two independent 
patient cohorts, it was reported a high somatic nonsynonymous mutation burden was
associated with greater durable clinical benefit, higher objective response rates
(ORRs) and a longer progression free survival. In addition clinical efficacy was 
associated with a molecular smoking signature, certain DNA repair mutations and
the burden of neoantigens.

DOI: 10.3978/j.issn.2218-6751.2015.05.06 
PMCID: PMC4700224
PMID: 26798594  [PubMed]


93. Front Immunol. 2015 Dec 17;6:633. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2015.00633. eCollection
2015.

Rapid Response of Advanced Squamous Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer with
Thrombocytopenia after First-Line Treatment with Pembrolizumab Plus Autologous
Cytokine-Induced Killer Cells.

Hui Z(1), Zhang X(1), Ren B(1), Li R(1), Ren X(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotherapy, Tianjin Medical University Cancer Institute and
Hospital, Tianjin, China; National Clinical Research Center for Cancer, Tianjin, 
China; Key Laboratory of Cancer Immunology and Biotherapy, Tianjin, China; Key
Laboratory of Cancer Prevention and Therapy, Tianjin, China. (2)Department of
Biotherapy, Tianjin Medical University Cancer Institute and Hospital, Tianjin,
China; National Clinical Research Center for Cancer, Tianjin, China; Key
Laboratory of Cancer Immunology and Biotherapy, Tianjin, China; Key Laboratory of
Cancer Prevention and Therapy, Tianjin, China; Department of Immunology, Tianjin 
Medical University Cancer Institute and Hospital, Tianjin, China.

We present the first clinical evidence of advanced squamous non-small cell lung
cancer with severe thrombocytopenia showing dramatic improvement after first-line
treatment with pembrolizumab plus autologous cytokine-induced killer cells.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2015.00633 
PMCID: PMC4681774
PMID: 26734004  [PubMed]


94. Lancet. 2016 Apr 9;387(10027):1540-50. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(15)01281-7. Epub
2015 Dec 19.

Pembrolizumab versus docetaxel for previously treated, PD-L1-positive, advanced
non-small-cell lung cancer (KEYNOTE-010): a randomised controlled trial.

Herbst RS(1), Baas P(2), Kim DW(3), Felip E(4), Pérez-Gracia JL(5), Han JY(6),
Molina J(7), Kim JH(8), Arvis CD(9), Ahn MJ(10), Majem M(11), Fidler MJ(12), de
Castro G Jr(13), Garrido M(14), Lubiniecki GM(15), Shentu Y(15), Im E(15),
Dolled-Filhart M(15), Garon EB(16).

Author information: 
(1)Yale School of Medicine, Yale Cancer Center, and Smilow Cancer Hospital, New
Haven, CT, USA. Electronic address: roy.herbst@yale.edu. (2)The Netherlands
Cancer Institute and The Academic Medical Hospital Amsterdam, Amsterdam,
Netherlands. (3)Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul, South Korea. (4)Vall
D'Hebron University Hospital and Vall d'Hebron Institute of Oncology, Barcelona, 
Spain. (5)Clinica Universidad de Navarra, Pamplona, Spain. (6)National Cancer
Center, Goyang, South Korea. (7)Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA. (8)CHA Bundang
Medical Center, CHA University, Gyeonggi-do, South Korea. (9)Centre François
Baclesse, Caen, France. (10)Samsung Medical Center Sungkyunkwan University School
of Medicine, Seoul, South Korea. (11)Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau,
Barcelona, Spain. (12)Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, IL, USA.
(13)Instituto do Câncer do Estado de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil. (14)Pontificia
Universidad Católica de Chile, Santiago, Chile. (15)Merck & Co, Kenilworth, NJ,
USA. (16)David Geffen School of Medicine at the University of California, Los
Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA.

Comment in
    Lancet. 2016 Apr 9;387(10027):1488-90.

BACKGROUND: Despite recent advances in the treatment of advanced non-small-cell
lung cancer, there remains a need for effective treatments for progressive
disease. We assessed the efficacy of pembrolizumab for patients with previously
treated, PD-L1-positive, advanced non-small-cell lung cancer.
METHODS: We did this randomised, open-label, phase 2/3 study at 202 academic
medical centres in 24 countries. Patients with previously treated non-small-cell 
lung cancer with PD-L1 expression on at least 1% of tumour cells were randomly
assigned (1:1:1) in blocks of six per stratum with an interactive voice-response 
system to receive pembrolizumab 2 mg/kg, pembrolizumab 10 mg/kg, or docetaxel 75 
mg/m(2) every 3 weeks. The primary endpoints were overall survival and
progression-free survival both in the total population and in patients with PD-L1
expression on at least 50% of tumour cells. We used a threshold for significance 
of p<0.00825 (one-sided) for the analysis of overall survival and a threshold of 
p<0.001 for progression-free survival. This trial is registered at
ClinicalTrials.gov, number NCT01905657.
FINDINGS: Between Aug 28, 2013, and Feb 27, 2015, we enrolled 1034 patients: 345 
allocated to pembrolizumab 2 mg/kg, 346 allocated to pembrolizumab 10 mg/kg, and 
343 allocated to docetaxel. By Sept 30, 2015, 521 patients had died. In the total
population, median overall survival was 10.4 months with pembrolizumab 2 mg/kg,
12.7 months with pembrolizumab 10 mg/kg, and 8.5 months with docetaxel. Overall
survival was significantly longer for pembrolizumab 2 mg/kg versus docetaxel
(hazard ratio [HR] 0.71, 95% CI 0.58-0.88; p=0.0008) and for pembrolizumab 10
mg/kg versus docetaxel (0.61, 0.49-0.75; p<0.0001). Median progression-free
survival was 3.9 months with pembrolizumab 2 mg/kg, 4.0 months with pembrolizumab
10 mg/kg, and 4.0 months with docetaxel, with no significant difference for
pembrolizumab 2 mg/kg versus docetaxel (0.88, 0.74-1.05; p=0.07) or for
pembrolizumab 10 mg/kg versus docetaxel (HR 0.79, 95% CI 0.66-0.94; p=0.004).
Among patients with at least 50% of tumour cells expressing PD-L1, overall
survival was significantly longer with pembrolizumab 2 mg/kg than with docetaxel 
(median 14.9 months vs 8.2 months; HR 0.54, 95% CI 0.38-0.77; p=0.0002) and with 
pembrolizumab 10 mg/kg than with docetaxel (17.3 months vs 8.2 months; 0.50,
0.36-0.70; p<0.0001). Likewise, for this patient population, progression-free
survival was significantly longer with pembrolizumab 2 mg/kg than with docetaxel 
(median 5.0 months vs 4.1 months; HR 0.59, 95% CI 0.44-0.78; p=0.0001) and with
pembrolizumab 10 mg/kg than with docetaxel (5.2 months vs 4.1 months; 0.59,
0.45-0.78; p<0.0001). Grade 3-5 treatment-related adverse events were less common
with pembrolizumab than with docetaxel (43 [13%] of 339 patients given 2 mg/kg,
55 [16%] of 343 given 10 mg/kg, and 109 [35%] of 309 given docetaxel).
INTERPRETATION: Pembrolizumab prolongs overall survival and has a favourable
benefit-to-risk profile in patients with previously treated, PD-L1-positive,
advanced non-small-cell lung cancer. These data establish pembrolizumab as a new 
treatment option for this population and validate the use of PD-L1 selection.
FUNDING: Merck & Co.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(15)01281-7 
PMID: 26712084  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Expert Rev Clin Pharmacol. 2016;9(3):419-28. doi: 10.1586/17512433.2016.1133289. 
Epub 2016 Feb 6.

Endocrinopathies induced by immune-checkpoint inhibitors in advanced non-small
cell lung cancer.

Rossi E(1), Sgambato A(2), De Chiara G(3), Casaluce F(2), Losanno T(4), Sacco
PC(1), Santabarbara G(1), Gridelli C(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Division of Medical Oncology , "S. G. Moscati" Hospital , Avellino , Italy. 
(2)b Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine , Second University of
Naples , Naples , Italy. (3)c Division of Pathologic Anatomy , "S. G. Moscati"
Hospital , Avellino , Italy. (4)d Department of Experimental Medicine ,
"Sapienza" University , Rome , Italy.

The advent of immunotherapy has recently expanded the therapeutic options in
advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). In these patients, the recent
efficacy demonstration of antibodies against immune checkpoints: the
anti-programmed death-1 (PD-1) and anti-programmed death ligand-1 (PD-L1), has
led to approval of nivolumab and pembrolizumab (anti-PD-1) in the treatment of
advanced NSCLC. The mechanism of action of checkpoint inhibitors explains the
development of autoimmune diseases as a side-effect of these medications. Among
these, a spectrum of endocrine disorders has been also reported. This manuscript 
focuses particularly on endocrine disorders induced by immuno-checkpoint
inhibitors employed in NSCLC, in order to suggest the strategies for their
diagnosis and effective management.

DOI: 10.1586/17512433.2016.1133289 
PMID: 26681547  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Dtsch Arztebl Int. 2015 Nov 27;112(48):809-15. doi: 10.3238/arztebl.2015.0809.

Immunotherapy in Tumors.

Kobold S(1), Duewell P, Schnurr M, Subklewe M, Rothenfusser S, Endres S.

Author information: 
(1)Center of Integrated Protein Science Munich (CIPS-M) and Division of Clinical 
Pharmacology, Department of Internal Medicine IV, Klinikum der Universität
München, Department of Internal Medicine III, Klinikum der Universität München,
München.

BACKGROUND: A number of new drugs for tumor immunotherapy have been approved in
the past few years. They work by activating T cells to combat tumors.
METHODS: This review is based on publications on recently approved
T-cell-activating drugs that were retrieved by a selective search in PubMed.
RESULTS: Randomized, controlled trials of "checkpoint" inhibitors, i.e.,
inhibitory antibodies for use against tumors, have shown that the cytotoxic
T-lymphocyte antigen 4 (CTLA-4) inhibitor ipilimumab can prolong the survival of 
patients with advanced melanoma by 2 to 4 months. No data on median overall
survival are yet available for the two programmed-death-1 (PD-1) inhibitors
pembrolizumab und nivolumab; the endpoint "tumor response" was achieved in 24%
and 32% of patients receiving these drugs, respectively. Grade 3 or 4 adverse
effects occurred in 50% of patients receiving ipilimumab and in 12 to 13% of
those taking either of the two PD-1-inhibitors. Nivolumab prolonged the median
survival of patients with metastatic non-small-cell lung cancer from 6 to 9
months. In refractory or recurrent Philadelphia-chromosome-negative pre-B acute
lymphoblastic leukemia (pre-B-ALL), treatment with the bispecific antibody
construct blinatumomab led to complete remission in 43% of the patients, while
grade 3, 4 or 5 toxicities occurred in 83%.
CONCLUSION: T-cell-directed strategies have been established as a new pillar of
treatment in medical oncology. As these drugs have frequent and severe adverse
effects, therapeutic decision-making will have to take account not only of the
predicted prolongation of survival, but also of the potential for an impaired
quality of life while the patient is under treatment.

DOI: 10.3238/arztebl.2015.0809 
PMCID: PMC4709658
PMID: 26667979  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Future Oncol. 2016 Jan;12(1):9-23. doi: 10.2217/fon.15.294. Epub 2015 Dec 3.

Pembrolizumab for the treatment of thoracic malignancies: current landscape and
future directions.

Karim S(1), Leighl N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Princess Margaret Cancer Center/University
Health Network, 5-105 610 University Avenue, Toronto, ON, M5G 2M9, Canada.

New insights into the interaction between the immune system and the tumor
microenvironment have led to the development of checkpoint inhibitors that target
the PD-1/PD-L1 pathway. Pembrolizumab (MK-3475, lambrolizumab, Keytruda(®)) is a 
PD-1 inhibitor that has shown clinical activity in a variety of solid tumors and 
is currently approved for the second-line treatment of PD-L1-positive
non-small-cell lung cancer and for unresectable/metastatic melanoma. This article
will discuss the results of early-phase trials of pembrolizumab in thoracic
malignancies as well as ongoing studies aimed to confirm clinical benefit.

DOI: 10.2217/fon.15.294 
PMID: 26631501  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Transl Lung Cancer Res. 2015 Oct;4(5):560-75. doi:
10.3978/j.issn.2218-6751.2015.06.06.

Immune checkpoint inhibitors in clinical practice: update on management of
immune-related toxicities.

Villadolid J(1), Amin A(1).

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Pharmacy, 2 Divisions of Immunotherapy and Medical Oncology,
Carolinas HealthCare System, Levine Cancer Institute, Charlotte, NC 28204, USA.

Immune checkpoint blockade using inhibitors of cytotoxic T-lymphocyte-associated 
antigen 4 (CTLA-4) and programmed cell death-1 (PD-1) has shown clinically
significant antitumor response and has been approved for the treatment of
malignant melanoma and squamous non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). These
immunotherapies are associated with unique set of toxicities termed
immune-related adverse events (irAEs) that are very different from toxicities
observed with conventional cytotoxic chemotherapy. Prompt recognition and
initiation of appropriate management, usually in the form of immunosuppression,
usually results in complete reversibility, but failing to do so can lead to
severe toxicity or even death. Clinical algorithms describing the management of
common irAEs have been published based on clinical trial information and
experience in metastatic melanoma with ipilimumab, a human IgG1 monoclonal
antibody that binds to CTLA-4 and blocks T cell inhibition. The most common irAEs
reported with ipilimumab are dermatologic toxicity, diarrhea/colitis,
hepatotoxicity, and endocrinopathies, although other sites can also be affected. 
Similar irAEs have been observed with agents targeting PD-1. Nivolumab and
pembrolizumab are humanized monoclonal antibodies that bind to PD-1 and prevent T
cell inactivation. Ipilimumab, pembrolizumab, and nivolumab are approved by the
Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for the treatment of advanced melanoma;
nivolumab was also recently approved for metastatic squamous NSCLC. This review
describes the optimal management of toxicities related to immune checkpoint
inhibition from FDA-approved agents targeting CTLA-4 and PD-1.

DOI: 10.3978/j.issn.2218-6751.2015.06.06 
PMCID: PMC4630514
PMID: 26629425  [PubMed]


99. Expert Rev Anticancer Ther. 2016;16(1):13-20.

Pembrolizumab for the treatment of PD-L1 positive advanced or metastatic
non-small cell lung cancer.

Dang TO, Ogunniyi A, Barbee MS, Drilon A.

The emergence of immune checkpoint inhibitors marked an important advancement in 
the development of cancer therapeutics. Pembrolizumab is a selective humanized
IgG4 kappa monoclonal antibody that inhibits the programmed death-1 (PD-1)
receptor, an integral component of immune checkpoint regulation in the tumor
microenvironment. The drug is currently approved by the Food and Drug
Administration for the treatment of advanced melanoma and metastatic squamous and
nonsquamous non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Several published studies
demonstrate that single-agent pembrolizumab is safe and has efficacy in patients 
with NSCLC. Many ongoing protocols are investigating the role of pembrolizumab in
combination with other agents in lung cancer and various other cancer types. We
review the available data on pembrolizumab in NSCLC and examine the role of
potential predictive biomarkers of response to therapy.

DOI: 10.1586/14737140.2016.1123626 
PMCID: PMC4993158
PMID: 26588948  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Drugs Context. 2015 Oct 14;4:212289. doi: 10.7573/dic.212289. eCollection 2015.

Metastatic squamous cell non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC): disrupting the drug 
treatment paradigm with immunotherapies.

Scarpace SL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Albany College of Pharmacy and Health Sciences, Albany, NY 12208, USA; ; St.
Peter's Health Partners Cancer Care Center, Albany, NY, USA.

Lung cancer is the third most commonly diagnosed cancer and the leading cause of 
cancer-related death in the United States. Unlike non-squamous NSCLC, squamous
NSCLC rarely harbor epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) and anaplastic
lymphoma kinase (ALK) mutations for which there are directed therapies, and until
the recent approval of immunotherapies for squamous NSCLC, a limited number of
traditional cytotoxic chemotherapy drugs have been FDA-approved for use in the
treatment of advanced and metastatic squamous NSCLC. Immunotherapies directed at 
the programmed cell death-1 receptor (PD-1) or its ligand (PD-L1) (nivolumab and 
pembrolizumab) have demonstrated efficacy in both nonsquamous and squamous cell
NSCLC. Because of their similar mechanism of action against the PD-L1/PD-1
pathway, both drugs have similar toxicity profiles related to immune-mediated
adverse reactions that can generally be monitored and managed with oral
corticosteroids. This paper provides an overview of drug therapy options for
squamous cell NSCLC with a focus on the evidence and clinical application of the 
anti-PD1 therapies. A comparison of the dosing, administration, indications, and 
differences in the measurement of PD-L1 expression in the clinical trials of
nivolumab and pembrolizumab is also provided.

DOI: 10.7573/dic.212289 
PMCID: PMC4630973
PMID: 26576187  [PubMed]


101. Expert Rev Mol Diagn. 2016;16(2):131-3. doi: 10.1586/14737159.2016.1117389. Epub 
2015 Nov 27.

Companion diagnostic assays for PD-1/PD-L1 checkpoint inhibitors in NSCLC.

Jørgensen JT(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Dx-Rx Institute , Fredensborg , Denmark.

The immune checkpoint inhibitors pembrolizumab and nivolumab together with their 
diagnostic assays have recently been granted market authorization for treatment
of advanced non-small-cell lung cancer in the USA. The two assays, PD-L1 IHC 22C3
pharmDx and PD-L1 IHC 28-8 pharmDx (both by Dako, Glostrup, Denmark), are the
first PD-L1 IHC assays to obtain regulatory approval through the Premarket
Approval process. This approval is supported by recent clinical studies that have
shown a positive correlation between PD-L1 expression and the outcome following
treatment with different PD-1/PD-L1 checkpoint inhibitors. These diagnostic
assays are able to identify the group of non-small-cell lung cancer patients who 
will benefit most from treatment with the immune checkpoint inhibitors. However, 
so far, it is only the PD-L1 IHC 22C3 pharmDx assay, which is linked to the use
of pembrolizumab, that has obtained regulatory status as a companion diagnostic.

DOI: 10.1586/14737159.2016.1117389 
PMID: 26559787  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Am J Clin Oncol. 2016 Feb;39(1):98-106. doi: 10.1097/COC.0000000000000239.

CTLA-4 and PD-1 Pathways: Similarities, Differences, and Implications of Their
Inhibition.

Buchbinder EI(1), Desai A.

Author information: 
(1)*Melanoma Disease Center, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Harvard Medical
School †Biologic Therapy Program, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center and
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA.

The cytotoxic T-lymphocyte-associated antigen 4 (CTLA-4) and programmed death 1
(PD-1) immune checkpoints are negative regulators of T-cell immune function.
Inhibition of these targets, resulting in increased activation of the immune
system, has led to new immunotherapies for melanoma, non-small cell lung cancer, 
and other cancers. Ipilimumab, an inhibitor of CTLA-4, is approved for the
treatment of advanced or unresectable melanoma. Nivolumab and pembrolizumab, both
PD-1 inhibitors, are approved to treat patients with advanced or metastatic
melanoma and patients with metastatic, refractory non-small cell lung cancer. In 
addition the combination of ipilimumab and nivolumab has been approved in
patients with BRAF WT metastatic or unresectable melanoma. The roles of CTLA-4
and PD-1 in inhibiting immune responses, including antitumor responses, are
largely distinct. CTLA-4 is thought to regulate T-cell proliferation early in an 
immune response, primarily in lymph nodes, whereas PD-1 suppresses T cells later 
in an immune response, primarily in peripheral tissues. The clinical profiles of 
immuno-oncology agents inhibiting these 2 checkpoints may vary based on their
mechanistic differences. This article provides an overview of the CTLA-4 and PD-1
pathways and implications of their inhibition in cancer therapy.

DOI: 10.1097/COC.0000000000000239 
PMCID: PMC4892769
PMID: 26558876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Cancer Immunol Res. 2015 Dec;3(12):1308-15. doi: 10.1158/2326-6066.CIR-15-0116.
Epub 2015 Nov 6.

PD-L1 Antibodies to Its Cytoplasmic Domain Most Clearly Delineate Cell Membranes 
in Immunohistochemical Staining of Tumor Cells.

Mahoney KM(1), Sun H(2), Liao X(3), Hua P(4), Callea M(2), Greenfield EA(4), Hodi
FS(3), Sharpe AH(5), Signoretti S(2), Rodig SJ(6), Freeman GJ(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, Massachusetts. Division of Hematology and Oncology, Beth Israel
Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts.
(2)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, Massachusetts. (3)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer
Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts. Center for
Immuno-Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston,
Massachusetts. (4)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts. (5)Department of Microbiology and 
Immunobiology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts. (6)Department of
Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston,
Massachusetts. Center for Immuno-Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts. (7)Department of Medical Oncology,
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts.
gordon_freeman@dfci.harvard.edu.

Blocking the programmed death-1 (PD-1) pathway has clinical benefit in metastatic
cancer and has led to the approval of the mAbs pembrolizumab and nivolumab to
treat melanoma and nivolumab for non-small cell lung cancer. Expression of PD-L1 
on the cell surface of either tumor cells or infiltrating immune cells is
associated with a higher likelihood of response to PD-1 blockade in multiple
studies. Most mAbs to PD-L1 in use are directed to its extracellular domain and
immunohistochemically stain tumor tissue with a mixture of cytoplasmic and
membrane staining. Cytoplasmic staining obscures the interpretation of a positive
reaction on the tumor cell membrane, and thus affects the accuracy of PD-L1
scoring systems. We developed a mAb to the cytoplasmic domain of PD-L1, 405.9A11 
(9A11), which is both more selective for membranous PD-L1 and more sensitive in
IHC and Western blotting, compared with previous mAbs specific for the PD-L1
extracellular domain. Here, we compare immunohistochemical staining patterns of
PD-L1 expression in five types of tumors, using five PD-L1 mAbs: 9A11, 7G11, and 
three commercially available mAbs. We demonstrate that 9A11, as well as two other
cytoplasmic domain-specific mAbs, E1L3N and SP142, can clearly delineate the
membrane of PD-L1-positive cells in formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue and
facilitate interpretation of staining results.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/2326-6066.CIR-15-0116 
PMCID: PMC4743889
PMID: 26546452  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Pharmacotherapy. 2015 Oct;35(10):963-76. doi: 10.1002/phar.1643.

Immune Checkpoint Inhibitors: New Insights and Current Place in Cancer Therapy.

La-Beck NM(1), Jean GW(2), Huynh C(1), Alzghari SK(1), Lowe DB(1,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunotherapeutics and Biotechnology, Texas Tech University
Health Sciences Center School of Pharmacy, Abilene, Texas. (2)Department of
Pharmacy Practice, Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center School of
Pharmacy, Dallas, Texas. (3)Experimmune, A Center for Immunotherapeutic
Development, Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center, Abilene, Texas.

Erratum in
    Pharmacotherapy. 2015 Dec;35(12):1205.

The treatment of cancer has largely relied on killing tumor cells with
nonspecific cytotoxic therapies and radiotherapy. This approach, however, has
limitations including severe systemic toxicities, bystander effects on normal
cells, recurrence of drug-resistant tumor cells, and the inability to target
micrometastases or subclinical disease. An increased understanding of the
critical role of the immune system in cancer development and progression has led 
to new treatment strategies using various immunotherapies. It is now recognized
that established tumors have numerous mechanisms of suppressing the antitumor
immune response including production of inhibitory cytokines, recruitment of
immunosuppressive immune cells, and upregulation of coinhibitory receptors known 
as immune checkpoints. This review focuses on the immune checkpoint inhibitors, a
novel class of immunotherapy first approved in 2011. Our objective is to
highlight similarities and differences among the three immune checkpoint
inhibitors approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration-ipilimumab,
pembrolizumab, and nivolumab-to facilitate therapeutic decision making. We
conducted a review of the published literature and conference proceedings and
present a critical appraisal of the clinical evidence supporting their use in the
treatment of metastatic melanoma and advanced squamous non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC). We also compare and contrast their current place in cancer therapy and
patterns of immune-related toxicities, and discuss the role of dual immune
checkpoint inhibition and strategies for the management of immune-related adverse
events. The immune checkpoint inhibitors have demonstrated a dramatic improvement
in overall survival in patients with advanced melanoma and squamous NSCLC, along 
with acceptable toxicity profiles. These agents have a clear role in the
first-line treatment of advanced melanoma and in the second-line treatment of
advanced squamous NSCLC.

© 2015 Pharmacotherapy Publications, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/phar.1643 
PMID: 26497482  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Cancer Biol Med. 2015 Sep;12(3):209-22. doi: 10.7497/j.issn.2095-3941.2015.0032.

Advances in immunotherapy for treatment of lung cancer.

Bustamante Alvarez JG(1), González-Cao M(1), Karachaliou N(1), Santarpia M(1),
Viteri S(1), Teixidó C(1), Rosell R(1).

Author information: 
(1)1 Albert Einstein Medical Center, Philadelphia 19141, USA ; 2 Translational
Cancer Research Unit, Instituto Oncológico Dr Rosell, Quirón Dexeus University
Hospital, Barcelona 08028, Spain ; 3 Medical Oncology Unit, Human Pathology
Department, University of Messina, Messina 98100, Italy ; 4 Pangaea Biotech S.L, 
Barcelona 08028, Spain ; 5 Cancer Biology & Precision Medicine Program, Catalan
Institute of Oncology, Germans Trias i Pujol Health Sciences Institute and
Hospital, Campus Can Ruti, Badalona, Barcelona 08916, Spain ; 6 Fundación
Molecular Oncology Research, Barcelona 08028, Spain.

Different approaches for treating lung cancer have been developed over time,
including chemotherapy, radiotherapy and targeted therapies against activating
mutations. Lately, better understanding of the role of the immunological system
in tumor control has opened multiple doors to implement different strategies to
enhance immune response against cancer cells. It is known that tumor cells elude 
immune response by several mechanisms. The development of monoclonal antibodies
against the checkpoint inhibitor programmed cell death protein 1 (PD-1) and its
ligand (PD-L1), on T cells, has led to high activity in cancer patients with long
lasting responses. Nivolumab, an anti PD-1 inhibitor, has been recently approved 
for the treatment of squamous cell lung cancer patients, given the survival
advantage demonstrated in a phase III trial. Pembrolizumab, another anti PD-1
antibody, has received FDA breakthrough therapy designation for treatment of
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), supported by data from a phase I trial.
Clinical trials with anti PD-1/PD-L1 antibodies in NSCLC have demonstrated very
good tolerability and activity, with response rates around 20% and a median
duration of response of 18 months.

DOI: 10.7497/j.issn.2095-3941.2015.0032 
PMCID: PMC4607819
PMID: 26487966  [PubMed]


106. Semin Oncol. 2015 Oct;42 Suppl 2:S11-8. doi: 10.1053/j.seminoncol.2015.09.019.
Epub 2015 Sep 11.

Current Perspectives in Immunotherapy for Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer.

Garon EB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Director of Thoracic Oncology Program, Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer Center,
University of California-Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA. Electronic address:
egaron@mednet.ucla.edu.

In non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), the first immune checkpoint inhibitor to
be approved by the US Food and Drug Administration was nivolumab, based on a
survival advantage over docetaxel in recurrent squamous NSCLC, a
difficult-to-treat histology. In addition, several other immune checkpoint
inhibitors are also in late-stage development. Most of these agents inhibit the
programmed cell death protein 1 (PD-1) pathway, targeting either the PD-1
receptor or its ligand, programmed cell death ligand 1 (PD-L1). In addition to
nivolumab, pembrolizumab is a PD-1 inhibitor under investigation in NSCLC, and
atezolizumab (MPDL3280A), durvalumab (MEDI4736), and avelumab (MSB0010718C) are
PD-L1 inhibitors under investigation. The cytotoxic T-lymphocyte-associated
antigen 4 (CTLA-4) immune checkpoint inhibitors ipilimumab and tremelimumab are
also under investigation in NSCLC, largely as part of combination approaches
rather than as monotherapy. PD-L1 expression as a potential biomarker to select
patients most likely to respond to inhibitors of the PD-1 pathway has been widely
studied.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1053/j.seminoncol.2015.09.019 
PMID: 26477470  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Curr Drug Saf. 2016;11(1):62-8.

Anti PD-1 and PDL-1 Immunotherapy in the Treatment of Advanced Non- Small Cell
Lung Cancer (NSCLC): A Review on Toxicity Profile and its Management.

Sgambato A, Casaluce F, Sacco PC, Palazzolo G, Maione P, Rossi A, Ciardiello F,
Gridelli C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Oncology, "S. G. Moscati" Hospital, Avellino, Italy.
cgridelli@libero.it.

The better understanding of immunology and antitumor immune responses have
prompted the development of novel immunotherapy agents like PD-1 checkpoint
inhibitors (anti-PD-1 and anti- PDL-1 antibodies) that improve the capacity of
the immune system to acknowledge and delete tumors, including lung cancer.
Currently, two anti-PD-1 (nivolumab and pembrolizumab) and one anti- PD-L1
(MPDL-3280A) agents are in advanced stages of development in advanced or
metastatic non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Among these, nivolumab
demonstrated a survival benefit versus docetaxel in refractory squamous NSCLC,
reporting 41% reduction in risk of death (median overall survival: 9.2 versus 6.0
months; objective response rate: 20% versus 9%), and better safety profile than
standard-of-care chemotherapy (grade 3-4 adverse events: 7% versus 55%). However,
the enhancement of immune response to cancer targeting specific immune regulatory
checkpoints is associated with a toxicity profile different from that related to 
traditional chemotherapeutic agents and molecularly targeted therapies. The
success of immunotherapy is related to ongoing evaluation/identification and
treatment of these immunerelated side effects. Herein, first clinical results of 
PD-1 agents in lung cancer are reviewed, focusing on toxicity profile and its
management.


PMID: 26412670  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Cancer J. 2015 Sep-Oct;21(5):383-91. doi: 10.1097/PPO.0000000000000151.

Immunotherapy for Advanced Lung Cancer.

Asmar R(1), Rizvi NA.

Author information: 
(1)From the *Division of Hematology/Oncology, Columbia University Medical Center;
and †Columbia University Medical Center, New York, NY.

Lung cancers are immunogenic tumors that manage to evade the immune system by
exploiting checkpoint pathways that render effector T cells anergic. Inhibition
of these checkpoints can restore and invigorate endogenous antitumor T-cell
responses. The immunotherapeutic approach of checkpoint inhibition has become an 
important treatment option for patients with advanced non-small cell lung cancer,
playing a role that will continue to evolve over the coming years. The programmed
death 1 inhibitors nivolumab and pembrolizumab have both been shown to induce
durable responses and improve survival in a subset of patients with
platinum-refractory metastatic non-small cell lung cancer. Nivolumab has recently
earned Food and Drug Administration approval for progressive squamous cell lung
cancer. Optimization and validation of a pretreatment biomarker to predict
response is a key area of ongoing research. Combination therapy is now being
investigated in an effort to improve response rates.

DOI: 10.1097/PPO.0000000000000151 
PMID: 26389763  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Cell. 2015 Aug 27;162(5):937. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2015.07.045.

PD-1 Blockers.

Wolchok JD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY
10065, USA. Electronic address: wolchokj@mskcc.org.

Nivolumab and pembrolizumab are monoclonal antibodies that block the programmed
death-1 receptor (PD-1, CD279), resulting in dis-inhibition of tumor-specific
immune responses. Both are recently approved for use in the treatment of
metastatic melanoma, and nivolumab as well for non-small cell lung cancer.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2015.07.045 
PMID: 26317459  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. J Immunother Cancer. 2015 Aug 18;3:36. doi: 10.1186/s40425-015-0078-9.
eCollection 2015.

Pembrolizumab.

Khoja L(1), Butler MO(1), Kang SP(2), Ebbinghaus S(2), Joshua AM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, 610
University Avenue, Toronto, ON M5G 2M9 Canada. (2)Merck & Co., Inc., Kenilworth, 
NJ USA.

The development of the cytotoxic T-lymphocyte-associated protein 4 inhibitor
ipilimumab and its approval in 2011 for the treatment of metastatic melanoma has 
heralded a new era in immuno-oncology. Subsequently, novel agents against the
programmed death receptor 1 (PD-1)/programmed death receptor ligand 1 (PD-L1)
axis have shown significant activity in melanoma and a variety of other tumor
types. Pembrolizumab was the first anti-PD-1 antibody to be approved by the US
Food and Drug Administration for the treatment of patients with unresectable or
metastatic melanoma with disease progression following ipilimumab, and if BRAF
(V600) mutation positive, a BRAF inhibitor. Pembrolizumab has also received
breakthrough status for the treatment of EGFR mutation-negative, ALK
rearrangement-negative non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) that has progressed on 
or following platinum-based chemotherapy. There remain a number of pivotal trials
in progress to further evaluate the optimal use of pembrolizumab alone and in
combination for melanoma, NSCLC, and other tumor types. In this article, we
review the efficacy and toxicity profile of pembrolizumab and evaluate its future
development.

DOI: 10.1186/s40425-015-0078-9 
PMCID: PMC4539882
PMID: 26288737  [PubMed]


111. PLoS One. 2015 Jun 18;10(6):e0130142. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0130142.
eCollection 2015.

Differential Activity of Nivolumab, Pembrolizumab and MPDL3280A according to the 
Tumor Expression of Programmed Death-Ligand-1 (PD-L1): Sensitivity Analysis of
Trials in Melanoma, Lung and Genitourinary Cancers.

Carbognin L(1), Pilotto S(1), Milella M(2), Vaccaro V(2), Brunelli M(3), Caliò
A(3), Cuppone F(4), Sperduti I(5), Giannarelli D(5), Chilosi M(3), Bronte V(3),
Scarpa A(6), Bria E(1), Tortora G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Oncology, University of Verona, Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria
Integrata, Verona, Italy. (2)Medical Oncology, Regina Elena National Cancer
Institute, Roma, Italy. (3)Department of Pathology and Diagnostic, University of 
Verona, Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria Integrata, Verona, Italy. (4)Agenzia
Italiana del Farmaco (AIFA), Roma, Italy. (5)Biostatistics, Regina Elena National
Cancer Institute, Roma, Italy. (6)Department of Pathology and Diagnostic,
University of Verona, Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria Integrata, Verona, Italy;
ARC-NET Center for Applied Research on Cancer, Verona, Italy.

BACKGROUND: The potential predictive role of programmed death-ligand-1 (PD-L1)
expression on tumor cells in the context of solid tumor treated with checkpoint
inhibitors targeting the PD-1 pathway represents an issue for clinical research.
METHODS: Overall response rate (ORR) was extracted from phase I-III trials
investigating nivolumab, pembrolizumab and MPDL3280A for advanced melanoma,
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and genitourinary cancer, and cumulated by
adopting a fixed and random-effect model with 95% confidence interval (CI).
Interaction test according to tumor PD-L1 was accomplished. A sensitivity
analysis according to adopted drug, tumor type, PD-L1 cut-off and treatment line 
was performed.
RESULTS: Twenty trials (1,475 patients) were identified. A significant
interaction (p<0.0001) according to tumor PD-L1 expression was found in the
overall sample with an ORR of 34.1% (95% CI 27.6-41.3%) in the PD-L1 positive and
19.9% (95% CI 15.4-25.3%) in the PD-L1 negative population. ORR was significantly
higher in PD-L1 positive in comparison to PD-L1 negative patients for nivolumab
and pembrolizumab, with an absolute difference of 16.4% and 19.5%, respectively. 
A significant difference in activity of 22.8% and 8.7% according to PD-L1 was
found for melanoma and NSCLC, respectively, with no significant difference for
genitourinary cancer.
CONCLUSION: Overall, the three antibodies provide a significant differential
effect in terms of activity according to PD-L1 expression on tumor cells. The
predictive value of PD-L1 on tumor cells seems to be more robust for anti-PD-1
antibody (nivolumab and pembrolizumab), and in the context of advanced melanoma
and NSCLC.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0130142 
PMCID: PMC4472786
PMID: 26086854  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Curr Opin Pharmacol. 2015 Aug;23:32-8. doi: 10.1016/j.coph.2015.05.011. Epub 2015
Jun 2.

PD-1/PD-L1 inhibitors.

Sunshine J(1), Taube JM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, Baltimore, MD, 
USA. (2)Department of Dermatology, Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, Baltimore,
MD, USA; Department of Pathology, Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, Baltimore, 
MD, USA; Department of Oncology, Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, Baltimore,
MD, USA. Electronic address: jtaube1@jhmi.edu.

Tumors may adopt normal physiologic checkpoints for immunomodulation leading to
an imbalance between tumor growth and host surveillance. Antibodies targeting the
PD-1/PD-L1 checkpoint have shown dynamic and durable tumor regressions,
suggesting a rebalancing of the host-tumor interaction. Nivolumab and
pembrolizumab are the anti-PD-1 antibodies that are currently the furthest in
clinical development, and anti-PD-L1 agents under investigation include
MPDL3280A, MEDI4736, and BMS-936559. These agents have been used to treat
advanced melanoma, non-small cell lung cancer, renal cell carcinoma, bladder
cancer and Hodgkin lymphoma, amongst other tumor types. In this article, we
review the updated response results for early clinical trials, note recent FDA
actions regarding this class of agents, and summarize results across trials
looking at PD-L1 status as a predictor of response to anti-PD-1/PD-L1.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.coph.2015.05.011 
PMCID: PMC4516625
PMID: 26047524  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Cancer Discov. 2015 Jul;5(7):684-5. doi: 10.1158/2159-8290.CD-NB2015-082. Epub
2015 Jun 1.

Expanding the Reach of Anti-PD-1 Therapy.

[No authors listed]

Results from three studies, including KEYNOTE-012 and CheckMate 057, indicate
that anti-PD-1 drugs look promising in cancers other than melanoma. Pembrolizumab
was twice as effective as cetuximab for advanced head and neck squamous cell
carcinoma; nivolumab induced durable antitumor activity in advanced liver cancer;
and nivolumab extended the median overall survival of patients with advanced
non-squamous non-small cell lung cancer.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/2159-8290.CD-NB2015-082 
PMID: 26034052  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Ann Pharmacother. 2015 Aug;49(8):907-37. doi: 10.1177/1060028015586218. Epub 2015
May 19.

Current status and future directions of the immune checkpoint inhibitors
ipilimumab, pembrolizumab, and nivolumab in oncology.

Barbee MS(1), Ogunniyi A(1), Horvat TZ(1), Dang TO(2).

Author information: 
(1)Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, USA. (2)Memorial Sloan
Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, USA dangt@mskcc.org.

OBJECTIVE: To provide the clinician with an update and the current status and
future direction of approved immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs) in oncology.
DATA SOURCES: A PubMed search from January 1, 1966 to March 13, 2015 was
performed using the key terms ipilimumab, pembrolizumab, lambrolizumab,
nivolumab, immune checkpoint inhibitor, MDX-010, MDX-101, BMS-734016, MK-3475,
SCH 900475, MDX-1106, BMS-936558, ONO-4538, CTLA-4, PD-1, or PD-L1 and cancer,
oncology, or neoplasm. Additional references were identified from the
investigators(') personal files, recent oncology meetings, review articles,
clinical guidelines, and package inserts.
STUDY SELECTION AND DATA EXTRACTION: All English-language clinical trials
assessing the safety and efficacy of ipilimumab, nivolumab, and pembrolizumab in 
cancer were considered. The PubMed search resulted in 215 trials; 33 met
inclusion criteria. A further 28 trials were identified from the above sources;
61 trials from 2005 to 2015 were included. We consolidated and clarified
treatment recommendations for the management of immune-related adverse events
(irAEs), assessed response criteria, and calculated the clinical utility of
leading tumor profiling options.
DATA SYNTHESIS: Ipilimumab and nivolumab, but not pembrolizumab, have an overall 
survival (OS) advantage over chemotherapy first line in unresectable/metastatic
melanoma. Nivolumab has an OS advantage versus chemotherapy in second-line
squamous non-small-cell lung cancer. Data in other settings are promising.
Nivolumab and pembrolizumab are better tolerated than ipilimumab. Further
validation of response criteria is needed. Tumor profiling to predict clinical
benefit is premature but promising.
CONCLUSIONS: The treatment landscape in oncology is quickly evolving with the
advent of ICIs.

© The Author(s) 2015.

DOI: 10.1177/1060028015586218 
PMID: 25991832  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Semin Oncol. 2015 Jun;42(3):466-73. doi: 10.1053/j.seminoncol.2015.02.008. Epub
2015 Feb 13.

Anti-PD-1 therapy in melanoma.

Homet Moreno B(1), Parisi G(2), Robert L(1), Ribas A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Hematology-Oncology, University of
California Los Angeles (UCLA), CA. (2)Department of Medicine, Division of
Hematology-Oncology, University of California Los Angeles (UCLA), CA; Department 
of Oncology, Division of Medical Oncology and Immunotherapy, University Hospital 
of Siena, Italy. (3)Department of Medicine, Division of Hematology-Oncology,
University of California Los Angeles (UCLA), CA; Department of Surgery,
University of California Los Angeles (UCLA), Los Angeles, CA; Department of
Medical and Molecular Pharmacology, University of California Los Angeles (UCLA), 
Los Angeles, CA; Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer Center (JCCC) at UCLA, Los Angeles,
CA. Electronic address: aribas@mednet.ucla.edu.

Immune-regulatory mechanisms are used by cancer to hide from the immune system.
Advances and in-depth understanding of the biology of melanoma and its
interaction with the immune system have led to the development of some of
antagonistic antibodies to the programmed death 1 pathway (PD-1) and one of its
ligands, programmed death ligand 1 (PD-L1), which are demonstrating high clinical
benefit rates and tolerability. Blocking the immune-regulatory checkpoints that
limit T-cell responses to melanoma upon PD-1/PD-L1 modulation has provided
clinically validated targets for cancer immunotherapy. Combinations with other
anti-melanoma agents may result in additional benefits. Nivolumab, pembrolizumab 
(formerly known as MK-3475 and lambrolizumab), and pidilizumab are anti-PD-1
antibodies in clinical development for melanoma, non-small cell lung cancer,
renal cell carcinoma, head and neck cancers, lymphoma, and several other cancers.
Long-term survivors already have been reported with these therapies. In this
review, we discuss the current state of anti-PD-1 agents, the evidence in the
literature to support the combination of anti-PD-1 antibodies with other
anti-cancer agents and discuss the future directions for rational design of
clinical trials that keep on increasing the number of long-term survivors.

Copyright © 2015. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1053/j.seminoncol.2015.02.008 
PMID: 25965365  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. J Immunother Cancer. 2015 Apr 21;3:11. doi: 10.1186/s40425-015-0057-1.
eCollection 2015.

Acute heart failure due to autoimmune myocarditis under pembrolizumab treatment
for metastatic melanoma.

Läubli H(1), Balmelli C(2), Bossard M(3), Pfister O(3), Glatz K(4), Zippelius
A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Oncology, University Hospital Basel, Basel, Switzerland ; 
Department of Biomedicine, Cancer Immunology Laboratory, University of Basel,
Basel, Switzerland. (2)Division of Medical Oncology, University Hospital Basel,
Basel, Switzerland. (3)Division of Cardiology, University Hospital Basel, Basel, 
Switzerland. (4)Institute of Pathology, University Hospital Basel, Basel,
Switzerland.

Antibodies that stimulate the immune system by targeting inhibitory T cell
receptors were successfully introduced into oncological practice and are capable 
to overcome tumor-induced immune evasion. In particular, targeting of the
inhibitory receptors CTLA-4 and PD-1 or its ligand PD-L1 have been shown to be
beneficial for patients with melanoma, renal cell cancer, non-small cell lung
cancer and a growing list of other cancers with impressive response rates. Here, 
we report a severe, potentially life-threatening side effect of anti-PD-1
immunotherapy with pembrolizumab, which has not been previously described in the 
literature. A 73-year-old woman with metastatic uveal melanoma treated with
pembrolizumab in third line developed severe heart failure due to
pembrolizumab-mediated autoimmune myocarditis. Echocardiographic studies revealed
a severely impaired left ventricular function with dyssynchrony. All tests for
cardiotropic viruses were negative and histological analysis of a myocardial
biopsy showed lymphocytic infiltration with a predominance of CD8 positive cells 
and a reduction of FOXP3 positive regulatory T cells. After initiation of
corticosteroids and guideline-conform heart failure therapy, the symptoms rapidly
improved and the left ventricular function recovered. While autoimmune
myocarditis is a documented side effect of other checkpoint inhibitors, as for
example ipilimumab and in one case with anti-PD-L1 antibody, it is not described 
for anti-PD-1-antibodies like pembrolizumab or nivolumab. As the FDA recently
approved both pembrolizumab and nivolumab for melanoma progressing after
anti-CTLA-4 treatment with ipilimumab, more patients will soon receive anti-PD-1 
therapy. Thus, it is important to be aware of such rare, but severe
immune-related adverse events.

DOI: 10.1186/s40425-015-0057-1 
PMCID: PMC4404586
PMID: 25901283  [PubMed]


117. Cancer Discov. 2015 Jun;5(6):572. doi: 10.1158/2159-8290.CD-NB2015-057. Epub 2015
Apr 20.

Pembrolizumab Shows Promise for NSCLC.

[No authors listed]

Data from the KEYNOTE-001 trial show that pembrolizumab improves clinical
outcomes for patients with advanced non-small cell lung cancer, and is well
tolerated. PD-L1 expression in at least 50% of tumor cells correlated with
improved efficacy.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/2159-8290.CD-NB2015-057 
PMID: 25895920  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. N Engl J Med. 2015 May 21;372(21):2018-28. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1501824. Epub 2015 
Apr 19.

Pembrolizumab for the treatment of non-small-cell lung cancer.

Garon EB(1), Rizvi NA, Hui R, Leighl N, Balmanoukian AS, Eder JP, Patnaik A,
Aggarwal C, Gubens M, Horn L, Carcereny E, Ahn MJ, Felip E, Lee JS, Hellmann MD, 
Hamid O, Goldman JW, Soria JC, Dolled-Filhart M, Rutledge RZ, Zhang J, Lunceford 
JK, Rangwala R, Lubiniecki GM, Roach C, Emancipator K, Gandhi L; KEYNOTE-001
Investigators.

Collaborators: Hui R, Chu Q, Leighl N, Chomy F, Dansin E, Lena H, Quere G, Soria 
JC, Cappuzzo F, Garassino M, Melotti B, Morabito A, Santini D, Brunsvig P,
Fløtten Ø, Ahn MJ, Lee DH, Lee JS, Carcereny E, Felip E, Insa A, Yang JC, Tsai
CM, Arkenau HT, Grummet S, Middleton G, Aggarwal C, Balmanoukian AS, Bessudo A,
Blumenschein GR Jr, Dronca R, Eder JP, Garon EB, Gandhi L, Goldman J, Gubens M,
Hager S, Hamid O, Hellmann MD, Horn L, Johnson E, O'Day S, Patnaik A, Ramalingam 
S, Rizvi NA, Ross H, Socinski M.

Author information: 
(1)The authors' affiliations are listed in the Appendix.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Clin Oncol. 2015 Jul;12(7):371.

BACKGROUND: We assessed the efficacy and safety of programmed cell death 1 (PD-1)
inhibition with pembrolizumab in patients with advanced non-small-cell lung
cancer enrolled in a phase 1 study. We also sought to define and validate an
expression level of the PD-1 ligand 1 (PD-L1) that is associated with the
likelihood of clinical benefit.
METHODS: We assigned 495 patients receiving pembrolizumab (at a dose of either 2 
mg or 10 mg per kilogram of body weight every 3 weeks or 10 mg per kilogram every
2 weeks) to either a training group (182 patients) or a validation group (313
patients). We assessed PD-L1 expression in tumor samples using
immunohistochemical analysis, with results reported as the percentage of
neoplastic cells with staining for membranous PD-L1 (proportion score). Response 
was assessed every 9 weeks by central review.
RESULTS: Common side effects that were attributed to pembrolizumab were fatigue, 
pruritus, and decreased appetite, with no clear difference according to dose or
schedule. Among all the patients, the objective response rate was 19.4%, and the 
median duration of response was 12.5 months. The median duration of
progression-free survival was 3.7 months, and the median duration of overall
survival was 12.0 months. PD-L1 expression in at least 50% of tumor cells was
selected as the cutoff from the training group. Among patients with a proportion 
score of at least 50% in the validation group, the response rate was 45.2%. Among
all the patients with a proportion score of at least 50%, median progression-free
survival was 6.3 months; median overall survival was not reached.
CONCLUSIONS: Pembrolizumab had an acceptable side-effect profile and showed
antitumor activity in patients with advanced non-small-cell lung cancer. PD-L1
expression in at least 50% of tumor cells correlated with improved efficacy of
pembrolizumab. (Funded by Merck; KEYNOTE-001 ClinicalTrials.gov number,
NCT01295827.).

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa1501824 
PMID: 25891174  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Clin Ther. 2015 Apr 1;37(4):764-82. doi: 10.1016/j.clinthera.2015.02.018. Epub
2015 Mar 29.

The Next Immune-Checkpoint Inhibitors: PD-1/PD-L1 Blockade in Melanoma.

Mahoney KM(1), Freeman GJ(2), McDermott DF(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology and Oncology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts; Department of Medical Oncology,
Harvard Medical School, Dana Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts.
Electronic address: kmmah5@bidmc.harvard.edu. (2)Department of Medical Oncology, 
Harvard Medical School, Dana Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts.
(3)Division of Hematology and Oncology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts.

PURPOSE: Blocking the interaction between the programmed cell death (PD)-1
protein and one of its ligands, PD-L1, has been reported to have impressive
antitumor responses. Therapeutics targeting this pathway are currently in
clinical trials. Pembrolizumab and nivolumab are the first of this anti-PD-1
pathway family of checkpoint inhibitors to gain accelerated approval from the US 
Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for the treatment of ipilimumab-refractory
melanoma. Nivolumab has been associated with improved overall survival compared
with dacarbazine in patients with previously untreated wild-type
serine/threonine-protein kinase B-raf proto-oncogene BRAF melanoma. Although the 
most mature data are in the treatment of melanoma, the FDA has granted approval
of nivolumab for squamous cell lung cancer and the breakthrough therapy
designation to immune- checkpoint inhibitors for use in other cancers: nivolumab,
an anti-PD-1 monoclonal antibody, for Hodgkin lymphoma, and MPDL-3280A, an
anti-PD-L1 monoclonal antibody, for bladder cancer and non-small cell lung
cancer. Here we review the literature on PD-1 and PD-L1 blockade and focus on the
reported clinical studies that have included patients with melanoma.
METHODS: PubMed was searched to identify relevant clinical studies of
PD-1/PD-L1-targeted therapies in melanoma. A review of data from the current
trials on clinicaltrial.gov was incorporated, as well as data presented in
abstracts at the 2014 annual meeting of the American Society of Clinical
Oncology, given the limited number of published clinical trials on this topic.
FINDINGS: The anti-PD-1 and anti-PD-L1 agents have been reported to have
impressive antitumor effects in several malignancies, including melanoma. The
greatest clinical activity in unselected patients has been seen in melanoma.
Tumor expression of PD-L1 is a suggestive, but inadequate, biomarker predictive
of response to immune-checkpoint blockade. However, tumors expressing little or
no PD-L1 are less likely to respond to PD-1 pathway blockade. Combination
checkpoint blockade with PD-1 plus cytotoxic T-lymphocyte antigen (CTLA)-4
blockade appears to improve response rates in patients who are less likely to
respond to single-checkpoint blockade. Toxicity with PD-1 blocking agents is less
than the toxicity with previous immunotherapies (eg, interleukin 2, CTLA-4
blockade). Certain adverse events can be severe and potentially life threatening,
but most can be prevented or reversed with close monitoring and appropriate
management.
IMPLICATIONS: This family of immune-checkpoint inhibitors benefits not only
patients with metastatic melanoma but also those with historically less
responsive tumor types. Although a subset of patients responds to single-agent
blockade, the initial trial of checkpoint-inhibitor combinations has reported a
potential to improve response rates. Combination therapies appear to be a means
of increasing response rates, albeit with increased immune-related adverse
events. As these treatments become available to patients, education regarding the
recognition and management of immune-related effects of immune-checkpoint
blockade will be essential for maximizing clinical benefit.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier HS Journals, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clinthera.2015.02.018 
PMCID: PMC4497957
PMID: 25823918  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Science. 2015 Apr 3;348(6230):124-8. doi: 10.1126/science.aaa1348. Epub 2015 Mar 
12.

Cancer immunology. Mutational landscape determines sensitivity to PD-1 blockade
in non-small cell lung cancer.

Rizvi NA(1), Hellmann MD(2), Snyder A(3), Kvistborg P(4), Makarov V(5), Havel
JJ(5), Lee W(6), Yuan J(7), Wong P(7), Ho TS(7), Miller ML(8), Rekhtman N(9),
Moreira AL(9), Ibrahim F(10), Bruggeman C(11), Gasmi B(12), Zappasodi R(12),
Maeda Y(12), Sander C(8), Garon EB(13), Merghoub T(14), Wolchok JD(15),
Schumacher TN(4), Chan TA(16).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY
10065, USA. Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, NY, 10065, USA.
chant@mskcc.org. (2)Department of Medicine, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer
Center, New York, NY 10065, USA. Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, NY,
10065, USA. (3)Department of Medicine, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center,
New York, NY 10065, USA. Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, NY, 10065, USA.
Human Oncology and Pathogenesis Program, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, 
New York, NY 10065, USA. (4)Division of Immunology, Netherlands Cancer Institute,
1066 CX Amsterdam, Netherlands. (5)Human Oncology and Pathogenesis Program,
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 10065, USA. (6)Department of
Radiation Oncology, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 10065,
USA. (7)Immune Monitoring Core, Ludwig Center for Cancer Immunotherapy, Memorial 
Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 10065, USA. (8)Computation Biology
Program, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 10065, USA.
(9)Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 
10065, USA. (10)Department of Medicine, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center,
New York, NY 10065, USA. (11)Department of Mathematics, Columbia University, New 
York, NY, 10027, USA. (12)Ludwig Collaborative Laboratory, Memorial Sloan
Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 10065, USA. (13)David Geffen School of
Medicine at UCLA, 2825 Santa Monica Boulevard, Suite 200, Santa Monica, CA 90404,
USA. (14)Department of Medicine, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New
York, NY 10065, USA. Ludwig Collaborative Laboratory, Memorial Sloan Kettering
Cancer Center, New York, NY 10065, USA. (15)Department of Medicine, Memorial
Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 10065, USA. Weill Cornell Medical
College, New York, NY, 10065, USA. Ludwig Collaborative Laboratory, Memorial
Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 10065, USA. (16)Weill Cornell Medical
College, New York, NY, 10065, USA. Human Oncology and Pathogenesis Program,
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 10065, USA. Department of
Radiation Oncology, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 10065,
USA. chant@mskcc.org.

Immune checkpoint inhibitors, which unleash a patient's own T cells to kill
tumors, are revolutionizing cancer treatment. To unravel the genomic determinants
of response to this therapy, we used whole-exome sequencing of non-small cell
lung cancers treated with pembrolizumab, an antibody targeting programmed cell
death-1 (PD-1). In two independent cohorts, higher nonsynonymous mutation burden 
in tumors was associated with improved objective response, durable clinical
benefit, and progression-free survival. Efficacy also correlated with the
molecular smoking signature, higher neoantigen burden, and DNA repair pathway
mutations; each factor was also associated with mutation burden. In one
responder, neoantigen-specific CD8+ T cell responses paralleled tumor regression,
suggesting that anti-PD-1 therapy enhances neoantigen-specific T cell reactivity.
Our results suggest that the genomic landscape of lung cancers shapes response to
anti-PD-1 therapy.

Copyright © 2015, American Association for the Advancement of Science.

DOI: 10.1126/science.aaa1348 
PMCID: PMC4993154
PMID: 25765070  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Tumour Biol. 2015 Mar;36(3):1411-22. doi: 10.1007/s13277-015-3285-6. Epub 2015
Mar 4.

Immunotherapy for lung cancer: for whom the bell tolls?

Madureira P(1), de Mello RA, de Vasconcelos A, Zhang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Investigação e Inovação em Saúde, Universidade do Porto, Porto,
Portugal.

Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer-related death and accounts for
approximately 30% of all cancer deaths. Despite the recent developments in
personalized therapy, the prognosis in lung cancer is still very poor.
Immunotherapy is now emerging as a new hope for patients with lung cancer. It is 
well known that standard chemotherapeutic regimens have devastating effects for
the patient's immune system. Therefore, the aim of immunotherapy is to
specifically enhance the immune response against the tumour. Recently, many
trials addressed the role of such therapies for metastatic non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC) treatment: ipilimumab, tremelimumab, nivolumab and pembrolizumab
are immunotherapeutic agents of high relevance in this field. Anti-tumour
vaccines, as well as dendritic cell-based therapies, have emerged as potent
inducers of immune response against the tumour. Herein, we will review some of
the most promising cancer immunotherapies, highlighting their advantages and try 
to understand, in an immunological perspective, the missteps associated with the 
current treatments for cancer.

DOI: 10.1007/s13277-015-3285-6 
PMID: 25736929  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Drugs Today (Barc). 2015 Jan;51(1):7-20. doi: 10.1358/dot.2015.51.1.2250387.

Pembrolizumab: PD-1 inhibition as a therapeutic strategy in cancer.

McDermott J(1), Jimeno A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Oncology, Department of Medicine, University of Colorado
School of Medicine, Aurora, Colorado, USA. (2)Developmental Therapeutics Program,
University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora, Colorado, USA.
Antonio.Jimeno@ucdenver.edu.

Programmed cell death protein 1 (PD-1) and its ligands, programmed cell death 1
ligand 1 (PD-L1) and 2 (PD-L2) play an important role in regulating immune
response through various mechanisms. This inhibitory action is thought to assist 
in immune evasion by cancer cells as PD-1, PD-L1 and PD-L2 have been found to be 
abnormally expressed by tumor cells and lymphocytes in the tumor
microenvironment. Preclinical studies described PD-1 blockade resulting in tumor 
growth suppression and even decreased metastasis. This has led to the development
of pembrolizumab (MK-3475), a highly selective, humanized monoclonal IgG4-kappa
isotype antibody against PD-1. Early clinical trials have shown high tumor
response rates and long duration of effect in previously treated advanced
melanoma resulting in accelerated FDA approval for the drug in this situation.
Pembrolizumab has also had success in non-small cell lung cancer and is being
tested in multiple other tumor types. This review will discuss the development,
preclinical data, pharmacokinetics and clinical efficacy to date of
pembrolizumab.

Copyright 2015 Prous Science, S.A.U. or its licensors. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1358/dot.2015.51.1.2250387 
PMID: 25685857  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Oncotarget. 2015 Feb 28;6(6):3479-92.

PD-1 pathway inhibitors: the next generation of immunotherapy for advanced
melanoma.

Luke JJ(1), Ott PA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Section of Hematology/Oncology, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.
(2)Melanoma Disease Center, Dana Farber Cancer Institute and Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA, USA.

Checkpoint inhibitors are revolutionizing treatment options and expectations for 
patients with melanoma. Ipilimumab, a monoclonal antibody against cytotoxic
T-lymphocyte-associated antigen 4 (CTLA-4), was the first approved checkpoint
inhibitor. Emerging long-term data indicate that approximately 20% of
ipilimumab-treated patients achieve long-term survival. The first programmed
death 1 (PD-1) inhibitor, pembrolizumab, was recently approved by the United
States Food and Drug Administration for the treatment of melanoma; nivolumab was 
previously approved in Japan. PD-1 inhibitors are also poised to become standard 
of care treatment for other cancers, including non-small cell lung cancer, renal 
cell carcinoma and Hodgkin's lymphoma. Immunotherapy using checkpoint inhibition 
is a different treatment approach to chemotherapy and targeted agents: instead of
directly acting on the tumor to induce tumor cell death, checkpoint inhibitors
enhance or de novo stimulate antitumor immune responses to eliminate cancer
cells. Initial data suggest that objective anti-tumor response rates may be
higher with anti-PD-1 agents compared with ipilimumab and the safety profile may 
be more tolerable. This review explores the development and next steps for PD-1
pathway inhibitors, including discussion of their novel mechanism of action and
clinical data to-date, with a focus on melanoma.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.2980 
PMCID: PMC4414130
PMID: 25682878  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Oncology (Williston Park). 2014 Nov;28 Suppl 3:39-48.

Prognostic and predictive markers for the new immunotherapies.

Mahoney KM, Atkins MB.

Blocking the programmed cell death 1 (PD-1) pathway with monoclonal antibodies
has shown promising antitumor responses in clinical trials, with less toxicity
than has been seen with prior immune therapies such as interleukin 2 and
ipilimumab. Pembrolizumab, an anti-PD-1 antibody, recently gained US Food and
Drug Administration (FDA) accelerated approval for the treatment of patients with
ipilimumab-refractory melanoma, while nivolumab, another anti-PD-1 antibody, and 
MPDL3280A, an anti-programmed cell death 1 ligand (PD-L1) antibody, have been
granted FDA "breakthrough designation" for treatment of subsets of patients with 
refractory Hodgkin lymphoma and metastatic bladder cancer, respectively.
Encouraging antitumor activity has also been seen with these agents in patients
with other malignancies, including non-small-cell lung cancer and head and neck
cancer, tumors not previously thought to be immune-responsive. PD-L1 expression
has emerged as a potential predictive biomarker for PD-1-directed therapy.
Multiple, distinct, companion assays for PD-L1 positivity have been developed,
but there is as yet no comparison, standardization, or prospective validation of 
these assays. PD-L1 expression on tumor cells and/or the tumor-immune infiltrate 
is likely only part of the predictive model necessary for selecting patients
predisposed to respond to monotherapy. Additional predictive biomarkers are
necessary to identify patients most likely to benefit from PD-1-based combination
therapy, since tumor cell PD-L1 expression appears to have limited predictive
value in this setting.


PMID: 25384886  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Curr Treat Options Oncol. 2014 Dec;15(4):658-69. doi: 10.1007/s11864-014-0305-5.

Immune checkpoint inhibitors in NSCLC.

Johnson DB(1), Rioth MJ, Horn L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Hematology/Oncology, Vanderbilt University
Medical Center, Vanderbilt-Ingram Cancer Center, 2220 Pierce Avenue, 777 Preston 
Research Building, Nashville, TN, 37232, USA, douglas.b.johnson@vanderbilt.edu.

OPINION STATEMENT: Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer-related mortality
worldwide. Cytotoxic chemotherapy and tyrosine kinase inhibitors provide
palliation and prolong survival, however, the median survival for patients with
metastatic disease remains poor and more effective therapies are needed. Immune
checkpoint inhibitors have shown promising results in phase I trials and are
being evaluated in ongoing clinical trials in both small cell lung cancer (SCLC) 
and non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients. These include agents targeting
the programmed cell death-1 receptor and its ligand (PD-1/PD-L1; notably
nivolumab, pembrolizumab, MPDL3280A, and MEDI-4736) and cytotoxic
T-lymphocyte-associated antigen 4 (CTLA-4; ipilimumab and tremelimumab); these
agents induce antitumor responses by inhibiting critical negative T cell
regulators. In particular, the anti-PD-1/PD-L1 therapies administered as single
agent therapy in chemotherapy refractory patients have produced objective
response rates ranging from 15 %-25 %, the majority of which were rapid and
ongoing 1 year after starting therapy. Furthermore, the toxicity profile for
these agents differs from that of cytotoxic chemotherapy but generally is much
better tolerated. Promising biomarkers, particularly tumor expression of PD-L1
and tumor infiltrating lymphocytes, may aid in treatment selection and
stratification. Ongoing evaluation is needed to define the most appropriate
timing and patient population that will benefit from therapy with an immune
checkpoint inhibitors and the role of combining these agents with existing
therapies including systemic therapy and radiation.

DOI: 10.1007/s11864-014-0305-5 
PMCID: PMC4216599
PMID: 25096781  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Am J Clin Oncol. 2015 Aug;38(4):422-30. doi: 10.1097/COC.0000000000000059.

Emerging immunotherapies in the treatment of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC): 
the role of immune checkpoint inhibitors.

Langer CJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Oncology, Abramson Cancer Center, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA.

Immune checkpoint inhibition as a new treatment approach is undergoing extensive 
investigation in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and other malignancies.
Unlike standard chemotherapy or targeted agents, which act directly on the tumor 
cells, immune checkpoint inhibitors work by restoring the immune system's
capacity to eradicate tumors. Agents currently in active clinical development for
lung cancer include ipilimumab, which modulates the cytotoxic
T-lymphocyte-associated antigen 4 pathway, and multiple agents targeting the
programmed death protein 1 (PD-1) pathway, both anti-PD-1 compounds (nivolumab,
pembrolizumab [MK-3475]) and those that target programmed death ligand 1 (PD-L1),
a key ligand for PD-1 (BMS-936559, MPDL3280A). Preliminary evidence shows
activity for these agents in NSCLC as monotherapy or in combination with
chemotherapy. This article reviews the immune checkpoint inhibitors and the
available data to date on their use in lung cancer. Clinical implications for the
use of these therapies in NSCLC are discussed as they relate to their novel
mechanisms of action, response patterns, and safety profiles.

DOI: 10.1097/COC.0000000000000059 
PMID: 24685885  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Expert Opin Investig Drugs. 2017 Feb 6. doi: 10.1080/13543784.2017.1292250. [Epub
ahead of print]

Eribulin in non-small cell lung cancer: challenges and potential strategies.

Swami U(1), Shah U(2), Goel S(2).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Hematology and Oncology , University of Iowa Hospitals and
Clinics , 200 Hawkins Dr, Iowa City , IA 52242 , USA. (2)b Department of Medical 
Oncology, Montefiore Medical Center , Albert Einstein College of Medicine , 1695 
Eastchester Road, Bronx , NY 10461 , USA.

INTRODUCTION: Eribulin is a non-taxane, macrocyclic, synthetic, ketone analog of 
Halichondrin B with a microtubule inhibitory action specific towards plus ends.
It is approved by United States Food and Drug Administration (USFDA) for the
treatment of patients with unresectable or metastatic liposarcoma who have
received a prior anthracycline-containing regimen. It is also approved as a third
line therapy for patients with metastatic breast cancer who have received a prior
treatment with anthracycline and taxane in either adjuvant or metastatic setting.
It has also undergone investigation in various cancers including non-small cell
lung cancer (NSCLC). Areas covered: This review covers eribulin in detail with
regards to pharmacodynamics, mechanism of action, pharmacokinetics, published
phase I studies along with special focus on phase II and III studies of eribulin 
in NSCLC. Expert opinion: Eribulin is a potent chemotherapeutic agent with
acceptable and easily manageable toxicity profile. It has shown activity in
NSCLC. However, the management of NSCLC is undergoing rapid evolution with
introduction of newer immune mediated and targeted agents. The way to move
forward is to combine eribulin with novel immune checkpoint inhibitors, targeted 
agents and chemotherapies in appropriate line of therapy.

DOI: 10.1080/13543784.2017.1292250 
PMID: 28161993  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. J Manag Care Spec Pharm. 2017 Feb;23(2):195-205. doi:
10.18553/jmcp.2017.23.2.195.

Treatment Patterns and Overall Survival Associated with First-Line Systemic
Therapy for Patients with Advanced Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer.

Spence MM(1), Hui RL(2), Chang JT(3), Schottinger JE(4), Millares M(5), Rashid
N(1).

Author information: 
(1)1 Pharmacy Outcomes Research Group, Kaiser Permanente Southern California,
Downey, California. (2)4 Pharmacy Outcomes Research Group, Kaiser Permanente
Northern California, Oakland, California. (3)2 Drug Information Services, Kaiser 
Permanente Southern California, Downey, California. (4)5 Quality and Clinical
Analysis, Kaiser Permanente Southern California, Pasadena, California. (5)3 Drug 
Information Services and Pharmacy Outcomes Research, Kaiser Permanente Southern
California, Downey, California.

BACKGROUND: A variety of regimens are used as first-line treatment in patients
with advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), which may include combination
regimens and single agents, depending on histology, molecular profile, and
performance status.
OBJECTIVE: To describe the types of first-line therapies and compare overall
survival between therapies used for patients with advanced NSCLC in an integrated
health care system.
METHODS: This retrospective cohort study included patients aged 18 years or older
from Kaiser Permanente California with a diagnosis of stage IIIB/IV NSCLC. First 
systemic treatment date occurred from January 1, 2008, through September 30,
2013. Overall survival was measured as the number of months from initial
treatment until death, end of enrollment, or September 30, 2014. Treatment
regimens were categorized into 6 mutually exclusive groups: platinum doublets;
pemetrexed-based, bevacizumab-based, and pemetrexed + bevacizumab-based
combinations; singlets; and tyrosine-kinase inhibitors (TKIs). Survival was
compared using Kaplan-Meier curves and adjusted Cox proportional hazard models.
Subgroup analyses were performed by age group and by nonsquamous histology.
RESULTS: Of 2,081 patients, approximately half (52.3%) received platinum
doublets, followed by TKIs (19.0%), pemetrexed-based regimens (13.4%),
bevacizumab-regimens (8.0%), singlets (5.5%), and pemetrexed + bevacizumab-based 
combinations (1.8%). Median survival was longest for pemetrexed +
bevacizumab-based combinations (18.5 months), followed by bevacizumab-based
regimens (14.5), TKIs (12.7), pemetrexed-based regimens (10.4), doublets (9.2),
and singlets (5.3). There was a significantly reduced risk of mortality for
pemetrexed + bevacizumab-based combinations (HR = 0.64; 95% CI = 0.42-0.94) and
TKIs (HR = 0.83; 95% CI = 0.73-0.94) compared with doublets. Singlets were
associated with an increased risk of mortality (HR = 1.50; 95% CI = 1.22-1.84).
Subgroup analysis among patients aged 65 years and over found no significant
differences among treatment groups, with the exception of singlets, which were
associated with an increased risk of mortality compared with doublets (HR = 1.51;
95% CI = 1.20-1.90). Among patients under aged 65 years, pemetrexed +
bevacizumab-based combinations (HR = 0.36; 95% CI = 0.21-0.64) and TKIs (HR =
0.76; 95% CI = 0.59-0.97) were associated with a reduced risk of mortality, and
singlets were associated with an increased risk (HR = 1.85; 95% CI = 1.17-2.92).
CONCLUSIONS: In this cohort of patients with advanced NSCLC, patients received a 
platinum agent with or without bevacizumab or pemetrexed, a TKI, or a single
agent. Younger patients (aged < 65 years) receiving bevacizumab +
pemetrexed-based combinations had a survival advantage over those receiving
platinum doublets, and this finding merits further investigation. Younger
patients receiving TKIs also had longer survival. Compared with platinum
doublets, we found no survival advantage for older patients receiving bevacizumab
or pemetrexed, which suggests that combination therapy of a platinum agent and
taxane, such as carboplatin and paclitaxel, could be a reasonable option for
older patients who are not candidates for targeted therapy.
DISCLOSURES: No outside funding supported this study. Rashid has received past
funding from Bristol-Myers Squibb, Astellas, Novartis, and Pfizer. No other
authors report any potential financial conflicts of interest. Study concept and
design were primarily contributed by Spence and Hui, with input from the other
authors. Hui, Spence, and Rashid took the lead in data collection, and data
interpretation was performed by Schottinger, Millares, and Spence, assisted by
the other authors. The manuscript was written primarily by Spence, along with
Chang, and revised by Spence, with input from the other authors.

DOI: 10.18553/jmcp.2017.23.2.195 
PMID: 28125366  [PubMed - in process]


3. Clin Lung Cancer. 2016 Dec 22. pii: S1525-7304(16)30384-9. doi:
10.1016/j.cllc.2016.12.008. [Epub ahead of print]

Comparative Effectiveness and Resource Usage in Patients Receiving First-line
Taxane-based Chemotherapy for Stage IV Non-Small-cell Lung Cancer in a US
Community Oncology Setting.

Weiss J(1), Force RW(2), Pugmire BA(2), Peterson T(2), Faria C(3),
Margunato-Debay S(3), Patel MB(3).

Author information: 
(1)Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina at Chapel
Hill, Chapel Hill, NC. Electronic address: jared_weiss@med.unc.edu. (2)improveRx,
Pocatello, ID. (3)Celgene Corporation, Summit, NJ.

BACKGROUND: Weekly (qw) nanoparticle albumin-bound (nab)-paclitaxel was approved 
for advanced non-small-cell lung cancer based on the results from a phase III
trial in which nab-paclitaxel/carboplatin demonstrated a significantly greater
response rate compared with paclitaxel/carboplatin every 3 weeks (q3w). Little
information exists on relative real-world results.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The present retrospective study used data from a national 
electronic medical record database. Patients receiving first-line nab-paclitaxel 
qw, paclitaxel qw, or paclitaxel q3w for stage IV non-small-cell lung cancer
(NSCLC) were identified. The total cumulative dose, time to treatment
discontinuation (TTD), and database persistence (a proxy measure for survival)
were analyzed for all patients and for the squamous and elderly subgroups.
RESULTS: A total of 114, 208, and 153 patients received nab-paclitaxel qw,
paclitaxel qw, and paclitaxel q3w, respectively. In the corresponding treatment
arms, the median age was 72, 69, and 67 years; 56%, 48%, and 37% were aged ≥ 70
years; and 75%, 43%, and 23% had squamous cell NSCLC. The total cumulative dose
was significantly greater with nab-paclitaxel qw. The TTD was longer with
nab-paclitaxel qw than with paclitaxel qw (hazard ratio [HR], 0.54; 95%
confidence interval [CI], 0.40-0.72; P < .001) or with paclitaxel q3w (HR, 0.53; 
95% CI, 0.38-0.73; P < .001). Database persistence was longer with nab-paclitaxel
qw than with paclitaxel qw (HR, 0.56; 95% CI, 0.39-0.79; P = .001) or with
paclitaxel q3w (HR, 0.52; 95% CI, 0.34-0.78; P = .002). The TTD after
experiencing any hematologic adverse event was longer with nab-paclitaxel qw. The
findings were consistent across the subgroup analyses.
CONCLUSION: In a real-world setting, nab-paclitaxel qw was associated with a
significantly greater cumulative dose and significantly longer TTD and database
persistence compared with paclitaxel qw and paclitaxel q3w.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cllc.2016.12.008 
PMID: 28117221  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


4. Br J Cancer. 2017 Jan 17. doi: 10.1038/bjc.2016.453. [Epub ahead of print]

Aurora B expression modulates paclitaxel response in non-small cell lung cancer.

Al-Khafaji AS(1,)(2), Davies MP(1), Risk JM(3), Marcus MW(1), Koffa M(4), Gosney 
JR(1), Shaw RJ(3), Field JK(1), Liloglou T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Roy Castle Lung Cancer Research Programme, Department of Molecular and
Clinical Cancer Medicine, Institute of Translational Medicine, University of
Liverpool, Liverpool, UK. (2)Department of Biology, Collage of Science,
University of Baghdad, Baghdad, Iraq. (3)Mersey Head and Neck Oncology Research
Group, Department of Molecular and Clinical Cancer Medicine, Institute of
Translational Medicine, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, UK. (4)Department of 
Molecular Biology and Genetics, Democritus University of Thrace, Alexandroupolis,
Greece.

BACKGROUND: Taxanes are mitotic poisons widely used in the treatment of non-small
cell lung cancer (NSCLC), however, little is known about potential molecular
modulators of response to these compounds. Aurora B (AURKB) is a critical
regulator of the mitotic spindle assembly, previously shown overexpressed in
NSCLC. Here we investigated the hypothesis that AURKB expression modulates the
efficacy of taxanes in NSCLC cells.
METHODS: AURKB mRNA expression was determined by qPCR in 132 frozen NSCLC tissues
and nine NSCLC cell lines. Aurora B expression was knocked down in cell lines
using multiple shRNA constructs. Barasertib was used to specifically inhibit
AURKB activity, determined by the level of H3S10 phosphorylation.
RESULTS: Frequent AURKB mRNA upregulation was observed in NSCLC tissues
(P<0.0001), being more prominent in squamous carcinomas (P<0.0001). Aurora B
expression in cell lines strongly correlated with sensitivity to both docetaxel
(P=0.004) and paclitaxel (P=0.007). Aurora B knockdown derivatives consistently
showed a dose-dependent association between low-AURKB expression and resistance
to paclitaxel. Specific chemical inhibition of Aurora B activity also
demonstrated a strong dose-dependent efficiency in triggering paclitaxel
resistance.
CONCLUSIONS: Aurora B activity is an important modulator of taxane response in
NSCLC cells. This may lead to further insights into taxane sensitivity of NSCLC
tumours.British Journal of Cancer advance online publication 17 January 2017.
doi:10.1038/bjc.2016.453 www.bjcancer.com.

DOI: 10.1038/bjc.2016.453 
PMID: 28095398  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


5. Lancet. 2016 Oct;388 Suppl 1:S95. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(16)32022-0.

Dynamic contrast-enhanced MRI to predict response to vinorelbine-cisplatin alone 
or with rh-endostatin in patients with non-small cell lung cancer and bone
metastases: a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial.

Zhang R(1), Wang ZY(1), Li YH(2), Lu YH(3), Wang S(4), Yu WX(1), Zhao H(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Oncology, Shanghai Sixth People's Hospital Affiliated
to Shanghai Jiaotong University, Shanghai, China. (2)Department of Radiology,
Shanghai Sixth People's Hospital Affiliated to Shanghai Jiaotong University,
Shanghai, China. (3)Department of Clinical Skill Laboratory, Shanghai Sixth
People's Hospital Affiliated to Shanghai Jiaotong University, Shanghai, China.
(4)Department of Internal Oncology, Shanghai Sixth People's Hospital, Soochow
University, Shanghai, China. (5)Department of Internal Oncology, Shanghai Sixth
People's Hospital Affiliated to Shanghai Jiaotong University, Shanghai, China.
Electronic address: zhao-hui@sjtu.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: Metastatic bone disease is a frequent complication of advanced
non-small-cell lung cancer and causes skeletal-related events which result in a
poor prognosis. A standard method to assess the therapeutic response of bone
metastases does not currently exist. We used dynamic contrast-enhanced MRI to
obtain quantitative measures to assess the suitability of this technique to gauge
therapeutic response to vinorelbine-cisplatin plus rh-endostatinfor previously
untreated non-small cell lung cancer with bone metastases.
METHODS: We did a phase 4, randomised, prospective, double-blind,
placebo-controlled clinical trial in Shanghai Sixth People's Hospital, Shanghai, 
China. Inclusion criteria were non-small-cell lung cancer patients with bone
metastases confirmed by pathology or cytology; available imaging data of pelvic
metastatic lesions; aged 18 to 75 years old; expected survival at least 3 months;
not receiving taxane, bevacizumab, thalidomide, rh-endostatin, or bisphosphonate;
not having radiation therapy within 3 months of enrollment into study; normal
results of routine blood tests, liver and kidney function, and electrocardiogram;
absence of cardiovascular disease, autoimmune disease, vasculitis, severe
infection, diabetes, and other concomitant disease; and signed informed consent. 
Exclusion criteria were receiving granulocyte colony stimulating factor or
granulocyte-macrophage colony stimulating factor during chemotherapy, intolerance
to adverse reaction, and allergy to contrast agents. Patients were randomly
assigned to treatment group and control group at a ratio of 2:1 by random code
generation by an independent biostatistician in a double-blind fashion.
Participants received either vinorelbine-cisplatin plus rh-endostatin or
vinorelbine-cisplatin plus placebo. Vinorelbine (25 mg/m(2)) and cisplatin (75
mg/m(2)) were administered intravenously on the first day of a 21 day cycle.
Patients received rh-endostatin (7·5 mg/m(2)) or placebo on days 1-14 of a cycle.
The primary end points were objective response rate (complete remission+partial
remission)/total × 100) and disease control rate (complete remission+partial
remission+stable disease)/total × 100). Measurements including Ktrans, Kep, and
Ve were evaluated by dynamic contrast-enhanced MRI before treatment and after
completion of 2 treatment cycles. Blood concentrations of bone metabolites,
tumour markers, and tumour vascular growth related factors were measured before
and after treatment. Comparisons were made using paired t-test. Kaplan-Meier
survival analysis was used to indicate the correlation between some measurements 
and progression-free survival or overall survival. The difference in Ktrans
between patients who had partial remission or stable disease group and those who 
had disease progression was tested using the Chi-square test. All statistical
analyses were performed with SPSS version 21.0. This trial was approved by the
State Food and Drug Administration (No: S20050088) and China State Food and Drug 
Administration. The trial is registered with China Clinical Trials Registry,
number chictr-ctr-09000569. Written informed consent and ethical approval was
obtained.
FINDINGS: We enrolled 33 patients (aged 52-70, 15 men and 18 women) of whom 28
were evaluable (20 in treatment group and 8 in control group). Five patients were
excluded: 2 patients in treatment group and 1 patient in control group used
granulocyte-macrophage colony stimulating factor, and 2 patients in the control
group refused treatment. Objective response rate was higher (30% vs 0%;
p<0·00001), mean overall survival was longer (21·44 [SD 17·28] vs 7·71 [4·68]
months, p=0·008), and reduction in capillary permeability (measured by Ktrans)
was greater (60·0% vs 4·4%; p=0·026) in the group given rh-endostatin than in the
control group. Disease control rate was 80% in the treatment group and 75% in the
control group (p=0·07). Overall survival was longer in patients with a greater
than 50% reduction in Ktrans than in patients with a decrease of up to 50% (13·2 
[1·8] vs 9·8 [0·2] months, p=0·026).
INTERPRETATION: Addition of rh-endostatin to treatment with vinorelbine-cisplatin
increased the treatment response in patients with non-small cell lung cancer and 
bone metastases. Quantitative analysis using dynamic contrast-enhanced MRI can be
used to evaluate therapeutic response and to predict survival of bone metastases 
after anti-angiogenesis therapy. Limitations of this study include the small
number of patients and the single-centre design.
FUNDING: National Natural Science Foundation of China [grant number 81201628].

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(16)32022-0 
PMID: 27968915  [PubMed - in process]


6. Ann Oncol. 2016 Nov 9. pii: mdw608. [Epub ahead of print]

A Randomized Trial of TLR-2 agonist CADI-05 targeting desmocollin-3 for advanced 
non-small-cell lung cancer.

Belani CP(1), Chakraborty B(2), Modi R(2), Khamar B(3).

Author information: 
(1)Penn State Milton S, Hershey Medical Center, Penn State Hershey Cancer
Institute, Hershey, PA, USA. (2)Cadila Pharmaceuticals Ltd., Ahmedabad, India.
(3)Cadila Pharmaceuticals Ltd., Ahmedabad, India bmk@cadilapharma.co.in.

BACKGROUND: Randomised controlled trial to evaluate synergy between taxane plus
platinum chemotherapy and CADI-05, a TLR-2 agonist targeting desmocollin-3 as a
first line therapy in advanced Non Small cell lung cancer (NSCLC).
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Patients with advanced NSCLC (stage IIIB or IV) were
randomized to Cisplatin-Paclitaxel (Chemotherapy group, N=112) or
Cisplatin-Paclitaxel plus CADI-05 (Chemoimmunotherapy group, N=109). CADI-05 was 
administered a week prior to chemotherapy and on day 8 and 15 of each cycle and
every month subsequently for 12 months or disease progression. Overall survival
was compared using a log-rank test. Computed tomography was performed at
baseline, end of two cycles and four cycles. Response rate was evaluated using
RECIST criteria by an independent radiologist.
RESULTS: As per ITT analysis no survival benefit was observed between two groups 
(208 vs. 196 days; hazard ratio, 0.86; 95% CI, 0.63 to 1.19; P=0.3804). In a
subgroup analysis, improvement in median survival by 127 days was observed in
Squamous NSCC with chemoimmunotherapy (hazard ratio, 0.55; 95% CI, 0.32 to 0.95; 
P=0.046). In patients receiving planned four cycles of chemotherapy, there was
improved median overall survival by 66 days (299 vs. 233 days; hazard ratio,
0.64; 95% CI, 0.41 to 0.98; P=0.04) in Chemoimmunotherapy group compared to
chemotherapy group This was associated with improved survival by 17.48% at the
end of one year, in Chemoimmunotherapy group. Systemic adverse events were
identical in both the groups.
CONCLUSION: There was no survival benefit with the addition of CADI-05 to the
combination of Cisplatin-Paclitaxel in patients with advanced NSCLC; however, the
squamous cell subset did demonstrate a survival advantage.
CLINICAL TRIAL NO: NTC00680940 at clinicaltrials.gov.

© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the European
Society for Medical Oncology. All rights reserved. For permissions, please email:
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/annonc/mdw608 
PMID: 27831503  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


7. Lung Cancer. 2016 Nov;101:68-75. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2016.09.008. Epub 2016
Sep 9.

Development of symptomatic brain metastases after chemoradiotherapy for stage III
non-small cell lung cancer: Does the type of chemotherapy regimen matter?

Hendriks LE(1), Brouns AJ(2), Amini M(3), Uyterlinde W(4), Wijsman R(5), Bussink 
J(6), Biesma B(7), Oei SB(8), Stigt JA(9), Bootsma GP(10), Belderbos JS(11), De
Ruysscher DK(12), Van den Heuvel MM(13), Dingemans AC(14).

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Pulmonary Diseases, GROW - School for Oncology and Developmental
Biology, Maastricht University Medical Center+, PO Box 5800, 6202 AZ Maastricht, 
The Netherlands. Electronic address: lizza.hendriks@mumc.nl. (2)Dept. of
Pulmonary Diseases, Zuyderland Medical Center location Heerlen, PO Box 5500, 6130
MB Sittard-Geleen, The Netherlands. Electronic address: a.brouns@zuyderland.nl.
(3)Dept. of Pulmonary Diseases, Jeroen Bosch Hospital, PO Box 90153, 5200 ME 's
Hertogenbosch, The Netherlands. Electronic address: M.Amini@jbz.nl. (4)Dept. of
Thoracic Oncology, The Netherlands Cancer Institute/Antoni van Leeuwenhoek
Hospital, PO Box 90203, 1006 BE Amsterdam, The Netherlands. Electronic address:
W.uyterlinde@nki.nl. (5)Dept. of Radiation Oncology, Radboud University Hospital,
PO Box 9100, 6500 HA Nijmegen, The Netherlands. Electronic address:
Robin.Wijsman@radboudumc.nl. (6)Dept. of Radiation Oncology, Radboud University
Hospital, PO Box 9100, 6500 HA Nijmegen, The Netherlands. Electronic address:
Jan.Bussink@radboudumc.nl. (7)Dept. of Pulmonary Diseases, Jeroen Bosch Hospital,
PO Box 90153, 5200 ME 's Hertogenbosch, The Netherlands. Electronic address:
b.biesma@jbz.nl. (8)Dept. of Radiation Oncology, Institute Verbeeten, PO Box
90120, 5000 LA Tilburg, The Netherlands. Electronic address: oei@bvi.nl. (9)Dept.
of Pulmonary Diseases, Isala Clinics, PO Box 10400, 8000 GK Zwolle, The
Netherlands. Electronic address: j.a.stigt@isala.nl. (10)Dept. of Pulmonary
Diseases, Zuyderland Medical Center location Heerlen, PO Box 5500, 6130 MB
Sittard-Geleen, The Netherlands. Electronic address: g.bootsma@zuyderland.nl.
(11)Dept. of Radiation Oncology, The Netherlands Cancer Institute/Antoni van
Leeuwenhoek Hospital, PO Box 90203, 1006 BE Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
Electronic address: j.belderbos@nki.nl. (12)Dept. of Radiation Oncology (MAASTRO 
Clinic), GROW - School for Oncology and Developmental Biology, Maastricht
University Medical Center+, PO Box 3035, 6202 NA Maastricht, The Netherlands.
Electronic address: dirk.deruysscher@maastro.nl. (13)Dept. of Thoracic Oncology, 
The Netherlands Cancer Institute/Antoni van Leeuwenhoek Hospital, PO Box 90203,
1006 BE Amsterdam, The Netherlands. Electronic address: m.vd.heuvel@nki.nl.
(14)Dept. of Pulmonary Diseases, GROW - School for Oncology and Developmental
Biology, Maastricht University Medical Center+, PO Box 5800, 6202 AZ Maastricht, 
The Netherlands. Electronic address: a.dingemans@mumc.nl.

OBJECTIVES: Symptomatic brain metastases (BM) occur frequently after
chemoradiotherapy (CRT) for stage III NSCLC. Aim of the current study was to
determine whether the specific chemotherapy used in a CRT regimen influences BM
development.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Retrospective multicenter study including all consecutive 
stage III NSCLC who completed CRT. Primary endpoints: symptomatic BM development,
whether this was the only site of first relapse. Differences between regimens
were assessed with a logistic regression model including known BM risk factors
and the specific chemotherapy: concurrent versus sequential (cCRT/sCRT), within
cCRT: daily low dose cisplatin (LDC)-cyclic dose polychemotherapy;
LDC-(non-)taxane cyclic dose; LDC-polychemotherapy subgroups of ≥50 patients.
RESULTS: Between January 2006 and June 2014, 838 patients were eligible (737
cCRT, 101 sCRT). 18.2% developed symptomatic BM, 8.0% had BM as only site of
first relapse. BM patients were significantly younger, female, had more advanced 
N-stage and had adenocarcinoma histology. In both cCRT and sCRT BM were found in 
18% (p=0.904). In cyclic dose cCRT (N=346) and LDC (N=391) BM were found in 18.8%
and 17.9%, respectively (p=0.757). In 7.2% and 8.7%, respectively, BM were the
only site of first relapse (p=0.463). The chemotherapy used (cCRT versus sCRT)
had no influence on BM development, not for all brain relapses nor as only site
of first relapse (OR 0.88 (p=0.669), OR 0.93 (p=0.855), respectively). LDC versus
cyclic dose cCRT was not significantly different: neither for all brain relapses 
nor as only site of first relapse (OR 0.96 (p=0.819), OR 1.21 (p=0.498),
respectively). Comparable results were found for LDC versus cyclic dose
non-taxane (N=277) and cyclic dose taxane regimens (N=69) and for cCRT regimens
with ≥50 patients (LDC versus cisplatin/etoposide (N=188), cisplatin/vinorelbin
(N=65), weekly cisplatin/docetaxel (N=60)).
CONCLUSION: approximately 18% developed symptomatic BM after stage III diagnosis,
not dependent on type of chemotherapy regimen used within a CRT treatment.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2016.09.008 
PMID: 27794410  [PubMed - in process]


8. Expert Rev Respir Med. 2016 Oct 3:1-13. [Epub ahead of print]

The role of docetaxel in the treatment of non-small cell lung cancer lung cancer:
an update.

Matikas A(1), Georgoulias V(1), Kotsakis A(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Hellenic Oncology Research Group (HORG) , Athens , Greece.

INTRODUCTION: Non-small cell lung cancer lung cancer (NSCLC) is a devastating
disease, with poor prognosis for patients with metastatic disease. The management
of these patients has evolved during the past decade, challenging the role of
cytotoxic chemotherapy as the only available treatment option. Nevertheless,
chemotherapy still retains a dominant position for the majority of both treatment
naïve and pretreated patients. Among the chemotherapeutic agents, docetaxel is
one of the most commonly used in 1st and subsequent treatment lines, even in the 
current era of precision medicine. Areas covered: We searched Medline, Embase,
Scopus and Cochrane Library for randomized phase III trials that evaluated
docetaxel in various clinical settings of NSCLC and for meta-analyses of such
trials and we present all relevant data regarding the pharmacology and clinical
use of docetaxel in NSCLC. Expert commentary: Despite its diminishing role,
docetaxel in combination with novel targeted agents remains an important option
of the therapeutic armamentarium in advanced NSCLC.

DOI: 10.1080/17476348.2016.1240620 
PMID: 27661451  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


9. Clin Transl Oncol. 2017 Mar;19(3):317-325. doi: 10.1007/s12094-016-1532-y. Epub
2016 Aug 4.

Salvage treatment with irinotecan/cisplatin versus pemetrexed/cisplatin in
patients with non-small cell lung cancer pre-treated with a non-platinum-based
regimen in the first-line setting: a randomized phase II study of the Hellenic
Oncology Research Group (HORG).

Kentepozidis N(1), Economopoulou P(1), Christofyllakis C(1), Chelis L(1), Polyzos
A(1), Vardakis N(1), Koinis F(1), Vamvakas L(1), Katsaounis P(1), Kalbakis K(1), 
Nikolaou C(1), Georgoulias V(1), Kotsakis A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Lung Cancer Working Group of the Hellenic Oncology Research Group (HORG), 55
Lomvardou Street, 11471, Athens, Greece. (2)Lung Cancer Working Group of the
Hellenic Oncology Research Group (HORG), 55 Lomvardou Street, 11471, Athens,
Greece. info@horg.gr.

BACKGROUND: Platinum-based chemotherapy is the standard front-line treatment for 
patients with advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). However, non-platinum 
combinations of third-generation chemotherapeutic agents are considered an
alternative therapeutic option for patients who cannot tolerate the toxic effects
of platinum compounds. In this study, the efficacy and toxicity of the
combination of irinotecan plus cisplatin (IC) was compared to pemetrexed plus
cisplatin (PC) regimen, in platinum-naïve patients with advanced NSCLC, who had
been previously treated with the combination of a taxane plus gemcitabine.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: A total of 124 patients with locally advanced or metastatic
NSCLC were randomly assigned to either irinotecan 110 mg/m(2) on day 1 and
100 mg/m(2) on day 8 plus cisplatin 80 mg/m(2) on day 8 every 3 weeks (IC arm) or
pemetrexed 500 mg/m(2) plus cisplatin 80 mg/m(2) on day 1 every 3 weeks (PC arm).
The primary endpoint of the study was the overall response rate (ORR).
RESULTS: The ORR and median progression-free survival (PFS) in the IC arm were
18 % and 3.3 months, respectively, while in the PC arm were 19 % and 4.2 months
(p = ns). Median overall survival (OS) was significantly higher in patients with 
PC (6.9 vs. 10.9; p = 0.013). PC regimen had a better toxicity profile compared
to IC, with a statistically significant lower incidence of grade 3/4 neutropenia 
(3 vs. 31 %; p = 0.0001) and diarrhea (1.6 vs. 14.7 %, p = 0.018).
CONCLUSIONS: In patients with advanced NSCLC pretreated with
docetaxel/gemcitabine, the combination of pemetrexed/cisplatin is associated with
increased OS and is better tolerated than the combination of irinotecan/cisplatin
and should be considered as a valid therapeutic option for platinum-naive,
previously treated patients. CLINICALTRIALS.
GOV IDENTIFIER: NCT00614965.

DOI: 10.1007/s12094-016-1532-y 
PMID: 27492015  [PubMed - in process]


10. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol. 2016 Sep;78(3):509-15. doi:
10.1007/s00280-016-3088-5. Epub 2016 Jul 14.

Phase II study of a novel taxane (Cabazitaxel-XRP 6258) in previously treated
advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients.

Madan A(1), Jones BS(1), Bordoni R(2), Saleh MN(1), Jerome MS(3), Miley DK(4),
Jackson BE(5), Robert F(6).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of
Alabama at Birmingham, 1824 Sixth Avenue South, WTI 210B, Birmingham, AL,
934-5077, USA. (2)Georgia Cancer Specialists, Affiliated with Northside Hospital 
Cancer Institute, Marietta, GA, USA. (3)Clinical Studies Unit, Comprehensive
Cancer Center, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, USA.
(4)Clinical Studies Unit, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL,
USA. (5)Division of Preventive Medicine, Comprehensive Cancer Center, University 
of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, USA. (6)Division of
Hematology/Oncology, Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Alabama at
Birmingham, 1824 Sixth Avenue South, WTI 210B, Birmingham, AL, 934-5077, USA.
pacorobertuab@cs.com.

PURPOSE: Given the success of cabazitaxel in patients with prostate cancer who
progressed after receiving prior chemotherapy, its preclinical efficacy in
various cell lines and possible ability to cross blood-brain barrier, cabazitaxel
was hypothesized to increase objective response rate (ORR) in second-line setting
in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC).
METHODS: This was a phase II 2-stage trial in 28 patients using two different
treatment schedules (A: 20 mg/m(2) every 3 weeks intravenously and B: 8.4 mg/m(2)
intravenously weekly) to determine the ORR of cabazitaxel with secondary end
points including progression-free survival (PFS), safety, and overall survival
(OS).
RESULTS: There was one objective response in schedule B. PFS and OS of schedule A
was 3 and 6 months, respectively. PFS and OS of schedule B was 3 and 13 months,
respectively. The stable disease rate was higher in schedule A (SD = 69.23 %;
95 % CL 38.57, 90.90) as compared to schedule B (SD = 38.46 %; 95 % CL 13.86,
68.42), but this difference was not statistically significant (P value = 0.1156).
There were two grade 5 toxicities from sepsis. Hematuria of any grade developed
in greater percentage of patients (35%) as compared to previous cabazitaxel phase
3 trial and led to change in our protocol.
CONCLUSIONS: Response to cabazitaxel in NSCLC was not as robust as seen in
prostate cancer and not superior to currently used agents such as docetaxel,
pemetrexed, and erlotinib. In absence of significant objective responses, the
second stage of the study was not undertaken.

DOI: 10.1007/s00280-016-3088-5 
PMID: 27417317  [PubMed - in process]


11. Ann Transl Med. 2016 May;4(9):161. doi: 10.21037/atm.2016.05.13.

Prognostic factors for long term survival in patients with advanced non-small
cell lung cancer.

Moumtzi D(1), Lampaki S(1), Zarogoulidis P(1), Porpodis K(1), Lagoudi K(1),
Hohenforst-Schmidt W(1), Pataka A(1), Tsiouda T(1), Zissimopoulos A(1), Lazaridis
G(1), Karavasilis V(1), Timotheadou H(1), Barbetakis N(1), Pavlidis P(1),
Kontakiotis T(1), Zarogoulidis K(1).

Author information: 
(1)1 Pulmonary Department-Oncology Unit, "G. Papanikolaou" General Hospital,
Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki, Greece ; 2 Medical Clinic I, 
"Fuerth'' Hospital, University of Erlangen, Fuerth, Germany ; 3 Nuclear Medicine 
Department, University General Hospital of Alexandroupolis, Democritus University
of Thrace, Alexandroupolis, Greece ; 4 Oncology Department, "G. Papageorgiou"
University Hospital, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki, Greece ;
5 Thoracic Surgery Department, "Theageneio" Anticancer Hospital, Thessaloniki,
Greece ; 6 Forensic Medicine Department, University General Hospital of
Alexandroupolis, Democritus University of Thrace, Alexandroupolis, Greece.

BACKGROUND: Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) represents 85% of all lung
cancers. It is estimated that 60% of patients with NSCLC at time of diagnosis
have advanced disease. The aim of this study was to investigate clinical and
demographic prognostic factors of long term survival in patients with
unresectable NSCLC.
METHODS: We retrospectively reviewed data of 1,156 patients with NSCLC stage IIIB
or IV who survived more than 60 days from the time of diagnosis and treated from 
August 1987 until March 2013 in the Oncology Department of Pulmonary Clinic of
the General Hospital Papanikolaou. Initially univariate analysis using the
log-rank test was conducted and then multivariate analysis using the proportional
hazards model of Cox. Also Kaplan Meier curves were used to describe the
distribution of survival times of patients. The level of significance was set at 
0.05.
RESULTS: The mean age at diagnosis was 62 years. About 11.9% of patients were
women and 88.1% were male. The majority of cases were adenocarcinomas (42.2%),
followed squamous (33%) and finally the large cell (6%). Unlike men, most common 
histological type among women was adenocarcinoma rather than squamous (63% vs.
10.9%). In univariate analysis statistically significant factors in the
progression free survival (PFS) and overall survival (OS) were: weight loss ≥5%, 
histological type, line 1 drugs, line 1 combination, line 1 cycles and radio
lung. Specifically radio lung gives clear survival benefit in the PFS and OS in
stage IIIB (P=0.002) and IV (P<0.001). On the other hand, the number of distant
metastases in stage IV patients did not affect OS, neither PFS. In addition
patients who received platinum and taxane had better PFS (P=0.001) and OS
(P<0.001) than those who received platinum without taxane. Also the third drug
administration proved futile, since survival (682.06±34.9) (P=0.023) and PFS
(434.93±26.93) (P=0.012) of patients who received less than three drugs was
significantly larger. Finally, large cell carcinoma recorded the shortest OS and 
PFS compared with adenocarcinoma (P=0.043 and P=0.016 respectively) and squamous 
cell carcinoma (P=0.021 and P=0.004 respectively). In multivariate analysis the
same predictors were statistically significant except for line 1 drugs.
CONCLUSIONS: This study confirms the increased incidence of adenocarcinoma in
women than in men and the aggressiveness of large cell carcinoma. It also
underlines the vitality of factors such as weight loss, radio lung and doublet
platinum-based. On the other hand, it excludes significant factors such as
gender, age and smoking.

DOI: 10.21037/atm.2016.05.13 
PMCID: PMC4876261
PMID: 27275474  [PubMed]


12. Curr Pharm Des. 2016;22(33):5127-5143.

Role of Colloidal Drug Delivery Carriers in Taxane-mediated Chemotherapy: A
Review.

Kumar P, Raza K(1), Kaushik L, Malik R, Arora S, Katare OP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy, School of Chemical Sciences & Pharmacy, Central
University of Rajasthan, Bandar Sindri, Rajasthan, India-305817.
razakaisar_pharma@yahoo.co.in.

Chemotherapy is one of the most frequently employed and reliable treatment
options for the management of a variety of cancers. Taxanes (paclitaxel,
docetaxel and cabazitaxel) are frequently prescribed to treat breast cancer,
hormone refractory prostate cancer, non-small cell lung cancer and ovarian
cancer. Most of the commercial products of taxanes are available as injectables, 
which are not patient compliant and are associated with frequent side effects
like ototoxicity, baldness and neurotoxicity. Most of these concerns are
ascribable to the presence of toxic solvents in these commercial formulations,
which are used to solubilize these drug(s). However, there have been several
attempts to develop toxic solvent free taxane formulations, especially employing 
novel drug delivery systems (NDDS). These systems have been reported to result in
the advancement of anticancer activity, therapeutic index, stability,
biocompatibility, tissue or organ targeting, encapsulation capacity, tissue
permeability, oral bioavailability, reduced toxicity and reduced incidences of
abnormal reactions, sustained and controlled release in comparison to the
conventional solvent-based formulations. The review is an attempt to analyze the 
potential of NDDS-mediated taxane delivery for safer and effective cancer
chemotherapy.


PMID: 27215440  [PubMed - in process]


13. Gene. 2016 Jun 10;584(1):75-82. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2016.03.012. Epub 2016 Mar
11.

STAT3-dependent TXNDC17 expression mediates Taxol resistance through inducing
autophagy in human colorectal cancer cells.

Zhang Z(1), Wang A(1), Li H(1), Zhi H(1), Lu F(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Colorectum Anus Surgery, Zhoukou City Central Hospital, Zhoukou 
466000, China. (2)Department of Digestive System, Zhoukou City Central Hospital, 
Zhoukou 466000, China. Electronic address: lufengzks@163.com.

Taxol (paclitaxel) is one of the taxane class of anticancer drugs as a first-line
chemotherapeutic agent against many cancers including colorectal cancer, breast
cancer, non-small cell lung cancer, ovarian cancer and so on. It is verified to
induce cytotoxicity in a concentration and time-dependent manner. Numerous novel 
formulations of Taxol have been remanufactured for better therapeutic effect.
Though Taxol works as a common anticancer drug for a long time in clinical
practice, drug resistance is a major limitation of its long-term administration. 
In-depth research on drug resistance is still in progress and researchers have
made some achievements, however, the mechanism or key molecule related to Taxol
resistance in colorectal cancer still remains to be explored. In the present
study, we observed that the high expression of TXNDC17 (thioredoxin domain
containing 17) was associated with Taxol resistance in colorectal cancer cells.
And TXNDC17 mediated Taxol resistance was related with increased basal autophagy 
level. Taxol exposure induced high levels of phospho-STAT3 (Tyr 705) and TXNDC17;
and increase of basal autophagy in colorectal cancer cells. TXNDC17
overexpression cells obtained Taxol resistance and a high level of autophagy, and
it is not surprising that stable downregulation of TXNDC17 accordingly reversed
these phenomena. Interestingly, STAT3 could similarly work as TXNDC17 in spite of
slighter effect compared to TXNDC17. And it has been proved that phospho-STAT3
(Tyr 705) possesses transcriptional regulation activity through forming dimmers. 
Many research revealed that transcription factor STAT3 affected more than 1000
gene products, and TXNDC17 is predicted to be a target gene of STAT3 at UCSC
database. For the first time, we found STAT3 could bind promoter region of
TXNDC17 (-623 bp to -58 bp relative to the transcription start site (TSS)) for
regulating its expression. These results suggest the possibility that TXNDC17
could play an important role in Taxol resistance via enhancing autophagy in human
colorectal cancer cells. TXNDC17 may become a potential target of colorectal
cancer therapeutics.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gene.2016.03.012 
PMID: 26976343  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Case Rep Oncol. 2016 Jan 28;9(1):62-7. doi: 10.1159/000443725.

Partial Response to Platinum Doublets in Refractory EGFR-Positive Non-Small Cell 
Lung Cancer Patients after RRx-001: Evidence of Episensitization.

Carter CA(1), Oronsky BT(2), Caroen SZ(2), Scicinski JJ(2), Cabrales P(3), Reid
T(4), Degesys A(1), Jenkins J(1), Brzezniak C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Walter Reed National Military Medical Center, Bethesda, Md., USA.
(2)EpicentRx, Inc., Mountain View, Calif., USA. (3)Department of Bioengineering, 
University of California, La Jolla, Calif., USA. (4)Moores Cancer Center,
University of California and San Diego, La Jolla, Calif., USA.

RRx-001, an experimental systemically non-toxic epi-immunotherapeutic agent,
which potentiates the resensitization of resistant cancer cells to formerly
effective therapies, is under active investigation in several clinical trials
that are based on sequential or concomitant rechallenge to resistant first- or
second-line regimens. One of these trials is designated TRIPLE THREAT
(NCT02489903), because it explores the conditioning or priming effect of RRx-001 
on three tumor types - non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), small cell lung cancer
and high-grade neuroendocrine tumors - prior to re-administration of platinum
doublets. In follow-up to a recent case study, which describes early
monotherapeutic benefit with RRx-001 in a refractory EGFR-mutated NSCLC tumor, we
present subsequent evidence of a radiological partial response to reintroduced
platinum doublets after RRx-001. For the 50% of patients with EGFR-mutated NSCLC 
who progress on EGFR-tyrosine kinase inhibitors (without evidence of a T790M
mutations) as well as platinum doublets and pemetrexed/taxane, no other
clinically established treatment options exist. A retrial of these therapies in
EGFR-positive NSCLC patients via priming with epigenetic agents such as RRx-001
constitutes a strategy to 'episensitize' tumors (i.e. reverse resistance by
epigenetic means) and to extend overall survival.

DOI: 10.1159/000443725 
PMCID: PMC4772628
PMID: 26933421  [PubMed]


15. Clin Interv Aging. 2016 Feb 19;11:167-73. doi: 10.2147/CIA.S97363. eCollection
2016.

A retrospective analysis of safety and efficacy of weekly nab-paclitaxel as
second-line chemotherapy in elderly patients with advanced squamous
non-small-cell lung carcinoma.

Jin F(1), Zhu H(1), Shi F(1), Kong L(1), Yu J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Shandong Cancer Hospital and Institute,
University of Jinan, Jinan, Shandong Province, People's Republic of China;
Shandong Academy of Medical Sciences, University of Jinan, Jinan, Shandong
Province, People's Republic of China.

PURPOSE: The aim of this retrospective study was to investigate the anticancer
effect and toxicity of weekly administered nab-paclitaxel as a second-line
chemotherapy in elderly patients with relapsed squamous non-small-cell lung
cancer (NSCLC).
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We retrospectively reviewed the treatment of 42 elderly
patients with relapsed squamous NSCLC, who received nab-paclitaxel monotherapy as
a second-line treatment from January 2010 to March 2014. A dose of 100 mg/m(2)
nab-paclitaxel was administered weekly on days 1, 8, and 15, followed by 1 week
of rest. The protocol was maintained for at least two cycles.
RESULTS: The overall response rate (ORR) and the disease control rate (DCR) were 
21.43% (9/42) and 47.62% (20/42), respectively. The median progression-free
survival (PFS) and overall survival (OS) were 6.6 and 10.9 months, respectively. 
In the subgroup analysis, there was no significant difference in ORR, DCR, PFS,
and OS, accounting for the first-line therapy factors (taxane agent,
radiotherapy, or surgery). There was a statistically significant difference in
DCR for stages III and IV (62.96% vs 20%, P=0.008), but there was no such
difference in either PFS or OS. The ORR of 29 patients receiving more than three 
cycles of treatment was higher than that of those receiving less than three
cycles of treatment (31.03% vs 0%, P=0.038), and there was a significant
difference in PFS (7.6 vs 4.9 months, P=0.004) and OS (11.7 vs 8.9 months,
P=0.002). No hypersensitivity reactions or treatment-related grade 4 adverse
events were reported.
CONCLUSION: Nab-paclitaxel monotherapy administered weekly at a dose of 100
mg/m(2) is shown to be an effective and safe regimen for elderly patients with
relapsed squamous NSCLC, especially for patients with stage III disease or good
performance status.

DOI: 10.2147/CIA.S97363 
PMCID: PMC4767057
PMID: 26929611  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Eur J Med Chem. 2016 May 4;113:81-91. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmech.2016.02.007.

Differential metabolism of 3FDT and docetaxel in RLMs, rats, and HLMs.

Tang ML(1), Zhou L(2), Chang J(1), Hu ZH(3), Qin Y(4), Sun X(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Natural Products Chemistry, School of Pharmacy, Fudan
University, 826 Zhangheng Road, Shanghai 201203, China. (2)Department of
Medicinal Chemistry, School of Pharmacy, Fudan University, 826 Zhangheng Road,
Shanghai 201203, China. (3)Research Institute for Liver Diseases (Shanghai) Co.
Ltd., Shanghai 201203, China. (4)Pharmacological Evaluation Research Center,
Shanghai Institute of Pharmaceutical Industry, Shanghai 201203, China. Electronic
address: qinyn11@126.com. (5)Department of Natural Products Chemistry, School of 
Pharmacy, Fudan University, 826 Zhangheng Road, Shanghai 201203, China; Shanghai 
Key Laboratory of Clinical Geriatric Medicine, Shanghai 201203, China. Electronic
address: sunxunf@shmu.edu.cn.

3FDT, an analog of docetaxel with a blocked metabolism at its 3'-N-tert-butyloxyl
group with three fluorine atoms, exhibits more potent cytotoxicity than docetaxel
both with human cancer cell line SK-OV-3 in vitro and with human non-small cell
lung cancer A549 xenografts in vivo. To further develop pharmacodynamically and
pharmacokinetically favorable fluorinated docetaxel analogs as anticancer agents,
we chose 3FDT as the model compound to identify the metabolites of 3FDT in RLMs, 
rats, and HLMs and the cytochrome P450 enzymes responsible for the metabolism of 
3FDT. Our findings indicated that the major metabolic site switched from the C3' 
appendage for docetaxel to the taxane ring for 3FDT, and the main metabolizing
P450 enzymes switched from CYP3A to CYP3A4 and CYP2E1.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejmech.2016.02.007 
PMID: 26922231  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Fitoterapia. 2016 Apr;110:26-37. doi: 10.1016/j.fitote.2016.02.010. Epub 2016 Feb
22.

Recent advances in design, synthesis and bioactivity of paclitaxel-mimics.

Wen G(1), Qu XX(1), Wang D(1), Chen XX(1), Tian XC(1), Gao F(2), Zhou XL(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chinese Traditional Herbal, Agronomy College, Sichuan
Agriculture University, Chengdu 611130, PR China. (2)Department of Chinese
Traditional Herbal, Agronomy College, Sichuan Agriculture University, Chengdu
611130, PR China. Electronic address: gaofeng@sicau.edu.cn. (3)School of Life
Science and Engineering, Southwest Jiaotong University, Chengdu 610031, PR China.
Electronic address: xxbiochem@163.com.

Taxane-type anticancer drugs, including paclitaxel and its semi-synthetic
derivatives docetaxel and cabazitaxel, are widely applied to chemotherapy of
malignancy like breast cancer, ovarian cancer, non-small cell lung cancer and
prostate cancer. However, their clinical applications are generally limited by
scarce natural resources, various side effects and multidrug resistance.
Therefore, it is significant to develop paclitaxel-mimics with simplified
structure, fewer side effects and improved pharmaceutical properties. Based on
our investigation on chemistry of paclitaxel, the current review summarized the
most recent advances in the design, synthesis and biological activities of
paclitaxel-mimics, which could be appealing to researchers in the field of
medicinal chemistry and oncology. Meanwhile, smart design, interesting synthesis 
and potential bioactivities of these novel compounds may also provide valuable
reference for the wider scientific communities.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.fitote.2016.02.010 
PMID: 26906104  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Med Oncol. 2016 Feb;33(2):13. doi: 10.1007/s12032-015-0728-2. Epub 2016 Jan 9.

Treatment of recurrent and platinum-refractory stage IV non-small cell lung
cancer with nanoparticle albumin-bound paclitaxel (nab-paclitaxel) as a single
agent.

Saxena A(1), Schneider BJ(2,)(3), Christos PJ(4), Audibert LF(2,)(5), Cagney
JM(2,)(6), Scheff RJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology and Medical Oncology, Department of Medicine, Weill
Cornell Medicine, 1305 York Avenue, 7th Floor, New York, NY, 10021, USA.
ahs9018@med.cornell.edu. (2)Division of Hematology and Medical Oncology,
Department of Medicine, Weill Cornell Medicine, 1305 York Avenue, 7th Floor, New 
York, NY, 10021, USA. (3)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Internal 
Medicine, University of Michigan Health System, Cancer Center Floor B1, Reception
C, 1500 E Medical Center Dr, Ann Arbor, MI, 48109, USA. (4)Division of
Biostatistics and Epidemiology, Department of Healthcare Policy and Research,
Weill Cornell Medicine, 402 East 67th Street, New York, NY, 10065, USA.
(5)Pulmonary and Sleep Medicine, The Mount Sinai Hospital, 5 East 98th St, 8th
Floor, New York, NY, 10029, USA. (6)Breast Cancer Medicine Service, Breast and
Imaging Center, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, 300 East 66th St, New
York, NY, 10065, USA.

The role of single-agent nab-paclitaxel in relapsed or platinum-refractory
advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) has not been well reported in Western
populations. We reviewed our own institution's experience using nab-paclitaxel in
these settings. We analyzed the records of stage IV NSCLC patients with relapsed 
or platinum-refractory disease treated with single-agent nab-paclitaxel at Weill 
Cornell Medical College between October 2008 and December 2013. The primary
endpoint of the study was treatment failure-free survival (TFFS), defined as the 
time from the start of nab-paclitaxel therapy to discontinuation of the drug for 
any reason. The best overall response was recorded for each patient, and overall 
response and disease control rates were calculated. Thirty-one stage IV NSCLC
patients received a median of 4 cycles (range 1-40) of nab-paclitaxel. Dose
reduction or drug discontinuation due to toxicity occurred in 10 patients, mainly
because of grade 2/3 fatigue or peripheral neuropathy. The overall response rate 
was 16.1 %, and the disease control rate was 64.5 %. Median TFFS was 3.5 months
(95 % CI 1.3-5.3 months). No statistically significant difference in TFFS based
on line of therapy or prior taxane exposure was identified. There was a
statistically significant decrease in TFFS for patients with non-adenocarcinoma
histology, although there were only five patients in this group. There was a
trend toward reduction in the risk of treatment failure with increasing age. One 
patient remained on nab-paclitaxel therapy for over 3 years. Single-agent
nab-paclitaxel was well tolerated and demonstrated efficacy in advanced NSCLC
patients with relapsed or platinum-refractory disease. Further prospective
clinical trials with nab-paclitaxel in these settings are warranted.

DOI: 10.1007/s12032-015-0728-2 
PMCID: PMC4958019
PMID: 26749586  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Drugs. 2015 Nov;75(17):2017-24. doi: 10.1007/s40265-015-0484-9.

Albumin-Bound Paclitaxel: A Review in Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer.

Blair HA(1), Deeks ED(2).

Author information: 
(1)Springer, Private Bag 65901, Mairangi Bay 0754, Auckland, New Zealand.
demail@springer.com. (2)Springer, Private Bag 65901, Mairangi Bay 0754, Auckland,
New Zealand.

Nanoparticle albumin-bound paclitaxel (Abraxane) [hereafter referred to as
nab-paclitaxel] is a taxane developed to avoid some of the toxicities associated 
with solvent-bound (sb) paclitaxel. Nab-paclitaxel, in combination with
carboplatin, is indicated for the first-line treatment of non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC) in patients who are not candidates for curative surgery and/or
radiation therapy. This article summarizes pharmacological, efficacy and
tolerability data relevant to the use of nab-paclitaxel in this indication.
Compared with sb-paclitaxel plus carboplatin, nab-paclitaxel plus carboplatin
significantly improved the objective response rate (ORR), but did not prolong
progression-free survival or overall survival (OS), in the overall population of 
patients with advanced NSCLC in a multinational phase III trial. The
nab-paclitaxel regimen also provided benefit over the sb-paclitaxel regimen in
certain patient subgroups, including patients with squamous cell histology (in
terms of ORR) and patients who were elderly (in terms of OS). Nab-paclitaxel plus
carboplatin had a manageable tolerability profile with some benefits over
sb-paclitaxel plus carboplatin, including lower rates of grade ≥3 neutropenia,
peripheral neuropathy, arthralgia and myalgia, although was associated with more 
grade ≥3 anaemia and thrombocytopenia. Given its efficacy and tolerability,
intravenous nab-paclitaxel plus carboplatin is a valuable first-line treatment
option for patients with advanced NSCLC.

DOI: 10.1007/s40265-015-0484-9 
PMID: 26541764  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Lung Cancer. 2015 Nov;90(2):249-54. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2015.09.012. Epub 2015
Sep 15.

Comparison of clinical outcome after first-line platinum-based chemotherapy in
different types of KRAS mutated advanced non-small-cell lung cancer.

Mellema WW(1), Masen-Poos L(2), Smit EF(3), Hendriks LE(4), Aerts JG(5), Termeer 
A(6), Goosens MJ(7), Smit HJ(8), van den Heuvel MM(9), van der Wekken AJ(10),
Herder GJ(11), Krouwels FH(12), Stigt JA(13), van den Borne BE(14), Haitjema
TJ(15), Staal-Van den Brekel AJ(16), van Heemst RC(17), Pouw E(18), Dingemans
AM(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonary Diseases, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam,
Netherlands. (2)Department of Pulmonary Diseases, Jeroen Bosch
hospital's-Hertogenbosch, Netherlands. (3)Department of Pulmonary Diseases, VU
University Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands. Electronic address:
ef.smit@vumc.nl. (4)Department of Pulmonary Diseases, Maastricht University
Medical Center, Maastricht, Netherlands. (5)Department of Pulmonary Diseases,
Amphia hospital, Breda, Netherlands. (6)Department of Pulmonary Diseases,
Canisius Wilhemina hospital, Nijmegen, Netherlands. (7)Department of Pulmonary
Diseases, Gelre hospital, Zutphen, Netherlands. (8)Department of Pulmonary
Diseases, Rijnstate hospital, Arnhem, Netherlands. (9)Department of Thoracic
Oncology, NKI-AvL, Amsterdam, Netherlands. (10)Department of Pulmonary Diseases, 
University of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen,
Netherlands. (11)Department of Pulmonary Diseases, St Antonius hospital,
Nieuwegein, Netherlands. (12)Department of Pulmonary Diseases, Spaarne hospital, 
Hoofddorp, Netherlands. (13)Department of Pulmonary Diseases, Isala clinics,
Zwolle, Netherlands. (14)Department of Pulmonary Diseases, Catharina hospital,
Eindhoven, Netherlands. (15)Department of Pulmonary Diseases, Alkmaar Medical
Center, Alkmaar, Netherlands. (16)Department of Pulmonary Diseases, Ziekenhuis
groep Twente, Almelo, Netherlands. (17)Department of Pulmonary Diseases, Deventer
hospital, Deventer, Netherlands. (18)Department of Pulmonary Diseases, Groene
Hart hospital, Gouda, Netherlands.

OBJECTIVES: As suggested by in-vitro data, we hypothesize that subtypes of KRAS
mutated non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) respond differently to chemotherapy
regimens.
METHODS: Patients with advanced NSCLC and known KRAS mutation, treated with
first-line platinum-based chemotherapy, were retrieved from hospital databases.
PRIMARY OBJECTIVE: to investigate overall response rate (ORR), progression free
survival (PFS) and overall survival (OS) between different types of
platinum-based chemotherapy per type of KRAS mutation.
RESULTS: 464 patients from 17 hospitals, treated between 2000 and 2013, were
included. The majority of patients had stage IV disease (93%), had a history of
smoking (98%) and known with an adenocarcinoma (91%). Most common types of KRAS
mutation were G12C (46%), G12V (20%) and G12D (10%). Platinum was combined with
pemetrexed (n=334), taxanes (n=68) or gemcitabine (n=62). Patients treated with
taxanes had a significant improved ORR (50%) compared to pemetrexed (21%) or
gemcitabine (25%; p<0.01). Patients treated with bevacizumab in addition to
taxanes (n=38) had the highest ORR (62%). The PFS was significantly improved in
patients treated with taxanes compared to pemetrexed (HR=0.72, p=0.02), but not
OS (HR=0.87, p=0.41). In patients with G12V, significantly improved ORR (p<0.01) 
was observed for taxanes, but not PFS or OS. Patients with G12C or G12D mutation 
had comparable ORR, PFS and OS in all treatment groups.
CONCLUSION: KRAS mutated NSCLC patients treated with taxane-based chemotherapy
had best ORR. Response to chemotherapy regimens was different in types of KRAS
mutation. Especially patients with G12V had better response to taxane treatment.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2015.09.012 
PMID: 26415993  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Mar Drugs. 2015 Aug 7;13(8):5016-58. doi: 10.3390/md13085016.

Eribulin in Cancer Treatment.

Swami U(1), Shah U(2), Goel S(3).

Author information: 
(1)University of Iowa Hospitals and Clinics, 200 Hawkins Dr, Iowa City, IA 52242,
USA. umangtalking@gmail.com. (2)Department of Medical Oncology, Montefiore
Medical Center, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, 1695 Eastchester Road,
Bronx, NY 10461, USA. umshah@montefiore.org. (3)Department of Medical Oncology,
Montefiore Medical Center, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, 1695 Eastchester 
Road, Bronx, NY 10461, USA. sgoel@montefiore.org.

Halichondrin B is a complex, natural, polyether macrolide derived from marine
sponges. Eribulin is a structurally-simplified, synthetic, macrocyclic ketone
analogue of Halichondrin B. Eribulin was approved by United States Food and Drug 
Administration in 2010 as a third-line therapy for metastatic breast cancer
patients who have previously been treated with an anthracycline and a taxane. It 
has a unique microtubule dynamics inhibitory action. Phase III studies have
either been completed or are currently ongoing in breast cancer, soft tissue
sarcoma, and non-small cell lung cancer. Phase I and II studies in multiple
cancers and various combinations are currently ongoing. This article reviews the 
available information on eribulin with respect to its clinical pharmacology,
pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics, mechanism of action, metabolism, preclinical 
studies, and with special focus on clinical trials.

DOI: 10.3390/md13085016 
PMCID: PMC4557013
PMID: 26262627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. J Thorac Oncol. 2015 Aug;10(8):1142-7. doi: 10.1097/JTO.0000000000000572.

Bevacizumab in Combination with Taxane versus Non-Taxane Containing Regimens for 
Advanced/Metastatic Nonsquamous Non-Small-Cell Lung Cancer: A Systematic Review.

Behera M(1), Pillai RN, Owonikoko TK, Kim S, Steuer C, Chen Z, Saba NF, Belani
CP, Khuri FR, Ramalingam SS.

Author information: 
(1)*Department of Hematology and Medical Oncology, Emory University, Atlanta,
Georgia; †Winship Cancer Institute of Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia;
‡Biostatistics and Bioinformatics Research Center, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center,
Los Angeles, California; §Department of Biostatistics and Bioinformatics, Emory
University, Atlanta, Georgia; and ‖Penn State Hershey Cancer Institute, Hershey, 
Pennsylvania.

BACKGROUND: In preclinical studies, the efficacy of the combination of
antiangiogenic agents with chemotherapy seems to be dependent on the specific
cytotoxic agent. We conducted a systematic review of the efficacy of bevacizumab 
in combination with taxane or non-taxane containing regimens for untreated,
nonsquamous non-small-cell lung cancer patients.
METHODS: An extensive search of published clinical trials was conducted from
electronic databases (MEDLINE, EMBASE, and Cochrane) and meeting proceedings
using relevant search criteria. Phase 2 and randomized trials reporting on the
efficacy of bevacizumab combined with taxane or non-taxane regimens were
selected. A systematic analysis of extracted data was performed using
Comprehensive Meta-Analysis (Version 2.2) software. Clinical outcome in patients 
treated with taxane versus non-taxane regimen was compared using point estimates 
for weighted values of median overall survival, progression-free survival, and
response rate.
RESULTS: Twenty-nine studies reported between 2005 and 2015 were eligible. A
total of 5890 patients (2767 and 3123 in the taxane and non-taxane groups,
respectively) were included. The taxane and non-taxane groups were comparable in 
patient characteristics: median age, 62.8 versus 61.2 years; males, 57% versus
58%; adenocarcinomas, 83% versus 83%; stage IV, 87% versus 82%; performance
status 0/1- 45/55% versus 41/59%, respectively. The weighted median overall
survival was 14.4 versus 13.7 months (p = 0.5); progression-free survival was
6.93 versus 6.99 months (p = 0.61); response rate was 41% versus 39% (p = 0.65)
for taxane and non-taxane groups.
CONCLUSIONS: The outcomes between taxane and non-taxane regimens when given in
combination with bevacizumab for patients with nonsquamous non-small-cell lung
cancer are comparable.

DOI: 10.1097/JTO.0000000000000572 
PMID: 26200267  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Clin Transl Oncol. 2016 Jan;18(1):33-9. doi: 10.1007/s12094-015-1333-8. Epub 2015
Jul 7.

Retrospective analysis of second-line chemotherapy outcomes with paclitaxel or
docetaxel in correlation with STMN1 polymorphism in advanced non-small cell lung 
cancer patients.

Powrózek T(1), Mlak R(2), Krawczyk P(3), Bartoń S(3), Biernacka B(3),
Małecka-Massalska T(2), Milanowski J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pneumonology, Oncology and Allergology, Medical University of
Lublin, Jaczewskiego 8, 20-954, Lublin, Poland. tomaszpowrozek@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Human Physiology, Medical University of Lublin, Lublin, Poland. 
(3)Department of Pneumonology, Oncology and Allergology, Medical University of
Lublin, Jaczewskiego 8, 20-954, Lublin, Poland.

PURPOSE: Second-line chemotherapy of advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) 
with docetaxel or pemetrexed allows to achieve objective response rate only in
5-10 % of patients. Recent studies have shown that single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) in genes encoding proteins which regulate dynamics of
microtubules may be considered as predictive factors of response to taxane-based 
chemotherapy. STMN1 gene encodes stathmin 1, which plays role in cell division by
regulation of microtubules depolarisation, and this process may be associated
with taxanes' effectiveness.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Using HRM-PCR technique, we evaluated the -2166C>T SNP of 
STMN1 gene in DNA from peripheral blood leucocytes of 54 advanced NSCLC patients 
treated in second-line monotherapy with docetaxel or paclitaxel.
RESULTS: Patients with TT genotype of STMN1 gene demonstrated significantly
longer progression-free survival (PFS) and the lower risk of early disease
progression after second-line treatment compared to patients with other STMN1
genotypes (median PFS: 7 and 2 months; p = 0.0154; HR = 0.371; 95 % CI
0.184-0.743). Early disease progression during second-line chemotherapy was
significantly more frequently observed in patients with CC genotype of STMN1 in
contrast to patients with presence of T allele (median PFS: 2 and 4 months; p =
0.0385; HR = 1.776; 95 % CI 0.905-3.445).
CONCLUSION: Only selected NSCLC patients could benefit from second-line
chemotherapy. Therefore, investigations of novel predictive molecular factors for
proper qualification of patients to second-line taxane-based chemotherapy are
justified. Studied SNP of STMN1 gene may have potential predictive role in such
therapy.

DOI: 10.1007/s12094-015-1333-8 
PMID: 26148901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Dermatol Pract Concept. 2015 Apr 30;5(2):121-4. doi: 10.5826/dpc.0502a24.
eCollection 2015.

Nab-paclitaxel-associated photosensitivity: report in a woman with non-small cell
lung cancer and review of taxane-related photodermatoses.

Beutler BD(1), Cohen PR(2).

Author information: 
(1)University of Nevada, Las Vegas, School of Allied Health Sciences, Las Vegas, 
NV, USA. (2)Department of Dermatology, University of California San Diego, San
Diego, CA, USA.

BACKGROUND: Taxanes [paclitaxel, nab-paclitaxel (Abraxane, Celgene Corp, USA),
and docetaxel]-used in the treatment of lung, breast, and head and neck
cancers-have been associated with cutaneous adverse effects, including
photodermatoses.
PURPOSE: We describe a woman with non-small cell lung cancer who developed a
photodistributed dermatitis associated with her nab-paclitaxel therapy and review
photodermatoses in patients receiving taxanes.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The features of a woman with a nab-paclitaxel-associated
photodistributed dermatitis are presented and the literature on
nab-paclitaxel-associated photosensitivity is reviewed.
RESULTS: Our patient developed nab-paclitaxel-associated photodistributed
dermatitis on the sun-exposed surfaces of her upper extremities, which was
exacerbated with each course of nab-paclitaxel. Biopsies revealed an interface
dermatitis and laboratory studies were negative for lupus erythematosus and
dermatomyositis. Her condition improved following topical corticosteroid cream
application and strict avoidance of sunlight.
CONCLUSION: Chemotherapy can be associated with adverse mucocutaneous events,
including dermatoses on sun-exposed areas of the skin. Paclitaxel and
nab-paclitaxel have both been associated with photodermatoses, including
dermatitis, erythema multiforme, onycholysis, and subacute cutaneous lupus
erythematosus. Strict avoidance of sun exposure, topical or oral corticosteroids,
and/or discontinuation of the drug results in improvement with progressive
resolution of symptoms and skin lesions. Development of photodermatoses is not an
absolute contraindication to continuing chemotherapy, provided that the cutaneous
condition resolves with dermatosis-directed treatment and the patient avoids sun 
exposure.

DOI: 10.5826/dpc.0502a24 
PMCID: PMC4462915
PMID: 26114068  [PubMed]


25. Tumori. 2015 Jun 25;101(3):e92-5. doi: 10.5301/tj.5000275.

A commentary on interstitial pneumonitis induced by docetaxel: clinical cases and
systematic review of the literature.

Genestreti G(1), Di Battista M, Trisolini R, Denicolò F, Valli M, Lazzari-Agli
LA, Dalpiaz G, De Biase D, Bartolotti M, Cavallo G, Brandes AA.

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Clinical Oncology, AUSL Bologna, Bologna - Italy.

BACKGROUND: Pulmonary toxicity is a well-known complication observed with several
anticancer drugs. Docetaxel, a taxane chemotherapy drug widely used in the
treatment of many types of solid tumors including non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC), rarely causes infiltrative pneumonitis. The exact mechanism by which
docetaxel develops this side effect is not well understood; probably it is
produced by type I and IV hypersensitivity responses. Here we describe 2 cases of
infiltrative pneumonitis induced by docetaxel as second-line chemotherapy in
advanced NSCLC.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Two patients with advanced NSCLC were treated with weekly 
docetaxel as second-line chemotherapy. After 3 courses of chemotherapy, restaging
computed tomography (CT) of the chest revealed bilateral diffuse ground-glass
opacities with a peribronchial distribution possibly indicative of
hypersensitivity pneumonitis. No evidence of pulmonary embolus or pleural
effusion was found. Fiberoptic bronchoscopy showed normal bronchi without
lymphangitis; biopsies showed interstitial fibrosis without tumor cells.
Bronchial tissue laboratory tests for fungi or bacilli were negative. No
malignant cells were found at bronchoalveolar lavage. The patients were given
high-dose corticosteroid therapy with prednisone 0.7 mg per kilogram per day.
RESULTS: After 1 month of therapy, contrast-enhanced chest CT showed complete
disappearance of the pulmonary changes in both patients. Spirometry and blood gas
analysis revealed complete recovery of pulmonary function. The patients continued
their oncological follow-up program.
CONCLUSIONS: Pulmonary injury is a rare adverse event during docetaxel
chemotherapy. Prompt treatment with high-dose corticosteroids is needed to avoid 
worsening of respiratory performance.

DOI: 10.5301/tj.5000275 
PMID: 25908033  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2015 Jan 1;91(1):133-9. doi:
10.1016/j.ijrobp.2014.09.033.

Is intermediate radiation dose escalation with concurrent chemotherapy for stage 
III non-small-cell lung cancer beneficial? A multi-institutional propensity score
matched analysis.

Rodrigues G(1), Oberije C(2), Senan S(3), Tsujino K(4), Wiersma T(2),
Moreno-Jimenez M(5), Kim TH(6), Marks LB(7), Rengan R(8), De Petris L(9), Ramella
S(10), DeRuyck K(11), De Dios NR(12), Warner A(13), Bradley JD(14), Palma DA(13).

Author information: 
(1)London Health Sciences Centre, London, Ontario, Canada. Electronic address:
george.rodrigues@lhsc.on.ca. (2)MAASTRO Clinic, Maastricht, The Netherlands.
(3)VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. (4)Hyogo Cancer
Center, Akashi, Japan. (5)Universidad de Navarra, Pamplona, Spain. (6)National
Cancer Center, Goyang-si, Gy eonggi, Korea. (7)University of North Carolina,
Chapel Hill, North Carolina. (8)University of Washington, Seattle, Washington.
(9)Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden. (10)Campus Bio-Medico
University, Rome, Italy. (11)Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium. (12)Universidad
Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain. (13)London Health Sciences Centre, London,
Ontario, Canada. (14)Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis,
Missouri.

Erratum in
    Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2015 Apr 1;91(5):1115.

Comment in
    Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2015 Jul 1;92(3):700-1.
    Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2015 Jul 1;92(3):699-700.

PURPOSE: The clinical benefits and risks of dose escalation (DE) for stage III
non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) remain uncertain despite the results from
Radiation Therapy Oncology Group (RTOG) protocol 0617. There is significant
heterogeneity of practice, with many clinicians prescribing intermediate dose
levels between the 0617 study arms of 60 and 74 Gy. This study investigated
whether this strategy is associated with any survival benefits/risks by analyzing
a large multi-institutional database.
METHODS AND MATERIALS: An individual patient database of stage III NSCLC patients
treated with radical intent concurrent chemoradiation therapy was created (13
institutions, n=1274 patients). Patients were divided into 2 groups based on
tumor Biological Effective Dose at 10 Gy (BED 10): those receiving standard dose 
(SD; n=552), consisting of 72Gy ≤ BED 10 ≤ 76.8 Gy (eg 60-64 Gy/30-32 fractions
[fr]), and those receiving intermediate dose (ID; n=497), consisting of 76.8Gy < 
BED 10 < 100.8 Gy (eg >64 Gy/32 fr and <74 Gy/37 fr), with lower-dose patients
(n=225) excluded from consideration. Patients were then matched using propensity 
scores, leading to 2 matched groups of 196 patients. Outcomes were compared using
various statistics including interquartile range (IQR), Kaplan-Meier curves, and 
adjusted Cox regression analysis.
RESULTS: Matched groups were found to be balanced except for N stage (more N3
disease in SD), median treatment year (SD in 2003; ID in 2007), platinum and
taxane chemotherapy (SD in 28%; ID in 39%), and median follow-up (SD were 89
months; ID were 40 months). Median dose fractionation was 60 Gy/30 fr in SD (BED 
10 IQR: 72.0-75.5 Gy) and 66 Gy/33 fr (BED 10 IQR: 78.6-79.2 Gy) in ID. Survival 
curves for SD and ID matched cohorts were statistically similar (P=.27); however,
a nonstatistically significant trend toward better survival for ID was observed
after 15 months (median survival SD: 19.3 months; ID: 21.0 months). There was an 
increase in grades III to V lung toxicity associated with ID (13.0% vs 4.9%,
respectively).
CONCLUSIONS: No significant overall survival benefits were found with
intermediate DE; however, more grade III or greater lung toxicity was observed.
The separation of survival curves after 15 months of follow-up suggests that a
small overall survival improvement associated with intermediate DE cannot be
excluded.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijrobp.2014.09.033 
PMID: 25835622  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Discov Med. 2015 Mar;19(104):151-8.

CHFR methylation strongly correlates with methylation of DNA damage repair and
apoptotic pathway genes in non-small cell lung cancer.

Guo M(1), Alumkal J(2), Drachova T(3), Gao D(4), Marina SS(5), Jen J(6), Herman
JG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Chinese PLA General Hospital,
Beijing, 100853, China. (2)Department of Oncology, The Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21287, USA and Oregon Clinical and
Translational Research Institute, Portland, OR 97239, USA. (3)Laboratory of Human
Carcinogenesis, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. (4)College of Medicine, Nankai
University, Tianjin, 300071, China. (5)Medical Genome Facility Gene Expression
Core, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905, USA. (6)Medical Genome Facility Gene
Expression Core, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905, USA and Laboratory of Human
Carcinogenesis, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

DNA methylation occurs commonly in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). We sought 
to determine the frequency and relationship of methylation of key genes involved 
in the pathways of mitotic checkpoint control, DNA damage repair, apoptosis, and 
growth factor signaling in these patients. We analyzed the DNA methylation status
of eight genes (CHFR, FANCF, MGMT, p16, DAPK, ASC or TMS-1, RAR-B, and CRBP1)
using nested methylation-specific PCR (MSP) on over 314 paraffin-embedded, human 
non-small cell lung cancer samples. We determined the methylation frequency of
each gene in addition to the association of the methylation of each gene with
other members of the panel. Methylation was a common event in these samples. Our 
methylation analysis showed frequencies of methylation of 10% for CHFR, 14% for
FANCF, 30% for MGMT, 29% for p16, 17% for DAPK, 33% for ASC, 38% for RAR-B, and
7% for CRBP1. There was a strong correlation between methylation of the mitotic
G2-M checkpoint gene, CHFR, and methylation of other genes in our panel involved 
in DNA damage repair (FANCF and MGMT) and apoptosis (DAPK and ASC) but not with
other genes in our panel, including p16 (the G1-S checkpoint gene), CRBP1, or
RAR-B. In addition, MGMT methylation strongly correlated with the pro-apoptotic
gene, ASC. There are distinct associations of methylated genes in non-small cell 
lung cancer involving DNA damage repair, apoptosis, and the G2-M mitotic
checkpoint control. Further studies are warranted to determine whether these
methylation patterns have implications for prognosis in addition to prediction of
response to chemotherapeutic agents commonly used in the treatment of non-small
cell lung cancer, such as radiotherapy and platinum- or taxane-based
chemotherapy.


PMID: 25828518  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Zhongguo Fei Ai Za Zhi. 2015 Feb;18(2):98-103. doi:
10.3779/j.issn.1009-3419.2015.02.09.

[Nimotuzumab significantly enhances chemosensitivity of PC9 human lung
adenocarcinoma cells to paclitaxel in vitro].

[Article in Chinese; Abstract available in Chinese from the publisher]

Xiao Y(1), Cao B(1), Liang L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology and Radiation Sickness, Peking University Third
Hospital, Beijing 100191, China.

BACKGROUND: Nimotuzumab is a humanized IgG1 type monoclonal antibody targeting
epidermal growth factor receptor, and can enhance chemosensitivity and
radiosensitivity of certain cancers. The aim of this study is to investigate the 
effects of nimotuzumab on the chemosensitivities of PC9 human lung adenocarcinoma
cells to common chemtherapeutic drugs including ciaplatin, gemcitabine,
paclitaxel, pemetrexed and vinorelbine, and to elucidate possible mechanisms.
METHODS: PC9 human lung adenocarcinoma cell line was used in the study. Cell
proliferation was determined by WST-1 assay and cell apoptosis was detected by
TUNEL assay. Cell cycle distribution was analyzed by DNA analysis with FACS.
Tublin and microfilaments were observed by immunofluorescence staining.
RESULTS: Nimotuzumab significantly enhanced the chemosensitivity of PC9 cells to 
paclitaxel. Cell proliferation was inhibited significantly (P<0.05) and cell
apoptosis rate was higher in nimotuzumab combined with low dose paclitaxel (0.05 
μg/mL) group (P=0.013). G2/M arrest was increased significantly by nimotuzumab
combined with paclitaxel group (P<0.05). Nimotuzumab caused aggregation of tublin
and microfilaments into well organized microtubules.
CONCLUSIONS: Nimotuzumab enhanced the chemosensitivity of PC9 cell to paclitaxel 
by enhancing G2/M arrest and aggregation of tublin and microfilaments. Therefore,
Nimotuzumab combined with taxane drugs could be a potential effective regimen in 
non-small cell lung cancer.

Publisher: 背景与目的
尼妥珠单抗是一种针对表皮生长因子受体的人源化IgG1型单克隆抗体，可在多种肿瘤中提高化疗和放射治疗的敏感性；而非小细胞肺癌常用化疗药物有多种，尼妥珠单抗对这些药物
敏感性的影响尚缺乏报道。本研究探讨尼妥珠单抗对顺铂、吉西他滨、紫杉醇、培美曲塞、长春瑞滨在非小细肺癌细胞中敏感性的影响及可能机制。方法
选择PC9人肺癌细胞作为观察对象，WST-1法检测细胞增殖率、流式细胞仪检测细胞周期、TUNEL法检测细胞凋亡率、免疫荧光染色联合激光扫描共聚焦显微镜下观察细胞内
微管、微丝的分布情况。结果
尼妥珠单抗联合紫杉醇对PC9细胞的增殖抑制最为显著（P<0.05），细胞凋亡率显著增加（P=0.013），细胞发生G2/M期阻滞的比例显著提高（P<0.05）；共
聚焦显微镜下观察提示尼妥珠单抗促进PC9细胞中的微管和微丝聚集且排列整齐。结论
尼妥珠单抗能够显著提高紫杉醇在PC9细胞中的敏感性，机制可能与促进微管、微丝聚集和诱导G2/M期阻滞有关。尼妥珠单抗联合紫杉类药物可能是治疗非小细胞肺癌的一个潜在
有效方案。
DOI: 10.3779/j.issn.1009-3419.2015.02.09 
PMID: 25676404  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Oncologist. 2015 Mar;20(3):299-306. doi: 10.1634/theoncologist.2014-0212. Epub
2015 Feb 6.

Complex decisions for first-line and maintenance treatment of advanced wild-type 
non-small cell lung cancer.

Gentzler RD(1), Johnson ML(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, University of Virginia School of Medicine,
Charlottesville, Virginia, USA; Sarah Cannon Research Institute, Nashville,
Tennessee, USA. (2)Division of Hematology/Oncology, University of Virginia School
of Medicine, Charlottesville, Virginia, USA; Sarah Cannon Research Institute,
Nashville, Tennessee, USA meljohn22@hotmail.com.

Until recently, the first-line treatment of advanced non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC) required minimal clinical decision making. Patients who were eligible for
chemotherapy received a platinum-based doublet, and 5-year survival rates were
poor. With the advent of molecularly targeted agents and better tolerated
chemotherapies--namely, bevacizumab, erlotinib, and pemetrexed--new therapeutic
opportunities have emerged. Some of the strategies that have proven to be
successful for the treatment of patients with NSCLC are targeting of the vascular
endothelial growth factor, use of maintenance chemotherapy for patients without
progression of disease after initial therapy, and tailoring of cytotoxic agents
specific to the histology of an individual patient's cancer. Each approach has
been independently shown to improve overall survival, but integrating the data
from a number of complicated trials into the "best" approach for patients remains
challenging. This review attempts to address three fundamental questions
clinicians face in choosing first-line and maintenance treatment for advanced
NSCLC, particularly nonsquamous histology: Is pemetrexed or a taxane agent better
for combination with platinum therapy? Should bevacizumab be used, and is it
beneficial when added to pemetrexed chemotherapy? When is maintenance therapy
indicated, and which agent is best?

©AlphaMed Press.

DOI: 10.1634/theoncologist.2014-0212 
PMCID: PMC4350796
PMID: 25660158  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Respir Med. 2015 Jan;109(1):131-6. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2014.11.004. Epub 2014 Nov
21.

Molecular characteristics of non-small cell lung cancer with reduced CHFR
expression in The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) project.

Brodie SA(1), Li G(2), Brandes JC(3).

Author information: 
(1)Atlanta VAMC, USA; Department of Hematology and Medical Oncology, Emory
University, USA; Winship Cancer Institute, Emory University, USA. (2)Department
of Hematology and Medical Oncology, Emory University, USA; Winship Cancer
Institute, Emory University, USA. (3)Atlanta VAMC, USA; Department of Hematology 
and Medical Oncology, Emory University, USA; Winship Cancer Institute, Emory
University, USA. Electronic address: johann.brandes@emory.edu.

BACKGROUND: CHFR expression has previously been established as a powerful
predictor for response to taxane based first-line chemotherapy in non-small cell 
lung cancer. It is currently unknown however, if reduced CHFR expression
correlates with certain molecular subtypes of lung cancer.
PURPOSE: In order to determine which patients may benefit from CHFR biomarker
testing we conducted the present study to characterize clinical and molecular
characteristics of patients with reduced vs. high CHFR expression.
APPROACH: We utilized the extensive molecular and clinical data of the most
recent adeno- and squamous cell carcinoma datasets from The Cancer Genome Atlas
(TCGA) project. CHFR expression, analyzed by RNA-seq, was classified as high vs. 
low based on the median CHFR expression level and correlated with the presence or
absence of lung cancer specific mutations (EGFR, KRAS, ALK, MET, ERBB2, TP53,
STK11, ROS1, RET, NF1, Pik3CA for adenocarcinomas and FGFR1, FGFR2, FGFR3, TP53, 
STK11, EGFR for squamous cell carcinomas).
RESULTS: Reduced CHFR expression was associated with EGFR exon19/21 mutations in 
adenocarcinoma OR 0.23 (95%CI: 0.06-0.88) and male gender in squamous cell
carcinoma (OR 0.46 (95%CI 0.23-0.92), p = 0.02).

Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2014.11.004 
PMCID: PMC4277914
PMID: 25477232  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Clin Lung Cancer. 2015 Jan;16(1):46-50. doi: 10.1016/j.cllc.2014.09.002. Epub
2014 Sep 28.

Clinical likelihood of sporadic primary EGFR T790M mutation in EGFR-mutant lung
cancer.

Lee Y(1), Lee GK(2), Hwang JA(3), Yun T(2), Kim HT(2), Lee JS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Lung Cancer, National Cancer Center, Goyang, Republic of Korea.
Electronic address: yjlee@ncc.re.kr. (2)Center for Lung Cancer, National Cancer
Center, Goyang, Republic of Korea. (3)Cancer Genomics Branch, Division of
Convergence Technology, Research Institute, National Cancer Center, Goyang,
Republic of Korea.

BACKGROUND: It has been reported that the presence of pretreatment EGFR T790M
mutation may reduce the efficacy to EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKI) in
EGFR-mutant lung cancer. However, clinicopathologic features related to the
likelihood of T790M mutation before treatment remains unknown.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: DNA from 124 pretreatment tissue samples from patients with
advanced non-small-cell lung cancer carrying sensitive EGFR mutations was
genotyped for EGFR T790M mutation with mass spectrometry. We compared the
characteristics of 24 T790M patients and 100 patients with no or a low-level
T790M mutation.
RESULTS: There were no differences in age, sex, histology, or initial stage
between T790M and non/low T790M groups. However, there were significantly more
never-smokers in the T790M group (P = .017). Brain metastasis was also more
common in the T790M group (P = .036). The response rates to platinum, taxane,
gemcitabine, and pemetrexed did not differ between the 2 groups. In the T790M
group, the response rates were not significantly different among the 4 cytotoxic 
drugs (P = .809). The median time to progression during EGFR-TKI therapy was
shorter in the T790M group than in the non/low T790M group (4.1 vs. 11.5 months, 
respectively; P < .001). The median overall survival from the start of first-line
treatment of advanced disease was similar in both groups (31.5 vs. 36.0 months,
respectively; P = .310).
CONCLUSION: The clinical features of EGFR T790M-mutant lung cancer were similar
to those of sensitive EGFR-mutant lung cancer, except for the overrepresentation 
of never-smokers and brain metastasis.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cllc.2014.09.002 
PMID: 25450875  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Pharmacogenomics. 2014;15(12):1565-74. doi: 10.2217/pgs.14.107.

Genetic variation in platinating agent and taxane pathway genes as predictors of 
outcome and toxicity in advanced non-small-cell lung cancer.

Lamba JK(1), Fridley BL, Ghosh TM, Yu Q, Mehta G, Gupta P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental & Clinical Pharmacology, PUMA-Institute of
Personalized Medicine, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA.

AIM: Lung carcinoma is the most common malignancy and the leading cause of cancer
deaths worldwide. Although clinical factors including age, performance status and
stage influence the likelihood of benefit from and tolerability of chemotherapy, 
the genetic profile of individual patients may be an independent predictor of
response and toxicity. The present study aimed to identify pharmacogenetic
markers associated with clinical response and toxicity in patients with advanced 
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) treated primarily with carboplatin and
paclitaxel.
MATERIALS & METHODS: Genomic DNA samples from 90 adult male patients diagnosed
with stage IIIB/IV NSCLC were genotyped for SNPs in candidate genes of relevance 
to platinating agents and paclitaxel and analyzed for association with survival
and toxicities in univariate and multivariate models.
RESULTS: After adjusting for performance status and stage, SNPs in the drug
transporters ABCB1 and ABCC1, as well as within NQO1 were associated with
progression-free survival. With respect to hematological and nonhematological
toxicities, SNPs in drug transporters (ABCB1 and ABCG2) were associated with
thrombocytopenia, nausea and neutropenia, whereas SNPs in the DNA repair pathway 
genes ERCC4 and XPC were significantly associated with neutropenia and sensory
neuropathy, respectively.
CONCLUSION: Our study evaluated and identified SNPs in key candidate genes in
platinating agent and taxane pathways associated with outcome and toxicity in
advanced NSCLC. If validated in large prospective studies, these findings might
provide opportunities to personalize therapeutic strategies.

DOI: 10.2217/pgs.14.107 
PMCID: PMC4450105
PMID: 25340731  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Curr Oncol. 2014 Oct;21(5):e691-703. doi: 10.3747/co.21.1997.

Update on taxanes in the first-line treatment of advanced non-small-cell lung
cancer.

Socinski MA.

Based on demonstrated favourable risk-benefit profiles, taxanes remain a key
component in the first-line standard of care for advanced non-small-cell lung
cancer (nsclc) and nsclc subtypes. In 2012, a novel taxane, nab-paclitaxel
(Abraxane: Celgene Corporation, Summit, NJ, U.S.A.), was approved, in combination
with carboplatin, for the first-line treatment of locally advanced or meta-static
nsclc. The approval was granted because of demonstrated improved antitumour
activity and tolerability compared with solvent-based paclitaxel-carboplatin in a
phase iii trial. This review focuses on the evolution of first-line taxane
therapy for advanced nsclc and the new options and advances in taxane therapy
that might address unmet needs in advanced nsclc.

DOI: 10.3747/co.21.1997 
PMCID: PMC4189574
PMID: 25302040  [PubMed]


34. Med Oncol. 2014 Aug;31(8):79. doi: 10.1007/s12032-014-0079-4. Epub 2014 Jun 25.

Nuclear survivin expression: a prognostic factor for the response to
taxane-platinum chemotherapy in patients with advanced non-small cell lung
cancer.

Wu YK(1), Huang CY, Yang MC, Lan CC, Lee CH, Chan EC, Chen KT.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine, Taipei Tzu
Chi Hospital, Buddhist Tzu Chi Medical Foundation, Taipei, Taiwan.

Survivin, a structurally unique protein expressed in most common human neoplasms,
is thought to support cell cycle progression and suppress apoptosis. Survivin
expression is highly correlated with advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) 
and poor prognosis. In this retrospective study of banked pathology tissue of
patients with advanced NSCLC, we tested for correlations of N-survivin expression
in tumor tissues and responsiveness to treatment with platinum-based regimens
containing paclitaxel or docetaxel. The 48 patients with NSCLC included 32 (66.7 
%) males and 16 (33.3 %) females. Mean age at diagnosis was 59.4 years (range
36-83 years), and median follow-up time was 20.4 months (range 3.4-59.0 months). 
Patients with high tumor N-survivin expression had significantly better responses
to taxane-platinum chemotherapy than those with low tumor N-survivin expression
(P < 0.001). Adjusted multivariate modeling found high tumor N-survivin
expression to be an independent prognostic factor for a clinical response to
chemotherapy (high vs. low, OR 6.14, 95 % CI 1.62-23.29; P = 0.008). Median
overall survival differed significantly between those with high tumor N-survivin 
expression who did/did not respond to chemotherapy and between those with low
tumor N-survivin expression who did/did not respond to chemotherapy (P < 0.05).
Tumor N-survivin expression shows promise as a predictive biomarker in the
chemotherapy setting as a surrogate marker of high proliferation status.

DOI: 10.1007/s12032-014-0079-4 
PMID: 24961465  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Lung Cancer. 2014 Aug;85(2):224-9. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2014.05.013. Epub 2014 
May 21.

DISRUPT: a randomised phase 2 trial of ombrabulin (AVE8062) plus a
taxane-platinum regimen as first-line therapy for metastatic non-small cell lung 
cancer.

von Pawel J(1), Gorbounova V(2), Reck M(3), Kowalski DM(4), Allard A(5), Chadjaa 
M(6), Rey A(6), Bennouna J(7), Grossi F(8); DISRUPT Investigators.

Author information: 
(1)Asklepios Fachkliniken, Robert-Koch-Allee 2, 82131 München-Gauting, Germany.
Electronic address: j.pawel@asklepios.com. (2)Cancer Research Center, Kashirskoe 
Shosse 24, Moscow 115478, Russian Federation. (3)LungenClinic Grosshansdorf,
Member of German Center for Lung Research (DZL), Woehrendamm 80, 22927
Grosshansdorf, Germany. (4)Maria Sklodowska-Curie Memorial Cancer Centre and
Institute of Oncology Department of Lung Cancer and Chest Tumors, Roentgen Str 5,
Warsaw 02-781, Poland. (5)Sanofi, Chilly-Mazarin 91385, France. (6)Sanofi,
Vitry-sur-Seine 94403, France. (7)Institut de Cancérologie de l'Ouest, Boulevard 
Jacques Monod, 44805 Nantes, Saint Herblain Cedex, France. (8)IRCCS AOU San
Martino IST, Istituto Nazionale per la Ricerca sul Cancro, Largo R. Benzi 10,
16132 Genova, Italy.

BACKGROUND: DISRUPT evaluated whether adding the vascular-disrupting agent
ombrabulin to a taxane-platinum doublet in the first-line setting improved
progression-free survival (PFS) in patients with metastatic non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC).
METHODS: Patients were randomised to ombrabulin 35 mg/m(2) or placebo followed by
a taxane-platinum regimen every 3 weeks.
RESULTS: Overall, 176 patients were randomised. After 124 events, median PFS was 
not significantly improved with ombrabulin vs placebo (5.65 vs 5.45 months; HR
0.948; 60% CI 0.813-1.106; one-sided P=0.39). The two groups showed similar
overall survival (median 11.0 months in both groups), objective response rate
(32% ombrabulin; 31% placebo) and safety profiles.
CONCLUSION: This study did not meet its primary endpoint of improving PFS by
adding ombrabulin to a taxane-platinum regimen for first-line treatment of
metastatic NSCLC.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2014.05.013 
PMID: 24888230  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Recent Pat Anticancer Drug Discov. 2014;9(3):372-81.

Lung cancer chemotherapy, new treatment and related patents.

Cheepsattayakorn A, Cheepsattayakorn R(1).

Author information: 
(1)10th Zonal Tuberculosis and Chest Disease Center, 143 Sridornchai Road,
Changklan Muang, Chiang Mai 50100, Thailand and 10th Office of Disease Prevention
and Control, 447 Lumphun Road, Watgate Muang, Chiang Mai 50,000, Thailand.
attaponche@yahoo.com.

The majority of patients with lung cancer present with advanced stage which
contributes to death of more people than any other malignancy in the world. The
discovery of a number of lung cancer-molecular alterations contributes to
uniquely targeted therapies with specific inhibitors for non-small cell lung
cancer such as erlotinib, gefitinib and crizotinib. Pemetrexed has statistically 
shown significantly reduced adverse side effects of drug compared with docetaxel.
V1801, an analog of gefitinib may overcome gefitinib resistance in patients with 
non-small cell lung cancer. Thymosin α1, an immunomodulator significantly
improves patient's quality of life by enhancing T-cell function, stimulation of
Tcell maturation and differentiation. Various novel compounds and
chemotherapeutics were introduced in 2013 patents such as taxane, quinazoline,
arylamino purine, benzodiazepine, pyrrolopyrimidine, nitrobenzamide, cyclopropane
amide, 4-iodo-3-nitrobenzamide, heteroaryl (alkyl) dithiocarbamate, and histone
deacetylase in treating non-small-cell lung cancer and piperidine, piperazine,
picoplatin, and arsenic trioxide in treating small-cell lung cancer.


PMID: 24844233  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. PLoS One. 2014 Apr 4;9(4):e93997. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0093997. eCollection 
2014.

The prognostic role of the class III β-tubulin in non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC) patients receiving the taxane/vinorebine-based chemotherapy: a
meta-analysis.

Yang YL(1), Luo XP(2), Xian L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, the First Affiliated Hospital of Guangxi
Medical University, Nanning, Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region, China. (2)Clinical
Faculty of Guangxi Medical University, Nanning, Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region,
China.

BACKGROUND: A number of studies have examined the relationship between the
expression of the class III β-tubulin (TUBB3) and the treatment responses to the 
taxane/vinorebine-based chemotherapy in patients with non-small cell lung cancer 
(NSCLC). However, the results of these studies were inconsistent and
inconclusive. Therefore, we conducted an up-to-date meta-analysis to evaluate the
prognostic role of TUBB3 in the taxane/vinorebine-based chemotherapy.
METHODS: A literature search for relevant studies was conducted in PubMed,
Embase, and CNKI. The inclusion criteria were the taxane/vinorebine-based
chemotherapy in patients with NSCLC and the evaluation of the clinical outcomes
in relation to the expression of TUBB3. The clinical outcomes analyzed in this
study included the overall response rate (ORR), overall survival (OS), and
event-free survival (EFS). Odds ratio (OR) or hazard ratio (HR) with 95%
confidence interval (CI) were calculated to assess the risk associated with the
TUBB3 expression in the taxane/vinorebine-based chemotherapy.
RESULTS: A total of 28 studies with 2401 NSCLC patients were qualified for this
meta-analysis. We found that the positive or high level of TUBB3 expression was
associated with a poorer ORR (OR = 0.24, 95% CI = 0.16-0.36, p<0.001), an
unfavorable OS (HR = 1.52, 95% CI = 1.27-1.82, p<0.001), and a worse EFS (HR =
1.47, 95% CI = 1.24-1.74, p<0.001) compared to the negative or low level of TUBB3
expression. The statistically significant associations between TUBB3 and
chemotherapy responses were also observed in the stratified subgroup analysis,
which included the analysis by ethnic subgroup (Asian and Caucasian),
chemotherapy regimen (taxane-based and vinorebine-based), TUBB3 detection method 
(IHC and PCR), and treatment strategy (surgery plus adjuvant chemotherapy and
palliative chemotherapy).
CONCLUSIONS: The expression level of TUBB3 may be a useful biomarker to predict
the clinical outcomes of the taxane/vinorebine-based chemotherapy in patients
with NSCLC.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0093997 
PMCID: PMC3976369
PMID: 24705847  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Tuberc Respir Dis (Seoul). 2014 Jan;76(1):8-14. doi: 10.4046/trd.2014.76.1.8.
Epub 2014 Jan 29.

Long Term Therapeutic Plan for Patients with Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer Harboring
EGFR Mutation.

Jang SH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary, Allergy and Critical Care Medicine, Department of
Internal Medicine, Hallym University College of Medicine, Chuncheon, Korea.

Non-small cell lung cancer harboring epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)
sensitizing mutations has a distinct disease entity. Patients with this cancer
have better prognosis, and frequently achieve long-term survival. EGFR-tyrosine
kinase inhibitor (TKI) is the drug of choice for this cancer; but the disease
inevitably progresses, after durable response. The tumor is a mixture of EGFR-TKI
sensitive clones and resistant clones, regardless of their molecular mechanisms. 
EGFR-TKI sensitive clones are very susceptible to this drug, but rarely
eradicated; so, withdrawal of the drug permits rapid regrowth of drug sensitive
clones, possibly causing "disease flare." Re-administration or continuation of
EGFR-TKI can effectively suppress the expansion of drug sensitive clones, even
when the total tumor volume continuously increases. Chemotherapy can definitely
prolong the survival of patients experiencing EGFR-TKI failure. Prospective
clinical trials are warranted to compare efficacies of chemotherapeutic agents. A
few retrospective studies suggested that a taxane-based regimen may be superior
to others. Here, we reviewed therapeutic options and clinical evidence about this
unique disease entity.

DOI: 10.4046/trd.2014.76.1.8 
PMCID: PMC3919966
PMID: 24523812  [PubMed]


39. Anticancer Drugs. 2014 May;25(5):571-83. doi: 10.1097/CAD.0000000000000080.

Taxanes, past, present, and future impact on non-small cell lung cancer.

Joshi M(1), Liu X, Belani CP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Medical Oncology, Penn State College of
Medicine, Hershey, Pennsylvania, USA.

Taxanes are novel microtubule-stabilizing agents and have shown efficacy in
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) since the 1990s. Paclitaxel and docetaxel have
been used either as single agents or in combination with a platinum compound. The
newer generation albumin-bound taxane, nab-paclitaxel, has also shown similar
efficacy in advanced NSCLC, both as a single agent and in combination with a
platinum compound. Nab-paclitaxel, being Cremophor EL free, appears to have a
better toxicity profile than paclitaxel. Taxane/platinum combinations still
remain the foundation of treatment for advanced or metastatic NSCLC. Docetaxel
and paclitaxel as single agents have also shown efficacy in the second-line
setting in advanced/metastatic NSCLC. Oral formulations of paclitaxel and
docetaxel are of great interest, but have yet to receive regulatory approval in
this disease. The phase I-II trials have shown that these formulations are
feasible in the clinical setting.

DOI: 10.1097/CAD.0000000000000080 
PMID: 24463482  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. J Thorac Oncol. 2014 Jan;9(1):83-90. doi: 10.1097/JTO.0000000000000011.

Patient-reported neuropathy and taxane-associated symptoms in a phase 3 trial of 
nab-paclitaxel plus carboplatin versus solvent-based paclitaxel plus carboplatin 
for advanced non-small-cell lung cancer.

Hirsh V(1), Okamoto I, Hon JK, Page RD, Orsini J, Sakai H, Zhang H, Renschler MF,
Socinski MA.

Author information: 
(1)*McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada; †Kinki University Faculty of
Medicine, Osaka-Sayama, Japan; ‡Clearview Cancer Institute, Huntsville, Alabama; 
§The Center for Cancer and Blood Disorders, Fort Worth, Texas; ‖Essex Oncology of
New Jersey, Belleville, New Jersey; ¶Saitama Cancer Center, Saitama, Japan;
#Celgene Corporation, Summit, New Jersey; and **University of Pittsburgh Medical 
Center, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.

INTRODUCTION: nab-Paclitaxel (nab-P) is approved, in the United States, in
combination with carboplatin for the first-line treatment of advanced
non-small-cell lung cancer, based on a randomized phase 3 trial of nab-P plus
carboplatin (nab-P/C) versus solvent-based paclitaxel plus carboplatin (sb-P/C). 
This trial revealed a higher overall response rate (33% versus 25%; p = 0.005)
and longer, but not statistically significant, overall and progression-free
survival for nab-P/C versus sb-P/C. In addition, nab-P/C demonstrated lower rates
of grade 3 or higher peripheral neuropathy, myalgia, arthralgia, and neutropenia 
but higher rates of anemia and thrombocytopenia. This report analyzes patient and
physician assessment of symptoms within this trial.
METHODS: Patients completed the taxane subscale of the Functional Assessment of
Cancer Therapy questionnaire, which focuses on taxane toxicity, including
peripheral neuropathy and neurotoxicity. Mean baseline scores and changes from
baseline are reported. Physicians also graded the severity of neuropathy at each 
patient visit using National Cancer Institute Common Toxicity Criteria.
RESULTS: Patients receiving nab-P/C reported significantly less worsening of
peripheral neuropathy (p < 0.001), pain (p < 0.001), and hearing loss (p =
0.002). Patient-reported edema was similar between the two treatment arms. In
agreement with patient-reported symptoms, the results of a per-treatment cycle
physician assessment of peripheral neuropathy also favored nab-P/C over sb-P/C (p
< 0.001).
CONCLUSION: In this trial of patients receiving first-line treatment for advanced
non-small-cell lung cancer, nab-P/C was associated with statistically and
clinically significant reductions in patient-reported neuropathy, neuropathic
pain in the hands and feet, and hearing loss compared with sb-P/C.

DOI: 10.1097/JTO.0000000000000011 
PMID: 24346096  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Sci Rep. 2013 Oct 22;3:3012. doi: 10.1038/srep03012.

SGOL1 variant B induces abnormal mitosis and resistance to taxane in non-small
cell lung cancers.

Matsuura S(1), Kahyo T, Shinmura K, Iwaizumi M, Yamada H, Funai K, Kobayashi J,
Tanahashi M, Niwa H, Ogawa H, Takahashi T, Inui N, Suda T, Chida K, Watanabe Y,
Sugimura H.

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Tumor Pathology, Hamamatsu University School of Medicine,
1-20-1 Handayama, Higashi-ku, Hamamatsu, Shizuoka, 431-3192, Japan [2] Second
Division, Department of Internal Medicine, Hamamatsu University School of
Medicine, 1-20-1 Handayama, Higashi-ku, Hamamatsu, Shizuoka, 431-3192, Japan.

Mitosis is the most conspicuous cell cycle phase and Shugoshin-like 1 (SGOL1) is 
a key protein in protecting sister chromatids from precocious separation during
mitosis. We studied the role of SGOL1 and its splice variants in non-small cell
lung cancer (NSCLC) using 82 frozen NSCLC tissue samples. SGOL1-B expression was 
prevalent in smokers, in cases with a wild-type (WT) EGFR status, and in cases
with the focal copy number amplification of genes that are known to be important 
for defining the biological behaviors of NSCLC. The overexpression of SGOL1-B1 in
an NSCLC cell line induced aberrant chromosome missegregation, precociously
separated chromatids, and delayed mitotic progression. A higher level of SGOL1-B 
mRNA was related to taxane resistance, while the forced downregulation of SGOL1-B
increased the sensitivity to taxane. These results suggest that the expression of
SGOL1-B causes abnormal mitosis and taxane resistance in NSCLC cells.

DOI: 10.1038/srep03012 
PMCID: PMC3804856
PMID: 24146025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. J Control Release. 2013 Sep 28;170(3):365-72. doi: 10.1016/j.jconrel.2013.05.041.
Epub 2013 Jun 11.

nab-Paclitaxel mechanisms of action and delivery.

Yardley DA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Sarah Cannon Research Institute, 250 25th Avenue North, Suite 100, Nashville, 
TN 37203, USA. dyardley@tnonc.com

Taxanes are a key chemotherapy component for several malignancies, including
metastatic breast cancer (MBC), ovarian cancer, and advanced non-small cell lung 
cancer (NSCLC). Despite the clinical benefit achieved with solvent-based (sb)
taxanes, these agents can be associated with significant and severe toxicities.
Albumin-bound paclitaxel (Abraxane; nab®-Paclitaxel), a novel solvent-free
taxane, has demonstrated higher response rates and improved tolerability when
compared with solvent-based formulations in patients with advanced MBC and NSCLC.
The technology used to create nab-paclitaxel utilizes albumin to deliver
paclitaxel, resulting in an advantageous pharmacokinetic (PK) profile. This
review discusses the proposed mechanism of delivery of nab-paclitaxel, including 
an examination into a hypothesized greater ability to leverage albumin-based
transport relative to sb-paclitaxel. An advantageous PK profile and the more
efficient use of albumin-based transport may contribute to the preclinical
finding that nab-paclitaxel achieves a 33% higher tumor uptake relative to
sb-paclitaxel. Another possible contributing factor to the tumor accumulation of 
nab-paclitaxel is the binding of albumin to secreted protein acidic and rich in
cysteine (SPARC), although the data supporting this relationship between SPARC
and nab-paclitaxel remain largely correlative at this point. Recent data also
suggest that nab-paclitaxel may enhance tumor accumulation of gemcitabine in
pancreatic cancer treated with both agents. Additionally, a possible mechanistic 
synergy between nab-paclitaxel and capecitabine has been cited as the rationale
to combine the two agents for MBC treatment. Thus, nab-paclitaxel appears to
interact with tumors in a number of interesting, but not fully understood, ways. 
Continued preclinical and clinical research across a range of tumor types is
warranted to answer the questions that remain on the mechanisms of delivery and
antitumor activity of nab-paclitaxel.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jconrel.2013.05.041 
PMID: 23770008  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Invest New Drugs. 2014 Feb;32(1):195-9. doi: 10.1007/s10637-013-9980-5. Epub 2013
Jun 1.

Vorinostat and bortezomib as third-line therapy in patients with advanced
non-small cell lung cancer: a Wisconsin Oncology Network Phase II study.

Hoang T(1), Campbell TC, Zhang C, Kim K, Kolesar JM, Oettel KR, Blank JH,
Robinson EG, Ahuja HG, Kirschling RJ, Johnson PH, Huie MS, Wims ME, Larson MM,
Hernan HR, Traynor AM.

Author information: 
(1)University of Wisconsin Carbone Cancer Center, Madison, WI, USA,
txh@medicine.wisc.edu.

INTRODUCTION: The primary objective of this phase II trial was to evaluate the
efficacy and tolerability of vorinostat and bortezomib as third-line therapy in
advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients.
METHODS: Eligibility criteria included recurrent/metastatic NSCLC, having
received 2 prior systemic regimens, and performance status 0-2. Patients took
vorinostat 400 mg PO daily days 1-14 and bortezomib 1.3 mg/m2 IV day 1, 4, 8 and 
11 in a 21-day cycle. Primary endpoint was 3-month progression free survival
(3m-PFS), with a goal of at least 40 % of patients being free of progression at
that time point. This study followed a two-stage minimax design.
RESULTS: Eighteen patients were enrolled in the first stage. All patients had two
prior lines of treatment. Patients received a median of two treatment cycles
(range: 1-6) on study. There were no anti-tumor responses; stable disease was
observed in 5 patients (27.8 %). Median PFS was 1.5 months, 3m-PFS rate 11.1 %,
and median overall survival 4.7 months. The most common grade 3/4 toxicities were
thrombocytopenia and fatigue. Two patients who had baseline taxane-related grade 
1 peripheral neuropathy developed grade 3 neuropathy. The study was closed at its
first interim analysis for lack of efficacy.
CONCLUSIONS: Bortezomib and vorinostat displayed minimal anti-tumor activity as
third-line therapy in NSCLC. We do not recommend this regimen for further
investigation in unselected patients.

DOI: 10.1007/s10637-013-9980-5 
PMCID: PMC4310688
PMID: 23728919  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. PLoS One. 2013 May 28;8(5):e64816. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0064816. Print 2013.

Prognostic and predictive value of KRAS mutations in advanced non-small cell lung
cancer.

Sun JM(1), Hwang DW, Ahn JS, Ahn MJ, Park K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Department of Medicine, Samsung Medical
Center, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

Clinical implications of KRAS mutations in advanced non-small cell lung cancer
remain unclear. We retrospectively evaluated the prognostic and predictive value 
of KRAS mutations in patients with advanced NSCLC. Among 484 patients with
available results for both KRAS and EGFR mutations, 39 (8%) had KRAS and 182
(38%) EGFR mutations, with two cases having both mutations. The median overall
survivals for patients with KRAS mutations, EGFR mutations, or both wild types
were 7.7, 38.0, and 15.0 months, respectively (P<0.001). The KRAS mutation was an
independent poor prognostic factor in the multivariate analysis (hazard
ratio = 2.6, 95% CI: 1.8-3.7). Response rates and progression-free survival (PFS)
for the pemetrexed-based regimen in the KRAS mutation group were 14% and 2.1
months, inferior to those (28% and 3.9 months) in the KRAS wild type group. KRAS 
mutation tended to be associated with inferior treatment outcomes after
gemcitabine-based chemotherapy, while there was no difference regarding
taxane-based regimen. Although the clinical outcomes to EGFR tyrosine kinase
inhibitors (TKIs) seemed to be better in patients with KRAS wild type than those 
with KRAS mutations, there was no statistical difference in response rates and
PFS according to KRAS mutation status when EGFR mutation status was considered.
Two patients with both KRAS and EGFR mutations showed partial response to EGFR
TKIs. Although G12D mutation appeared more frequently in never smokers, there was
no difference in clinical outcomes according to KRAS genotypes. These results
suggested KRAS mutations have an independent prognostic value but a limited
predictive role for EGFR TKIs or cytotoxic chemotherapy in advanced NSCLC.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0064816 
PMCID: PMC3665805
PMID: 23724098  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Am J Clin Oncol. 2015 Jun;38(3):294-9. doi: 10.1097/COC.0b013e318297f333.

Clinical Significance of ABCG2 Haplotype-tagging Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms 
in Patients With Unresectable Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer Treated With First-line 
Platinum-based Chemotherapy.

Kim SH(1), Kim MJ, Cho YJ, Jeong YY, Kim HC, Lee JD, Hwang YS, Kim IS, Lee S, Oh 
SY, Ling H, Lee GW.

Author information: 
(1)*Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Hematology and Medical Oncology,
Samsung Changwon Hospital, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Changwon
†Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Hematology-Oncology, Gyeongsang
National University School of Medicine ‡Department of Internal Medicine, Division
of Pulmonology, Gyeongsang National University Hospital, Jinju §Department of
Laboratory Medicine, Pusan National University School of Medicine, Busan
∥Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Hematology-Oncology, Dong-A
University Medical Center, Busan, Republic of Korea ¶Department of Experimental
Therapeutics, M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, University of Texas, Houston, TX.

OBJECTIVES: The ATP-binding cassette (ABC) ABCG2, involved in multidrug
resistance (MDR) in cancer cells, plays an integral role in drug resistance.
Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) have been identified in many
MDR-associated ABC genes that seem to influence drug sensitivity/resistance
through various mechanisms. Therefore, we investigated whether ABCG2
haplotype-tagging SNPs (htSNPs) were associated with clinical outcomes in
patients with unresectable non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) treated with
front-line platinum-based chemotherapy.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We genotyped 4 ABCG2 htSNPs for 129 unresectable NSCLC
cases treated with first-line platinum-based chemotherapy. Clinical
characteristics, treatment outcomes, and predictive value of the htSNPs in
patient response, survival, and adverse events related to platinum-based
chemotherapy were analyzed according to each ABCG2 htSNP using the χ test,
Kaplan-Meier method, and Cox proportional hazard model.
RESULTS: The rs2725264 was significantly related to overall survival (OS)
(P=0.018, log-rank test). The median survival duration (in months) for patients
with the rs2725264 T/T, T/C, and C/C genotypes was 35.75 (95% confidence interval
[CI], 24.25-47.25), 34.25 (hazard ratio [HR] 1.27 [0.68 to 2.35]; 95% CI,
27.16-41.34), and 14.89 (HR 3.22 [1.26 to 8.24], 95% CI, 13.86-15.92),
respectively. The rs2725264 was identified as an independent factor by Cox
proportional hazard model analysis (P=0.028). In the taxane-based groups, OS was 
associated with rs2725264 (P=0.041), whereas in the gemcitabine-based groups, OS 
was associated with rs4148149 (P=0.014).
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest ABCG2 htSNPs rs2725264 (overall group and
taxane-platinum combination group) and rs4148149 (gemcitabine-platinum
combination group) were associated with OS in unresectable NSCLC patients treated
with first-line platinum-based chemotherapy. Thus, the ABCG2 htSNP rs2725264 may 
be independently associated with OS in unresectable NSCLC patients treated with
first-line platinum-based chemotherapy.

DOI: 10.1097/COC.0b013e318297f333 
PMID: 23689644  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Clin Adv Hematol Oncol. 2012 Oct;10(10 Suppl 18):1-16.

Clinical roundtable monograph: Recent advances in taxanes for the first-line
treatment of advanced non-small cell lung cancer.

Socinski MA(1), Govindan R, Spigel D.

Author information: 
(1)University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA.

Treatments for non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) are based on the broad
categories of squamous or non-squamous histology. Frontline treatment options
include pemetrexed and cisplatin, pemetrexed and a taxane, gemcitabine with
cisplatin, and the addition of bevacizumab to a taxane and carboplatin.
Pemetrexed is used for maintenance therapy for non-squamous NSCLC, whereas
patients with squamous NSCLC lack easy options for maintenance therapy.
nab-Paclitaxel overcomes the solubility and toxicity issues of solvent-based
paclitaxel, and the albumin in nab-paclitaxel improves the concentration of the
drug in the tumor. A recent phase III trial in NSCLC compared nab-paclitaxel with
carboplatin versus solvent-based paclitaxel with carboplatin, and found improved 
overall response rates (ORRs) in the nab-paclitaxel arm (33% vs 25%; P=.005). In 
a subset analysis, NSCLC patients with squamous histology had a higher ORR (41%) 
with nab-paclitaxel than with solvent-based paclitaxel (24%; P<.001). Another
subset analysis found that patients ages 70 years and older had improved overall 
survival (median 19.9 months) with nab-paclitaxel compared with solvent-based
paclitaxel (median 10.4 months; P=.009). Patients in the nab-paclitaxel arm had
less neuropathy, less hearing loss, and fewer interruptions in daily living than 
patients in the solvent-based paclitaxel arm.


PMID: 23187688  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Oncogene. 2014 Mar 13;33(11):1418-28. doi: 10.1038/onc.2013.85. Epub 2013 Mar 25.

BRCA1 regulates microtubule dynamics and taxane-induced apoptotic cell signaling.

Sung M(1), Giannakakou P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology and Medical Oncology, Department of Medicine, Weill
Medical College of Cornell University, New York, NY, USA.

The taxanes are effective microtubule-stabilizing chemotherapy drugs used in the 
treatment of various solid tumors. However, the emergence of drug resistance
hampers their clinical efficacy. The molecular basis of clinical taxane
resistance remains poorly understood. Breast cancer 1, early onset gene, BRCA1,
is a tumor-suppressor gene, whose expression has been correlated with taxane
sensitivity in many solid tumors including non-small cell lung cancer. However,
the molecular mechanism underlying the relationship between BRCA1 (B1) expression
and taxane activity remains unclear. To this end, we created a stable B1
knockdown A549 cell line (B1-KD) to investigate B1's role in microtubule biology 
and response to taxane treatment. We show that B1-KD rendered A549 cells
resistant to paclitaxel (PTX), phenocopying clinical studies showing that low B1 
expression correlated with taxane resistance. As previously reported, we show
that loss of B1 enhanced centrosomal γ-tubulin localization and microtubule
nucleation. Interestingly, we found that the B1-KD cells exhibited increased
microtubule dynamics as compared with parental A549 cells, as assessed by
live-cell confocal microscopy using enhanced green fluorescent protein-tagged
α-tubulin or EB1 protein. In addition, we showed that loss of B1 impairs the
ability of PTX to induce microtubule polymerization using immunofluorescence
microscopy and a cell-based tubulin polymerization assay. Furthermore, B1-KD
cells exhibited significantly lower intracellular binding of a fluorescently
labeled PTX to microtubules. Recent studies have shown that PTX-stabilized
microtubules serves as a scaffold for pro-caspase-8 binding and induction of
apoptosis downstream of induced-proximity activation of caspase-8. Here we show
that loss of B1 reduces the association of pro-caspase-8 with microtubules and
subsequently leads to impaired PTX-induced activation of apoptosis. Taken
together, our data show that B1 regulates indirectly endogenous microtubule
dynamics and stability while its loss leads to microtubules that are more dynamic
and less susceptible to PTX-induced stabilization conferring taxane resistance.

DOI: 10.1038/onc.2013.85 
PMCID: PMC3865028
PMID: 23524581  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Anticancer Res. 2013 Mar;33(3):1107-15.

Biomarkers as prognostic factors for cN2 or 3 non-small cell lung cancer treated 
by induction chemoradiotherapy and surgery.

Yokomise H(1), Liu D, Chang S, Go T, Ishikawa S, Misaki N, Nakashima N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Thoracic Surgery, Faculty of Medicine, Kagawa
University, 1750-1 Ikenobe, Miki-cho, Kita-gun, Kagawa 761-0793, Japan.
yokomise@kms.ac.jp

BACKGROUND: We have reported promising results of surgery after induction
chemoradiotherapy (carboplatin-taxane, 50 Gy radiation) for cN2,3 non-small cell 
lung cancer (NSCLC). In order to understand the underlying mechanism, expression 
of excision repair cross-complementing 1 (ERCC1), class III β-tubulin (tubulin), 
thymidylate synthase (TYMS), and ribonucleotide reductase M1 (RRM1) were
investigated.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Immunohistochemistry was performed in 45 patients with
cN2,3 NSCLC, but only in twelve pathologically-complete response cases to
evaluate intratumoral expression of these biomarkers.
RESULTS: High expression of ERCC1, tubulin, TYMS and RRM1 was observed in 25
(55.6%), 19 (42.2%), 20 (44.4%) and 25 (55.6%) patients, respectively. Low
expressions of ERCC1, tubulin, TYMS and RRM1 were favorable prognostic factors
(p=0.044, p=0.025, p=0.039 and p=0.037, respectively). The simultaneously low
expression of ERCC1 and tubulin was observed to be the most significant
prognostic factor, by Cox regression analysis (hazard ratio=2.381; p=0.0059).
CONCLUSION: Patients with simultaneous low expression of ERCC1 and tubulin are
promising candidates for surgery after carboplatin-taxane chemoradiotherapy. For 
patients with high expression of ERCC1 and tubulin, uracil-tegafur, pemetrexed,
and gemcitabine may be the alternative agents for personalized chemotherapy.


PMID: 23482788  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Clin Cancer Res. 2013 Mar 15;19(6):1603-11. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-12-2995.
Epub 2013 Feb 5.

CHFR protein expression predicts outcomes to taxane-based first line therapy in
metastatic NSCLC.

Pillai RN(1), Brodie SA, Sica GL, Shaojin Y, Li G, Nickleach DC, Yuan L, Varma
VA, Bonta D, Herman JG, Brock MV, Ribeiro MJ, Ramalingam SS, Owonikoko TK, Khuri 
FR, Brandes JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia
30322, USA.

PURPOSE: Currently, there is no clinically validated test for the prediction of
response to tubulin-targeting agents in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Here,
we investigated the significance of nuclear expression of the mitotic checkpoint 
gene checkpoint with forkhead and ringfinger domains (CHFR) as predictor of
response and overall survival with taxane-based first-line chemotherapy in
advanced stage NSCLC.
METHODS: We studied a cohort of 41 patients (median age 63 years) with advanced
NSCLC treated at the Atlanta VAMC between 1999 and 2010. CHFR expression by
immunohistochemistry (score 0-4) was correlated with clinical outcome using
chi-square test and Cox proportional models. A cutoff score of "3" was determined
by receiver operator characteristics analysis for "low" CHFR expression. Results 
were validated in an additional 20 patients who received taxane-based
chemotherapy at Emory University Hospital and the Atlanta VAMC.
RESULTS: High expression (score = 4) of CHFR is strongly associated with adverse 
outcomes: the risk for progressive disease after first-line chemotherapy with
carboplatin-paclitaxel was 52% in patients with CHFR-high versus only 19% in
those with CHFR-low tumors (P = 0.033). Median overall survival was strongly
correlated with CHFR expression status (CHFR low: 9.9 months; CHFR high: 6.2
months; P = 0.002). After multivariate adjustment, reduced CHFR expression
remained a powerful predictor of improved overall survival (HR = 0.24; 95% CI,
0.1-0.58%; P = 0.002). In the validation set, low CHFR expression was associated 
with higher likelihood of clinical benefit (P = 0.03) and improved overall
survival (P = 0.038).
CONCLUSIONS: CHFR expression is a novel predictive marker of response and overall
survival in NSCLC patients treated with taxane-containing chemotherapy.

DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-12-2995 
PMCID: PMC3602233
PMID: 23386692  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol. 2013 Mar;71(3):627-33. doi:
10.1007/s00280-012-2048-y. Epub 2012 Dec 30.

A phase I study of liposomal-encapsulated docetaxel (LE-DT) in patients with
advanced solid tumor malignancies.

Deeken JF(1), Slack R, Weiss GJ, Ramanathan RK, Pishvaian MJ, Hwang J,
Lewandowski K, Subramaniam D, He AR, Cotarla I, Rahman A, Marshall JL.

Author information: 
(1)Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center, Georgetown University Medical Center,
3800 Reservoir Road, NW, Washington, DC 20007, USA.
John.Deeken@gunet.georgetown.edu

BACKGROUND: Docetaxel is a taxane anticancer drug used in a wide variety of solid
tumors. Liposomes are versatile drug carriers that may increase drug solubility, 
serve as sustained release systems, provide protection from drug degradation and 
toxicities, and help overcome multidrug resistance. This phase I study was
conducted to determine the maximum tolerated dose, dose-limiting toxicities
(DLTs), pharmacokinetics (PK), and clinical response of liposomal-encapsulated
docetaxel (LE-DT) in patients with advanced solid tumor malignancies.
METHODS: LE-DT was administered using a standard 3 + 3 dose escalation schema
with dose levels of 50, 65, 85, 110, and 132 mg/m(2) IV on a 3-week cycle.
Toxicities were assessed using the NCI-CTCAE version 3.0, and response was
assessed using RECIST criteria (version 1.0). PK samples were drawn during cycle 
1 and analyzed using a non-compartmental analysis.
RESULTS: Twenty-four patients were treated for 1-30 cycles (median = 4). No DLTs 
were experienced through dose levels of 50, 65, 85, and 110 mg/m(2). Two out of
two patients experienced grade 4 neutropenia at the 132 mg/m(2) dose level. When 
an additional three patients were treated at the expanded 110 mg/m(2) dose level,
two experienced grade 4 neutropenia. The 85 mg/m(2) dose level was reassessed
with an expanded group of three additional patients, and only one of three
patients experienced grade 4 neutropenia. The protocol was amended to allow G-CSF
during cycle 1, and an additional three patients were treated at 110 mg/m(2) with
no DLTs experienced. No patient experienced significant neuropathy, even patients
treated for 19, 20, and 30 cycles. PK followed a two-compartment elimination
pattern; there was no correlation between PK and toxicity. Two patients with
thyroid and neuroendocrine cancer had partial responses (PR, 8%), and one patient
with non-small-cell lung cancer had an unconfirmed PR. Eight patients (33%) had
stable disease lasting more than 3 months, for a clinical benefit rate of 41%.
CONCLUSION: LE-DT was well tolerated with expected toxicities of neutropenia,
anemia, and fatigue, but without neuropathy or edema. Clinical benefit (SD + PR) 
was observed in 41% of the patients. The recommended phase II dose of LE-DT is 85
mg/m(2) without G-CSF or 110 mg/m(2) with G-CSF.

DOI: 10.1007/s00280-012-2048-y 
PMCID: PMC3703246
PMID: 23274395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Gan To Kagaku Ryoho. 2012 Dec;39(13):2533-6.

[Comparative examination of preparation time in docetaxel hydrate formulation].

[Article in Japanese]

Arii D(1), Ikeno Y, Narita K, Murooka K, Nojima M, Kidokoro A.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Pharmacy, Juntendo University Urayasu Hospital, Japan.

Docetaxel hydrate(DTX), a taxane anticancer drug, is known to be effective
against a wide range of cancers, including breast cancer and non-small cell lung 
cancer. The DTX preparation Taxotere(2-vial DTX)has conventionally required
dissolution in the attached solvent, while Onetaxotere(1-vial DTX), a newer
product, is provided as a solution. This allows reduction of preparation time, so
that improvement in operational efficiency can be expected. In this study, we
measured the actual preparation time for 2-vial DTX and 1-vial DTX to compare
their usefulness. The median preparation time for 2-vial DTX(n=84)and 1-vial
DTX(n=84)was significantly different, with the respective values being 6. 52
minutes and 2. 67 minutes(p<0. 01). By switching to 1-vial DTXfrom 2-vial DTX,
which requires preparation of a premix solution with the attached solvent, the
preparation procedure in daily practice becomes more convenient. This is because 
of a shorter preparation time as well as a lower risk of contamination,
suggesting the usefulness of 1-vial DTX.


PMID: 23235174  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. BMC Cancer. 2012 Sep 24;12:422. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-12-422.

Genetic association with overall survival of taxane-treated lung cancer patients 
- a genome-wide association study in human lymphoblastoid cell lines followed by 
a clinical association study.

Niu N(1), Schaid DJ, Abo RP, Kalari K, Fridley BL, Feng Q, Jenkins G, Batzler A, 
Brisbin AG, Cunningham JM, Li L, Sun Z, Yang P, Wang L.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical Pharmacology, Department of Molecular Pharmacology and
Experimental Therapeutics, Mayo Clinic, 200 First Street SW, Rochester, MN 55905,
USA.

BACKGROUND: Taxane is one of the first line treatments of lung cancer. In order
to identify novel single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) that might contribute to
taxane response, we performed a genome-wide association study (GWAS) for two
taxanes, paclitaxel and docetaxel, using 276 lymphoblastoid cell lines (LCLs),
followed by genotyping of top candidate SNPs in 874 lung cancer patient samples
treated with paclitaxel.
METHODS: GWAS was performed using 1.3 million SNPs and taxane cytotoxicity IC50
values for 276 LCLs. The association of selected SNPs with overall survival in 76
small or 798 non-small cell lung cancer (SCLC, NSCLC) patients were analyzed by
Cox regression model, followed by integrated SNP-microRNA-expression association 
analysis in LCLs and siRNA screening of candidate genes in SCLC (H196) and NSCLC 
(A549) cell lines.
RESULTS: 147 and 180 SNPs were associated with paclitaxel or docetaxel IC50s with
p-values <10-4 in the LCLs, respectively. Genotyping of 153 candidate SNPs in 874
lung cancer patient samples identified 8 SNPs (p-value < 0.05) associated with
either SCLC or NSCLC patient overall survival. Knockdown of PIP4K2A, CCT5, CMBL, 
EXO1, KMO and OPN3, genes within 200 kb up-/downstream of the 3 SNPs that were
associated with SCLC overall survival (rs1778335, rs2662411 and rs7519667),
significantly desensitized H196 to paclitaxel. SNPs rs2662411 and rs1778335 were 
associated with mRNA expression of CMBL or PIP4K2A through microRNA (miRNA)
hsa-miR-584 or hsa-miR-1468.
CONCLUSIONS: GWAS in an LCL model system, joined with clinical translational and 
functional studies, might help us identify genetic variations associated with
overall survival of lung cancer patients treated paclitaxel.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2407-12-422 
PMCID: PMC3573965
PMID: 23006423  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. J Thorac Oncol. 2012 Oct;7(10):1490-502.

Impact of systematic EGFR and KRAS mutation evaluation on progression-free
survival and overall survival in patients with advanced non-small-cell lung
cancer treated by erlotinib in a French prospective cohort (ERMETIC project--part
2).

Cadranel J(1), Mauguen A, Faller M, Zalcman G, Buisine MP, Westeel V, Longchampt 
E, Wislez M, Coudert B, Daniel C, Chetaille B, Michiels S, Blons H, Solassol J,
De Fraipont F, Foucher P, Urban T, Lacroix L, Poulot V, Quoix E, Antoine M,
Danton G, Morin F, Chouaid C, Pignon JP.

Author information: 
(1)Service de Pneumologie-AH-HP Hôpital Tenon, Faculté de Médecine P&M Curie,
université Paris 6 Paris, France. jacques.cadranel@tnn.aphp.fr

BACKGROUND: Epidermal growth factor and v-Ki-ras2 Kirsten ras sarcoma (KRAS)
mutation status, although associated with EGFR- tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI)
efficacy, has not been used in clinical practice until recently. The prospective 
Evaluation of the EGFR Mutation status for the administration of EGFR-TKIs in non
small cell lung Carcinoma (ERMETIC) study aimed to implement these biomarkers in 
France.
METHODS: Between March 2007 and April 2008, EGFR and KRAS were studied by
sequencing DNA tumor specimens from 522 consecutive advanced non-small-cell lung 
cancer patients treated with EGFR-TKI, mostly in second- or third-line settings. 
Cox models were used to investigate the impact of patient characteristics and
mutations on progression-free survival (PFS) and overall survival (OS). Added
value from mutation status was evaluated using likelihood ratio (LR) tests.
Classification and regression tree analysis aimed to identify homogeneous groups 
in terms of survival.
RESULTS: Among the 522 patients, 87% were white, 32% were women, and 18% were
never-smokers, with 65% presenting with adenocarcinoma. Biological data were
available for 307 patients, showing 44 EGFR mutations (14%) and 42 KRAS (14%)
mutations. Median PFS was 2.4 months (interquartile range, 1.4-4.6) and median OS
5.6 months (interquartile range, 2.2-14.0). Factors independently associated with
PFS were performance status 1 or 2 to 3 (hazards ratio [HR] = 1.5, 95% confidence
interval [CI] 1.1-1.9; and HR = 2.3, CI 1.7-3.1, respectively; p < 0.001); former
or current smoker status (HR = 1.8, CI 1.4-2.4 and 2.0,CI 1.4-2.8, respectively; 
p < 0.001); nonadenocarcinoma histology (squamous cell: HR = 0.9 CI 0.7-1.2];
others: HR = 1.6, 1.3-2.1; p < 0.001); at least two metastatic sites (HR = 1.3,
CI 1.1-1.6 and 1.6, CI 1.3-2.1, respectively; p < 0.001); prior taxane-based
chemotherapy (HR = 1.3, CI 1.0-1.3, p = 0.01); non-white (HR = 0.7, CI 0.5-0.9, p
= 0.009). Similar results were found for OS. In addition, EGFR and KRAS mutations
were significantly associated with PFS (HR = 0.5, CI 0.3-0.7 and HR = 1.2, CI
0.8-1.8, respectively, versus no mutation; LR p = 0.001). In the OS model,
adjusted HR was 0.7 (0.4-1.0) for EGFR mutation and 1.7 (1.1-2.4) for KRAS (LR p 
= 0.004). Classification and regression tree analysis revealed EGFR mutation to
be the primary factor for identifying homogeneous patient subgroups in terms of
PFS.
CONCLUSIONS: EGFR and KRAS status independently impacts outcomes in advanced
non-small-cell lung cancer patients treated with EGFR-TKI. However, EGFR status
impacts both PFS and OS whereas KRAS only impacts OS. These findings support the 
nationwide use of EGFR status for patient selection before EGFR-TKI therapy. The 
role of KRAS mutations remains to be elucidated.

DOI: 10.1097/JTO.0b013e318265b2b5 
PMID: 22982650  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Toxicology. 2012 Dec 16;302(2-3):190-6. doi: 10.1016/j.tox.2012.07.015. Epub 2012
Aug 4.

Involvement of hypothalamic cyclooxygenase-2, interleukin-1β and melanocortin in 
the development of docetaxel-induced anorexia in rats.

Yamamoto K(1), Asano K, Ito Y, Matsukawa N, Kim S, Yamatodani A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Pharmacology, Department of Medical Science and Technology,
Division of Health Sciences, Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka University,
Yamadaoka 1-7, Suita, Osaka, Japan. kouichi@sahs.med.osaka-u.ac.jp

Docetaxel, a taxane derivative, is frequently used for the treatment of advanced 
breast cancer, non-small cell lung cancer, and metastatic prostate cancer.
Clinical reports demonstrated that docetaxel-based chemotherapy often induces
anorexia, but the etiology is not completely understood. To elucidate possible
mechanisms, we investigated the involvement of central interleukin (IL)-1β,
cyclooxygenase (COX)-2, and pro-opiomelanocortin (POMC) in the development of
docetaxel-induced anorexia in rats. Rats received docetaxel (10mg/kg, i.p.) with 
or without pretreatment with selective COX-2 inhibitors, NS-398 (10 and 30 mg/kg,
i.g.) or celecoxib (10 and 30 mg/kg, i.g.), and a non-selective COX inhibitor,
indomethacin (10mg/kg, i.g.), then food intake was monitored for 24h after
administration. We also examined expression of IL-1β, COX-2, and POMC mRNA in
hypothalamus of docetaxel-treated rats and the effect of a COX-2 inhibitor on
docetaxel-induced POMC mRNA expression. Food consumption in rats was
significantly decreased 24h after administration of docetaxel and anorexia was
partially reversed by all COX inhibitors. Administration of docetaxel increased
IL-1β, COX-2, and POMC mRNA expression in the hypothalamus of rats. The time
required to increase these gene expressions was comparable to the latency period 
of docetaxel-induced anorexia in rats. In addition, pretreatment with COX-2
inhibitors suppressed docetaxel-induced expression of POMC mRNA. These results
suggest that IL-1β and COX-2 mRNA expression and subsequent activation of POMC in
the hypothalamus may contribute to the development of docetaxel-induced anorexia 
in rats.

Copyright © 2012. Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tox.2012.07.015 
PMID: 22902858  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Br J Cancer. 2012 Aug 21;107(5):823-30. doi: 10.1038/bjc.2012.324. Epub 2012 Jul 
26.

βV-tubulin expression is associated with outcome following taxane-based
chemotherapy in non-small cell lung cancer.

Christoph DC(1), Kasper S, Gauler TC, Loesch C, Engelhard M, Theegarten D,
Poettgen C, Hepp R, Peglow A, Loewendick H, Welter S, Stamatis G, Hirsch FR,
Schuler M, Eberhardt WE, Wohlschlaeger J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, West German Cancer Centre, University Hospital
Essen, University Duisburg-Essen, Hufelandstrasse 55, Essen 45147, Germany.
daniel.christoph@uk-essen.de

BACKGROUND: Tubulin-binding agents (TBAs) are effective in non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC) treatment. Both βIII- and βV-tubulins are expressed by cancer
cells and may lead to resistance against TBAs.
METHODS: Pre-treatment samples from 65 locally advanced or oligometastatic NSCLC 
patients, who underwent uniform induction chemotherapy with paclitaxel and
platinum followed by radiochemotherapy with vinorelbine and platinum were
retrospectively analysed by immunohistochemistry. Protein expression of βIII- and
βV-tubulin was morphometrically quantified.
RESULTS: Median pre-treatment H-score for βIII-tubulin was 110 (range: 0-290),
and 160 for βV-tubulin (range: 0-290). Low βIII-tubulin expression was associated
with improved overall survival (OS) (P=0.0127, hazard ratio (HR): 0.328). An
association between high βV-tubulin expression and prolonged progression-free
survival (PFS, median 19.2 vs 9.4 months in high vs low expressors; P=0.0315, HR:
1.899) was found. Further, high βV-tubulin expression was associated with
objective response (median H-score 172.5 for CR+PR vs 120 for SD+PD patients,
P=0.0104) or disease control following induction chemotherapy (170 for CR+PR+SD
vs 100 for PD patients, P=0.0081), but not radiochemotherapy.
CONCLUSION: Expression of βV-tubulin was associated with treatment response and
PFS following paclitaxel-based chemotherapy of locally advanced and
oligometastatic NSCLC patients. Prolonged OS was associated with low levels of
βIII-tubulin. Prospective evaluation of βIII/βV-tubulin expression in NSCLC is
warranted.

DOI: 10.1038/bjc.2012.324 
PMCID: PMC3425975
PMID: 22836512  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Clin Ther. 2012 Jul;34(7):1467-73. doi: 10.1016/j.clinthera.2012.06.003. Epub
2012 Jun 25.

Eribulin mesylate (E7389): review of efficacy and tolerability in breast,
pancreatic, head and neck, and non-small cell lung cancer.

Scarpace SL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Albany College of Pharmacy and Health Sciences, 106 NewScotland 
Avenue, Albany, NY 12208, USA. sarah.scarpace@acphs.edu

BACKGROUND: Eribulin mesylate is a halichondrin B analogue that acts as a
nontaxane microtubule dynamics inhibitor. Eribulin was approved in the United
States in 2010 for the treatment of metastatic breast cancer for patients who
have received at least 2 metastatic breast cancer chemotherapeutic regimens,
including an anthracycline and a taxane. Eribulin is administered as a single
agent at 1.4 mg/m(2) IV for 2 to 5 minutes on days 1 and 8 of a 21-day cycle.
OBJECTIVES: The goals of this article are to review eribulin's medication
profile, including pharmacology, pharmacokinetic properties, efficacy, and
tolerability. Recommendations are provided at the end of the article based on the
published information.
METHODS: PubMed, the Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials, and Clinical
Trials.gov were searched from the beginning of each database through January 3,
2012, for relevant articles on human studies published in English. Search terms
included eribulin, eribulin mesylate, and Halaven. Clinical trials, case reports,
comparative studies, meta-analyses, evaluation studies, controlled clinical
trials, and randomized controlled trials were included as search limits. The
references from selected articles were also reviewed to identify additional
publications. Eisai, the manufacturer of eribulin mesylate, was also contacted
for information regarding trials listed in Clinicaltrials.gov but not yet
published.
RESULTS: One Phase III trial was identified that evaluated eribulin for use in
patients with metastatic breast cancer. Four Phase II trials were identified that
studied eribulin in patients with head and neck, pancreatic, and non-small cell
lung cancers. The median overall survival among previously treated metastatic
breast cancer patients treated with eribulin was 13.1 months compared with 10.6
months (P = 0.041) with other active chemotherapy for this setting. In non-small 
cell lung cancer, median overall survival in eribulin-treated patients has been
reported as 9.4 months in an unselected population and varies according to taxane
sensitivity: 12.6 months in taxane-sensitive disease versus 8.9 months in
taxane-resistant disease. Patients with head and neck or pancreatic cancers did
not experience improvements in response rates or survival outcomes when treated
with eribulin in clinical trials.
CONCLUSIONS: Eribulin is approved by the Food and Drug Administration for
patients with previously treated metastatic breast cancer and has demonstrated a 
survival benefit compared with standard treatment options in this setting.
Non-small cell lung cancer patients had improved response rates when treated with
eribulin in open-label, nonrandomized, Phase II trials reported in abstract form.
Eribulin was not effective in the treatment of head and neck or pancreatic cancer
in Phase II trials.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier HS Journals, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clinthera.2012.06.003 
PMID: 22739019  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. PLoS One. 2012;7(6):e39167. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0039167. Epub 2012 Jun 18.

miR-337-3p and its targets STAT3 and RAP1A modulate taxane sensitivity in
non-small cell lung cancers.

Du L(1), Subauste MC, DeSevo C, Zhao Z, Baker M, Borkowski R, Schageman JJ, Greer
R, Yang CR, Suraokar M, Wistuba II, Gazdar AF, Minna JD, Pertsemlidis A.

Author information: 
(1)Greehey Children's Cancer Research Institute, UT Health Science Center at San 
Antonio, San Antonio, Texas, USA.

NSCLC (non-small cell lung cancer) often exhibits resistance to paclitaxel
treatment. Identifying the elements regulating paclitaxel response will advance
efforts to overcome such resistance in NSCLC therapy. Using in vitro approaches, 
we demonstrated that over-expression of the microRNA miR-337-3p sensitizes
NCI-H1155 cells to paclitaxel, and that miR-337-3p mimic has a general effect on 
paclitaxel response in NSCLC cell lines, which may provide a novel adjuvant
strategy to paclitaxel in the treatment of lung cancer. By combining in vitro and
in silico approaches, we identified STAT3 and RAP1A as direct targets that
mediate the effect of miR-337-3p on paclitaxel sensitivity. Further investigation
showed that miR-337-3p mimic also sensitizes cells to docetaxel, another member
of the taxane family, and that STAT3 levels are significantly correlated with
taxane resistance in lung cancer cell lines, suggesting that endogenous STAT3
expression is a determinant of intrinsic taxane resistance in lung cancer. The
identification of a miR-337-3p as a modulator of cellular response to taxanes,
and STAT3 and RAP1A as regulatory targets which mediate that response, defines a 
novel regulatory pathway modulating paclitaxel sensitivity in lung cancer cells, 
which may provide novel adjuvant strategies along with paclitaxel in the
treatment of lung cancer and may also provide biomarkers for predicting
paclitaxel response in NSCLC.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0039167 
PMCID: PMC3377607
PMID: 22723956  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Ann Pharmacother. 2012 Jun;46(6):802-11. doi: 10.1345/aph.1Q636. Epub 2012 May
22.

Eribulin: a novel cytotoxic chemotherapy agent.

Preston JN(1), Trivedi MV.

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmacy, University of Houston, Houston, TX, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To review the chemistry, pharmacology, pharmacokinetics, safety, and
efficacy of eribulin (Halaven).
DATA SOURCES: A literature search (up to December 2011) using the terms eribulin,
Halaven, ER-086526, and E7389 was performed with PubMed, Google Scholar, selected
Ovid bibliography searches, and the abstract search tool from the American
Society of Clinical Oncology Annual Meetings and the San Antonio Breast Cancer
Symposia. Additional references from the bibliographies of these articles were
also assessed.
DATA EXTRACTION: English-language preclinical and clinical studies on the
chemistry, pharmacology, pharmacokinetics, safety, and efficacy of eribulin were 
reviewed.
DATA SYNTHESIS: Eribulin is a novel microtubule inhibitor with a unique mechanism
of action, which involves interaction with a distinct binding site on β-tubulin
leading to G(2)/M phase cell-cycle arrest and apoptosis. Eribulin has been
approved by the Food and Drug Administration for the treatment of metastatic
breast cancer in patients who have been previously treated with an anthracycline 
and a taxane. In a pivotal Phase 3 study conducted in patients with metastatic
breast cancer, eribulin 1.4 mg/m(2), administered over 2-5 minutes as an
intravenous infusion on days 1 and 8 of 21-day cycles, was associated with a
significantly increased median overall survival of 13.1 months compared to the
median overall survival of 10.6 months in the therapy of physician's choice.
Eribulin has also shown activity in Phase 2 studies in other types of cancers,
such as non-small cell lung cancer, prostate cancer, urothelial cancer, soft
tissue sarcomas, and platinum-susceptible ovarian, fallopian tube, or peritoneal 
cancers. The most severe (grade 3/4) adverse effects associated with eribulin
include neutropenia, leukopenia, and peripheral neuropathy. Common toxicities
include fatigue, neutropenia, alopecia, anemia, and peripheral neuropathy.
CONCLUSIONS: Eribulin is a promising new cytotoxic chemotherapy agent due to its 
ability to treat cancers that are refractory or resistant to other drugs as well 
as its manageable toxicity profile.

DOI: 10.1345/aph.1Q636 
PMID: 22619477  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Lung Cancer. 2012 Sep;77(3):578-84. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2012.04.016. Epub 2012
May 18.

Clinical significance of ERCC2 haplotype-tagging single nucleotide polymorphisms 
in patients with unresectable non-small cell lung cancer treated with first-line 
platinum-based chemotherapy.

Kim SH(1), Lee GW, Lee MJ, Cho YJ, Jeong YY, Kim HC, Lee JD, Hwang YS, Kim IS,
Lee S, Oh SY.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology and Medical Oncology, Department of Internal Medicine, 
Samsung Changwon Hospital, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Changwon, 
Republic of Korea.

BACKGROUND: First-line platinum-based chemotherapy is currently considered the
standard treatment for unresectable non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). However, 
resistance to platinum-based chemotherapy results in poor prognoses. The DNA
repair pathway is a crucial molecular mechanism potentially involved in
resistance to platinum-based chemotherapy. ERCC2 plays an integral role in the
nucleotide excision repair pathway. Furthermore, single nucleotide polymorphisms 
(SNPs) and haplotypes in the ERCC2 gene are thought to be associated with the
risk of developing lung cancer and clinical outcomes. Therefore, we evaluated the
impact of ERCC2 haplotype-tagging SNPs (htSNPs) on the clinical parameters of
first-line platinum-based chemotherapy in unresectable NSCLC.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We genotyped 8 ERCC2 htSNPs for 129 unresectable NSCLC
(stage IIIA, 12; stage III, 36; stage IV, 82) cases treated with first-line
platinum-based chemotherapy. Clinical characteristics, treatment outcomes,
hematological and non-hematological toxicities, and predictive value of the
htSNPs in patient response, survival, and adverse events related to
platinum-based chemotherapy were analyzed according to each ERCC2 htSNP using the
chi-square test, Kaplan-Meier method, and Cox proportional hazard model.
RESULTS: No differences were observed in patient or disease characteristics and
response according to ERCC2 htSNPs. In a survival analysis, rs50872 was
significantly related to overall survival (OS) (log-rank test, p=0.014). The
median survival duration of rs50872 G/G, A/G, and A/A genotypes was 35.75 (95%
confidence interval [CI] 21.05-50.45), 36.07 (hazard ratio [HR] 1.02, 95% CI
25.20-46.94), and 16.75 (HR 3.49, 95% CI 5.73-27.77) months, respectively. A
significant association was observed between grades 3 and 4 infections and poor
survival: OS in patients with a grade 0-2 infection: 35.75 months (95% CI
28.15-43.35); OS in patients with a grade 3-4 infection: 12.86 months (95% CI
8.99-16.72, HR 3.57) (log-rank test, p<0.001). In a subgroup analysis based on
taxane-platinum vs. gemcitabine-platinum doublets, the rs238405 genotype was
significantly related to OS in the taxane-platinum doublets group. However, the
rs238416 genotype was significantly associated with OS in the gemcitabine-based
group.
CONCLUSIONS: ERCC2 htSNPs rs50872 (overall), rs238405 (taxane-platinum doublets
group), and rs238416 (gemcitabine-platinum doublets group) and infection related 
to first-line chemotherapy were associated with OS in unresectable NSCLC patients
treated with first-line platinum-based chemotherapy. However, additional large
prospective studies focusing on the role of ERCC2 htSNPs in unresectable NSCLC
are needed.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2012.04.016 
PMID: 22608006  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Anticancer Res. 2012 May;32(5):1611-9.

Broad spectrum preclinical antitumor activity of eribulin (Halaven(R)): optimal
effectiveness under intermittent dosing conditions.

Towle MJ(1), Nomoto K, Asano M, Kishi Y, Yu MJ, Littlefield BA.

Author information: 
(1)Discovery Biology, Oncology Product Creation Unit, Eisai Inc., Andover, MA,
USA.

BACKGROUND: Eribulin is a pharmaceutically and structurally optimized analog of
the marine sponge natural product halichondrin B. Its salt form, eribulin
mesylate (Halaven®) is clinically used in the United States, the European Union, 
and Japan for the treatment of heavily pretreated patients with metastatic breast
cancer, who previously received an anthracycline and a taxane. Early preclinical 
studies of this new inhibitor of microtubule dynamics showed high antitumor
potency towards several human cancer types in vitro and in vivo. Here we extend
those early studies by examining the effects of eribulin against a wider spectrum
of human tumor xenografts in vivo, and by directly comparing the in vivo
effectiveness of different dosing administration schedules.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: In single-schedule studies, in vivo activity of eribulin
against HT-1080 fibrosarcoma, U251 glioblastoma, SR-475 head and neck cancer,
SK-LMS-1 leiomyosarcoma, NCI-H322M and NCI-H522 non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC), PANC-1 pancreatic cancer, and NCI-H82 small cell lung cancer (SCLC)
xenografts was examined at dose levels of 0.19-4.0 mg/kg using q2d×3(×3), q4d×3, 
q4d×4, and q7d×2 schedules. Administration schedule dependence was evaluated by
directly comparing q1d×5, q2d×3(×3), q4d×3, and q7d×3 schedules in the MDA-MB-435
breast cancer xenograft model, using conditions of equivalent total dosing over
the course of the experiment.
RESULTS: In single-schedule studies, maximum tolerated dose (MTD) values (or
maximal 'at or below MTD' values) ranged from 0.8-1.7 mg/kg. In vivo antitumor
responses at these dosing levels included tumor growth inhibition, stasis, and
regression; several studies showing regression also yielded long-term tumor-free 
survivors. Effectiveness of eribulin showed model-to-model variability that
appeared to be unrelated to dose level or administration schedule, suggesting
that characterization of models with differing eribulin sensitivities may reveal 
potential biomarker strategies. Results of the dose schedule comparison study in 
the MDA-MB-435 model suggested the following order of effectiveness and
tolerability: q2d×3(×3)>q4d×3≈q7d×3>> q1d×5. Moderately intermittent dosing thus 
shows optimal preclinical effectiveness, in good agreement with the approved
intermittent clinical schedule for eribulin (days 1 and 8 of a 21-day cycle).
CONCLUSION: The current results show that eribulin has broad spectrum preclinical
antitumor activity against a wide variety of human cancer types, and indicate
that maximum effectiveness and optimal tolerability are obtained using moderately
intermittent dosing schedules.


PMID: 22593439  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Crit Rev Oncol Hematol. 2012 Dec;84(3):340-9. doi:
10.1016/j.critrevonc.2012.03.007. Epub 2012 Apr 23.

Comparison of the efficacy and safety of single-agent and doublet chemotherapy in
advanced non-small cell lung cancer in the elderly: a meta-analysis.

Des Guetz G(1), Uzzan B, Nicolas P, Valeyre D, Sebbane G, Morere JF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, AP-HP, Avicenne Hospital, Paris-XIII University, 125
route de Stalingrad, 93009 Bobigny, France. gdesguetz@gmail.com

BACKGROUND: In patients with advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) aged
more than 70 years, the benefit-to-risk ratio of doublet chemotherapy vs
single-agent is not established.
METHODS: We performed a meta-analysis (MA), with a PubMed query using keywords
simultaneously (Randomized controlled trial, Aged, Anti-neoplastic combined
chemotherapy protocols/therapeutic use, Carcinoma, Non-small cell lung/drug
therapy). Abstracts from ASCO, WCLC, and ESMO proceedings were reviewed. Articles
were also obtained by cross-checking references. Third-generation agents
(gemcitabine, vinorelbine, paclitaxel, docetaxel) in combination with or without 
platinum were included. The efficacy outcomes were Overall Response Rate (ORR)
and 1-Year Overall Survival (OS). We used EasyMA software and a random-effect
model in case of heterogeneity.
RESULTS: This MA comprised 10 studies including 2605 patients (mean age 74; 1866 
men and 620 women; 654 stage IIIB and 1677 stage IV; 839 squamous cell cancers,
968 adenocarcinomas, 521 other pathological types). One-year OS (including the
last trial by Abe) did not significantly improve for doublets compared with
single-agents (HR 0.92; 95% Confidence Interval or CI: 0.82-1.03) whereas it
improved significantly before inclusion of this last study, when the study by
Quoix et al., the most favorable to doublets, was included. However, doublet
chemotherapy significantly improved ORR after inclusion of Abe study (HR 1.51;
1.22-1.86; p<0.001). OS was not significantly improved, neither by doublets
including platinum (HR 0.90, 0.70-1.16), nor by those without platinum (HR 0.94, 
0.84-1.07). ORR, but not OS, was improved by doublets including a taxane
(docetaxel and paclitaxel) (HR 1.72; 1.28-2.33) except for paclitaxel with a
significant OS and ORR benefit. All-grade neutropenia thrombocytopenia and anemia
were significantly more frequent with doublets than with single-agents (HR 1.26, 
1.15-1.39; 1.75, 1.11-2.77 and 1.33, 1.17-1.52 respectively). Grade 3/4
thrombocytopenia and anemia but not neutropenia were significantly more frequent 
with doublets (HRs 2.13, 1.01-4.49 and 1.84, 1.29-2.63 respectively).
CONCLUSION: Compared with single-agents, doublets significantly improved ORR but 
not OS. They induced significantly more frequent thrombocytopenia and anemia. The
benefit-to-risk ratio of doublets in advanced NSCLC might be more favorable than 
that of single agents, based on ORR but not OS.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.critrevonc.2012.03.007 
PMID: 22534083  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Lung Cancer. 2012 Aug;77(2):433-7. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2012.03.020. Epub 2012 
Apr 21.

EGFR mutations as a predictive marker of cytotoxic chemotherapy.

Park JH(1), Lee SH, Keam B, Kim TM, Kim DW, Yang SC, Kim YW, Heo DS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul,
Republic of Korea.

BACKGROUND: Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutations in non-small cell
lung cancer (NSCLC) are important predictive markers for the response to
EGFR-tyrosine kinase inhibitors (EGFR-TKIs). Whether EGFR mutations can also
predict the clinical outcomes in NSCLC patients receiving chemotherapy has not
yet been established.
METHODS: We included 217 locally advanced/metastatic NSCLC cases in our study
cohort. Each patient had received platinum doublet chemotherapy as a first line
treatment, and had been screened for an EGFR mutation.
RESULTS: The subject cohort comprised 80 EGFR wild type and 137 EGFR-mutated lung
cancer patients. Gemcitabine-based and taxane-based regimens were administered in
131 (60.4%) and 86 (39.6%) cases, respectively. Among the patients with a wild
type EGFR, there was no significant difference in the response rate (RR), disease
control rate (DCR), or progression-free survival (PFS) between gemcitabine-based 
and taxane-based therapies. Among the patients with EGFR mutations, no difference
in RR was observed between gemcitabine-based and taxane-based treatments. On the 
other hand, the DCR and PFS associated with taxane-based therapy were superior
when compared with the gemcitabine-based treatments. When we analyzed patients
with an EGFR exon 19 deletion, the PFS of the taxane treated cases was better
than that of the gemcitabine treated cases (5.3 months vs 3.7 months, P=0.012).
CONCLUSIONS: Our current data indicate that lung cancer patients with
EGFR-mutations had longer PFS with taxane than gemcitabine when receiving a
platinum-based doublet regimen. The predictive meaning of EGFR mutations for
cytotoxic chemotherapy should be further investigated.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2012.03.020 
PMID: 22521649  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Anticancer Res. 2012 Apr;32(4):1339-46.

The value of induction chemotherapy for survival in patients with non-small cell 
lung cancer treated with radiotherapy.

Holgersson G(1), Sandelin M, Hoye E, Bergström S, Henriksson R, Ekman S, Nyman J,
Helsing M, Friesland S, Brodin O, Holgersson M, Lundström KL, Janson C, Ekberg L,
Mörth C, Blystad T, Ewers SB, Löden B, Bergqvist M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.

AIM: The aim of the present study was to retrospectively investigate the impact
of induction chemotherapy on treatment outcome in patients treated with
curatively intended radiotherapy for non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC).
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Patients with a diagnosed NSCLC that have been subjected to
curatively intended irradiation (≥50 Gy) and treated in an oncology department in
Sweden during the years 1990-2000 were included in the study. Operated patients
and patients having received concomitant chemotherapy were excluded. The included
patients were localised by a manual search of all the oncology departments'
medical records and radiation charts.
RESULTS: Patients treated with induction chemotherapy (n=79) had a significantly 
better overall survival compared with patients treated with radiotherapy alone
(p=0.0097) in a univariate Cox regression analysis. A platinum/taxane combination
produced the greatest survival benefit; hazard ratio=0.49 (95% confidence
interval=0.31 to 0.75).
CONCLUSION: We found that patients treated with induction chemotherapy in
addition to radiotherapy for NSCLC have a better overall survival than patients
treated with radiotherapy alone and that the best results are achieved using a
platinum/taxane combination.


PMID: 22493368  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Mol Cancer Ther. 2012 May;11(5):1203-13. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-11-0899. Epub
2012 Mar 12.

High TUBB3 expression, an independent prognostic marker in patients with early
non-small cell lung cancer treated by preoperative chemotherapy, is regulated by 
K-Ras signaling pathway.

Levallet G(1), Bergot E, Antoine M, Creveuil C, Santos AO, Beau-Faller M, de
Fraipont F, Brambilla E, Levallet J, Morin F, Westeel V, Wislez M, Quoix E,
Debieuvre D, Dubois F, Rouquette I, Pujol JL, Moro-Sibilot D, Camonis J, Zalcman 
G; Intergroupe Francophone de Cancérologie Thoracique (IFCT).

Author information: 
(1)ER3 INSERM Cancers et Populations, CHU de Caen, Caen, France.

We assessed the prognostic and predictive value of β-tubulin III (TUBB3)
expression, as determined by immunohistochemistry, in 412 non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC) specimens from early-stage patients who received neoadjuvant
chemotherapy (paclitaxel- or gemcitabine-based) in a phase III trial (IFCT-0002).
We also correlated TUBB3 expression with K-Ras and EGF receptor (EGFR) mutations 
in a subset of 208 cryopreserved specimens. High TUBB3 protein expression was
associated with nonsquamous cell carcinomas (P < 0.001) and K-Ras mutation (P <
0.001). The 127 (30.8%) TUBB3-negative patients derived more than 1 year of
overall survival advantage, with more than 84 months median overall survival
versus 71.7 months for TUBB3-positive patients [HR, 1.58; 95% confidence interval
(CI), 1.11-2.25)]. This prognostic value was confirmed in multivariate analysis
(adjusted HR for death, 1.51; 95% CI, 1.04-2.21; P = 0.031) with a bootstrapping 
validation procedure. TUBB3 expression was associated with nonresponse to
chemotherapy (adjusted HR, 1.31; 95% CI, 1.01-1.70; P = 0.044) but had no
predictive value (taxane vs. gemcitabine). Taking account of these clinical
findings, we further investigated TUBB3 expression in isogenic human bronchial
cell lines only differing by K-Ras gene status and assessed the effect of K-Ras
short interfering RNA (siRNA) mediated depletion, cell hypoxia, or pharmacologic 
inhibitors of K-Ras downstream effectors, on TUBB3 protein cell content. siRNA
K-Ras knockdown, inhibition of RAF/MEK (MAP-ERK kinase) and phosphoinositide
3-kinase (PI3K)/AKT signaling, and hypoxia were shown to downregulate TUBB3
expression in bronchial cells. This study is the first one to identify K-Ras
mutations as determinant of TUBB3 expression, a chemoresistance marker. Our in
vitro data deserve studies combining standard chemotherapy with anti-MEK or
anti-PI3K drugs in patients with TUBB3-overexpressing tumors.

©2012 AACR

DOI: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-11-0899 
PMID: 22411898  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Int J Clin Oncol. 2013 Jun;18(3):371-9. doi: 10.1007/s10147-012-0386-8. Epub 2012
Feb 23.

The role of βIII-tubulin in non-small cell lung cancer patients treated by
taxane-based chemotherapy.

Kaira K(1), Takahashi T, Murakami H, Shukuya T, Kenmotsu H, Ono A, Naito T, Tsuya
A, Nakamura Y, Endo M, Kondo H, Nakajima T, Yamamoto N.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Thoracic Oncology, Shizuoka Cancer Center, 1007 Shimonagakubo,
Nagaizumi-cho, Sunto-gun, Shizuoka, 411-8777, Japan. kkaira1970@yahoo.co.jp

BACKGROUND: The aim of this study is to evaluate whether class III β-tubulin
(TUBB3) expression could predict progression-free survival or overall survival in
relapsed non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients treated with taxene-based
chemotherapy.
METHODS: Immunohistochemistal staining was used to examine the expression of
TUBB3 in resected lung tumor specimens obtained from 56 patients treated with
platinum-based chemotherapy against recurrent tumors after curative resections.
Excision repair cross-complementation group 1, breast cancer susceptibility gene 
1, vascular endothelial growth factor, Ki-67, CD34, and p53 were also correlated 
with clinical features and outcome after treatment.
RESULTS: Of the 56 patients enrolled in the study, 29 were treated by carboplatin
plus paclitaxel as first-line treatment, and 24 patients received docetaxel
monotherapy as second- or third-line treatment. A positive TUBB3 expression is
closely associated with a poor response to taxane-based chemotherapy. TUBB3
expression was an independent prognostic factor for predicting poor
progression-free survival after docetaxel administration. However, TUBB3
expression could not predict outcome after carboplatin plus paclitaxel treatment.
The other biomarkers tested were not independent prognostic factors for
predicting outcome after taxane-based chemotherapy.
CONCLUSION: TUBB3 expression is associated with resistance to taxane-based
chemotherapy and is an independent prognostic factor for predicting poor
progression-free survival after docetaxel treatment alone. TUBB3 expression may
be a predictive marker for chemoresistance to docetaxel in NSCLC with
postoperative recurrent disease.

DOI: 10.1007/s10147-012-0386-8 
PMID: 22358390  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. J Thorac Oncol. 2012 Mar;7(3):574-8. doi: 10.1097/JTO.0b013e31823f43ca.

A phase II study of halichondrin B analog eribulin mesylate (E7389) in patients
with advanced non-small cell lung cancer previously treated with a taxane: a
California cancer consortium trial.

Gitlitz BJ(1), Tsao-Wei DD, Groshen S, Davies A, Koczywas M, Belani CP, Argiris
A, Ramalingam S, Vokes EE, Edelman M, Hoffman P, Ballas MS, Liu SV, Gandara DR.

Author information: 
(1)University of Southern California, Norris Comprehensive Cancer Center, Los
Angeles, CA, USA. gitlitz@usc.edu

INTRODUCTION: Eribulin mesylate (E7389) is an analog of halichondrin B with a
unique mechanism of microtubule binding. The activity and toxicity of eribulin
were assessed in patients with advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
previously treated with a taxane.
METHODS: An open-label phase II study included patients with NSCLC previously
treated with platinum and taxane-based therapy, with up to two prior cytotoxic
regimens, given for metastatic disease or as adjuvant therapy. Patients were
stratified by taxane-sensitivity: taxane-sensitive (TS, progression >90 days
after taxane) or taxane-resistant (TR, progression ≤90 days after taxane).
Patients received an intravenous infusion of eribulin at 1.4 mg/m on days 1 and 8
every 21 days. The primary end point was objective response rate and secondary
end points included progression-free survival and overall survival.
RESULTS: Sixty-six patients were accrued. The objective response rate was 5% with
a median duration of response of 7.8 months. In the TS arm, 3 of 45 patients (7%)
achieved a partial response and another 11 of 45 (24%) achieved stable disease
for at least 3 months, whereas in the TR arm, no patients achieved a partial
response and 4 of 21 (19%) achieved stable disease for at least 3 months. Median 
progression-free survival was 2.9 months in the TS subgroup and 1.2 months in the
TR subgroup. The median overall survival was 12.6 months in the TS subgroup and
8.9 months in the TR subgroup. Toxicities were primarily hematologic; only two
patients developed grade 3 neuropathy.
CONCLUSIONS: Eribulin mesylate is well tolerated and demonstrates activity in
pretreated, TS NSCLC.

DOI: 10.1097/JTO.0b013e31823f43ca 
PMCID: PMC3288403
PMID: 22198425  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Clin Lung Cancer. 2012 May;13(3):171-80. doi: 10.1016/j.cllc.2011.02.005. Epub
2011 May 19.

Epothilones in development for non--small-cell lung cancer: novel anti-tubulin
agents with the potential to overcome taxane resistance.

Edelman MJ(1), Shvartsbeyn M.

Author information: 
(1)University of Maryland Greenebaum Cancer Center, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA.
medelman@umm.edu

Progress in the treatment of non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) will require the 
introduction of new agents as well as better use of existing therapies. Targeted 
therapies are likely to have a profound effect on the treatment of NSCLC after
identification of patients who are most likely to benefit. The epothilones are
novel anti-tubulin agents derived from Sorangium cellulosum. β III tubulin
overexpression has been implicated as a mechanism of anti-tubulin resistance that
can be overcome by epothilones. Several epothilones have advanced to clinical
trials; ixabepilone (BMS247550, aza-epothilone B, Bristol-Myers Squibb, New York,
NY), patupilone (EPO906, Novartis, Basel, Switzerland) and sagopilone (ZK-EPO,
ZK-219477, Schering AG, Berlin-Wedding, Germany) are currently in active
development. Several of the epothilones, most notably ixabepilone, have
demonstrated activity in lung cancer in phase I and II trials, including
taxane-resistant patients. Although a phase II study failed to show superior
outcome in patients with β III tubulin overexpression, other aspects of the
epothilones argue for their continued development.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cllc.2011.02.005 
PMID: 22133291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]

1. Onco Targets Ther. 2017 Jan 12;10:353-359. doi: 10.2147/OTT.S119714. eCollection 
2017.

Advances in antiangiogenic treatment of small-cell lung cancer.

Lu H(1), Jiang Z(2).

Author information: 
(1)Zhejiang Key Laboratory of Diagnosis & Treatment Technology on Thoracic
Oncology (Lung and Esophagus); Department of Thoracic Medical Oncology, Zhejiang 
Cancer Hospital, Hangzhou, People's Republic of China. (2)Department of Thoracic 
Medical Oncology, Zhejiang Cancer Hospital, Hangzhou, People's Republic of China.

Small-cell lung cancer (SCLC), a poorly differentiated neuroendocrine malignancy,
has a rapid growth rate, strong aggressiveness, early metastases, and poor
prognosis. Angiogenesis greatly contributes to the metastatic process of SCLC,
which has a higher vascularization compared with non-small-cell lung cancer
(NSCLC). SCLC might constitute an ideal malignancy for assessing new
antiangiogenic drugs and therapeutic strategies. Combining bevacizumab with
paclitaxel has therapeutic benefits in chemoresistant, relapsed SCLC. The
cisplatin-etoposide and bevacizumab combination, as the first-line treatment for 
extensive-stage SCLC, can improve progression-free survival (PFS), with an
acceptable toxicity profile. Ziv-aflibercept combined with topotecan is promising
for platinum-refractory SCLC. Chemotherapy combined with thalidomide cannot
prolong survival. Maintenance sunitinib of 37.5 mg/day in extensive-stage SCLC
patients following induction chemotherapy with platinum/etoposide improves median
PFS by 1.6 months. Serum angiopoietin-2 concentrations and vascular endothelial
growth factor levels correlate with poor prognosis. Bevacizumab, ziv-aflibercept,
and sunitinib are worthy of further evaluation. Thalidomide, sorafenib,
pomalidomide, and cediranib may not be suitable for SCLC.

DOI: 10.2147/OTT.S119714 
PMCID: PMC5238765
PMID: 28138259  [PubMed - in process]


2. Lancet. 2016 Oct;388 Suppl 1:S95. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(16)32022-0.

Dynamic contrast-enhanced MRI to predict response to vinorelbine-cisplatin alone 
or with rh-endostatin in patients with non-small cell lung cancer and bone
metastases: a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial.

Zhang R(1), Wang ZY(1), Li YH(2), Lu YH(3), Wang S(4), Yu WX(1), Zhao H(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Oncology, Shanghai Sixth People's Hospital Affiliated
to Shanghai Jiaotong University, Shanghai, China. (2)Department of Radiology,
Shanghai Sixth People's Hospital Affiliated to Shanghai Jiaotong University,
Shanghai, China. (3)Department of Clinical Skill Laboratory, Shanghai Sixth
People's Hospital Affiliated to Shanghai Jiaotong University, Shanghai, China.
(4)Department of Internal Oncology, Shanghai Sixth People's Hospital, Soochow
University, Shanghai, China. (5)Department of Internal Oncology, Shanghai Sixth
People's Hospital Affiliated to Shanghai Jiaotong University, Shanghai, China.
Electronic address: zhao-hui@sjtu.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: Metastatic bone disease is a frequent complication of advanced
non-small-cell lung cancer and causes skeletal-related events which result in a
poor prognosis. A standard method to assess the therapeutic response of bone
metastases does not currently exist. We used dynamic contrast-enhanced MRI to
obtain quantitative measures to assess the suitability of this technique to gauge
therapeutic response to vinorelbine-cisplatin plus rh-endostatinfor previously
untreated non-small cell lung cancer with bone metastases.
METHODS: We did a phase 4, randomised, prospective, double-blind,
placebo-controlled clinical trial in Shanghai Sixth People's Hospital, Shanghai, 
China. Inclusion criteria were non-small-cell lung cancer patients with bone
metastases confirmed by pathology or cytology; available imaging data of pelvic
metastatic lesions; aged 18 to 75 years old; expected survival at least 3 months;
not receiving taxane, bevacizumab, thalidomide, rh-endostatin, or bisphosphonate;
not having radiation therapy within 3 months of enrollment into study; normal
results of routine blood tests, liver and kidney function, and electrocardiogram;
absence of cardiovascular disease, autoimmune disease, vasculitis, severe
infection, diabetes, and other concomitant disease; and signed informed consent. 
Exclusion criteria were receiving granulocyte colony stimulating factor or
granulocyte-macrophage colony stimulating factor during chemotherapy, intolerance
to adverse reaction, and allergy to contrast agents. Patients were randomly
assigned to treatment group and control group at a ratio of 2:1 by random code
generation by an independent biostatistician in a double-blind fashion.
Participants received either vinorelbine-cisplatin plus rh-endostatin or
vinorelbine-cisplatin plus placebo. Vinorelbine (25 mg/m(2)) and cisplatin (75
mg/m(2)) were administered intravenously on the first day of a 21 day cycle.
Patients received rh-endostatin (7·5 mg/m(2)) or placebo on days 1-14 of a cycle.
The primary end points were objective response rate (complete remission+partial
remission)/total × 100) and disease control rate (complete remission+partial
remission+stable disease)/total × 100). Measurements including Ktrans, Kep, and
Ve were evaluated by dynamic contrast-enhanced MRI before treatment and after
completion of 2 treatment cycles. Blood concentrations of bone metabolites,
tumour markers, and tumour vascular growth related factors were measured before
and after treatment. Comparisons were made using paired t-test. Kaplan-Meier
survival analysis was used to indicate the correlation between some measurements 
and progression-free survival or overall survival. The difference in Ktrans
between patients who had partial remission or stable disease group and those who 
had disease progression was tested using the Chi-square test. All statistical
analyses were performed with SPSS version 21.0. This trial was approved by the
State Food and Drug Administration (No: S20050088) and China State Food and Drug 
Administration. The trial is registered with China Clinical Trials Registry,
number chictr-ctr-09000569. Written informed consent and ethical approval was
obtained.
FINDINGS: We enrolled 33 patients (aged 52-70, 15 men and 18 women) of whom 28
were evaluable (20 in treatment group and 8 in control group). Five patients were
excluded: 2 patients in treatment group and 1 patient in control group used
granulocyte-macrophage colony stimulating factor, and 2 patients in the control
group refused treatment. Objective response rate was higher (30% vs 0%;
p<0·00001), mean overall survival was longer (21·44 [SD 17·28] vs 7·71 [4·68]
months, p=0·008), and reduction in capillary permeability (measured by Ktrans)
was greater (60·0% vs 4·4%; p=0·026) in the group given rh-endostatin than in the
control group. Disease control rate was 80% in the treatment group and 75% in the
control group (p=0·07). Overall survival was longer in patients with a greater
than 50% reduction in Ktrans than in patients with a decrease of up to 50% (13·2 
[1·8] vs 9·8 [0·2] months, p=0·026).
INTERPRETATION: Addition of rh-endostatin to treatment with vinorelbine-cisplatin
increased the treatment response in patients with non-small cell lung cancer and 
bone metastases. Quantitative analysis using dynamic contrast-enhanced MRI can be
used to evaluate therapeutic response and to predict survival of bone metastases 
after anti-angiogenesis therapy. Limitations of this study include the small
number of patients and the single-centre design.
FUNDING: National Natural Science Foundation of China [grant number 81201628].

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(16)32022-0 
PMID: 27968915  [PubMed - in process]


3. Biomed Pharmacother. 2017 Jan;85:549-555. doi: 10.1016/j.biopha.2016.11.063. Epub
2016 Nov 23.

Anticancer effects of novel thalidomide analogs in A549 cells through inhibition 
of vascular endothelial growth factor and matrix metalloproteinase-2.

El-Aarag B(1), Kasai T(2), Masuda J(2), Agwa H(3), Zahran M(3), Seno M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Biochemistry Division, Chemistry Department, Faculty of Science, Menoufia
University, Shebin El-Koom, Egypt; Division of Chemistry and Biotechnology,
Graduate School of Natural Science and Technology, Okayama University, Okayama
7008530, Japan. Electronic address: bishoy.yousef@gmail.com. (2)Division of
Chemistry and Biotechnology, Graduate School of Natural Science and Technology,
Okayama University, Okayama 7008530, Japan. (3)Chemistry Department, Faculty of
Science, Menoufia University, Shebin El-Koom, Egypt.

Lung cancer is one of the major causes of cancer-related mortality worldwide, and
non-small-cell lung cancer is the most common form of lung cancer. Several
studies had shown that thalidomide has potential for prevention and therapy of
cancer. Therefore, the current study aimed to investigate the antitumor effects
of two novel thalidomide analogs in human lung cancer A549 cells. The
antiproliferative, antimigratory, and apoptotic effects in A549 cells induced by 
thalidomide analogs were examined. In addition, their effects on the expression
of mRNAs encoding vascular endothelial growth factor165 (VEGF165) and matrix
metalloproteinase-2 (MMP-2) were evaluated. Their influence on the tumor volume
in nude mice was also determined. Results revealed that thalidomide analogs
exhibited antiproliferative, antimigratory, and apoptotic activities with more
pronounced effect than thalidomide drug. Furthermore, analogs 1 and 2 suppressed 
the expression levels of VEGF165 by 42% and 53.2% and those of MMP-2 by 45% and
52%, respectively. Thalidomide analogs 1 and 2 also reduced the tumor volume by
30.11% and 53.52%, respectively. Therefore, this study provides evidence that
thalidomide analogs may serve as a new therapeutic option for treating lung
cancer.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biopha.2016.11.063 
PMID: 27889230  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Contemp Oncol (Pozn). 2014;18(1):39-47. doi: 10.5114/wo.2014.40782. Epub 2014 Feb
28.

The efficacy and safety of thalidomide-based therapy in patients with advanced
non-small cell lung cancer: a meta-analysis.

Liu Y(1), He S(2), Ding Y(3), Huang J(3), Zhang Y(3), Chen L(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical
University, Guangzhou, Guangdong Province, People's Republic of China ; Ying Liu 
and Shuhua He are joint first authors. (2)Department of Urology, Nanfang
Hospital, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, Guangdong Province, People's
Republic of China ; Ying Liu and Shuhua He are joint first authors. (3)Department
of Radiation Oncology, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, 
Guangdong Province, People's Republic of China.

Several randomized controlled clinical trials have compared therapy with or
without thalidomide in the treatment of advanced non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC). However, these studies did not produce consistent results. We carried
out a meta-analysis to determine the efficacy and safety of thalidomide-based
therapy in patients with advanced NSCLC. For this meta-analysis, we selected
randomized clinical trials that compared thalidomide in combination with other
therapy or other therapy alone in patients with advanced NSCLC. The outcomes
included median overall survival (OS), one- and two-year survival, tumor
response, and toxicities. Hazard ratios (HRs) or risk ratios (RRs) were reported 
with 95% confidence intervals (CIs). A total of 5 eligible trials were included
for the meta-analysis, with 729 patients in the thalidomide group and 711
patients in the control group. Compared with non-thalidomide-based therapy,
patients receiving thalidomide plus other therapy did not differ significantly in
terms of one- and two-year survival or tumor response (RR = 1.32, 95% CI:
0.66-2.63, p = 0.43; RR = 1.22, 95% CI: 0.48-3.11, p = 0.68; RR = 1.05, 95% CI:
0.92-1.19, p = 0.51, respectively). However, thalidomide-based therapy induced
more grade 3-4 dizziness and constipation (RR = 2.05, 95% CI: 1.10-3.81, p =
0.02; RR = 4.78, 95% CI: 1.84-12.38, p = 0.001, respectively). The addition of
thalidomide to other therapy did not improve survival and tumor response in
patients with advanced NSCLC, and thalidomide-based therapy was associated with
more grade 3/4 dizziness and constipation.

DOI: 10.5114/wo.2014.40782 
PMCID: PMC4037987
PMID: 24876820  [PubMed]


5. Cancer Med. 2013 Jun;2(3):360-6. doi: 10.1002/cam4.74. Epub 2013 Apr 24.

A potential new enriching trial design for selecting non-small-cell lung cancer
patients with no predictive biomarker for trials based on both histology and
early tumor response: further analysis of a thalidomide trial.

Lee SM(1), Hackshaw A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, University College London (UCL) Hospitals and UCL
Cancer Institute, 250 Euston Road, London, NW1 2PG, United Kingdom.
sm.lee@uclh.nhs.uk

There are few predictive biomarkers for antiangiogenic trials in lung cancer. We 
examine a potential treatment strategy in which a patient group is enriched using
both histology and an early assessment of response during standard chemotherapy, 
and where a new agent is given for the remainder of chemotherapy and as
maintenance. We performed a retrospective analysis of 722 stage IIIB/IV
non-small-cell lung cancer patients from a double-blind placebo-controlled trial 
of thalidomide or placebo 100-200 mg/day, combined with gemcitabine/carboplatin
(for up to four cycles), then given as single agent maintenance therapy. There
was a significant statistical interaction between treatment and histology, with a
possible benefit among squamous cell cancer (SCC) patients. We examined 150 SCC
patients who were "nonprogressors" (stable disease or complete/partial response) 
after completing the second chemotherapy cycle. Endpoints were progression-free
survival (PFS) and overall survival (OS). Among the 150 patients nonprogressors
after cycle 2 (thalidomide, n = 72; placebo, n = 78; baseline characteristics
were similar), the hazard ratios (HRs) were: OS = 0.76 (95% CI: 0.54-1.07) and
PFS = 0.69 (95% CI: 0.50-0.97). In 57 patients who had a complete/partial
response, the HRs were: OS = 0.63 (95% CI: 0.34-1.15) and PFS = 0.50 (95% CI:
0.28-0.88). SCC patients who were nonprogressors after 2 cycles of standard
chemotherapy showed evidence of a benefit from thalidomide when taken for the
remainder of chemotherapy and as maintenance. This strategy based on histology
and, importantly, early assessment of tumor response, as a means of patient
enrichment, could be examined in other lung cancer studies. Such an approach
might be suitable for trials where there are no predictive biomarkers.

DOI: 10.1002/cam4.74 
PMCID: PMC3699848
PMID: 23930213  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Br J Cancer. 2012 Mar 13;106(6):1153-9. doi: 10.1038/bjc.2012.50. Epub 2012 Feb
21.

Analysis of circulating angiogenic biomarkers from patients in two phase III
trials in lung cancer of chemotherapy alone or chemotherapy and thalidomide.

Young RJ(1), Tin AW, Brown NJ, Jitlal M, Lee SM, Woll PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Academic Unit of Clinical Oncology, School of Medicine & Biomedical Sciences, 
University of Sheffield, Sheffield S10 2RX, UK. r.j.young@sheffield.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: Thalidomide has potent anti-inflammatory and anti-angiogenic
properties. It was evaluated in combination with chemotherapy in two randomised
placebo-controlled trials in patients with small cell lung cancer (SCLC, n=724)
and advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC, n=722). Neither study
demonstrated an improvement in overall survival with the addition of thalidomide 
to chemotherapy. This study investigated circulating angiogenic biomarkers in a
subset of these patients.
METHODS: Serial plasma samples were collected in a cohort of patients enrolled in
these two trials (n=95). Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), soluble
truncated form of VEGF receptor-2 (sVEGFR-2), interleukin-8 (IL-8), tumour
necrosis factor-α (TNF-α), basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF) and soluble
intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (sICAM-1) levels were measured by enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assays. Results were correlated with patient clinical data
including stage, response rate and progression-free survival (PFS).
RESULTS: Baseline biomarker levels were not significantly different between SCLC 
and NSCLC. For pooled treatment groups, limited stage SCLC was associated with
lower baseline VEGF (P=0.046), sICAM-1 (P=0.008) and IL-8 (P=0.070) than
extensive stage disease. Low baseline IL-8 was associated with a significantly
improved PFS in both SCLC and NSCLC (P=0.028), and a greater reduction in IL-8
was associated with a significantly improved tumour response (P=0.035). Baseline 
angiogenic factor levels, however, did not predict response to thalidomide.
CONCLUSION: Circulating angiogenic biomarkers did not identify patients who
benefited from thalidomide treatment.

DOI: 10.1038/bjc.2012.50 
PMCID: PMC3304418
PMID: 22353811  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. J Clin Oncol. 2012 Feb 20;30(6):616-22. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2011.36.9116. Epub 2012 
Jan 23.

Randomized phase III study of thoracic radiation in combination with paclitaxel
and carboplatin with or without thalidomide in patients with stage III
non-small-cell lung cancer: the ECOG 3598 study.

Hoang T(1), Dahlberg SE, Schiller JH, Mehta MP, Fitzgerald TJ, Belinsky SA,
Johnson DH.

Author information: 
(1)Wisconsin Institute for Medical Research, 1111 Highland Ave, Madison, WI
53705, USA. txh@medicine.wisc.edu

Comment in
    J Clin Oncol. 2012 Feb 20;30(6):582-4.

PURPOSE: The primary objective of this study was to compare the survival of
patients with unresectable stage III non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) treated
with combined chemoradiotherapy with or without thalidomide.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Patients were randomly assigned to the control arm (PC)
involving two cycles of induction paclitaxel 225 mg/m(2) and carboplatin area
under the curve (AUC) 6 followed by 60 Gy thoracic radiation administered
concurrently with weekly paclitaxel 45 mg/m(2) and carboplatin AUC 2, or to the
experimental arm (TPC), receiving the same treatment in combination with
thalidomide at a starting dose of 200 mg daily. The protocol allowed an increase 
in thalidomide dose up to 1,000 mg daily based on patient tolerability.
RESULTS: A total of 546 patients were eligible, including 275 in the PC arm and
271 in the TPC arm. Median overall survival, progression-free survival, and
overall response rate were 15.3 months, 7.4 months, and 35.0%, respectively, for 
patients in the PC arm, in comparison with 16.0 months (P = .99), 7.8 months (P =
.96), and 38.2% (P = .47), respectively, for patients in the TPC arm. Overall,
there was higher incidence of grade 3 toxicities in patients treated with
thalidomide. Several grade 3 or higher events were observed more often in the TPC
arm, including thromboembolism, fatigue, depressed consciousness, dizziness,
sensory neuropathy, tremor, constipation, dyspnea, hypoxia, hypokalemia, rash,
and edema. Low-dose aspirin did not reduce the thromboembolic rate.
CONCLUSION: The addition of thalidomide to chemoradiotherapy increased toxicities
but did not improve survival in patients with locally advanced NSCLC.

DOI: 10.1200/JCO.2011.36.9116 
PMCID: PMC3295560
PMID: 22271472  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


